p2403 11906242 50681
portrait of Paul Rycaut, Consul of Smyrna and Fellow of the Royal Society
THE LIVES OF THE POPES, From the time of our Saviour Jesus Christ, TO THE REIGN OF SIXTUS IV. Written Originally in Latine by BAPTISTA PLATINA Native of Cremona, And Translated into ENGLISH. And the same History continued from the Year 1471. to this present time; wherein the most remarkable Passages of Christendom both in Church and State are Treated of and Described. By PAUL RYCAUT, Esq; LONDON: Printed for Christopher Wilkinson at the Black Boy over against S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1685.
TO THEDiv. S. READER. THE History of Platina of the Lives of the Popes, being rendred into English by an unknown hand, was delivered to me by the Bookseller; and considering that Platina was an Author of good Repu∣tation and Authority in the World, I often wished that he had lived in that Age, in which he might have de∣duced his History from ancient to the present times; or that some other of our learned men would have con∣tinued the same in the Language of our own Country; for since our Tongue is so well refined, and so copious, it ought justly to comprehend all those Histories, Sciences and Arts, which are related and made known in forreign Languages. But observing that this Work was neglected, and not thought worthy the labour of better Pens, I essayed to do it in my own rude and plain Style, without affecta∣tion or ornament, more than what the simplicity of naked truth would afford me; in search of which I have always had recourse to the best and to the most impartial Au∣thors, who have neither disguised the Vices of Men by flattery, nor out of prejudice branded those Actions with shame and obloquy, which might have admitted of a fair∣er character. Nor have I mixed any thing of Re∣ligion in this History, but where the nature of the re∣lation could not subsist without it: for in regard the Court, and not the Church of Rome, is the subject on which I treat, I have made the Points of Religion ac∣cidental only to the following Discourses.
But as to Platina himself, Trithemius in his Treatise of Ecclesiastical Writers gives him this Cha∣racter. He was born (sayes he) at Cremona, was Bre∣viary to the Pope, and a man learned in all Sciences, he was an excellent Philosopher, and a famous Orator, of an acute and ready wit, and perswasive eloquence; he was couragious, and so constant to his principles, that under Pope Paul II. he was deprived of his Estate and Preferments, and after having endured the wrack or torture, he was cruelly cast into Prison, where he re∣mained during the Reign of this Paul II. afterwards he was set at liberty by Sixtus IV. to whom he dedi∣cated this following History of the Popes. He died at Rome of the Plague, Aged 60 years, A. D. 1481. Frederick III. being Emperour, and Sixtus IV. be∣ing Pope.
AN INTRODUCTION To the following HISTORY. THIS continuation of Plaetina, (the subject of which is the Lives and Reigns of the Popes,) is a Treatise purely historical, collected from feveral Latin, French, and Italian Authors: whose design being solely to transmit matter of Fact to posterity, did not intermeddle with points of Religion, but as they accidentally occurred in the connexion of History, there being a vast difference between the Church of Rome, and the Court of Rome. To this latter Notion, which consists of a Pope, who is Sovereign and of seventy Cardinals, or more; who are his Counsellours, besides a great number of Prelats, we shall con∣fine our Discourse. And whereas the Pope is a Prince, who hath a Temporal Dominion under his Government, and Juris∣diction; it is no wonder if he, and the Creatures, and Confi∣dents who attend him in all his Counsels, should act by Ma∣ximes purely civil, and political: whence it is, that Popes are approached with so much more awe, and profound Reverence, than is performed towards Kings and Emperours, because the Spiritual comes in to maintain and uphold the Authority of the Temporal, and both being united do mutually support each other: hence proceed all the flatteries used in that Court, all the contrivances which Ambition can suggest to raise Families, and make those great who are in Authority. And in short, nothing is omitted, which the Wit of Man, and the Artifices of the most refined Heads in the World, (such as those are at Rome) can devise to conserve, and exalt the Interest and Autho∣rity of that Court.
The Original of this Jurisdiction, which is encreased to suchThe Original of Ecclesiasti∣cal Jurisdi∣ction. a degree of Power and Greatness, as is become suspected by Kings, and formidable to its people, sprang at first from those words of our Saviour to his Apostles, Whose sins ye shall for∣give on Earth shall be forgiven in Heaven, and whose sins ye shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven: the which large and ex∣tensive priviledg was attended with a Commission to feed Christs Flock, to preach the Gospel, and to administer the Sa∣craments, and with an exhortation to all the faithful to love one the other, and to pardon, and forgive each other their of∣fences. The Primitive Church which was always zealous to reconcile the Brethren, and procure pardon of the Offender from the person offended, did ordain according to the Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, that the Saints, or Christians1 Cor. cap. 6. should not maintain a process of Law one against the other at the Bar, or Tribunals of Infidels, but that they should rather appoint, and constitute some of the Faithful who were Men of approved wisdom, and integrity, to hear, and examine, and determine all their differences. This manner of trial was cer∣tainly submitted unto with great charity of the both parties, and with an unbiassed sentence of the Judg; for the first had no power over them to enforce execution, unless the constraint of their own Consciences, which bore witness that the adjudg∣ment was from God; Nor did the Ecclesiastical Judg pro∣nounce sentence without regret, sorrow, and grief for the De∣linquent, as appears by the words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. chap. 2. where the sorrow of the Offender is said to be so great as to require comfort; and that the Judg also did partake in the like affliction and anguish of heart with him. This dispensation of the Ecclesiastical Censures, being a work of great Charity, was an Office onely proper for such as had attained to a good esteem for piety, and to the degree and dignity of a Bishop. But as the Faithful encreased, and the Churches became numerous, so the deliberations on Causes were too heavy, and burdensom for the Bishop alone; and there∣fore though the Bills, and Processes at Law were received by the hands of the Bishop, they were yet afterwards transferred to the consideration of the Ancients, who were called Presbyters, which being digested by them, received their ultimate determi∣nation and sentence from the General Assembly of the Church: the which practice was in use in the year of our Lord 250. as
appears by the Epistles of St. Cyprian, wherein he writes to the Presbyters of his Diocese of Carthage, that he intended not to act in any thing without the counsel and advice of them, and consent of the people, and that he would examine the Causes, and the merits thereof in their presence: and moreover he re∣proves certain Priests for their irregular proceedings in cases of judgment, threatning to give an account thereof unto the people. This charity, and plain dealings of the Bishops gain∣ed them such reputation, that their advice, and sentence was almost in all matters followed, and admitted by the people, whose charity in after-Ages growing cold, and careless of the mutual good and benefit each of other, came by degrees to cast off this burdensom Office of Judgment, and to remit it solely to the Incumbence of the Bishop, who also degenerating from the primitive humility, easily gave way to the allurements of ambition, and under the disguise of Charity, and Vertue em∣braced the Authority of passing sentence without the assistance, or consultation with co-ordinate Judges. So soon as the per∣secutions ceased great loads of business, Cases, and Trials at Law devolved upon the Bishop, so that then he was forced to erect a Tribunal of Justice, and contrive Methods, and rules for Judicial proceedings: howsoever in those times of simplicity and innocence, things were not so wholly corrupted, but that though the antient Discipline of remitting matters to the deter∣mination of the Church did cease, yet sincerity and uprightness in passing Sentence still continued. The which when Constan∣tine the Emperour observed, and considered the great difference there was between the captious, and litigious proceedings of secular Advocats, and Proctors, who made Law-suits and wranglings their benefit and Trade, and the honest and con∣scientious Methods, and determinations of the Clergy; he or∣dained that the Sentence of the Bishop should be definitive and without appeal, with power to grant an injunction to all pro∣ceedings at Common Law, in case the party agrieved should desire to have recourse to the Episcopal judgment, and juris∣diction in his case. Hence it came to pass that the Sentence of the Bishop wasThe degrees by which the greatness of the Clergy did arise. made a judgment of Court, and put in execution by the hands of the secular Magistrate: and this jurisdiction was farther am∣plified and increased in the year 365. by the Decree of the Emperour Valens. But the extent of this Authority, establish∣ed
by the Law of Constantine, being afterwards abused by the corruption of succeeding Bishops, was recalled by the Empe∣rours Arcadius, and Honorius, and confined to causes purely re∣ligious, without Courts or formal processes of Law, and with∣out power to intermeddle in civil differences, unless the parties concerned should on both sides agree to remit their case by way of Arbitration, or compromise to the Sentence of the Bishop. But in regard the Bishops of Rome had for a long time been powerful in that City, little notice was taken of this In∣junction until in the year 452. it was again enforced, and re∣newed by Valentinian the Emperour. But not long afterwards the succeeding Emperours restored part of that Authority which had been taken from them, and Justinian again erected their Courts of Judicature, to which he assigned all Causes about Religion, complaints, and differences between the Clergy, Ec∣clesiastical Fines and forfeitures, with power to determine Cases between Lay-persons who should by way of Umpirage, or Arbitration refer themselves to the Episcopal Court: and in this manner did that charitable correction, and that plain, and sincere way of ending and composing differences between Bre∣thren, instituted by Christ Jesus begin to degenerate into that Dominion which our Saviour had forbidden to his Apostles. And farther to strengthen, and confirm this Episcopal Au∣thority so soon as the Empire was divided, and that the Western Provinces were separated from the Eastern Dominions; then were many of the Bishops taken into the Councils of Princes, whereby the Secular Power being annexed to their Spiritual ca∣pacity, served much to advance, and raise the reputation, and Authority of the Episcopal Dignity: so that two hundred years had not passed in this manner, before the Bishops arrogated to themselves a Power to judg the Clergy in all Cases both Crimi∣nal, and Civil; And to extend their Jurisdiction farther, they framed a Term, called Mixed Actions, in which the Bishop, as well as the Secular Magistrate might grant Process; that is, in matters where the Judg had not been diligent, or cold, and re∣miss, or dilatory in his proceedings, then the Bishop might take the Causes out of his hands: by which pretence and usur∣pation little business remained for the Secular Courts. And farther, by vertue hereof they established a general, standing Rule, as unalterable, as a fundamental of Faith: that in Cases where the Magistrate was remiss, or delayed to do Justice,
those Causes did ipso facto, devolve to the cognizance of the Bishop. Had the Prelats stuck at this point, and not pro∣ceeded farther, it had been pretty tolerable; for then a Power might have remained still in the hands of the Civil Magistrate, to moderate and retrench the excesses of Ecclesiastical encroach∣ments as occasion served: but those, who had imposed this yoak on the people, thought fit for their own security, to rivet it in such manner about their necks, that it could never be shaken off again; having to that purpose forged a principle in their own Shops under the Title of a fundamental point of Faith. That the Bishops power of judging in Causes, as well tempo∣ral, as spiritual, took not its Original and Authority from the Decrees, or connivence of Emperours, or from the will and pleasure of the people, or by custom, or prescription; but from a right inherent in the Episcopal Dignity and conferred thereupon by the institution of Christ himself. As appears in the History of the Council of Trent wrote by Father Paul Sarpi. This was certainly a bold and a hardy Assertion, which could so easily have been refuted by those who had read the Codes of Theodosius, and Justinian, with the Capitularies of Charles the Great, and Concessions and Ordinances of succeeding Princes, both of the Eastern and Western Empire: in reading and con∣sidering which, a Man must be strangely blind, or stupid, who cannot observe by what ways, and Methods, the excess, and exorbitance of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was introduced into the World. And indeed it is strange to consider, that on the bare foundation of that Spiritual Power to bind and loose, given by Christ to his Church; and by that Ordinance of St. Paul to compose differences between the Brethren, and prevent their going to Law before Infidels, should by a long tract of time, and by several Artifices, and subtil contrivances, be e∣rected a Temporal Tribunal the most extensive, and most con∣siderable of any that ever was in the World: and that in the midst of divers Kingdoms and Principalities of Europe, there should be an other State established, independent on the Pub∣lick; which is such a Model, and form of Political Govern∣ment, as never any of the Antient Legislators could ever fansie, or imagine to be consistent with the Sovereignty of a Tempo∣ral Prince.
But such a Government as this, was long in growing, andThe difficul∣ties which the Clergy met in ma∣king them∣selves great. required much time to bring it to a maturity, because many difficulties interposed in the way. For in the first place, the very foundation of Christianity, which was humility, was dia∣metrically opposite to Grandeur and Dominion: then the Popes were chosen by the People, to whom they were accountable for all their administrations, and to the Clergy for their soundness in Faith, and Orthodox Doctrine; for which reason Pope Eugenius the first was Interdicted by the Clergy from celebrating Divine Service in Santa Maria Maggiore, until he had disclaimed pub∣lickly the Heresie he held of one Operation or Will in Christ; the Assertors of which were called Monothelites; and this Choice of the People required a confirmation from the Emperour, be∣fore the Pope could be legally invested in his Authority; the which is apparent in all History; and in regard the Seat of the Emperours was far distant, a Power was delegated to the Exarch of Ravenna, to confirm the suffrages of the people, in case the person they had chosen was not obnoxious, or displeasing to the Emperour: and so it was, when Severinus was made Pope, that Isaacius the Exarch of Italy, made a journey to Rome to confirm him, though before his departure he plundered the Lateran of its Treasures: in which attempt, though he was opposed by some of the Clergy, yet his Soldiers being too strong for them, he carried away his prize, upon a pretence, that it was unreasonable the Clergy should grow rich, and the State poor; and that they should amass vast sums into their Coffers, when the Soldiers, who were their defence, and guard, were miserably necessitous, and in a starving condition. Nor had the See of Rome less difficulty in its advancement, by reason of the long disputes, and contentions between that, and the Church of Constantinople for precedency; to which se∣veral Princes gave encouragement, who asserted that the Su∣premacy ought to be lodged at that place, which was account∣ed and esteemed the Capital Seat of the Empire: On the other side the Roman Bishops, termed Constantinople but a Colony of Rome, since the Greeks themselves stiled their Prince , the Emperour of the Romans; and the Constanti∣nopolitans themselves even in that age were called Romans, and not Greeks: the which Controversie remained undecided until the time of Boniface the third, who by great intercession, and a powerful interest obtain'd of the Emperour Phocas, that
the See of Rome should be acknowledged; and stiled the Head of all the Churches. But notwithstanding this priviledg given to the See of Rome,The Popes depended on the Emperor. the Popes continued still in their dependence on the Emperor's confirmation, without which their Election was not valid. And though in the time of Mauritius the Emperour, Pelagius the 2d. was made Bishop of Rome without the Imperial con∣sent and confirmation; and though the same was excused by a cause of necessity occasioned by the Siege which the Lom∣bards had laid to the City; yet the Emperour was much dis∣pleased with this encroachment upon his Prerogative, until such time as Gregory a Deacon a Person of great Piety, and Learn∣ing was sent to Constantinople to appease his anger. In this manner the Popes depended on the Emperours plea∣sure for their confirmation until about the year 705. when Benedict the second was created Pope, a Person of so much piety and vertue, and of compassion towards the poor, that he gained an esteem, aud veneration from all people of what degree soever; and so great was his renown, that the report of his Vertue and Devotion reaching the Ears of the Emperour; he conceived such a high Opinion of his Sanctity, that he sent him a Decree, whereby he ordained and established, that for the time to come, He whom the Clergy and people of Rome should choose Pope, should be immediately acknowledged, without recourse to the Authority of the Emperour, or his Exarchs according to former custom, when the confirmation of the Emperour or his Lieutenant in Italy was esteemed neces∣sary to the establishment of a Pope. But whence this Temporal Power was derived in its firstHow the Temporal Power was derived to the Popes. Original to the Popes, hath been an enquiry of divers Authors: There are those who pretend a Donation from the Emperour Constantine, by which the City of Rome it self, most part of Italy, Africa, and all the Islands of the Mediterranean Seas were conferred upon them. But this Opinion is exploded by Guic∣ciardin an Author without exception in this case. And more∣over, in all History these particulars are very clear and appa∣rent, as namely, That during the Exarchate, the Popes had nothing to do with the Temporal Sword, but lived as Sub∣jects to the Emperour. That after the overthrow of the Exar∣chate, the Emperours neglecting Italy, the Romans began to be governed by the advice and power of the Popes. That
Pepin of France having subdued the Kingdom of the Lombards, gave unto Pope Gregory the 3d. and his Successours Ravenna, Urbin, Ancona, Spoleto, with many other Towns, and Territo∣ries about Rome: in testimony and remembrance of which there remains unto this day a Marble Stone ingraven in La∣tin with this Inscription thereupon, and Englished thus: Pepin the most pious King of France was the first who gave example to Posterity, how and in what manner the Power and Authority of Holy Church was to be amplified and increased. After which Charlemagne, or Charles the Great the Son of Pepin, having made his entrance into Rome in the time of Pope Adrian the first, con∣firmed by Oath, and amply enlarged the Donation which his Father Pepin had made to Gregory the 3d. which as our Platina saith, contained in Liguria, all that reaches from the long since de∣molished City Luna to the Alps, the Isle of Corsica, and the whole Tract between Luca and Parma, together with Friuli, the Exar∣chate of Ravenna, and the Dukedoms of Spoleto, and Beneven∣tum. And though the Popes having this Temporal Power began to set up for themselves, maintaining, That the Ponti∣fical Dignity was to give Laws to the Emperours, and not to receive them: yet this Doctrine was not openly asserted, during the Reign of Charlemagne, who challenged and exercised the antient, and original power to govern the Church, to call Councils, and to order the Papal Election. The which Power continued for a long time in his posterity, and so afterwards remained, so long as wise and valiant Princes ruled; but when weak Princes, who were distracted with great and dangerous Wars governed, then the Popes prevailed, who were strong in their Councils, being for the most part composed of subtil and designing Men: Howsoever these turns of Fortune were carried in succeeding times with various changes and successes: the Emperour sometimes tugging, and plucking from the Pope, and the Pope from the Emperour, winning, or losing ground, as they were endued with abilities, courage and understand∣ing; or as the circumstances of the World were ordered, and disposed in different times. So Hadrian the 3d. was a Man of so great a Spirit, that immediately upon his advance to the Popedom, Anno 895. he proposed to the Senate and people, that a Law should pass, that no regard should be hereafter given to the Authority of the Emperour in the creation of a Pope: taking, as Platina saith, an advantage when the Empe∣rour
Charles was marched with his Army out of Italy against the rebellious Normans. This must have been Charles le Gros, and the year 885. according to those Authors who have written the History of France. But that which must have given this Pope courage herein,Charles the Bald resigns the power of Election of the Emperour to the Pope. was the weakness of Charles the Bald, a Prince bold in his un∣dertakings, but unable in the execution of them, for so soon as he received information of the death of the Emperour Lewis the 2d. he resolved to seize the Empire, which at that time was confined to the narrow compass of Rome, and all Italy; because his two Uncles had miserably rent the French Monarchy in pieces, and divided between them after the death of Lo∣tharius those two Kingdoms which belonged unto him. But to be short, Charles the Bald in order to his design raised all the Troops he was able, and on a sudden passing the Alps, he so surprised the Lombards, that not being provided of a Force to resist, they presenty yielded themselves unto him; and therewith the Treasure of Lewis deceased, which he so well employed at Rome, that he corrupted therewith both the Senate and the Magistrates, and promised great matters to Pope John the 8th, if by his means he might obtain the Imperial Crown. This Pope, whom we call Pope Joan, (the Story of whom, being a Woman, and with Child, is related by divers Authors, and not wholly disbelieved by our Platina) acting according to the false wisdom of this World, as appears in many particulars of which Baronius accuses him, (or her,) thought fit to make advantage of this ambition of Charles, that thereby he might for the future procure a right to Popes to elect and create Emperours. But our Platina saith it was John the 9th. but be it John the 8th, or the 9th. he conferred with the Barons and principal Lords of Rome on this point, who being already prepared by the bribes of Charles, and o∣verjoyed to become Electors, easily concurred with the Pope in the proposal he made to them in favour of Charles; who being accordingly invited to Rome, made his entry there, on the 18th. of December, in the year of our Lord 856, and on the 25th. day following being Christmas day, the Pope pro∣claimed, and Crowned him Emperour in St. Peter's Church with the consent of the Prelates, Chief of the Clergy, and all the People of Rome.
But lest this assumption of Charles to the Empire should seem to proceed from a right of Succession, and not of Ele∣ction, like the other three French Emperours his Predecessours: the Pope designing to put the matter out of dispute, that so the Emperour might own his Title to be derived from him, and his Nobles; and no other; he held an Assembly at Pavia, composed of Bishops and Counts, where having first shame∣fully fiattered him with praises of notorious falsity extolling him above Charlemagne; he declared, that his Election was an effect of his merit, and piety, and agreeable to the Will of God, which had long before been revealed to Pope Nicolas by divine inspiration: and in pursuance hereof the Act of Election was signed, and confirmed by the whole Assembly, and registred in the Books of that Court. In this manner the right of those who were descended from Charlemagne, and the Sovereignty which the Emperours had until that time exercised in Rome, and in all the Lands of the Ecclesiastical State, was surrendred up into the hands, and power of the Pope: in ver∣tue of which, as it is most certain, that several succeeding Popes did challenge a right of Creating Emperours, or at least to the confirmation of them, by that right which they had to Crown them: so also it is apparent that there have been Em∣perours, who after this time have exercised a Sovereign power in Italy, and without regard to the base condescention of Charles the Bald, have made themselves Masters of Rome, and of the Pope himself. An example whereof we have in Otho the Em∣perour, who recovered three advantageous points, which the Greek and French Emperours had enjoyed, and which Charles the Bald had lost and betrayed to the Pope. Namely, 1. The Sovereign power in Rome it self. 2. The right of Succession of his Children to the Empire. 3dly. A power to Elect a Pope, or what amounts to the same thing; a Right to hinder any from being chosen, who was not agreeable to his good will or pleasure: Nay farther, it is apparent in History, that the Popes themselves; as well as others, did take the Oath of Fidelity, as it was administred to them by the Emperour's Commissioners: and it is as certain, that from the time that Justinian recovered Rome from the Goths, the Emperours were ever Masters of the Election in such manner, as that either it could not pass without his permission, or being done, required his confirmation. Accordingly Otho the 3d. caused Bruno his
near Kinsman, Son of Otho Duke of Franconia and Suabia, his own Cousin-German to be chosen Pope, who took upon him∣self the name of Gregory the 5th. But at length by other turns of fortune, Hildebrand who was Gregory the 7th. in the year 1073. raised the Papacy to the highest pitch of power and honour that ever it was in. Upon consideration of which whole matter, it is certain, that the Pope had some right in the Election of the Emperour: for when the Kingdom of Italy with Rome it self was united to the Teutonick or German Kingdom, and that by the Donation of Pepin the Popes were Masters of the Exarchate, Urbin, Ancona, Spoleto, and other Towns and Countries, and confirmed by Charles his Son; then the Pope himself representing the people of Rome by his Le∣gats with the Princes, Lords, and Deputies of the Towns of Italy, had a priviledg of giving his Votes at those Elections: and on no other foundation than this could the Pope pretend co a right of Electing Emperours, nor in any other manner than as he was Prince over a Dominion which had a right of Election in concurrence with other States, Princes, and Feu∣dataries of the Empire. But when and in what manner, and by what Methods afterwards this power, of Election came to be transferred to the seven Electors, is not very clear in Hi∣story,How the Ele∣ction of Em∣perours was transferred to the seven Electors. there being many and various conjectures thereupon. Maimbourg in his History called la Decadence de l'Empire, concludes, that this Institution was established by the Authority of Gregory the 10th. in the year 1274. And farther he pro∣ceeds to say: That the second Pope from whom we may conjecture, that this Authority was derived, was Leo the 8th. who by a Decree made by and with the consent of the Clergy, and people of Rome, gives and grants unto the Emperour Otho the first, and to those who should succeed him, a Right for ever to chuse a Successour: and certainly he could not mean a Successour to the Kingdom of Germany, which was hereditary, and indepen∣dent of the Roman See, and therefore it can onely have refe∣rence to the Imperial Dignity. Now whereas by the decease of Otho the 3d. who died without issue, this Right of the Em∣perour devolved to the States, who succeeded to the Sovereign Authority; for it is a sure Maxim, That the King cannot die: they therefore challenged, and appropriated to themselves the same Right of chusing Emperours, the which afterwards they
resigned, and transferred to the seven Electors, who exercise the same power unto this day; three of which, viz. Mentz, Triers, and Colen are Ecclesiasticks, being Arch-bishops and Arch∣Chancellours, to shew and keep in remembrance, that the Ec∣clesiastical State had once a Right in the Election of Emperours. But Historians are so much at variance in this point, and relate it with such variety, that we shall not search farther into this matter, but proceed to our purpose of the Election of Popes, and of the formality therein used in this Age. We have in our foregoing Discourse mentioned, that Popes were antiently chosen by the Nobility, Clergy and people of Rome, which was certainly the Original Custom. Though the Book of the Sacred Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome, tells us, That St. Peter named Clemens for his Successour, provided, that it might so seem good to the Senators of the Roman Church, that is, to the Presbyters; of which St. Peter had constituted a College of twenty four before his death, with power, and Authority to decide, and determine all matters of difficulty arising in the Church. The which Presbyters having little or no regard to the nomination, and appointment of St. Peter, chose Linus, and after him Cletus, and then Clemens succeeded, who was rather recom∣mended, than chosen by St. Peter; that so it might more plainly appear, that Popes had not a Right to Elect their Successours; for if that priviledg was denied to St. Peter, much more ought it to be unto those who succeeded him. These twenty four Presbyters were in the time of Pope Syl∣vester the first, called Cardinals, that is, Princes in the Church;Presbyters called Cardi∣nals, and when. on whom Innocent the 4th. at the Council of Lions bestowed the red Hat, as a mark and badg of their Dignity: after∣wards Schisms, and Dissentions arising amongst the Senators, the Clergy and people of Rome were admitted to be present at the Election, but to have no Voice, or Suffrage therein: afterwards the force and violence of the people was such, that they would have a Voice, and concur with others in their Votes. This popular way of Election caused such heats and disturbances, that the Emperours were constrained for keeping the peace to interpose by their Authority, and to Order, that no Election should stand good until it was con∣firmed by the Imperial approbation. The Kingdom of the Lombards being overthrown in the year 776. the Roman Em∣pire
was translated from the Greek to the German Princes, and then Charles the Great assumed, and exercised this power of Electing, or what is all one, the confirming of Popes. After∣wards a Series of pious Emperours succeeding, and consider∣ing, that the Supreme Bishop was Instituted, and Ordained by Christ himself to be a Shepherd to the Emperour, as well as to feed his other Flock, and to purge, and spiritually to judg them, they renounced the power of confirming Popes, and entirely transferred it to the Roman Presbyters, the Clergy and the people. This popular manner of Election produced parties, Schisms and contentions, which often broke forth in∣to bloud, and wounds; so that there was scarce a Regular Election for a long time, the strongest always possessing the Chair, until he was subverted by another more powerful than himself: so that in the space of few years, nine several Men seized on the Papal Chair; namely, Benedict the 9th. Sylvester the 3d. Gregory the 6th. Clement the 2d. Damasus the 2d. Leo the 2d. Victor the 2d. Stephen the 9th, and Be∣nedict the 10th. To which last Nicolas the 2d. succeeding, a person of unparallel'd Sanctity and Wisdom, did in the year 1051. study to cure and prevent these riotous courses for the future, which upon the choice of every Pope were ready to bring, and precipitate every thing into confusion. For a Remedy whereunto he established a Law, which was after∣wards confirmed by the Council of Lateran, that the ele∣ction of the Popes should entirely rest, and remain in the power of the Cardinals: the which Law or Canon was af∣terwardsElection of Popes by Car∣dinals, and when begun. confirmed by Alexander the 3d. and by Gregory the 10th. in the Council of Lions, and at Vienna by Clement the 6th. The which happy Constitution hath tended much to the peace and quiet of the Church; and as a Rule hereof Alexan∣der the 3d. instituted at a General Council, that he onely should be esteemed to have been canonically elected, who had obtained his Choice by at least two Thirds of the College of Cardinals. This power of Election hath ever since that time rested in the power of the Cardinals, who after the Octaves appointed for solemnizing the Funerals of the deceased Pope, have on the 9th or 10th. day entered the Conclave in order to a new Election. The Conclave is for the most part held at the Vatican Palace: where in a long Gallery are erected small Apartments, or Cells
made of boards, covered with purple Cloth for every Cardinal, which place is appointed for the more convenient conference each with other: to every Cardinal is allowed no more than two Servants, which are called his Conclavists, unless in case of sickness or other infirmity, when three may be admitted. The Cardi∣nalsThe form and manner of E∣lecting Popes. being entered, the Conclave is strictly guarded with the City Militia, to hinder all commerce, and intercourse of Letters from without. The Gallery also is very closely watched, being kept by a Master of the Ceremonies; so that when the Cardinals have their Dishes served up to them, they are visited and inspect∣ed by him, lest any Letters, or Advices should be concealed with∣in the Meat. According to this first Institution; the Cardinals have a free use of several dishes of Meat for the first three days: and whilst they are eating, or doing any thing else in their Cells, the outward Curtains are to be open, and undrawn, unless in the Night when they sleep, or at other times, that they take their repose: when great care is taken, that no undecent noise, or di∣sturbance be given. It hath been accustomary of late years, for the Cardinals to premise certain particular points and Articles ne∣cessary and convenient for the better government of the Church, which are subscribed by the whole Community, and every one takes an Oath to observe them, in case he should prove to be the person chosen, and promoted to the Pontifical Dignity. After which matters are performed, they proceed to an Election. There are three ways by which Popes are chosen, namely, byThe several ways by which Popes are E∣lected, and the methods and forms thereof. Scrutiny, by Access, or by Adoration: the first is, when every Cardinal writes in a Scroll of paper, the name of that person whom he designs to be elected, folding it into five several pages, or columns. On the first of which he writes these words, Ego eligo in summum Pontificem Reverendissimum Dominum meum Cardi∣nalem — the which is written by the hand of the Conclavist, that the Cardinal may not be discovered by his own writing. On this fold two others are doubled down, and some Wax dropped thereupon, and sealed with some private Seal made for that pur∣pose; on the 4th. page the Cardinal writes his own name, and covers the same with the 5th. folding. Then all the Cardinals sitting in their Order on Benches in the Chappel, with the Scrolls they have prepared in their hands; take their turns to a∣scend unto the altar, before which a Table is placed covered with a purple Cloth, and a Chalice with a Patina, or plate set thereupon: On the right side of which sits the first Cardi∣nal
Bishop, and on the left the first Cardinal Deacon, then every one kneeling makes a short Prayer, and arising puts his Scroll into the Chalice; which being done, and all the Cardinals re∣turned to their places; the first Cardinal Bishop takes the Cha∣lice with his right hand, and turns out all the Scrolls upon the Patina, or plate which he holds in his left: then setting the Chalice again on the Altar, he takes the Scroll which comes first to hand, and gives it to the Deacon Cardinal, who reads it with an audible Voice; the Cardinals noting with their pen and ink, or Table-book how many Voices every person hath; and the Papers being read, the Master of the Ceremonies comes in with a pan of coals, and burns all the papers or Scrolls, so that no Man is known for which person he hath given his Vote. In case any person hath gained two thirds of the number there present, the election is good and he is presently declared Pope. And this is the way of Scrutiny which is the most commonly used, and practised in the election of Popes. When the choice is not determined by Scrutiny, it is then tried and proved by Access, or Accessus, which is performed in this manner: All the Cardinals sitting in their Places, one arises, and goes to the Cardinal, whom he designs to have elected, and says, Ego ac∣cedo ad Reverendissimum Dominum meum talem, the which is no∣ted by the other Cardinals, as are the names of those, who make the Access and those to whom they are made. If two thirds agree in their Access to one person, the election is deter∣mined by Access: if not, the next day they proceed again to the Scrutiny, for it cannot be made twice in a day. This way of Access seems to resemble the antient manner of giving Votes in the Senate of Rome; when those that concurred in the same Opinion with an other, went from his place to that side, where the motion was first made, whence came that saying, Ire in sententiam; and something we have like it in our Parliaments when the House divides it self. The third way by Adoration is performed almost in the same manner as that by Access; the Cardinal approaching him, whom he desires to have created Pope, with a profound reve∣rence, and lowly bowing: but both the Access, and the Ado∣ration are to be proved, and confirmed by the Scrutiny. There was antiently another way of Election which wasThe ways of Election by compromise and inspira∣tion. called by Compromise, which was, when the divisions were high, and scarce determinable by the Conclave, that then the
Cardinals with common consent referred all their Votes to the choice of three or five Cardinals, giving them power to elect any person, whom all or the major part should chuse; promi∣sing, and obliging themselves to rest, and remain satisfied with such choice by them made, provided, that the said election were concluded, and determined within the time, that a Candle lighted by the common consent of all the Conclave did last and continue. Hereupon, if any election were made during such time, the person so chosen was acknowledged for Pope, and Universal Bishop. Moreover, there is another way of election, called by Inspi∣ration; that is, when the Cardinals are Assembled in the Chap∣pel, and that every one hath taken his place according to his degree, and order. Then the first Bishop arises, and in a short Speech exhorts the Fathers to provide such a person for Govern∣ment of the Church, as by his Wisdom, and Sanctity may be capable to sustain so great a burden. Then he demands of them the manner, by which they are pleased to proceed, whe∣ther by Compromise, or by Scrutiny: telling them, that if his Opinion, and Vote might prevail, he would chuse no other than — and accordingly did elect him for Supreme Bishop, and Head of the Universal Church. If in case all then present, or at least two thirds of the number did concur in such person so nomi∣nated; he was then without farther process, or Scrutiny cano∣nically elected Pope. Which manner of election was frequently practised amongst the Antients, and was called, by Inspiration, or designation of the Holy Ghost. The Pope being legally chosen by any of the foregoing Me∣thods, he is conducted into the Sacristia or Vestry; where being disrobed by the Cardinal-Deacons of his own Habit, he is cloth∣ed in his Pontificalibus, or Papal Vestments, and being thence brought forth with his Mitre on his Head adorned with Gold, and Jewels into the Chappel, he is seated on the Altar; where the Cardinals perform the ceremony of Adoration to him, every one in his order, kissing his feet, hands, and mouth. Whilst these Ceremonies are performing, all the doors, and gates of the Conclave are opened; at which a multitude of people appearing, the Pope shews himself, and blesses them. And then the first Deacon Cardinal proclaims with a loud Voice to the people in these words: Annuntio vobis gaudium magnum, Papam habemus: Reverendissimus Dominus Cardinalis — electus est
in Summum Pontificem, & elegit sibi nomen. This being said, the Pope descends into St. Peter's Church, the Cardinals leading the way with a Cross carried before them; and going directly to the High Altar, he takes off his Mitre, kneels and prays a while, and returns thanks to God, and the Blessed Apostles; and then arising sits upon the Altar; and the first Bishop kneels, and sings Te Deum: and then again the Cardinals perform their Act of Adoration, kissing the feet, hand and mouth of the Pope. Which, and the short Office being finished, the Pope blesses the people again; and then in the same order re∣turns to his Apartment to take his repose, and the Cardinals to their respective Lodgings. The Pope being chosen, for the most part changes his Name,Why Popes changed their names, and since that time. it having been an antient custom so to do, and observed unfor∣tunate to those Popes, who have retained their own baptis∣mal Names without alteration. Our Platina saith, That the first who began this Form, was Sergius the Second, who came to the Popedom at the same time, that Michael Empe∣rour of Constantinople died. This Sergius, 'tis said, was sur∣named Bocca di Porco, or Hog's Snout, which for shame he changed into Sergius, Anno 843. and from thence came the custom down to our times, that when any one is made Pope, he laid by his own Name and took one of some of his Predecessours, though all have not observed it. Thus far are the words of Platina. And since that time the Popes have commonly out of gratitude taken the Name of that Pope, by whose favour he was first created Cardinal. In all Histories we read of great Divisions, and Factions in the Elections of Popes, even in the first times, when the popular tumults proceeded to the heighth of Rage and Sedi∣tion: causing sometimes such difficulties in the Elections, that after the decease of Nicolas the First: Platina reports, that some Authors say, that the See of Rome was vacant eight years, seven months, and nine days; and then Hadrian the 2d. was chosen in the year 868. Afterwards in the year 1051. when Nicolas the Second had cured these riotous courses by trans∣ferring the whole power of Election into the hands of the Cardinals, the Elections were then carried more smoothly in∣deed, and with less noise; but the Factions were not abated, but oftentimes kept up with such Art and Interest, that after the decease of Clement the 4th. the differences held for the space
of two years before the election of Gregory X. who was the next Successour, came to be determined. And now even in these days many Intrigues are managed in the Conclave before an Election can be perfected: for the Emperour, and the Kings of France, and Spain must first be consulted; and every Cardinal hath some Patron, or Friend, or Interest of his own to advance; every one takes his measures of the person, that may best suit and agree with his designs. And now of late years, since the Monarchy of France hath over-topped all the other Sove∣reignties of Christendom which depend on the Papal See, that King must first be consulted, and his assent taken before the Pope can be created; as appears by the election of this pre∣sent Pope Innocent XI. In some convenient time after the Election, or upon theThe Solemni∣ties used at the Coronati∣on of Popes. first great Festival ensuing, a day is appointed for the Pope's Coronation. It would perhaps be very long, and tedious in a Preface of this nature to describe distinctly all the Ceremo∣nies thereof, the particulars of which take up the space of a whole day from Morning until Night; so that in the midst of them the Pope, and Cardinals are constrained to take a short repose, and refreshment to support the labour of the day. For in the Morning early the Pope goes from his Bed∣chamber into the Chamber called Papagalli; where he is clothed by the Cardinal-Deacons, Sub-deacons and other Of∣ficers belonging to that Chamber with a white Cassock girt about with a long Girdle: over it, he wears his Stole and Pluvial, or Robe of a Scarlet colour, with a rich Mitre on his Head set with many pretious Stones: And in this Habit, ha∣ving the train of his Robes carried up by the Emperour, or some King then present; or in their absence by one of the chiefest Princes then attending at that Ceremony; and a Ca∣nopy of State over his Head supported by eight Ambassadours or Nobles, and the Cardinals in their Habits walking before with a Cross for their Banner, they orderly proceed to St. Peter's Church: where being entered, and having laid aside his Mitre, and prayed a while, he arises and goes in the Chappel of St. Gregory, otherwise called the Chappel of St. Andrew, where being sate in a Chair placed there for that purpose, he receives all the Cardinals with their Caps on their Heads, to kiss his Hand, and other Prelates to kiss his Feet: then the Pope arising stands up, and blesses the people: after which the Sub-deacon
reads the Epistle, and all the rest of the Office for the Corona∣tion, which being performed, the Pope vests himself with the Pontifical Habit according to the Method prescribed for those Rites. According to the antient constitution, it belonged only to the Bishop of Hostia to consecrate the Pope; but of late years, the first Cardinal Bishop performs that function: when the Pope is consecrated, he is anointed with Oil on his Head, and on the palms of his Hands; but the day of his Consecra∣tion is not always the day of his Coronation. All the Cere∣monies as we have said, being finished, and the Pope him∣self having celebrated the Mass; they proceed then to the solemnities of the Coronation. And in the first place the Pope goes to the stairs ascending to the Altar of St. Peter and St. Paul, where a Throne is erected for him, on which being seated, he is encompassed by his Prelats, and the people com∣manded to withdraw at some distance: then the Dean-Cardi∣nal takes off the Mitre from the Head of the Pope, and places it on the left hand; and having the Triara ready, or the Triple Crown, he sets it on his Head, the people making a loud Ac∣clamation with a Kyrie Eleison, or Lord have mercy upon us. Then the Dean publishes the Indulgences which the Pope is pleased to ; and when he proclaims them on the right hand, he recites them in Latin, and on the left in the vulgar Language. After which, a Dinner is prepared for the Pope and Cardi∣nals at the Palace of the Arch-Presbyter of St. Peter's, and for the other Prelats at the Houses of the Canons: and having taken their repast, the Cardinals mount on their Mules, and the Pope on his Horse, and with a Noble train of all the Officers and Nobles in their due rank and order, they march in solemn procession to the Lateran; where the Pope alighting from his Horse, is met by the chief Canon of the Church, who offers the Cross to be kissed by him, which the Dean-Cardinal ta∣king from his hands, puts it to the mouth of the Pope. Then the triple Crown being taken from off his Head, is de∣livered to the custody of the Auditor of the Rota, who is one of the chief Justices; and the Mitre is again planted on the Pope's head; for the burden of the Triple Crown is so heavy, with the Gold and Jewels, that it is not born on the head without much trouble. Platina saith, That Paul the Second so delighted to see his Triple Crown studded with precious
Stones, that he exhausted the Treasury of the Church to pur∣chase Jewels at any rate; which being fixed in his Crown, and Mitre, he looked like the picture of a Cybele with Tur∣rets on her Head; and were so weighty, and so burdensom on his Brow, that they put his gross body into a violent heat, and sweat, which produced an Apoplexy, of which soon after he died. But to proceed; The Pope wearing his Mitre is conducted to the Sedes stercoraria, on which he seems rather to lye, than to sit; from whence being raised with honour by the Cardinals, the Hymn is sung. He hath put down the mighty from their Seats, and hath exalted the humble and meek; he hath raised the needy from the dust, that he may set him amongst the Princes of his People. After which several other Ceremonies be∣ing performed, and the Pope receiving again the Adoration of the Cardinals, and Prelats, returns towards the Evening to his Palace of Monte-cavallo. This is in short the sum of those Cere∣monies practised at the Coronation of Popes, which we have extracted from the Book entitled the Sacred Ceremonies used in the Roman Church. The Popes Elected, and Crowned (as we have said) arePopes very aged before they are Elected. for the most part old, and decrepit with age, or of a weak and tender constitution, that so they may not live long to the dis∣appointment of others, who live, and breath passionate de∣sires after this Sublime exaltation: and being thus decayed with years, and unable to support the weight of Government; have commonly called to their aid, some Nephew, or near Relation, with the Title of Cardinal-Nephew, or Cardinal-Pa∣tron, on whose Wit, and dexterous management of Affairs the fortune and success of the Papal Dominion doth depend. And indeed a person under such circumstances had need to be qualified with great endowments of Mind, and Body: for be∣ing always obliged to afford his personal attendance on the Pope, who is to see, and hear with his Eyes, and Ears, he can never be at leisure, or free from thoughts and business, either relating to the Palace within, or direction of Affairs without. He is ever the Chief, or President of Councils, he assists at all Congregations; he appoints the days for Consistories, of Chappels, Visits, Audiences, and regulates every thing which relates to the Spiritual or Temporal Government.
The Pope being established in his Throne, begins at firstPopes usually advance their Families. to cast about by what way and means to raise and establish his Family, by strong Alliances with Princes, and Noble Houses. He also divides the great Offices of the Church a∣mongst his Kindred: one is made Governour in one place, and an other in another. The chief Favourite is made General of the Forces of the Church, an other General of the Gallies, a third Governour of the Castle of St. Angelo; and in like manner all the preferments are dispensed amongst the Rela∣tions, according to that degree, and quality that every one pos∣sesses in the good will, and esteem of the Pope. But the great Atlas of State is the Cardinal-Nephew, whofeThe great Art of the Cardi∣nal-Nephew, is how to com∣port himself towards fo∣rein Ministers. Wisdom is most exerted in his comportment towards the Mi∣nisters of forein Princes, and especially in taking true mea∣sures of Interest between France and Spain: which is of such great concernment, that in a Book called il Livello Politico, it is affirmed, That the Glory, and happiness of the Popedom, the security, and honour of the Cardinal-Nephew, the Gran∣dieur and prosperity of the City of Rome consists in this one point, of a happy correspondence with forein Ambassa∣dours, the failure in which hath produced many unhappy Events: witness the Government of the Barberini, who, for not knowing the true means and Methods, how and in what manner to maintain a right and good understanding with Christian Princes, and especially with those of Italy, reduced (as is notorious to all the World) the Church unto a most unhappy, and turbulent Estate.
And farther, in case we reflect with serious thoughts on the Reigns of divers Popes in these latter Ages, we shall find the truth of this assertion proved by plain, and mani∣fest experience. We shall find the Reigns of some Popes full of Lustre and Glory, as those of Paul the 2d. and Clement the 8th. others buried in obscurity, and abased with sordid meanness, as those of Adrian the 6th. and Gregory the 13th. Others have passed away in a quiet, silent and smooth currant of affairs, as those of Celestine, and Clement the 9th. Others have been engulfed in a thousand troubles and intrigues, as were the Reigns of Alexander the 6th. Cle∣ment the 7th. of Paul the 3d and 4th. and Urban the 8th. And if we will search into the depth hereof we shall find, that the Ambition, covetousness, and exorbitances of the Car∣dinal-Nephews to be the original cause of all the troubles, and misfortunes which have rendered the Lives of some Popes inglorious, or perhaps infamous. Though indeed to speak true, it is almost impossible for a Cardinal-Nephew to hold the ballance of his deportment towards foreign Repre∣sentatives residing in the Court of Rome, so equal, as not to give a cause, or occasion of offence to some one or other: considering, that what is pleasing and acceptable to one, dissa∣tisfies, and interferes with the interest of an other. Howso∣ever, there are some Men so dexterous and happy in their Ne∣gotiations, that they carry all with a good Air, and if they are enforced to disoblige some, it is done with such circumstances, and in such manner, as takes off much of the anger and acri∣mony of the person offended. Most Princes of Christendom, who are of the Roman Reli∣gionThe reasons for which the Christian maintain their Ambassadours, Residents, or Agents at the Court of Rome: and though many of these Princes have noPrinces main∣tain their Ambassadors. great zeal, or kindness for that Court, being disobliged perhaps by some action of the Cardinal-Nephew, or some other pre∣judice taken against the Pope; yet it may be that on some score of Interest of State, or of their Clergy, or for the sake, or support of Monasteries, or for the determination of diffe∣rences which arise between them, and their Subjects, which are to be decided at the Spiritual Judicatures; it is necessary for them to conserve an Agent, or Resident at Rome. The Emperour hath seldom maintained an Ambassadour at that Court; because he ordinarily makes use of a Protector of the German Nation, to manage his Affairs: and in case any matter of great importance occurs, which is to be addressed unto the Pope, it is performed by some Cardinal in whom his Imperial Majesty reposes a great confidence, unless he dis∣patches an Express. The King of Poland follows almost the same Maxim; but yet professes a profound Obedience to the Papal See, and ex∣ercises the power and interest he hath there with such modesty and caution, that though like other Kings, he might pretend to a Right of nominating Cardinals of his own Nation, yet he seldom imposes any, but such as the Pope shall offer of his own accord unto him.
Portugal for the most part maintains a Resident at Rome. The State of Venice, and the G. Duke of Tuscany make greater applications, than the other Princes of Italy, to that Court; perhaps from a sence of the Pope's temporal power, whose Dominions border upon theirs, rather than out of an affection to his Spiritual capacity. But, it is certain, that amongst all the Christian Princes, none so warmly interest themselves in the Affairs of the Roman Court, as France, and Spain, the Kings of which do always maintain and keep up the honour of their respective Embas∣sies with splendid Equipage. And yet these two Kings do in a different manner depend on the Court. France hath no great Obligation or dependency upon Rome, unless it be in some respects to the privileges of the Gallican Church. But Spain is engaged in a kind of Partnership with Rome in Government and Jurisdiction, and is beholden thereunto for a great part of its Revenue. The Income of the Crusada granted by the Popes to the Kings of Spain, is one of the chief branches of the Royal Revenue: The Tribunals of the Inquisition are ab∣solutely constituted by the Ecclesiastical Authority, which gives such an unlimited power to the Nuntios, Judges, and Officers of the Pope within the Catholick Dominions, as doth very much eclipse, and diminish the greatness of that Monarch: whereunto when we add the Tribute yearly paid by that King to the Pope for the Kingdom of Naples; it seems, as if they two held the reins of Government in partnership together: onely with this difference, that though the Pope hath intermixt his power with the Temporal, yet the King dares not inter∣pose in matters Ecclesiastical. Hence we may see, how dangerous it is, for Kings to ad∣mit Partners with them in their Thrones: Never was the Monarchy of Spain more abased, and rendered inglorious, than when the Inquisition was set up, and an other power intro∣duced to allay and attemper the Sovereign Authority: where∣fore France having no need of such dependencies hath always kept up, and asserted the Right of Monarchy, not suffering it to be debased by the Concessions of Regalia, or other mean Compliances. And indeed how much more happy now is the Crown of Great Britain, than in the time of King John, who was forced to yield that of England to the Pope and his Successours: and
how considerable, and flourishing hath it been, since it hath disowned all dependencies on forein power either in Church or State: in defence of which, may His Sacred Majesty King James the Second, who is the Supreme Moderator and Go∣vernour thereof, upon Earth, live long, and Reign happily: and when it shall please the King of Kings to translate Him from a fading to an Immortal Crown, there may never fail one of his Royal Line to sit upon His Throne, and defend His Loyal People against all the Encroachments, and Usurpa∣tions of forein Jurisdiction.
An Alphabetical TABLE OF THE POPES, Whose Lives were written by B. Platina. A ADeodatus, Pag. 114 Adrian I. 145 II. 169 III. 172 IV. 240 V. 281 Agapetus I. 90 II. 183 Agatho, 117 Alexander I. 15 II. 206 III. 242 IV. 269 V. 341 Anacletus, 12 Anastasius I. 66 II. 83 III. 179 IV. 240 Anicetus 21 Anterus 33 B Benedict I. 97 II. 120 III. 166 IV. 177 V. 186 VI. 188 VII. 189 VIII. 196 IX. 199 X. 204 XI. 298 XII. 310 Boniface I. 72 II. 89 III. 102 IV. 103 V. 105 VI. 174 VII. 189 VIII. 294 IX. 330 C Caius, 43 Calistus I. 28 II. 231 III. 383 Celestine I. 73 II. 236 III. 252 IV. 265 V. 293 Christopher, 178 Clemens I. 11 II. 201 III. 251 IV. 275 V. 299 VI. 312 Cletus, 9 Conon, 122 Constans, Constantine, 128 Cornelius, 35 D Damasus I. 61 II. 201 Deus-dedit, 104 Dionysius, 40 Donus I. 115 II. 188 E Eleutherius, 24 Euaristus, 14 Eugenius I. 112 II. 155 III. 238 IV. 357
Eusebius. 48 Eutychianus, 42 F Fabianus, 34 Felix I. 41 II. 59 III. 80 Formosus, 173 G Gelasius I. 81 II. 228 Gregory I. 99 II. 130 III. 134 IV. 157 V. 192 VI. 200 VII. 207 VIII. 250 IX. 260 X. 278 XI. 320 XII. 339 H Hadrian V. Adrian.   Hilarius, 78 Honorius I. 196 II. 233 III. 258 IV. 288 Hormisda, 85 Hyginus, 19 I Innocent I. 68 II. 234 III. 254 IV. 265 V. 280 VI. 315 VII. 336 John I. 86 II. 90 III. 95 IV. 109 V. 121 VI. 125 VII. 127 VIII. 165 IX. 170 X. 176 XI. 180 XII. 182 XIII. 184 XIV. 187 XV. 190 XVI. 191 XVII. ibid. XVIII. 193 XIX. 195 XX. ibib. XXI. 198 XXII. 282 XXIII. 305 XXIV. 343 Julius I. 56 L Landus, 179 Leo I. 76 II. 119 III. 149 IV. 162 V. 177 VI. 181 VII. 182 VIII. 186 IX. 202 Liberius, 56 Linus, 7 Lucius I. 37 II. 237 III. 247 M Marcellinus, 44 Marcellus, 47 Marcus, 55 Martin I. 111 II. 171 III. 183 IV. 285 V. 347 Miltiades, 49 N Nicolas I. 167 II. 205 III. 283 IV. 290 V. 373 P Paschal I. 154 II. 220 Paul I. 141 II. 401 Pelagius I. 94 II. 98 S. Peter, 1 Pius I. 20 II. 389 Pontianus, 31 R Romanus, 175 S Sabinianus, 101 Sergius I. 123 II. 160 III. 178 IV. 196 Severinus, 108 Simplicius, 79 Sisinnius, 128 Sixtus I. 16 II. 39 III. 74 Soter, 23 Stephen I. 38 II. 138 III. 142 IV. 153 V. 172 VI. 174 VII. 181 VIII. 183 IX. 204 Sylverius, 91
Sylvester I. 50 II. 194 III. 199 Symmachus, 84 Syricius, 64 T Telesphorus, 18 Theodore I. 110 II. 175 U Valentine, 157 Victor I. 25 II. 203 III. 215 Vigilius, 92 Vitalianus, 113 Vrban I. 30 II. 216 III. 248 IV. 273 V. 319 VI. 323 X Xistus V. Sixtus. Z Zacharias, 136 Zephyrinus, 26 Zozimus. 70 A TABLE Of those POPES Names, whose Lives are written in the Continuation. A A Drian VI. created Pope, Jan. 9. 1522. Page 40 Alexander VI. created Pope, Au∣gust 11. 1492. p. 12. Alexander VII. created Pope, A∣pril 7. 1655. p. 320 C Clement VII. created Pope, Novem∣ber 19. 1523. p. 46 Clement VIII. created Pope, Ja∣nuary 30. 1592. p. 211 Clement IX. created Pope, June 20. 1667. p. 344 Clement X. created Pope, April 29 1670. p. 357 G Gregory XIII. created Pope, May 13. 1572. p. 163 Gregory XIV. created Pope, De∣cember 15. 1590. p. 207 Gregory XV. created Pope, Feb. 21. 1621. p. 267 I Innocent VIII. created Pope, Au∣gust 29. 1684. p. 8
Innocent IX. created Pope, Octo∣ber 29. 1591. p. 210 Innocent X. created Pope, Septem∣ber 15. 1644. p. 293 Innocent XI. created Pope, Septem∣ber 21. 1676. p. 376 Julius II. created Pope, Novem∣ber 1. 1503. p. 20 Julius III. created Pope, Febr. 17. 1550. p. 88 L Leo X. created Pope, March 11. 1513. p. 29 Leo XI. created Pope, April 1. 1605. p. 225 M Marcellus II. created Pope, April 9. 1555. p. 107 P Paul III. created Pope, October 12. 1534. p. 67 Paul IV. created Pope, May 23. 1555. p. 109 Paul V. created Pope, May 16. 1605. p. 227 Pius III. created Pope, Septemb. 22. 1503. p. 19 Pius V. created Pope, Decemb. 24. 1559. being Christmas Eve, p. 119 Pius IV. created Pope, January 7. 1566. p. 157 S Sixtus IV. created Pope, August 9. 1471. p. 1. Sixtus V. created Pope, April 24. 1585. p. 172 U Urban VII. created Pope, Septem∣ber, 15. 1590. p. 205 Urban VIII. created Pope, August 6. 1623. p. 271
THE LIVES OF THE BISHOPS and POPES OF ROME. S. PETER the Apostle. AFTER the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and the Completion of the days of Pentecost; the Disci∣ples received the Holy Ghost: and being filled with the Spirit, they published the wonderful works of God in divers Tongues, though most of them, espe∣cially Peter and John, were look'd upon as utterly illiterate men. Their manner of living was mea∣sur'd by the common Good; none of them challenged any propriety in any thing; and whatsoever Religious Oblation was laid at their feet, they either divided it between themselves for the supply of the necessities of Nature, or else distributed it to the Poor, These Di∣sciples had each of them his Province assigned to him; to St. Thomas was allotted Parthia, to St. Matthew Aethiopia, to St. Bartholomew India on this side Ganges, to St. Andrew Scythia, and Asia to St. John; who after a long series of toyl and care, died during his abode at Ephesus. But to St. Peter, the chief of the Apostles, were assigned Pontus, Ga∣latia, Bithynia and Cappadocia; who being by birth a Galilean, of the City of Bethsaida, the son of John, and Brother of Andrew the Apostle, sate first in the Episcopal See of Antioch for seven years in the days of Tiberius. This Emperour was Son-in-law and Heir to Augustus, and for the spaceTiberius. of twenty three years his administration of the Government had so much of change and variety in it, that we cannot reckon him altoge∣ther a bad, or absolutely a good Prince. He was a Man of great Learn∣ning, and weighty Eloquence; his Wars he managed not in Person, but by his Lieutenants: and shew'd a great deal of Prudence in suppressing any sudden commotions. Having by Arts of flattery enticed sevcral Princes to his Court, he never suffered them to return home again: as particu∣larly
among others Archelaus of Cappadocia, whose Kingdom he made a Province of the Empire. Many of the Senators were banish'd, and some of them slain by him. C. Asinius Gallus the Pleader, son of Asinius Pollio, was by his Order put to death with the most exquisite torments; and Vocienus Montanus Narbonensis, one of the same profession, died in the Baleares, whither Tiberius had confined him. Moreover Historians tell us, that that his Brother Drusus was poisoned at his command. And yet upon occasion he exercised so much lenity, that when certain Pub∣licans and Governours of Provinces moved him to raise the publick taxes, he gave them this Answer, That a good Shepherd does indeed shear, but not flay his sheep. Tiberius dying, C. Coesar, who, with a jocular reflection upon his education in the Camp, had the surname ofCaliga signi∣fying a Com∣mon Soldier's Hose. Caligula, succeeded him in the Empire; he was the son of Drusus (son-in-law to Augustus) and Nephew to Tiberius. The greatest Villain in the World, and one who never did any wor∣thy Action either at home or abroad. His Avarice put him upon all manner of Oppression; his Lust was such, that he did not forbear to violate the Chastity of his own Sisters; and his cruelty was so great, that he is reported oftentimes to have cryed out, Oh! That all the people of Rome had but one Neck! At his Command all who were under pro∣scription were put to Death; for having recalled a certain person from banishment, and enquiring of him, what the Exiles did chiefly wish for; the man imprudently answering, that they desired nothing more than the Death of the Emperour; he thereupon gave order that every man of them should be executed. He would often complain of the condition of his times, that they were not rendred remarkable by any publick Calamities, as those of Tiberius had been, in whose Reign no less than 20000 men had been slain by the fall of a Theatre at Tarracina. He ex∣press'd so much envy at the renown of Virgil and Livy, that he was very near taking away their Writings and Images out of all the Libra∣ries; the former of which he would censure as a man of no Wit and little Learning, the latter as a verbose and negligent Historian; and it was his common by-word concerning Seneca, That his Writings were like a rope of Sand. Agrippa the son of King Herod, who had been cast into prison by Tiberius for accusing Herod, was by him set at liberty, and made King of Judoea; while Herod himself was confin'd to perpe∣tual banishment at Lyons. He caused himself to be translated into the number of the Gods, and ordered the setting up Images in the Temple of Jerusalem. At last he was assaulted and slain by some of his own Of∣ficers, in the third year, and tenth month of his Empire. Among his Writings were found two Rolls or Lists, one of which had a Dagger, the other a Sword stamp'd upon it for a Seal; they both contain'd the Names and Characters of certain principal men, both of the Senatorian and Equestrian Order, whom he had design'd to slaughter, There was found likewise a large Chest fill'd with several sorts of Poisons, which being at the Command of Claudius Coesar, not long after, thrown into the Sea, 'tis reported that the Waters were so infected thereby, that there died abundance of Fish, which the Tide cast up in vast numbers upon the neighbouring shores. I thought good to give this account of these Monsters of men, that thereby it might the better appear, that God could then have scarce for∣born
destroying the whole World, unless he had sent his Son and his Apostles; by whose bloud manking, though equal to Lycaon in impiety, was yet redeem'd from destruction. In their times lived that St. Peter, whom our Saviour (upon his ackowledgment of him to be the Christ) bespake in these words; Blessed art thou Simon Bar Jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven; and, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church; and I will give unto thee the keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Power of binding and loosing. This Apostle being a Person of most unwearied indu∣stry, when he had sufficiently setled the Churches of Asia, and confuted the Opinion of those who maintained the necessity of Circumcision, came into Italy in the second year of Claudius. This Claudius, who was Uncle to Caligula, and had been all along veryClaudius. contumeliously treated and bussoon'd by his Nephew, being now Emperor, making an Expedition into Britain, had the Island surrendred up to him; an Enterprise which none before Julius Coesar, nor any after Claudius durst undertake: he also added the Isles of Orkney to the Roman Empire. He ba∣nish'd out of the City of Rome the seditious Jews, and suppress'd the tumults in Judoea, which had been rais'd by certain false Prophets. And while Cuma∣nus was appointed by him Procurator of Judoea, there were crush'd to Death in the Porches of the Temple of Jerusalem during the days of Unlca∣vened bread to the number of thirty thousand Jews. At the same time also there was a great dearth and scarcity of provision throughout the whole World; a Calamity which had been foretold by gabus the Prophet. Being secure of any hostilities from abroad he finish'd the Aquaeduct that had been begun by Caligula, whose ruines are yet to be seen in the Lateran. He attempted also to empty the Lake Fucinus, being prompted thereto by the hope of getting not only honour and reputation, but profit and ad∣vantage by it; since there was a certain person who proffered to undertake that work at his own private charge, upon condition that the Land when it was drein'd might have been granted to him for his reward. The Mountain being partly undermin'd, partly cut through, the length of three miles, the Passage was at the end of eleven years with much ado finish'd, there being no less than 30000 labourers continually employ'd in it. It was he likewise that made the Harbour of Ostia, by drawing an Arm of the Sea on each hand, and so breaking the violence of the Waves; a Work, the footsteps of which are not to be seen at this day without Wonder. Having put to death his Wife Messalina for Adultery, he af∣terwards, against all Law both Humane and Divine, married Agrippina the Daughter of his Brother Germanicus, by whom in the fourteenth year of his Empire he was poison'd with Mushrooms prepared by her for that purpose. In his time St. Peter came to Rome the principal City of the World; both because he judg'd it a Seat best accommodated to the Pontifical dignity, and because likewise he understood that Simon Magus, a certainSimon Ma∣gus. Samaritan, had planted there; who by his Sorceries had so far seduced the People, that they believed him to be a God. For his Statue had been al∣ready erected at Rome, between the two Bridges, with this Latin Inscrip∣tion Simoni Deo Sancto, i. e. to Simon the Holy God. This man while he stai'd in Samaria, pretended Faith in Christ so far as to obtain Baptism from Philip one of the seven Deacons; which afterwards abusing to ill
ends, he laid the foundation of divers Heresies. To him was joyn'd one Sebene a shameless Strumpet, who was his Companion and partner in Villany. To such an heighth of impudence did this lewd Fellow arrive, that he challenged St. Peter to work Miracles with him; and particu∣larly he undertook to raise to life a dead child; which indeed at first seem'd somewhat to move at his Charms: But it being manifest present∣ly that the Child nevertheless continued dead still, at St. Peters com∣mand in the Name of Jesus, it immediately arose. Simon being enraged hereat, profered, as a further trial which of them was the more holy man, and more beloved of God, to fly from the Capitol to the Aventine in the sight of all the People, provided Peter would follow him. While he was yet flying, at the prayer of Peter who with hands lift up to Hea∣ven, beseeched God not to suffer so great a multitude to be deluded with Magical Arts, down he fell and broke his Leg, with grief of which Mis-adventure he not long after died at Aricia, whither his followers had conveighed him after this foul disgrace. From him the Hereticks called Simoniaci had their original, who pretended to buy and sell the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and who asserted the Creatures to proceed from a certain superiour Power, but not to be from God. After this St. Peter applying himself both by Preaching and ExampleS. Mark. to the propagating of the Word of God, was by the Christian Romans earnestly desired, that John surnamed Mark, who was his Son in Baptism, and a person of a most approved life and conversation, might be employed by him in writing a Gospel. St. Hierom saith that he being a Priest in Israel, a Levite according to the flesh, after his conversion to the Chri∣stian Faith, wrote his Gospel in Italy; shewing what he owed to his own Parentage and Extraction, and what to Christ. Which Gospel, as we now have it, was approved by the testimony of St. Peter. Being af∣terwards sent into Egypt, as Philo the Jew a famous Writer tells us, after that by Preaching and Writing he had well form'd the Alexandrian Church, being a man very eminent both for his Life and Learning, in the eighth year of the Emperor Nero, he died and was buried at Alexan∣dria; in whose place succeeded Anianus. The year before died James, surnamed Justus, the Brother of ourJames. Lord, being the Son of Joseph by another Wife, or, as some will have it, Sisters son to Mary Christ's Mother. Egefippus, who lived near the A∣postles times, affirms of him that he was holy in his Mothers Womb; that he drank neither Wine nor strong drink, nor ever tasted flesh; that he neither shaved, nor bathed, nor anointed himself, nor ever wore any other but linnen garments. He was often accustomed to enter into the Holy of Holies, where he continued so incessantly in his Prayers for the Welfare of the People, that his knees were grown hard and callous like those of Ca∣mels. But Festus leaving the Government of Judoea, before Albinus his suc∣cessor arrived there, the High Priest Ananus, the son of Ananus, requiring James publickly to deny Christ to be the Son of God, upon his refusal he gave order he should be stoned to Death; who, after he had been thrown down headlong from a pinacle of the Temple, continuing yet half alive, and with hands stretch'd forth towards Heaven praying for his persecutors, was at last kill'd outright with a blow of a Fullers Club. Josephus reports him to have been a man of so great sanctity, that it was the general belief that his murder was the cause of the destruction
of Jerusalem. This is that James, whom our Lord appeared to after his Resurrection, and to whom, having blessed Bread and broken it, he said, Brother eat thy Bread, because the son of man is risen. He presided over the Church of Jerusalem thirty years, that is, to the seventh year of Nero. His Sepulchre with an Inscription, hard by the Temple from which he had been cast down, was yet in being in Andrian's time. It is evident likewise that Barnabas, by birth a Cypriot, surnamed Joses,Barnabas. a Levite, died before St. Peter's martyrdom. He being chosen together with Paul an Apostle of the Gentiles, wrote only one Epistle of mat∣ters concerning the Church, and that too is reckoned Apocryphal There happening to be a difference between him and Paul occasioned by Mark a Disciple, he accompanied with the said Mark, went to Cyprus, where Preaching the faith of Christ he was crowned with Martyrdom. Paul,Paul. first called Saul, was descended of the Tribe of Benjamin, of a Town of Judoea, called Giscalis; which being taken in War by the Romans, he with his Parents removed to Tarsus a City of Cilicia. And be∣ing sent thence to Jerusalem to study the Law, he had his Education under the learned Gamaliel. After this receiving Letters from the High Priest, he became a Persecutor of those that professed Christ to be the true God; and particularly was present and assistant at the death of St. Stephen the Protomartyr. But as he was going to Damascus, being by the Divine Spirit wonderfully converted to the Faith, he be∣came a chosen Vessel; and from that time took the name of Paul, from a Pro-consul of Cyprus, whom by his preaching he had converted to Christianity. After this he, together with Barnabas, having travel∣led through divers Cities, upon his return to Jerusalem, was by Pe∣ter, John, and James, chosen an Apostle of the Gentiles. In the twenty fifth year after the death of Christ, which was the second of the Emperor Nero, and the time when Festus succeeded Felix in the Procurator∣ship of Judoea, he with his fellow-captive Aristarchus was as a free Denizon sent bound to Rome; where continuing the space of two years under very little confinement, he was daily engaged in disputa∣tion with the Jews. Being at length set at liberty by Nero, he both preached and wrote many things. We have at this day fourteen of his Epistles; one to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, one to the Galatians, one to the Ephesians, one to the Philippians, one to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians. two to Timothy, one to Titus, and one to Phi∣lemon; that to the Hebrews is generally said to be his, though because of the difference of style and phrase from the rest, it be uncertain whe∣ther it were so or no; and there have been anciently divers who have entituled it, some to Luke, some to Barnabas, some to Clemens. St. Peter also wrote two general Epistles, though the latter be by many denied to be his for the same reason of the difference of style. But being so taken up with Prayer and Preaching, that he could not attend any other great variety of business, he constituted two Bishops, viz. Linus and Cletus, who might exercise the sacerdotal Ministery to the Romans and other Christians. The holy man applying himself entirely to these things, gained thereby so great and universal a Reputation, that men were ready to worship him as a God. The Emperor Nero being displeased hereat, began to contrive his death; whereupon St. Peter, with the ad∣vice of his Friends, that he might avoid the Emperours envy and rage,
departed out of the City by the Via Appia; and at the end of the first mile he travelled, to use the words of Egesippus, meeting with Christ in the way, and falling down and worshipping him, he said, Lord whither goest thou? to whom Christ replied, I go to Rome to be crucified again. There is yet remaining a Chappel built on the same place where these words were spoken. Now St. Peter believing this saying of our Saviour to re∣late to his own martyrdom, because Christ might seem to be ready to suffer again in him, went back to the City, and forth with consecra∣ted Clemens a Bishop, and in these words recommended to him his Chair, and the Church of God; I deliver to thee the same power of binding and loosing which Christ lest to me; do thou, as becomes a good Pastor, promote the salvation of men both by Prayer and Preaching, without regard to any hazard of Life or Fortune. Having set these things thus in order, at the Command of Nero in the last year of his Empire, He was put to death together with St. Paul, though the kinds of their Punishment were different. For St. Peter was crucified with his Head towards the ground, and his Feet upwards, for so he desired it might be, saying, That he was unworthy to undergo the same kind of death with his Saviour. He was buried in the Vatican, in the Via Aurelia, near Nero's Gardens, not far from the Via Triumphalis which leads to the Temple of Apollo. He continued in the See 25 years. But St. Paul being on the same day beheaded, was interred in the Via Ostiensis, in the 37th year after the death of Christ. This is confirmed by the testimony of Caius the Historian, who in a Disputation against one Proculus a Montanist has these words; I, says he, can shew you the Victorious Ensigns of the Apostles; for you cannot pass the Via Regalis that leads to the Vatican, nor the Via Ostiensis, but you will find the Trophies of those Hero's that established this Church: where certainly he refers to these two St. Peter and St. Paul. In the fore-mentioned Gardens of Nero, were reposited the ashes of a multitude of holy Martyrs. For a Fire happening in the time of Nero, which raging for six days together, had wasted a great part of the City, and devoured the substance of many wealthy Citizens, the blame of all which was laid upon the Emperour; He, as Tacitus tells us, being very desirous to quell the rumour, suborn'd false Wit∣nesses to accuse, and lay all the blame of that Calamity upon the Chri∣stians. Whereupon so great a number of them were seiz'd and put to death, that it is said the flame of their empaled bodies supplied the room of lights for some nights together. There are those who say this Fire was kindled by Nero, either that he might have before his Eyes the Re∣semblance of burning Troy, or else because he had taken offence at the irregularity of the old Houses, and the narrowness and windings of the streets; neither of which are improbable of such a man as he, who was pro∣fligately self-will'd, intemperate and cruel, and in all respects more lewd and wicked than his Uncle Caligula. For he both put to death a great part of the Senate, and also without any regard to Decency would in the fight of the People sing and dance in the publique Theatre. His dissolute Lux∣ury was such, that he made use of perfum'd cold Baths, and fished with golden Nets, which were drag'd with Purple Cords. Yet he took such care to conceal all these Vices in the beginning of his Empire, that men had generally great hopes of him. For being put in mind to sign a War∣rant according to Custom for the Execution of one that was condemn'd to
die, How glad, says he, should I be that I had never learnt to write. Ho∣was very sumptuous in his Buildings both in the City and elsewhere; for the Baths called by his Name, and the Aurea Domus, and the Portico three miles long were finish'd by him with with wondrous magnificence; be∣sides which he was at a vast expence to make the Haven at Antium, at the sight of which I my self not long since was wonderfully pleased. I return to his Cruelty, which he exercised towards his Master Seneca, towards M. Annoeus Lucanus the famous Poet, towards his Mother A∣grippina, and his Wife Octavia, towards Cornutus the Philosopher Perfius's Master, whom he banish'd, towards Piso, and in a word towards all those who were in any reputation among the Citizens. In the end, he so highly provok'd the rage and hatred of the people against him, that most diligent search was made after him to bring him to condign punish∣ment: Which punishment was, that being bound, he should be led up and down with a Gallows upon his neck; and being whipped with Rods to Death, his body should be thrown into the River Tyber. But he making his escape four miles out of the City, laid violent hands upon himself in the Countrey-house of one of his Freemen; between the Via Salaria, and Nomentana, in the thirty second year of his Age, and of his Reign the fourteenth. S. LINUS. LINUS, by Nation a Tuscan, his Father's name Herculeanus, was in the Chair from the last year of Nero to the times of Vespasian, and from the Consulship of Saturninus and Scipio, to that of Capito and Rufus. In this space of time there were no less than three Emperours, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, each of them reigning but a very little while. Galba, a Person descended of the most ancient Nobility, being createdGalba. Emperour by the Soldiers in Spain, assoon as he heard of the death of Nero, came immediatey to Rome. But rendring himself obnoxious to all men by his Avarice and Sloth, through the treachery of Otho, he was slain at Rome near Curtius's Lake in the seventh month of his Reign; to∣gether with Piso a Noble Youth whom he had adopted for his Son. He was doubtless a man, who before he came to the Empire, was very eminent in the management both of Military and Civil affairs; being often Consul, often Proconsul, and several times General in the most important Wars. That which makes me speak this in his praise, is the Learning of M. Fabius Quintilianus, whom Galba brought with him out of Spain to Rome. Otho, a man of better extraction by his Mother's than by his Fa∣ther'sOtbc. side, who while he led a private life was very loose and effemi∣nate, as being a great and intimate Friend of Nero's, in the midst of tumults and slaughters, as I hinted before, invaded the Empire. But being ingaged in a Civil War against Vitellius, who had been created Emperour in Germany, though he got the better in three small Skir∣mishes, one at the Alps, another at Placentia, the third at Castor; yet
losing the day in the last and most considerable, which was at Bebriacum, he thereupon fell into so deep a melancholly, that, in the third month of his Empire he stab'd himself. Vitellius, concerning whose Extraction there are different Opinions,Vitellius. coming to Rome, and obtaining the Empire, soon degenerated into all manner of lewdness, cruelty and gluttony, being used to make several Meals in a day, and some of them to such an height of Luxury, that there have been at one Supper no less than two thousand Fishes, and seven thousand Fowl serv'd up to his Table. But having intelligence that Ve∣spasian, who had been created Emperour by the Army in Judoea, was advancing with his Legions, he at first determin'd to quit the Empire; yet being afterwards encouraged by those about him, he took up Arms, and forc'd Sabinus, Vespasian's Brother, with his Flavian Soldiers into the Capitol; which being set on fire, they were all burnt. Hereupon being surpriz'd by Vespasian, and having no hope of pardon left him, he hid himself in a private Chamber in the Palace, from whence he was most ignominiously drag'd and carried naked through the Via Sacra to the Scaloe Gemonioe, where being quartered he was thrown into the River Tyber.
During this time Linus was Successor to St. Peter, though there are some who place Clemens here, and wholly leave out Linus and Cletus; who yet are sufficiently confuted not only by History, but also by the authority of S. Hierom, who tells us, that Clemens was the fourth Bishop of Rome after Peter, for Linus was accounted the second, and Cletus the third, notwithstanding that most of the Romans immediately after Peter reckon Clemens. To whom, though St. Peter had as it were by Will bequeath'd the Right of Succession, yet his modesty was so great that he compelled Linus and Cletus to take upon them the Pontifical Dignity before him, lest any ambition of preheminence might be of ill example to after Ages. This Linus by Commission from St. Peter, ordained that no Woman should enter the Church but with her Head veiled. More∣over, at two Ordinations which he held in the City, he made eighteen Presbyters and eleven Bishops. He wrote also the Memoirs of St. Peter, and particularly the Contention he had with Sinion Magus. In his time lived Philo, a Jew, by Nation of Alexandria, in whose Writings there isPhilo Judoeus. so much Wit and Judgment, that, from the likeness there appears be∣tween them, he deserv'd to have it proverbially said, Either Plato does Philonize, or Philo does Platonize. By his Learning and Eloquence he corrected the rashness of Appion, who had been sent Ambassa∣dour from the Alexandrians with Complaints against the Jews. While he was at Rome, in Claudius his time, he contracted an acquaintance with St. Peter, and thereupon wrote several things in praise of the Christians. Josephus also, the son of Matathias, a Priest at Hierusa∣lem,Josephus. being taken Prisoner by Vespasian, and committed to the custody of his son Titus till that City was taken, coming to Rome during the Pontificate of Linus, presented to the Father and the Son seven Books of the Jewish War, which were laid up in the publick Library, and the Author himself, as a reward for that performance, had most deserved∣ly a Statue erected to him. He wrote likewise twenty four other Books of Antiquities, from the beginning of the World to the fourteenth year of the Emperour Domitian. As for Linus himself, though he had gain'd a mighty reputation by the sanctity of his Life, by his Power of casting out Devils and raising the Dead, yet was he put to Death by Saturninus the Consul, whose very Daughter he had dispossess'd; and was buried in the Vatican near the Body of St. Peter, on the twenty first day of September, when he had sat in the Pontifical See eleven years, three months, and twelve days. There are some who affirm that Gre∣gory Bishop of Ostia, did, according to a Vow which he had made, re∣move the Body of this holy Bishop to that place, and solemnly interr it in the Church of St. Laurence. S. CLETUS. CLETUS, born in Rome in the VicopatricianOne of the Divisions of the City of Rome, answer∣ing to one of our Wards in London. Region, Son of Aemilianus, through the persuasion of Clemens, unwillingly took upon him the burden of the Pontificate, though for his Learning, Life and Quality he was a Person of very great esteem and Authority among all that knew him. He lived in the time of Vespa∣sian and Titus, from the seventh Consulship of Vespasian, and the fifth of Domitian, to Domitian and Rufus Coss. according to Damasus. Vespasian, as I said before, succeeding Vitellius, committed the ma∣nagementVespasianus. of the Jewish War, which had been carrying on two years before, to his Son Titus, which he within two years after, with great resolution finished. For all Judoea being conquer'd, the City Hierusalem destroyed, and the Temple levelled to the ground, it is reported that no less than six hundred thousand Jews were slain; nay Josephus a Jew, who was a Captive in that War, and had his life given him because he foretold the death of Nero, and that Vespasian should in a short time be Emperor, relates that eleven hundred thousand perished therein by sword and fa∣mine, and that a hundred thousand were taken Prisoners, and publickly exposed to sale. Nor will it seem improbable, if we consider that he tells us this happened at the time of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when they came from all parts of Judoea to Jerusalem, as into a publick Prison; and especially on the day of the Passeover, upon which they crucified Christ: being now to undergo the deserved punishment, both of their frequent revolts from the Roman Government; and also of their villany and perfidiousness in putting to death the innocent Jesus. Up∣on this Victory over the Jews, the Father and Son were honoured with a Triumph, both riding in the same Chariot, and Domitian upon a white Horse following them. The Monuments of this Triumph remain still in the Via Nova, where are to be seen engraven the Candesticks and the Tables of the old Law that were taken out of the Temple and trium∣phantly brought away. Yet Vespasian exercised so much humanity to∣wards the Jews, even when they were conquered, that for all those whom he found among them remaining of the House of David, as being of Royal descent, he had a very good esteem. And indeed he always used his Power with great Moderation, being of so mild and merciful a Temper, as to discharge even Traytors with no other than a verbal Correction, and to slight the Discourses of insolent and talkative people,
and in general to be forgetful of Faults and Injuries. He was look'd up∣on as too much enclin'd to Avarice; and yet he used no oppression for the getting of Money, and what he had he employed in Bounty and Magnificence. For he both finish'd the Temple of Peace adjoyning to the Forum, that had been begun by Claudius; and began that Amphi∣theatre, a part of which is yet to be seen with admiration. He had so great an opinion of the Bravery and Merit of his Son Titus, that upon occasion of certain tumults, rais'd by some ambitious men who aspir'd to the Em∣pire, he said publickly, That either his Son, or no man, would be his Succes∣sor in the Empire. And good ground he had to say so, for that Titus, bothTitus. for his Courage and Integrity was accounted the Darling and Delight of Mankind. He was endued with an Eloquence excellency suited to the times of Peace, and with a Courage to those of War; he was very mer∣ciful to Offenders, and so kind and bountiful to all, that he never de∣nied any man any thing. Upon which occasion when some of his Friends took the liberty to find fault with him as too profuse; he told them, It was not fit that any man should depart sad out of the presence of a Prince. And remembring at a certain time that he had not con∣ferr'd any benefit in a whole day, he thereupon cried out to those about him, My Friends, I have lost a Day. Never any Emperour was superiour to him in Magnificence; the Amphitheatre, together with the Baths near adjoyning, being perfectly compleated and dedicated, and an Hunting of five thousand wild Beasts exhibited by him. He recall'd from Exile Mursonius Rufus a famous Philosopher, and was much pleased with the conversation of Asconius Poedianus a most learned man. He died in the second year of his Empire, and was carried to his Sepulchre with so great and universal a lamentation, as if every man had lost a Father. There are some who write that Cletus succeeded Linus in the second year of Vespasian, who held the Empire ten years. Whether that were so or no, 'tis certain that Cletus was a most holy and good man, and that he left nothing undone that might contribute to the enlargement and in∣crease of the Church of God. In his time lived Luke, a Physitian of An∣tioch,Luke. one extraordinarily well skilled in the Greek Language, a follower of S. Paul the Apostle, and his constant attendant and Companion in his Travels. He pen'd the Gospel, which is commended by S. Paul, and which S. Paul for a good reason calls his Gospel. He wrote also the Acts of the Apostles, being himself an Eye-witness of them. He lived eighty four years, was married in Bithynia, and buried at Constantinople, whither his bones, together with those of Andrew the Apostle, were in the tenth year of Constantius, conveyed out of Achaia. At the same time like∣wise Philip returning out of Scythia, which by his Example andPhilip. Preaching he had kept stedfast in the faith for twenty years together, into Asia, died at Jerusalem. As for Cletus himself, having setled the Church as well as the Times would bear, and ordain'd according to St. Peter's command twenty five Presbyters, he was crown'd with Martyr∣dom in the Reign of Domitian, and buried near the body of S. Peter in the Vatican, April 27. There were many other Martyrs about the same time, among whom is reckoned Flavia Domicilla, Sisters Daughter to Flavius Clemens the Consul who was banish'd into the Island Pontia for the profession of Christianity. Cletus sate in the Chair twelve years,
one month, eleven days; and by his Death the See was vacant twenty days. S. CLEMENS. CLEMENS, born in Rome, in the Region of Mons Coelius, his Fathers name Faustinus, lived in the time of Titus his Succes∣sor Domitian, Who was more like to Nero or Caligula than to his Father Vespasian orDomitian. his Brother; yet at the beginning of his Empire he kept within some tolerable bounds, but soon after he broke out into very great enormi∣ties of Lust, Idleness, Rage and Cruelty; crimes which brought upon him so great an Odium, as almost quite defac'd the Memory and Re∣nown of his Father and his Brother. Many of the Nobility he put to death, whereof most were by his order assassined in the places whither he had banish'd them. He was so industriously idle as to spend the time of his privacy and retirement in killing Flies with a Bodkin; for which reason when a certain person coming out of his Presence was asked, whe∣ther any one were with Coesar, he answer'd merrily, No, not so much as a Fly. He arriv'd to such an heighth of Folly and arrogance, as to ex∣pect divine Honours, and command that in all Discourses and Writings concerning him, the Title of Lord and God should be given him. He was the second from Nero that rais'd a Persecution against the Christians. Moreover, he gave order that all those of the Linage of David among the Jews, should by Interrogatories and racking them to Confession be diligently search'd after, and being found utterly destroy'd and extin guish'd. In the end, the divine Vengeance overtaking him, he was in the fifteenth year of his Empire stab'd to death in the Palace by his own servants. His Body was carried out by the common Bearers and inglo∣riously buried by Philix at her Countrey-house in the Via Latina. Clemens was now (as I have said) the fourth Bishop of Rome from S. Peter, Linus being accounted the second and Cletus the third, though the Latins generally reckon Clemens next after Peter; and that he was design'd so appears from his own Letter to James Bishop of Jerusalem, wherein he gives him the following account of that matter; Simon Peter being apprehensive of his approaching Death, in the presence of several Bre∣thren, taking hold of my hand, This, says he, is the person, whom having been my assistant in all affairs since I came to Rome, I constitute Bishop of that City; and when I shewed my willingness eo decline so great a Burden, he exposulated with me in this manner, Wilt thou consult only thine own convenience; and deny thy assistance to the poor fluctuating Church of God when it is in thy power to steer it? But he being a person of wonderful modesty, did freely prefer Linus and Cletus to that dignity before him∣self undertook it. He wrote in the name of the Roman Church a very useful Epistle to the Corinthians, not differing in style from that of the Hebrews, which is said to be St. Pauls. This Epistle was formerly read publickly in several Churches: there is another bearing his name which the Ancients did not thing authentick; and Eufebius in the third Book
of his History, does find fault with a long Disputation between St. Peter and Appion, said to be written by our Clement, 'Tis certain that JohnS. John. the Apostle, son of Zebedee and Brother of James lived till this time, who was the last Penman of the Gospel, and confirmed what had been before written by Matthew, Mark and Luke. The reason why he wrote last is said to be, that he might confront and defeat the Heresie of the Ebionites, who impudently denied Christ to have had a being before his Birth of the Blessed Virgin; and accordingly we find him very particu∣lar in demonstrating the Divinity of our Saviour. He wrote several other things, and among the rest his Revelation, during his banishment into the Island Patmos by Domitian; who being afterwards slain and his Acts for their excessive severity rescinded by the Senate, he returned to Ephesus in the time of Nerva; where he continued till the Reign of Trajan, supporting the Churches of Asia by his Counsel and Writings, till at last being worn out with Age he rested in the Lord the sixty eighth year after the Passion of Christ. Our Clemens by his Piety, Reli∣gion and Learning made daily many Proselytes to Christianity; where∣upon P. Tarquinius the High Priest, and Mamertinus the City Praefect stir'd up the Emperour against the Christians; at whose command Cle∣ment was banish'd to an Island, where he found near two thousand Chri∣stians condemn'd to hew Marble in the Quarries. In this Island there being at that time a great scarcity of water, which they were forced to fetch at six miles distance, Clement going going to the top of a little Hill hard by, sees there a Lamb, under whose right foot flowed miraculously a plen∣tiful Spring, with which all the Islanders were refresh'd, and many of them thereupon converted to the Christian faith. At which Trajan be∣ing enraged, sent some of his Guards, who threw Clement into the Sea, with an Anchor tied about his neck. But his blessed Body was not long af∣ter cast on the shore, and being buried at the place where this miraculous fountain had sprung up, a Temple was built over it. This is said to have happened September the fourteenth in the third year of the Emperor Tra∣jan. He was in the Chair nine years, two months, and ten days; he divi∣ded the Wards of the City among seven Notaries, who were to register the Acts of the Martyrs; and at the Ordinations which he held according to Custom in the Month of December, he made ten Presbyters, two Deacons, and fifteen Bishops. By his death the See was vacant two and twenty days. S. ANACLETUS. ANACLETUS, an Athenian, son of Antiochus, was successor to Clement in the time of Trajanus. This Trajans Predecessor Nerva Cocceius, was an excellentNerva. person both in his private and publick capacity, just and equal in all his proceedings, and one whose Government was very advantageous to the Republick. Through his procurement the Acts of Domitian being re∣peal'd by Decree of the Senate, multitudes thereupon return'd from banish∣ment, and several by his bounty had the Goods of which they had be∣fore been plundered, restor'd to them. But being now very old, and
drawing near to the time of his Death, out of his care of the Publick Weal, he adopted Trajan, and then died in the sixteenth Month of his Reign, and of his Age the seventy second year. Trajan himself, a Spaniard, surnamed Ulpius Crinitus, coming to theTrajanus. Empire surpassed the best of Princes in in the glory of his Arms, the the Goodness of his Temper, and the moderation of his Government. He extended the bounds of the Empire far and wide, reduced that part of Getmany beyond the Rhine to its former state, subdued Dacia, and several other Nations beyond the Danow; recovered Parthia; gave a King to the Albanians; made Provinces beyond Euphrates and Tygris; overcame and kept Armenia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Seleucia, Ctesiphon and Babylon; and proceeded as far as the borders of India, and the Red Sea, where he left a Fleet to infest those Borders. The Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions of Anacletus were as fol∣loweth; viz. That no Prelate or other Clerk should suffer his beard or hair to grow long; that no Bishop should be ordained by less than three other Bishops; that the Clergy should be admitted into holy Orders in publick only; and that all the faithful should after Consecration com∣municate or be put out of the Church. By this means the Christian interest encreas'd, that Trajan fearing lest the Roman State might be impaired thereby, gave allowance to a third Persecution of the Chri∣stians, in which multitudes were put to Death, and particularly Igna∣tiusIgnatius. the third Bishop of the Church of Antioch after St. Peter. Who being taken and condemn'd to suffer by wild beasts, as he was carried to Rome by his Guards, whom he called his Ten Leopards, he all along in his passage encourag'd and confirm'd the Christians, by Discourse with some, and by Epistle to others; declaring his readiness to suffer in this manner; Come Cross, come Beasts, come Wrack, come the torture of my whole body, and the torments of the Devil upon me, so I may enjoy Christ. And upon the occasion of his hearing the Lions roar, Corn, says he, I am, let me be ground by the teeth of these beasts, that I may be found fine bread. He died in Trajan's eleventh year, and his bones were afterwards buried in the Suburbs of Antioch. But Plinius Secundus, who was then Governour of that Province, being moved with compassion to see so many executed, wrote to the Emperour Trajan, informing him that incredible numbers of men were daily put to Death, who were per∣sons of an unblameable life, and who in no point transgressed the Roman Laws, save only that before day-break, they would sing Hymns to Christ their God, but that Adulteries and the like Crimes were disal∣lowed and abominated by them. Hereupon Trajan gave order, that the Magistrates should not make search after the Christians, but only punish those who voluntarily offered themselves. During this Persecution Simeon, the kinsman of our Lord, son of Cleophas and Bishop of Jerusalem, was crucified in the hundred and twentieth year of his Age. These things which we have spoken were acted in the time of this Bishop and not of Cletus, as Eusebius in the third book of his History would have it; for Damasus makes out that Cletus and Anacletus differed both as to their Countrey and manner of Death, Cletus being a Roman and suffering under Domitian, but Anacletus and Athenian and suffering under Trajan. Our Anacletus having erected an Oratory to St. Peter, and assigned places of burial for the Martyrs distinct from those of other men, and
at one Decembrian Ordination made five Presbyters, three Deacons, and six Bishops; upon his Martyrdom the See was vacant thirteen days, after he had sat in it nine years, two months and ten days. S. EUARISTUS. EUARISTUS, by birth a Grecian, his Father a Jew, named Juda, of the City of Bethleem, lived in the time of Trajan. A Prince whom I take delight to mention, because of his sin∣gularTrajan. Justice and Humanity. Who behav'd himself so acceptably to∣wards all men, that as far as the times of Justinian the usual acclamation of the People at the Creation of an Emperour was this, Let him be more prosperous than Augustus and better than Trajan. He was of a temper so courteous and condescending in visiting the Sick, in saluting his Friends, in keeping Festivals, and being present at Collations to which he was invited, that the fault which some found with him for that very reason, gave the occasion of that worthy noble saying of his, That a Prince ought to be such to his Subjects, as he desires they should be to him. He impartially distributed Honours, Riches, and Rewards to all that deserved well; never oppress'd any man to fill his own Exchequer; granted advantageous immunities to poor Cities; repaired the High∣ways, and made the passages of Rivers secure; made a high large Mole at the Haven of Ancona, to break the violence of the Waves; and in∣deed neither acted nor designed any thing in his whole life but what tended to the publick Good. Having gain'd such Renown both in War and in Peace, he died of a Flux, at Seleucia a City of Isauria, in the eighteenth year and sixth month of his Reign. His bones were af∣terward convey'd to Rome, and there buried in an Urn of Gold, in the Forum which himself had built, under the winding Pillar of an hundred forty foot high, which is yet to beseen. But we return to Euaristus, who, as Damasus tells us, divided the City of Rome among the Presbyters into Parishes; ordained that seven Dea∣cons should attend the Bishop when ever he preached to be witnesses of the truth of his Doctrine; and moreover that the accusation of a Lay∣man should not be admitted against a Bishop. He held Decembrian Ordinations, at which he made six Presbyters, two Deacons and five Bishops. In his time lived Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, an Auditor ofPapias. John, a person who took not so much delight in the Records of the an∣cient Disciples of our Lord, as in the living Conversation of Aristion and John the Elder. And it is manifest from the order he observes in setting down the names of these two after the mention of almost all the Apostles, that the John whom he places among the Apostles, was a distinct Person from this John the Aged, whom hereckons after Aristion. He was certain∣ly a very learned man, and followed by many, as particularly Irenaeus, Apollinarius, Tertullian, Victorinus Pictaviensis, and Lactantius Firmia∣nus. Now also Quadratus, a Disciple of the Apostles, did by his Indu∣stryQuadratus. and Courage support the Church of God as much as might be in
such dangerous times. For when Adrian, who now passed the Winter at Athens, and was admitted a Priest to the Goddess Eleusina, began to persecute the Christians, Quadratus with his own hand presented to him a very honest and rational Book of the Excellency of the Christian Religion. The like did Aristides, and Athenian Philosopher, converted toAristides: Christianity; who at the same time with Quadratus, presented to Adrian a Treatise, containing an account of our Religion. The effect of which Apologeticks was, that Adrian being convinc'd of the injustice of put∣ting the Christians to death without their being heard, wrote to Minu∣tius Fundanus the Proconsul of Asia, ordering that no Christian should be executed, unless his guilt were proved by a credible Witness. As for our Euaristus, some tell us that he was martyr'd in the last year of Tra∣jan; but they are more in the right, who are of opinion that he suffered under Adrian before his being reconciled to the Christians. For he was in the Chair nine years, ten months, two days, and was buried in the Vatican, near the body of S. Peter, October the twenty seventh. The See was then vacant nineteen days. S. ALEXANDER I. ALEXANDER, a Roman, Son of Alexander, a Person of Wis∣dom and Gravity far exceeding his years, held the Pontificate in the time of Aelius Adrianus. This Adrian, who was Son to Trajan's Cosin-German, at his first com∣ingAdrian. to the Empire proved an Enemy to the Christians, but afterwards (as shall be said anon) upon knowledg of their Religion and Devotion, became very kind and propitious to them. From the great benefits which the Roman State receiv'd by his Government, he was called the Father of his Countrey, and his Wife had the Title of Augusta. He was excel∣lently well skil'd both in the Roman and Greek Languages, made many Laws, created a goodly Library at Athens, being mightily pleased with the Learning and Conversation of Plutarch, Sixtus, Agathocles and Oeno∣maus the Philosopher; and at the request of the Athenians compiled Laws for them according to the Model of Draco and Solen. Being ad∣mitted to the Eleusinian Mysteries, he was very bountiful to the Ci∣tizens of Athens, and repair'd their bridg broken down by an Innunda∣tion of the River Cephysus. He built also a Bridg at Rome, called by his own name, remaining to this day, and a stately Sepulchre in the Vati∣can near the River Tyber, which the Popes now make use of for a Cita∣del. Moreover, he made that most sumptuous and stately Villa, now called Old Tiber, to the several parts of which he gave the names of Pro∣vinces, and the most celebrated parts of the World. Coming to Pelusi∣um, he was at great expence in adorning Pompey's Tomb, and in Britain he built a Wall of sixty miles to sever the Romans from the Natives. And because Septicius Clarus the Captain of his Guards, and Suetonius Tranquillus his Secretary, with several others, had without his leave conversed somewhat more familiarly with his Empress Sabina than the Reverence of a Court admitted of, he remov'd them all and put others into their Offices.
But to return to our Alexander, He was the first who for the remem∣brance of Christs Passion at the Communion added those words, Qui pridie quam pateretur, to the Clause Hoc est corpus meum. He ordained likewise that the Holy Water (as it is called) mix'd with Salt and con∣secrated by Prayer, should be kept in Churches and in private Houses, as a guard against evil Spirits. Moreover, he instituted that Water should be mingled with the Wine, at the consecration of the Elements, to sig∣nifie the Union of Christ with his Church; and that the Host should not be of leavened bread as was formerly used, but of unleavened only, as being the more pure, and by which all occasion of cavilling would be taken away from the Ebionite Hereticks, who were very much ad∣dicted to Judaism. In his time lived Agrippa Castor, who learnedly andAgrippa Ca∣stor. effectually confuted the books which Basilides the Heretick wrote a∣gainstBafilides. the Holy Gospel; exposing to derision his Prophets Barcabas and Barthecab, and his great God Abraxas, names invented by him to amuse and terrifie the ignorant. This Basilides died at that time when the Christians were very much perfecuted and tormented by Cochebas, the Head of the Jewish Faction. But Adrian soon repress'd the pertinacy of this Rebel and the whole Nation of the Jews, by an almost incre∣dible slaughter of them; and then commanded that no Jew should be suffered to enter Jerusalem, permitting only Christians to inhabit that City, and having repaired the Walls and buildings of it, he called it af∣ter his own name Aelia; Marcus being after the expulsion of the Jews, chosen the first Gentile Bishop of it. In the time of this Bishop also Sapphira of Antioch, and Sabina a Roman Lady suffer'd martyrdom for the faith of Christ; and Favorinus, Palaemon, Herodes Atheniensis and Marcus Byzantius were famous Rhetoricians. Our Alexander having at three Decembrian Ordinations made five Presbyters, three Deacons, five Bishops, was, together with his Deacons Euentius and Theodulus, crowned with Martyrdom, on the third day of May, and buried in the Via Nomentana, where he suffered, seven miles from the City. He was in the Chair ten years, seven months, two days. After his Death the See was vacant twenty five days. S. SIXTUS I. SIXTUS a Roman, the Son of Pastor, or as others will have it, of Helvidius, held the Pontificate in the time of Adrian, to the Consulship of Verus and Anniculus. Which Adrian is reckoned in the number of the good Emperours, upon the account of his Liberality, Splendour, Magnificence and Clemency; an eminent instance of the last of which good qualities was this, That when a Servant run madly upon him with his Sword, he took no farther notice of the Action than to order him a Physician to cure his Phrenzy. He visited the Sick twice or thrice in a day; at his own charge he repair'd Alexandria when it had been ruined by the Romans; he rebuilt the Pantheon in Rome, and made Aromatick Pre∣sents
to the People. Being at the point of Death, he is said to have ut∣tered these Verses; Animula, vagula, blandula, Hospes, comesque corporis, Quae nunc abibis in loca, Pallidula, rigida, nudula, Nec, ut soles, dabis, jocos. He died of a Dropsy in the two and twentieth year of his Reign, and was buried at Puteoli in Cicero's Villa. Sixtus out of his care of the Church, ordained, that the Elements and Vessels of the Altar should not be touched by any but the Mini∣sters, but especially not by Women; and that the Corporal, as it is cal∣led, should be made of Linnen-cloth only, and that of the finest sort. That no Bishop who had been cited to appear before the Apostolick See, should at his return be received by his Flock, unless he brought with him Letters Communicatory to the People. At the Celebration he instituted the Hymn, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth. Anciently the Office of the Communion was performed in a plain manner, and unclog'd with humane mixtures. St. Peter after Consecration used the Paternoster; James Bishop of Jerusalem added some Rites, Bazil more, and others more still. For Celestine brought in the Introitus of the Mass, Gregory the Kyrie Eleyson, Telesphorus The Glory be to God on High, Gelasius the first the Collects, and Hierom the Epistle and Gospel. The Alelujah was taken from the Church of Jerusalem, the Creed was instituted by the Council of Nice, Pelagius introduced the Comme∣moration of the Dead, Leo the third the Incense, Innocent the first the Kiss of Peace, and Sergius ordered the Agnus Dei to be sung. During the time of Sixtus the Persecution being so sharp, that few had courage enough to own the Profession of Christianity, and the Christian Gauls desiring a Bishop, to them he sends Peregrine a Citizen of Rome, who having confirmed them in the Faith, at his return suffered Martyrdom in the Via Appia, at the place where Christ appeared to Peter as he was leaving the City. His body was by the faithful carried into the Vati∣can, and buried near S. Peter. Aquila also by birth a Jew of Pontus, who with his Wife Priscilla had been banish'd by the Edict of Claudius, is said by some to have lived till this time; he was the second Translatour of the Old Testament, after the Seventy who lived in the time of Pto∣lomey Philadelphus. As for Sixtus, having at three Decembrian Ordina∣tions, made eleven Presbyters, eleven Deacons, and four Bishops, he was crowned with Martyrdom, and buried in the Vatican near St. Peter, having been in the Chair ten years, three months, and one and twenty days. Upon his Death the See was vacant only two days.
S. TELESPHORUS. TELEPHORUS, a Grecian, the Son of an Anchorete, lived in the time of Antoninus Pius.Antoninus Pius. This Emperour was by his Fathers side a Cisalpine Gaul, and to∣gether with his Sons Aurelius and Verus, he ruled twenty two years and three months with so much moderation and Clemency that he deserved∣ly gain'd the name of Pius, and Father of his Countrey. He was never severe or rigorous towards any man in the recovery of his own private Debts, or the exaction of publick Taxes, but would sometimes wholly remit them by burning the Bonds of his Debtors. What shall I need say more of this Prince, who in the opinion of all good men was for Religion, Devotion, Humanity, Clemency, Justice, and Modesty equal to Numa Pompilius himself. When the River Tiber had by an inunda∣tion much impaired many private and publick buildings, he was at vast expence to assist the Citizens in restoring the City to its former state again. Moreover, it was he who carried on those prodigious Works which appear to this day, for improving the Havens of Tarracina and Cajeta; and I believe that the famous winding Pillar, from which the principal Ward of the City is denominated, was built at his charge. As for our Telesphorus, he ordained that a Quadragesimal Fast should be observed before Easter; and that on the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord there should be three Masses; one at Midnight, at which time Christ was born in Bethelehem, another at break of Day when he was discovered to the Shepherds, the third at that hour wherein the light of Truth and our Redemption shone in the World (i. e. when our Sa∣viour was crucified) whereas at other times the celebration of the Mass was forbidden till the third hour, or between the hours of nine and twelve a Clock, the time when, as St. Mark tells us, he was fastned to the Cross. He also appointed that the Hymn, Glory be to God on High,Justin Mar∣tyr. should be sung before the Sacrifice. In his time Justinus, a Philosopher of Neapolis a City of Palestine, labour'd successfully in the defending Christianity; presented to Antoninus and his Sons a book which he had written against the Gentiles; and held a Dialogue with Tryphon a prin∣cipal Jew. He wrote also very warmly against Marcion, who adhering to the Heresie of Cerdo, affirmed that there were two Gods, the one good, the other just, as two contrary principles of Creation and Good∣ness. He opposed likewise Crescens the Cynick, as a person glutto∣nous, fearful of Death, given over to Luxury and lust, and a blasphemer of Christ. But being at length by this mans treacherous practices be∣tray'd, he suffered in the cause of Christianity Eusebius writing of this Cynick, allows him only to have been a vain-glorious Pretender, but not a Philosopher. At the same time the Valentinian Hereticks prevail'd, who were the followers of one Valentinus a Platonist; and held that Christ took nothing of the body of the Virgin, but passed clean through her, as through a Pipe. Now also Photinus Bishop of Lyons, a man of singular Learning and Piety, as Isidore tells us, suffered Martyrdom with great resolution, being ninety years old. Telesphorus having at four
Decembrian Ordinations, made fifteen Presbyters, eight Deacons, thir∣teen Bishops, died a Martyr, and was buried in the Vatican near Saint Peter. He was in the Chair eleven years, three months, twenty two days. By his Death the See was vacant seven days. S. HYGINUS. HYGINUS an Athenian, Son of a Philosopher, succeeded Te∣lesphorus, during the Empire of Antoninus Pius, Wse extraordinary merit compels me to add something far∣therAntonimus Pius. in his praise,  I come to give an account of Hyginus. He was so far from the vanity of valuing himself upon the glory of his Arms, that he made it his business rather to defend the Provinces of the Empire, than to encrease them; and had often that saying of Scipio in his mouth, that he had rather save one Citizen than destroy a thou∣sand Enemies: being herein of a quite contrary temper to that of Do∣mitian, who from a consciousness of his own cruelty did so hate and fear a multitude, that he would expose the Roman Army to the fury of its Enemies, on purpose that it might return home thinner and less formidable. Moreover, Pius was so famous for his Justice, that seve∣ral Princes and Nations did at his Command cease their Hostilities, making him the Arbitratour of their differences, and standing to his determination as to the Justice of their Pretensions. For these admi∣rable qualities, the Romans after his much lamented death, in honor to his memory, appointed Cirque-shews, built a Temple, and  a Flamen, with an Order, called by his name. At this time Hyginus prudently setled and confirm'd the several Or∣ders and Degrees of the Clergy; and ordain'd the Solemn Consecration of Churches, the number of which he would not have encreas'd or diminish'd without leave of the Metropolitan or Bishop. He forbad also that the Timber or other Materials prepared for the building any Church, should be converted to prophane uses; yet allowing that with the Bishop's consent, they might be made use of towards the erecting any other Church or Religious House. He likewise ordained that at least one Godfather or one Godmother should be present at Baptism; and that no Metropolitan should condemn or censure any Bishop of his Province, until the cause were first heard and discussed by the other Bishops of the Province; though some make this latter an Institution of Pelagius, not Hyginus. In his time lived Polycarp, a Disciple of St.Polycarp. John the Apostle, and by him made Bishop of Smyrna; the most cele∣brated man for Religion and learning in all Asia. He coming to Rome, reduc'd to the Orthodox Faith multitudes who had been seduc'd into the Errours of Marcion and Valentinus; the former of which by chance meeting him, and asking whether he knew him; Polycarp answered, that he knew him to be the first-born of the Devil. For this Heretick denied the Father of our blessed Saviour to be God the Creatour, who by his Son made the World. But afterwards in the time of M. Antoninus, and L. Aurclius Commodus, who raised the fourth Persecution, Poly∣carp
was burnt at Smyrna by order of the Proconsul. Melito also an Asian, Bishop of Sardis, and a Disciple of Fronto the Oratour, presented to M. Antoninus, a book written in desence of the Christian Doctrine. Tertullian highly extols his Parts, and says, that most of the Christians look'd upon him as a Prophet. Moreover, Theophilus Bishop of Antioch wrote a book against the Heresie of Hermogenes, who asserted an un∣created eternal matter, co-eval to God himself. As for Hyginus him∣self, having deserved well of the Church, and at three Decembrian Ordi∣nations, made fifteen Presbyters, five Deacons, six Bishops, he died, and was buried in the Vatican by S. Peter, January 11. He was in the Chair four years, three months, four days. The See was then vacant four days. S. PIUS I. PIUS, an Italian of Aquileia, son of Ruffinus, lived to the time of M. Antoninus Verus, who together with his Brother L. Au∣relius Commodus jointly exercis'd the Government nineteen years. These two Princes undertook a War against the Parthians, and ma∣nag'dVerus and Commodus. it with such admirable courage and success, that they had the ho∣nour of a Triumph decreed to them. But not long after Commodus dying of an Apoplexy, Antoninus was sole Emperour; a person who so excell'd in all good qualities, that it is more easie to admire than to describe him; for both because from his very youth no change of his Fortune made any alteration in his mind or his countenance, and because it is hard to determine whether the sweetness of his natural temper, or the knowledg he learnt from Cornelius Fronto, were more conspicuous in him, he deservedly gain'd the surname of Philosopher. And indeed (as Capitolinus tells us) he was often wont to use that saying of Plato, That then the World would be happy, when either Philosophers were Princes, or Princes would be Philosophers. He was so great a lover of Learning, that even when he was Emperour he would be present at the Lectures of Apollonius the Philosopher, and Sextus Plutarch's Nephew; and he set up the Statue of his Tutour Fronto in the Senate-house as a Testimony of the Honour he had for him. At this time Pius maintain'd a strict friendship and familiarity with Hermes who wrote the book called Pastor; in which book he intro∣ducesHermes. an Angel in the form of a Shepherd. who commanded him to persuade all Christians to keep the Feast of Easter on a Sunday, which Pius accordingly did. Moreover, he ordained that every Convert from the Cerinthian Heresie should at his reception into the Church be bap∣tized. At the request of Praxedes a devout Woman, he dedicated a Church at the Baths of Novatus to her Sister S. Pudentiana; to which himself made several donations, oftentimes celebrated Mass in it, and built a Font which he blessed and consecrated, and at which he baptized a great number of Proselytes. He also appointed a punishment upon those who were negligent in handling the body and blood of Christ. If through the Priests carelesness any of the Cup had fallen upon the
ground, he was to undergo a Penance of forty days; if it fell upon the Altar, of three days; if upon the Altar-cloth, of four days; it upon any other Cloth, of nine days. Whithersoever it fell, he was to lick it up if he could, if not, the board or stone to be wash'd or scraped, and what of it could be recovered thereby either burnt or laid up in the Sacrary. In his time Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis in Asia was much esteem'd,Apollinaris. who wrote an excellent Apology for Christianity, and presented it to Antoninus the second. He wrote also against the Montanists, who with their two fanatick Prophetesses Priscillia and Maximilla, pretended that the descent of the Holy Ghost was not upon the Apostles, but them∣selves; an opinion which they had learn'd from their Leader Montanus. At this time also the learned Tatianus was in good reputation, so longTatianus. as he swerved not from the Doctrine of his Master Justin Martyr; but afterwards being puff'd up with a great conceit of himself, he became the Author of a new Heresie, which being propagated by one Severus, the followers of it were from him called Severians. They drank no Wine, ate no Flesh, rejected the Old Testament, and believed not the Resurrection. Moreover, Philip Bishop of Crete now published an ex∣cellent book against Marcion and his followers, whose Errours were the same with those of Cerdo. Musanus also wrote a book against the He∣reticks called Encratitoe, or the Abstemious, who agreed in opinion with the Severians, looking upon all carnal copulation as filthy and unclean, and condemning those Meats which God hath given for the use of mankind. But to return to Pius, having at five Decembrian Ordinati∣ons, made nineteen Presbyters, twenty one Deacons, ten Bishops, he died and was buried in the Vatican near S. Peter, July 11. He was in the Chair eleven years, four months, three days; and by his death the See was vacant thirteen days. S. ANICETUS. ANICETUS, a Syrian, the son of one John de Vicomurco, lived in the time of Antoninus Verus, concerning whom we have spoken in the Life of Pius. Which Antoninus though he were a great Phisopher, yet neglected not the pursuit of Military glory. For together with his Son Commodus Antoni∣nus, he did with great courage and success gain a Victory and a Triumph over the Germans, Marcomanni, Quadi, and Sarmatoe. At his first enter∣prizing this War, his Exchequer being so low that he had not money to pay his Soldiers, he expos'd to publick sale in the Forum Trajani all the furniture of his Palace, and all the Jewels of his Empress, But after∣wards returning home victoriously, to those who were willing to re∣store the Goods they had bought, he refunded what they paid for them; but used no force against those who refus'd to relinquish their bargains. Upon this Victory, he was very liberal to all who had done any good service to the publick; to some Provinces he remitted their accustomed Tribute; he caused to be publickly burnt in the Forum the Writings by which any man was made a Debtor to the Exchequer; and by new
Constitutions moderated the severity of the old Laws. By this means he became so much the darling of the People, that any man had a par∣ticular brand of infamy set upon him, who had not Antoninus his Ef∣figies in his House. Anicetus, that the reputation of the Church might not suffer by the extravagancy of a few men, ordained that no Clergyman should upon any pretence wear long hair; and that no Bishop should be consecrated by fewer than three of the same Order (a Constitution which was af∣terwards confirmed by the Council of Nice;) and that at the Consecra∣tion of a Metropolitan all the Bishops of the Province should be present. Moreover he ordained (as Ptolomy tells us) that no Bishop should im∣plead his Metropolitan but before the Primate or the See Apostolick; (this being also a Constitution which was afterwards confirm'd by the Council of Nice, and several succeeding Bishops of Rome;) and that all Arch-bishops should not be called Primates, but only those of them who have a particular title to that denomination; the Primates having also the  of Patriarchs, whereas the others are simply Arch-bishopsEgesippus. or Metropolitans. In his time Egestippus was a great propugner of the Christian , who, as an imitator of their manner of speaking, of whose lives he had been a diligent observer, in a very plain unaffected style wrote a History of Ecclesiastical affairs from the Passion of our Lord to the Age in which he lived. He says of himself that he came to Rome in the time of Anicetus, whom he calls the tenth Bishop from St. Peter, and that he staid there to the time of Ele, who had been Deacon to Anicetus. He inveighed much against Idolators for building sumptuous Monuments and Temples to the Dead; as particu∣larly Adrian the Emperour, who in honour to his darling Antinous, had instituted solemn Games and Prizes at the City which he built and cal∣led by his name Antinoe, and also erected a Temple and appointed priests for his Worship. Some say that Dionysius lived in the Pontificat of Anicetus but Writers are in this place very confused in their Chro∣nology, some placing Pius first, others Anicetus, and so they are in their  too. However, in an History of things so remote, and of which through the negligence of the Ancients we have so slender an ac∣count, it will be better to say something of the matters themselves, though it be some time before or after they were transacted, than alto∣gether to pass them by in silence. As for Anicetus, having at five De∣cembrian Ordinations made nineteen Presbyters, four Deacons, nine Bi∣shops, he received a Crown of Martyrdom, and was buried in the Sepulchre of  in the Via Appia, April the seventeenth. He was in the Chair eleven years, four months and three days, and by his Death the See was vacant seventeen days.
S. SOTER SOTER, a Campanian of Fundi, Son of Concordius, lived in the time of L. Antoninus Commodus. This Commodus was, (as Lampridius plays upon his name)Commodus. very  and hurtful to all his Subjects; being in nothing like his Father, save that he also, thanks to the Christian Soldiers for it, fought successfully against the Germans. In that War, when the Army of Commodus was in great straits for want of Water, 'tis said that at the Prayers of the Christian Legion, God supplied and refreshed the Romans with rain from Heaven, and at the same time destroyed the Germans with Thundershot. The truth of which the Emperour himself testified by his Letters. But at his return to Rome, he utterly re∣nounced all Virtue and goodness, and shamefully gave himself up to all manner of Luxury and uncleanness. He used, in imitation of Nero, to combat with the Gladiators, and oftentimes encountred with wild beasts in the Amphitheatre; many of the Senatours he put to death, and those especially whom he observed to be more conspicuous for ex∣traction or merit. Soter diverting his mind from the contemplation of this wretched Scene of things to the care of Ecclesiastical affairs, decreed, That no Deaconess should touch the Altar-cloth, or put the Incense upon the Censer, at the time of celebration. There is extant an Epistle of his concerning that matter, written to the Bishops of Italy. He ordained likewise that no Woman should be accounted a lawful Wife, but she whom the Priest had formally blessed, and whom her Parents had with the usual Christian solemnities given to her Husband. This Constitu∣tion he made, to remove the danger and scandal that was incident to new-married persons, from the jugling Magical tricks of lewd Fel∣lows. Indeed, Gratian ascribes this Decree to Euaristus, but whose due it is I leave the Reader to judg, for it matters not much whether it be attributed to the one or the other. During the Pontificat of Soter, as Eusebius tells us, lived Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, a person of so great parts and Industry, that he instructed not only the people of his own City and Province, but also by his Epistles the Bishops of other Cities and Provinces, For being throughly acquainted with the Wri∣tings of St. Paul, he could the more easily keep others within the bounds of their duty by the Authority which his Learning and Sanctity had gained him.  also, an Asian, Scholar to Tatianus, wrote seve∣ral things in defence of our Religion; and in particular he very hand∣somly exposed Apelles the Heretick, for worshipping a God whom heApelles. professed he did not know; for he denied Christ to be truly a God, and affirmed him to be only in appearance a Man. Some say that the Cataphrygian Heresie was at this time set on foot by Montanus. More∣over,Cataphrygae. Clemens a Presbyter of Alexandria, and Master to Origen, was now a great Writer; among other things he was Author of Strom. lib. 9. , lib. 8. and one book against the Gentiles. There are some who make Pinytus, a person of admirable Eloquence: , a fa∣mous
Poet, who wrote the Halieutics or books concerning Fishes; and Herodian the Grammarian Contemporaries to our Bishop Soter; who having at five Decembrian Ordinations made eight Presbyters, nine Dea∣cons, eleven Bishops, he died and was buried in the Via Appia, in the Sepulchre of Calistus. He was in the Chair nine years, three months, twenty one days. And the See was vacant twenty one days. S. ELEUTHERIUS. ELEUTHERIUS, a Grecian of Nicopolis, Son of Habun∣dius, lived also in the Reign of L. Antoninus Commodus. For whose flagitious Life the City of Rome smarted sorely;. for in his time the Capitol, being fired with Lightning, together with the famous Library which had cost the Ancients so much care in colle∣cting, were consumed; nor did the Neighbouring Houses escape the same calamity. Not long after another Fire brake forth, in which the Temple of Vesta, the Palace, and a good part of the City were burnt to the ground. He was of so rash and freakish a humour, that he caused the Head of a vast Colosse to be taken off, and that of his own Statue to be placed in the room of it; and in imitation of Augustus, he would needs have a month of his own name, ordering December to be called Commodus. But these things were soon changed after his Death, and himself adjudged an Enemy to mankind, such an hatred and detestation did all men entertain of his Villanies. He was strangled in the twelfth year and seventh month of his Reign. Eleutherius, soon after his entrance upon the Pontificate, received aLucius Rex. Message from Lucius King of Britain; wherein he expressed a desire that  and his Subjects might become Christians. Hereupon Eleuthe∣rius sends Fugatius and Damianus, two very religious men, to that Island to baptize the King and his People; there were at that time in Britain twenty five Heathen Priests called Flamens, and among them three sty∣led Arch-flamens, in the place of which, as Ptolomy says, were constitu∣ted three Arch-bishops; the ancient Church being wont to fix Patriarchs there, where in the time of Gentilism Proto-flamens had been seated. Furthermore, Eleutherius ordained that no person should superstitiously abstain from any sort of meat which was commonly eaten: and that no Clergy-man should be degraded before he were legally found guilty of the Crime laid to his Charge; following herein the Example of our Saviour, who so patiently bore the fault of Judas, being not yet convicted, though really guilty, that whatsoever he acted in the mean time by virtue of his Apostleship, remained firm and valid. He also pro∣hibited the passing sentence against any person accused, unless he were pre∣sent to make his defence; which was afterwards confirmed by Damasus and the Pontifical Laws. In his Pontificate the Church enjoy'd peace and tranquility, and Christianity was wonderfully propagated in the World, but especially at Rome, where many of the best quality with their Wives and Children received the Faith and were baptized. Only Apollonius, a great Oratour, was now a Martyr, having first in theApollonius.
Senate made an excellent Speech in favour of Christianity, the doing of which was then a capital Crime. Apollonius being dead, several Here∣sies very much prevailed. For the Sect of the Marcionites was divided into several Parties; some of them owning but one Principle, or God; others two; others three; thereby utterly undermining the credit of the Prophets and other discoverers of revealed Religion. Moreover Flo∣rinus and Blastus set up new Figments against the Truth, asserting God to be the Author of all kinds of evil, in contradiction to that Text, that every thing which God made was good. Opposite to theseGen. 1. were the Quotiliani, who denied God to be the author of any kind of evil, in equal contradiction to that other Text, I the Lord create evil.Esay 45. Some are of Opinion that Galen of Pergamus the famous Physician, and Julian the great Lawyer, and Fronto the Rhetorician, lived at this time; though whether they did or no, in so great a confusion of time and Story, I shall neither affirm nor deny. But I dare be confident con∣cerning Modestus and Bardesanes, the former of which wrote against Marcion, the latter against Valentinus, being now as strenuous an op∣poser, as he had been formerly a zealous follower of that Heretick. S.  upon the perusal of his books, translated out of the Syriack lan∣guage into Greek, affirms this Bardesanes to have been a wonderfully brisk ingenious Writer; And if, says he, there be so much smartness in the Translation, how much more shall we judg to be in the Original? As for , having at three Decembrian Ordinations, made twelve Presbyters, eight Deacons, fifteen Bishops, he died and was buried near S. Peter in the Vatican, May 26. He was in the Chair fif∣teen years, three months, two days, and the See was vacant five days. S. VICTOR I. VICTOR, an Asian, Son of Felix, was, as I believe, in the time of Aelius Pertinax. Which Aelius being seventy years of Age, was from the Of∣ficeAelius Per∣tinax. of City-praefect created Emperour, by a Decree of the Se∣nate. Being afterwards desired to declare his Lady Augusta, and his Son Coesar, he refused both, saying, it was enough that he himself was Em∣perour against his Will. But undergoing the reproach of that unprince∣ly Vice, Covetousnes, being so sordid as to cause the half of a Lettuce or Artichoke to be served up to his Table, he was without any oppo∣sition slain in the Palace by Didius Julianus the Lawyer, in the sixth month of his Reign. This is that Julian, who made the perpetual E∣dict,Julianus. and who in the seventh month after his coming to the Empire was vanquished and slain in a Civil War by Severus at Pons Milvius. Victor out of his care of the Affairs of the Church, decreed, that according to a former constitution of Eleutherius, as Damasus tells us, Easter should be kept upon the Sunday, which fell between the four∣teenth and twenty first day after the Phasis or appearance of the Moon in the first Month. Theophilus Bishop of Coesarea Palestinoe was obedi∣ent
to this Decree, and wrote against those who observed that Feast, as the Jews did their , always upon the fourteenth day of the Moon, whatever day of the Week it happened to be. But Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus very hotly declaimed against this Constitution, stifly contend∣ing, that according to ancient Custom it ought to be celebrated pre∣cisely on that day on which the Jews kept their . For he main∣tain'd that herein he  the Example of S.  the Apostle and others the Ancients. We, says he, observe the exact day, neither antici∣pating nor protracting it. Thus did Philip who died at Hierapolis; thus did John who leaned on our Lords bosom; thus did Polycarp, Thraseas, Me∣lito and Narcissus Bishop of Hierusalem.  some tell us, that a Council was held in Palestine, at which were present , Irenoeus, Narcissus, Polycarp, Bacchylus, all Bishops of great Note in Asia. But the whole matter was afterwards refer'd to the Council of Nice, in which it was decreed that Easter should be kept on the Sunday following the fourteenth day of the Moon, to avoid all appearance of Judaizing.  also ordain∣ed that in cases of necessity Proselytes might at their  be baptized in any kind of Water or at any time of the year.  his Pontificate there flourished many learned men. As for instance, Appion, who wrote the Hexaëmeron, or account of the six days work of Creation;  Samosatenus, who together, with Theodotus, held our Saviour to have been a meer man; Sixtus, who wrote of the , and Ara∣bianus, who published several Treatises of Christian Doctrine. Now also one Judas wrote a Cronology to the tenth year of Severus the Emperor; wherein yet he is guilty of a mistake in asserting that Antichrist would come in his time; an Errour into which I suppose him to have fallen from the observation he had made of the Cruelty and other Vices of the Age, which he saw now grown to such an heighth, that he thought Almighty God could not bear with mankind any longer. By which very thing Lactantius and S. Austin themselves were after deceived. Our Victor, having first written some books concerning Religion, died and was buried near S.  in the Vatican, whose Feast we observe on the twenty eighth of July. He was in the Chair ten years; three months, ten days, And the See was vacant twelve days. S. ZEPHYRINUS. ZEPHERINUS a Roman, Son of Habundius, lived in the time of Severus the Emperour. Who being by birth an Asrican, of the Town of Leptis, up∣on. the death of Julian succeeded in the Empire, and took the Sur∣name of Pertinax. He was first an Officer of the Exchequer, then a Colonel in the Army, till by several steps he advanced himself to the Dignity of Imperator. He was of a very frugal temper; the cruelty of his nature was heightened by the many Wars he had been engaged in; and he exercised great Valour in defending, and great care in go∣verning
his Subjects. He was eminent not only for his skill in Arms, but in Letters too, taking very much delight in the study of Philosophy. He conquer'd the Parthians and Adiabeni, and made Arabia Interior a Province of the Roman Empire. For this Atchievement he triumphed, and upon the Arch erected to him in the Capitol he was styled Parthicus Arabicus and Adiabenicus. Moreover, he adorned the City with publick buildings. For he made those  from his own name are called the Severian Baths, and erected the famous Septizonium; that part of which noble Pile that is now remaining, hardly  being pull'd down some years ago by order of Pope Paul the second, to make the best of the stones. But Bishop Zephyrinus  more intent upon Ecclesiastical than se∣cular Affairs, decreed, that every Deacon and Priest should be ordained in the presence of the Faithful both Clergy and Laity: which was af∣terwards  in the Council of Chalcedon. He decreed likewise that the  at the Communion should not be consecrated, as had been  used, in a wooden Chalice, but in Glass. Though this  was altered in following times; wherein order was given that it should  be in Wood, because of its spunginess, whereby some of  might soak into it; nor of Glass, because of its brittleness, and the  of its being broken; nor of any ordinary course mettal by  the ill taste it might contract from it; but only in  of Gold or Silver, or at least of Pewter; as appears in the Canons of  Councils  and Reims. He also ordained, that all  of fourteen years of Age should communicate every year upon Easter-day, which in after-times Innocent the third extended not only to Communion, but Confession too. He commanded likewise, that no Bishop being  by his Patriarch, or Primate, or Metropoli∣tan, should have sentence pass'd against him but by the Authority of the See . Lastly, he ordained that when the Bishop cele∣brated, all his Presbyters should be present. In his time flourished He∣raclius, who wrote a Comment upon the Apostle; Maximus who in a. large book  the great Controversie of this Age (viz. concerningMaximus. the Author  and the Original of Matter;) Candidus who comCandidus. posed an ; and Origen, who in the tenth year of Severus. , a  being rais'd against the Christians, and his   put to death for his Religion, whom he himself being yet a Youth, did very much confirm in his constancy and Resolution, was left with his Mother a Widow and six Brethren in a very low condition; all his Fathers Estate being confiscated, because they owned Christ to be the true God. Hereupon he was forced to teach a Gram∣mar-School to get a livelihood for himself and his Relations; and among others he had for his Scholar Plutarchus, who afterwards became a Mar∣tyr. Not long after applying himself wholly to Religion, he undertook the Office of a Catechist or Preacher. He was a person of very great parts and skil'd in all Languages and kinds of Learning. He was won∣derfully temperate and abstemious as to meat and drink and all other things; imitating the poverty of Christ, and for many years walking bare-foot; and moreover in his younger days he made himself an Ex∣ample of that passage in the Gospel, there be Eunuchs which have madeMat. 19. 12. themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake. Many were so
encouraged in Religion by his Pattern, that they did with great  lay down their lives for Christianity, and particularly a Woman named , who was put to death by pouring scalding Pitch up∣on her Head. As for Zephyrinus, having at four Decembrian Ordina∣tions, made thirteen Presbyters, seven Deacons, thirteen Bishops; he died in the time of Severus, and was buried in the Via Appia, not  from the Sepulchre of Calistus, August the 26th. He was in the Chair eight years, seven months, ten days, and the See was vacant six days. S. CALISTUS I. CALISTUS, an Italian of , Son of Domitius, lived in the time of Severus, an Emperour whose fortune changed with his mind; For no sooner did he raise the fifth Persecution against the Christians,. but he was presently exposed to a multitude of dangers, and engaged in several Wars; on the one side by Piscennius Niger who was the cause of great Commotions in Syria, on the other by Clodius Albinus, whom yet he vanquish'd with great slaughter in Gaul. But passing over from thence into Britain, being deserted of his Friends, and accompanied only with calamities, he died at  in the fifth year of his Empire, leaving be∣hind him two Sons, Bassianus and Geta; the latter of which was look'd upon and put to death as a publick Enemy, both because of his abo∣minably dissolute , but especially because he had with his own hand slain Papinian the great Asylum of the Civil Law. But Bassianus receiving from the  the name of Antoninus, became possess'd of the Empire; and took the  of Caracalla from a kind of long Vests. which he bestow'd by way of largess among the . He was of a nature more cruel than his Father; and so impotently vicious, thatthere was no kind of Villany which he was not guilty of. He is said to have slain his Brother Geta, and to have married his own Step-mother. He left behind him nothing great and magnificent to perpetuate his me∣mory, save only the Antoninian Baths, (which bore his name as being begun by him, but were indeed finish'd by the Emperour Alexander Se∣verus) and the Causey he made in the Via Nova. He made it Capital for any to wear Amulets about their necks for the cure of Quartan or Tertian Agues. But at length undertaking a War against the Parthians, he was surprized by his Enemies between Edessa and Charroe, and stab'd in the seventh year of his Reign, as he was alighting off his Horse to ease Nature. But during the most confused state of things and  the Govern∣ment of the most dissolute Emperours, Calistus was not at all diverted from his purpose of Establishing a solemn Fast three times in the year, to be observed on the Sabbath or Saturday, particularly to implore a blessing upon the fruits of the Earth, Corn, Wine and Oyl; viz. in the fourth month, the seventh and the tenth, beginning the year according to the custom of the Jews. Though afterwards he changed his opinion,
and appointed it at the four seasons of the year, viz. Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; at which times in succeeding Ages holy Orders were , which before was used to be only in the month of De∣cember. He also ordained that Accusations against Clergymen should not be admitted of in any Court if the informers were either infa∣mous, or liable to just suspicion, or avowed Enemies of the accused. Moreover, he adjudged those to be Hereticks, who maintained, that Priests after they  once convicted of any notorious Crime, were not to be restored to their former Dignity, though they shewed never so great signs of their repentance. Damasus tells us, that he built Saint Maries Church in Trastevere; but I cannot imagine that of his founding to be the magnificent vast one which continues there at this time, since in those days of frequent Persecution all things were carried secretly, and the Christians had only small Chappels, and those private and hid∣den, and for the most part under-ground. He likewise built a Burial∣place,  by his own name, in the Via Appia, at the very place where the ashes of a multitude of Martyrs had been formerly reposited; so that  Reader must not think it strange that we have already said of several that they were  in the Coemetery of , though it had not that name till now. I  self with some of my Friends have religiously went to view it,  the ashes and bones of the Mar∣tyrs are  to be seen, and  and Chappels in which the Chri∣stians privately communicated, when through the Edicts of some Em∣perours they could not do it publickly. In his time lived Tertullian, anTertullian. African, the Son of a Proconsular Centurion, whom S. Hierom reckoneth next to  and Apollonius the principal of the Latin Writers. He was a man of excellent Parts, and wrote a multitude of books. I have  (saith ) at Concordia a little Town in Italy one Paul, who said, that when he was very young he was at Rome acquainted with S. Cyprian's Amanuensis, who assured him, that S. Cyprian never passed a day without the reading of Tertullian. But having continued half his life-time a Presbyter at Rome, through the Envy and Reproaches of the Roman Clergy he afterwards  Montanist, and wrote several Pieces against the Orthodox Doctrine, particularly those de Pudicitiâ de Monogamiâ, and de . He also composed six Books against Apollonius. At the same time likewise Origen flourished, and did greatOrigen. service for the Church. For he opposed the Heresie of the Ebionites, who asserted our  to be a  Man, the Son of Joseph and Mary, and press'd the observation of Mosaical Rites; both which Er∣rours were  by Symmachus. Moreover, by his Learning he brought over to the Orthodox faith one Ambrosius, who had been (as  ) a , or (as Hierom will have it) a Marcio∣nite; to whom with  a Presbyter, he dedicated his book de .  that violent opposer of Christianity, and who was Origen's , cannot yet sometimes  commending him; calling him  most learned and Prince of Philosophers, acknow∣ledging  he was prosoundly skill'd in Platonism, and finding no fault in him but his  a Christian. S. Hierom himself says that he wrote six thousand Volumes; though that Father and S. Austin too tell us, that he was erroneous in most  them, and particularly in his book of Go∣vernment, entituled ; yet Pamphilus the Martyr, and Eu∣sebius,
and Russinus a Priest of Aquileia, appear very much in his Praise and Defence. As for Calistus, having at five Decembrian Ordinations, made sixteen Presbyters, four Deacons, eight Bishops: he was crown'd with Martyrdom, and was buried in the Coemetery of Calepodius, in the Via Aurelia, three miles distant from the City, October 14th. He was in the Chair six years, ten months, ten days. The See was then va∣cant six days. S. URBANUS I. VRBANUS, a Roman, Son of Pontianus, was Bishop of Rome in the time of the Emperour M. Aurelius Antoninus, Anno Dom. 226. U. C. 970. This Antoninus, supposed to be the base Son of , coming toAntoninus. Rome, and being advanced to the Empire not without an universal ex∣pectation of good from him, took the name of Heliogabalus from the Sun, so called by the Phoenicians, to which he built a Temple and was himself a Priest of it. But he led a life so contrary to the hopes and opinion men had entertain'd of him, that he has left no other memory of himself, than that of his exorbitant Villanies and all kinds of debau∣chery. For he violated the chastity of the Vestal Virgins, made his Palace no better than a Stews, and in a rage commanded Sabinus, a man of consular dignity (and to whom Ulpian the famous Civilian wrote) to be immediately put to death. He conferred all places of trust and honour upon the vilest of men, with whom he was wont sometimes to make himself sport after this manner: he would make them lie down with him at Supper, but it should be upon large bellows, which be∣ing raised and distended, they would all of a sudden tumble down un∣der the Table. He had such a loud and undecent way of laughing, that in a full Theatre his Voice might be heard above all the Com∣pany. He was the first among the Romans who wore Velvet, and used Tables and other Utensils of Silver. When some of his Friends ad∣vised him to beware that by his luxury he did not reduce himself to want; Can I do better, says he, than to make my self my own and my Wives Heir? He was once so extravagantly freakish as to cause a Collection to be made of ten thousand pound weight of Spiders, from whence he pretended an estimate might be taken of the bigness of the City of Rome; and to get together ten thousand Mice, and as many Weazels, and Rats. These mad pranks by degrees rendred him so con∣temptible in the eyes of all men, that himself and his Mother were both slain in a Military Tumult. 'Tis said that some Syrian Priests ha∣ving told him, that he should undergo a violent death; he  fairly provided himself of a decent Scarlet Silken Halter to do his own work withal. He died in the fourth year of his Reign, at the same time when the City of Nicopolis in Palestine (formerly called (Emmaus) was built; Africanus the Historian and Chronologer, undertaking an Embassie to promote that Affair.
Urban, who lived in the time of this Monster, not of Dioclesian (as some would have it) by his eminent Piety and Learning proselyted multitudes to the Christian Faith; and among others particularly Vale∣rianus, an excelient Person, and contracted to S. Cecilia, with his Bro∣ther Tiburtius, both which afterwards suffered Martyrdom with great constancy of mind; as did also the espoused Virgin her self, in her Fa∣thers house, which was at her request consecrated and made a Church by Urban. The same Urban also ordained that the Church might re∣ceive Estates in Land or Houses, given and bequeathed to her by any of the Faithful, but that the Revenues of them should not be any ones property, but for the common good be distributed among the whole Clergy to every one his share; a Constitution long since antiquated through the coverousness and rapacity of following Ages. Some attri∣bute to him the distinction of the four stated annual Times of Fasting or Ember-weeks, which through mens ignorance were before kept very confusedly. In his time lived Tryphon one of Origen's Disciples, re∣markableTryphon. markable for the book he composed concerning the red Heiser in Deu∣teronomy. Minutius Felix also a famous Pleader at Rome, wrote a Dia∣logue,Minutius Felix. in which he introduces a Christian and an Heathen disputing; besides another book against the Mathematicians, of which Lactantius makes mention. Moreover Alexander, Bishop of Hierusalem, at thisAlexander. time founded the famous Library there, by which he has gained so great a reputation. As for Urban himself, having at five Decembrian Ordinations, made nine Presbyters, five Deacons, nine Bishops; he re∣ceived a Crown of Martyrdom, and was buried in the Coemetery of Pretexatus, in the Via Tiburtina; having been in the Chair four years, ten months, twelve days. And the See was vacant thirty days. S. PONTIANUS. PONTIANUS, a Roman, Son of Calphurnius, lived in the time of the Emperour Alexander, in the Year nine hundred se∣venty four from the building of Rome, and the Year of our Lord two hundred forty five. But between the Reign of Heliogabalus and Alexander there are rec∣koned three other Emperours, Macrinus, Diadumenus and Albinus; whose Names I intended to have left out, not only because they go∣verned but a very little while, but chiefly because they did nothing memorable: only Albinus became notorious to Posterity for his Glut∣tony, eating, if we may believe the Authority of Cordus, an hundred large Peaches, ten choice Melons, five hundred dryed Figs, and four hundred Oysters at one Meal. But to pass by these Monsters of men, I come to Alexander, a singular pattern of Virtue, who being createdAlexander Severus. Emperour by the favour of the Senate and the Army, immediately ap∣plyed himself to the setling of the Commonwealth, which had been very much impaired by the miscarriages of former Princes. To which end he made use of Julius Frontinus a vert learned Man, and Ulpi∣an and Paul, two excellent Civilians, as Assistants and Coadjutors
in that Affair. He was so upright in all his dealings, that no man could ever complain of any Injury receiv'd from him: and so far removed from any kind of Vanity or Ostentation, that he appear'd but once in the costly Robes belonging to his Office, while he was Consul. All those who in their Addresses to him were sneakingly obsequious in their car∣riage, or affectedly complaisant in their words, he would reject as fawn∣ing Fellows; for he was so wise and discerning that no man could im∣pose upon him; one instance of which was his proceeding with Turi∣nus, to whom, for his taking Bribes upon the appearance of his being the Emperours mighty Favourite, he allotted this remarkable punish∣ment; that being bound to a Stake in the Transitory Forum, a place of greatest Concourse, and the most publick thorow-fare, he should be suffo∣cated with smoak; the common Cryer in the mean time proclaiming these words, He that sold smoak, is punish'd with smoak. Though his Mo∣ther Mammoea, as she was a Woman, had a great love for Money, yet he was altogether above it; and for Jewels, he slighted them, as femi∣nine Trifles, being often wont to say, that in Virgil (whom he called the Plato of the Poets) there were more, and more precious Gems to be found. The Revenue which arose from Bawds, and Whores, and Ca∣tamites, he forbad to be laid up in the sacred Treasury, and judg'd it more fit to be assign'd to the defraying some publick Charge, as the re∣pairing of the Theatre, the Cirque, the Amphitheatre, and the Sta∣dium. Having after great search gotten a Collection of the Images of Famous Men, he caus'd them to be set up in the Transitory Forum; and likewise finish'd and beautified those which are at this time call'd the Antonian Baths, having been begun by Antoninus Caracalla. He had it in his design to acknowledg our Saviour to be a God, and build a Temple to him; and did actually set up the Effigies of Christ and A∣braham, and Orpheus in his Domestick Chappel. Being renowned for so many excellent qualities, and created Emperour while he was very young, he immediately engag'd in a War against the Persians, and brave∣ly vanquish'd their King Xerxes. In reforming the Military Discipline he was so strict, that he cashier'd some whole Legions at once; which severity of his was the occasion of his being slain in a tumult of the Sol∣diers at Mentz. Pontianus being now Bishop of Rome, at the instigation of the Idol∣Priests, both he and Philip a Presbyter, were at the Emperours Com∣mand transported from the City of Rome to the Island Sardinia, much about that time when Germanus a Presbyter of Antioch, and Beryllus a Bishop of Arabia, were converted to the Truth by Origen. The He∣resie of Beryllus was his denial that Christ had any Being before his Incarnation. He wrote some small Pieces, and particularly certain E∣pistles, in which he returns thanks to Origen for his sound Doctrine. There is extant likewise a Dialogue between them, wherein Origen con∣victs Beryllus of Heresie. As for Origen himself, he was a Person of soOrigen. great Wit and Learning that seven Amanuenses taking their turns, were scarce sufficient for him. He had also as many Transcribers, and young Women well-skill'd in Writing, all which he wearied out with the copi∣ousness and fertility of his Inventions. Being sent for from Antioch to Rome by Mammoea the pious Emperours Mother; he was in great e∣steem with her, and having fully instructed her in the Christian Faith,
he returned to Antioch. But Pontianus, having suffered divers calami∣ties and severe Torments for the Faith of Christ, at length died in Sar∣dinia; his body being afterward at the request of the whole Clergy brought back with great Veneration to Rome by Bishop Fabian, and in∣terred in the Via Appia in the Coemetery of Calistus. At the Ordina∣tions which he held twice in the Month of December, he made six Pres∣byters, five Deacons, and six Bishops. He was in the Chair nine years, five months, two days, and from his Martyrdom the See was vacant ten days. S. ANTERUS. ANTERUS, a Grecian, the Son of Romulus, was made Bishop of Rome in the time of Maximine; who Anno U. C. 987. ha∣ving fortunately managed the War in Germany, was elected  by the Army without any Authority of the Senate. He was a Man of a mighty Stature, being above eight foot high;Maximine. and had a Foot of such a magnitude, that it is since become Proverbial, when men speak of a tall Silly Fellow, to say, he needs Maximine's Hose. His Wives Bracelet served him only for a Ring; and his Appe∣tite was so large, that he would drink a Rundlet of nine Gallons of Wine at a Sitting. He raised the sixth Persecution against the Chri∣stians, but in the third year of his Reign himself together with his Son Maximine was slain by Pupienus at Aquileia a City which he besieged, and so an end was put to his Life and that Persecution together; by which means Mammea a Christian Lady, and the famous Origene, the blood of both which he very much thirsted for, escaped his Cruelty. 'Tis reported, that during this Siege of Aquileia, when their bowstrings failed, the Women of the City supplied that want with their hair; for which reason in honour to those Matrons the Senate dedicated a Temple to Venus the Bald. Anterus was the first who, for the sake of one Maximus a Martyr, ordained that the Acts of the Martyrs diligently search'd after should be committed to Writing by certain Notaries appointed to that pur∣pose, and being written should be reposited in the Treasury of the Church, that so the memory of good men might not perish with their Lives. He ordered likewise that no Bishop should be translated from his first Bishoprick to another for his private Need or Benefit, but only for the sake of the Flock committed to him, and by the leave of the Supreme Bishop. A Constitution which at this day is made void by common Practice; for now the Prelates being intent upon their own Profit and Pleasure, are always looking out for a fatter; Not that they are at all inquisitive how they may feed a larger Flock, but the great Enquiry is, how much any See may be made worth yearly. There is very little discourse among them concerning the care of Souls, but very much concerning the encrease of their Revenues; that thereby they may be able to keep more Horses, and have a greater Retinue ofJulius Afri∣canus. useless lubberly Servants. In his time flourished Julius Africanus, an
eminent Writer, who as  tells us, founded a famous Library at Coesarea, This   the Reign of M. Aurelius Antoninus, undertook an Embassie for the rebuilding the City of Emmaus, which as I have al∣ready said, was  Nicopolis. He wrote also an Epistle to Origen, shewing that the story of Susanna was not received among the Jews: against whom Origen afterwards penn'd a large Epistle up∣on that Argument. At this time likewise flourished Geminus, a Pres∣byter of the Church of Antioch, and Heraclas Patriarch of the Church of Alexandria. As for Anterus himself, having consecrated only one Bishop, he suffered Martyrdom, and was interr'd in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia, on the third of January. He was in the Chair eleven years, one month, twelve days, and the See was then va∣cant thirteen days. S. FABIANUS. FABIANUS, a Roman, the Son of Fabius, continued from the Reign of Gordianus and Philip to that of the Emperour Decius. Gordianus getting the Empire, and having given a mighty Defeat toGordianus. the Parthians that made head against him, in his return home to Tri∣umph was slain by the two Philips. His chief commendation was, that he is reported to have had sixty two thousand books in his Li∣brary. Philip, Anno U. C. 997. having brought home his Army out of SyriaPhilip. into Italy, reigned together with his Son, whom he joyned to him as a Partner in the Empire, five years. He was the first Christian Empe∣rour, and 'tis said of him, that he never presumed to go to the holy Mysteries, before he had confessed. After the third year of his Reign, the thousandth year from the building of the City being compleated, he caused to be celebrated the Secular Games, which were wont to be re∣peated every hundredth year. They were first instituted by Valerius  after the expulsion of the Kings, and had their name from the Latin word seculum, which signifies the space of an hundred years. But by the fraud of Decius, both the Philips were slain, though in di∣vers places; the Father being put to death at Verona, the Son at Rome. Fabianus distributed the several Regions of the City among the seven Deacons, by whom the Acts of the Martyrs written by the Notaries were to be collected and digested, for the example of others who pro∣fessed the Faith of Christ. He also built Monuments in the Coemeteries for the honour of the Martyrs. Further, he ordained, that every year at some Sacrament the Chrism or holy Oyl should be new consecrated, and the old burnt in the Church. In his time sprang up the Novatian Heresie. For Novatianus a Presbyter of the City of Rome, out of anNovatianus. eager desire of being Bishop put all things into a great disorder, that the Pontificate might not come into the hands of Cornelius, who was Successor to Fabianus. Having separated himself from the Church, he gave to himself and his Followers the Denomination of the Pure; and
denied that Apostates, though truly penitent, ought to be received into the Church. Upon this occasion a Council of sixty Bishops, as many Presbyters, and several Deacons was held at Rome, in which the opi∣nion of Novatianus was condemned as false, for that according to the example of our Saviour, Pardon is to be denied to no man that repents. At the same time Origen opposed the heretical Doctrine of certain per∣sons, who affirmed, that the Souls of men died with their bodies, and were both together to be raised again at the Resurrection; as also that of the Helchesaites, who altogether rejected the Apostle S. Paul, and asserted, that though a man in his Torments should outwardly deny Christ, yet he might be free from Guilt, provided his heart were up∣right. The same Author wrote against Celsus an Epicurean, who op∣posed the Christians; and sent Letters concerning Religion to the Em∣perour Philip and his Wife Severa; and wrote also many things con∣cerning the order of Faith to Fabianus. Alexander Bishop of Cappa∣docia, having from a desire to see the holy Places, made a Journey to Jerusalem, was there compell'd by Narcissus Bishop of that City and now grown old, to be his Assistant in the Administration of that Bi∣shoprick. But the Persecution under Decius growing hot, at the same that Babylas suffered Martyrdom at Antioch, he being carried to Coesarea, was there put to death for the faith of Christ. As for Fabianus (con∣cerning whom it is commonly believed, that, when enquiry was made for a Successour to Anterus, a Dove lighted upon his head in the same shape with that which descended upon the head of Jesus at Jordan) he received a Crown of Martyrdom, after that at five Ordinations, which he held in the month of December, he had ordained twenty two Pres∣byters, seven Deacons, eleven Bishops; and was interr'd in the Coeme∣tery of Calistus in the Via Appia, Jan. the 19th. He was in the Chair fourteen years, eleven months, eleven days, and by his death the See was vacant six days. S. CORNELIUS. CORNELIUS, a Romam, the Son of Castinus, lived in the times of the Emperour Decius, Who being born at Buda in Hungary, upon the death of theDecius. two Philips, assumed the Empire, proving a bitter Enemy to the Chri∣stians, because those Philips had been favourers of their Religion. But having with his Son Caesar reigned only two years, he was so suddenly cut off by the Goths, that not so much as his dead body was ever found. A just Judgment upon him, who raising the seventh Persecution, had put to death a multitude of most holy Men. During the Pontificate of Cornelius, whose Judgment was, that Apostates upon their Repentance ought to be received, Novatus irregularly ordained Novatianus and Nicostratus; upon which occasion the Confessour's who had fallen off from Cornelius, being of the same opinion with Maximus the Presbyter and Moyses, reconciled themselves to the Church again, and thereby gained the name of Confessours indeed. But not long after,
these Hereticks pressing hard upon him, Cornelius is banished to Centum∣celioe; to him Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, being himself imprison'd, wrote Letters, by which he came to understand both the calamity of his Friend and the confirmation of his own Exile. There are extant  other Epistles of Cyprian to Cornelius, full of Religion and Piety, but the choicest of them is accounted to be that wherein he accuses and condemns Novatus a certain Disciple of his. Concerning the same He∣resie, Dionysius B. of Alexandria, who had once been Scholar to Origen, wrote to Cornelius; and in another Epislle reproves Novatianus, for ha∣ving deserted the Communion of the Roman Church, and pretending that he was forced against his will to take the  upon him; to whom he thus replies, That thou wert (says he) O Novatian, chosen to that Dignity against thy Will, will appear when thou dost volunta∣rily leave it. Cornelius, before he went into banishment, at the Instance of Lucina a holy , by night removed the bodies of S.  and S.  out  the publick burial places, where they seemed to be less secure, that of S. Paul was by Lucina her self reposited in ground of her own in the  Oxiensis, near the place where he suffer'd, and that of Peter was by  laid near the place where he also was Mar∣tyr'd, not far  the Temple of Apollo. But when Decius came to understand that  had received Leters from Cyprian, he caused him to be brought from Ceutumcelioe to Rome; and in the Temple of Tel∣lus, the  Praefect being , he thus  with him, Are  ()  to  thus , that neither regarding the gods, nor fearing the commands and threatning of Princes, you keep a  tending to endanger the publick Weal? To whom Cor∣nelius replied, That the Letters which he receiv'd and return'd, were only concerning the Praises of Christ, and the Design of the Redem∣ption of Souls, lut contain'd nothing in them tending to the Diminu∣tion of the Empire. At this Decius being enraged, gave order that the holy man should first be scourged with a kind of Whips that had small globes of Lead  to the end of them; that afterwards he should be carried to the Temple of Mars to pay Adoration to his Image, and upon his refusal so to do, that he should be put to death. The good man, as they were leading him to Punishment, disposed of what he had to Stephen the Arch-deacon; and afterwards upon the fifth of May was beheaded. Lucina, with some of the Clergy, buried his body by night in a Grotto of hers in the Via Appia, nor far from the Coemetery of Calistus. There are some who write that the Bishop suf∣fered under Gallus and Volusianus, but I rather give credit to Damasus, who affirms Decius to have been the Author of his Martyrdom. Cor∣nelius held two Ordinations in the Month of December, in which he made four Presbyters, four Deacons, seven Bishops. He sat in the Chair two years, three days, and by his death the See was vacant thirty five days.
S. LUCIUS I. LUCIUS, by birth a Roman, his Father's Name Porphyrius, was chosen Bishop, when Gallus Hostilianus was Emperour. Gallus associated to himself in the Government his Son Volusia∣nus;Gallus. in whose times there arose so great a Plague to revenge the cause of Christianity, that there were few Families, much less Cities and Provinces, which had not their share in the publick Calamity. But while Gallus and Volusianus were engaging in a Civil War against Aemilianus, who had attempted an alteration of the Government, they were both kill'd at , before they had compleated the second year of their Empire. Aemilianus, a person of obscure birth, was slain e're he had possess'd hisAemilianus usurped Power three months; and soon after Valerianus and Gallienus were chosen Emperours, the former by the Army in Rhetia and Nori∣cum, the latter at Rome by the Senate. Their Government proved very pernicious to the Roman State, by the means of their own Pusillanimity and the  they exercised against the Christians. For both the Ger∣mans had marched forward as far as Ravenna, laying all  where ever they came with Fire and Sword, and also Valerianus himself makingValerianus. War in Mesopotamia, was taken Prisoner by the Parthians and forced to live in the most ignominious servitude; for Sapores King of Persia made use of him for a Footstool when he got up on Horseback. A Punishment which justly  him for this reason, that as soon as he was seiz'd of the Empire, he was the eighth from Nero who command∣ed that the Christians should be put to Tortures, be made to worship Idols, or upon their refusal be put to death. Gallienus, being terrisied. by this manifest Judgment of God, suffered the Christians to live quiet∣ly. But it was now too late, for by the Divine Permission, the Bar∣barians had already made Inroads upon the Roman borders, and certain pernicious Tyrants arose; who overthrew at home what was left un∣destroyed by the forein Enemy.  hereupon leaves the care of the Publick, and spending his time very dissolutely at , was there slain. Lucius, upon the death of Volusianus, being released from banish∣ment, at his return to Rome, ordained, that every Bishop  be accompanied where-ever he went with two Presbyters and three Dea∣cons, as witnesses of his Life and Actions. In his time suffered Saint Cyprian; who was first a Professor of Rhetorick, and afterward, as St.S. Cyprian. Hierem tells us, at the persuasion of Coecilius the Presbyter from whom he took his -, becoming a Christian, he gave his Estate to the Poor. Having  first ordained a Presbyter, and then Bishop of Carthage, he was  to death under  and Volusianus. His Life and Martyrdom were  well written by Pontius a Presbyter and his Companion in . And it ought not to be forgotten, that Cyprian before he  was reconciled to the Opinion of the Church of Rome, that  were not to be re-baptized, but to be receiv'd without any further Ceremony than that of Imposition of Hands; a matter about which there had been formerly a great Controversie be∣tween
him and Cornelius. But to return to Lucius; before his Martyr∣dom, which he suffered at the command of Valerianus, he delivered up his Ecclesiastical Power to  the Arch-deacon. He conferred holy Orders thrice in the month of December, ordaining four Presby∣ters, four Deacons, seven Bishops. He was interred in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia, Aug. the 25th. He was in the Chair three years, three months, three days, and by his death the See was vacant thirty five days. S. STEPHANUS I. STEPHANUS, a Roman, the Son of Julius, was chosen Bishop when the Roman Empire seem'd to be utterly ruin'd; and particularly at the time when Posthumus  his U∣surped Power in Gallia, though not without great advantage to the Publick. For he governed very well ten years together, freed the CountreyPosthumus. from Hostility, and restored that Province to its ancient Form. But being afterwards kill'd at Mentz in a tumult of the Soldiers, Victorinus succeeded him, who was indeed an excellent Soldier, but being excesVictorinus. ssively incontinent and adulterous, was slain at Cologne. Stephanus applying himself to the Regulation of the Church, or∣dained that the Priests and other Ministers should not use their sacred Vestments any where but in the Church, and during the performance of Divine Offices; lest otherwise they should incur the Punishment of Belshazzar King of Babylon for touching the holy Vessels with prophane hands. Concerning the Re-baptization of those who returned to the Faith, he was of the same Judgment with Cornelius his Predecessor, and thought it by no means lawful to communicate with those who re-baptized them; Whereupon Dionysius, who had formerly concurred in opinion about the matter with those of Carthage and the East, both his and their Sentiments of it being now altered, writes to Stephen, and encourages him from the assurance that both the Asian and African Churches were now reconciled to the Judgment of the Roman See con∣cerning it. About the same time Malchion a Presbyter of Antioch, a personMalchion of extraordinary Eloquence, became very useful to the Church of God, inPresbyter. writing against Paulus Samosatenus the Bishop of that place, who en∣deavoured to revive the Opinion of Artemon, affirming Christ to have been a meer man, and that he had no Existence till he was conceived by the Virgin Mary. An Opinion which being afterwards condemned in the Council of Antioch by general consent, this Malchion in the name of the Synod wrote a large Epistle to the Christians concerning it. As for Stephanus, when he had by his Example and Persuasion converted a multitude of Gentiles to Christianity, being seized by Gal∣lienus, as some say, or else by those who upon the Edict of Decius were appointed to persecute the Christians, he himself, together with many others his Proselytes, was hurried away to Martyrdom; and having suffered, he was interred in the Coemetery of Calistus in the
Via Appia, August the 2d, after that he had at two Decembrian Ordina∣tions, made six Presbyters, five Deacons, three Bishops. He was in the Chair seven years, five months, two days; and the See was va∣cant two and twenty days. S. SIXTUS II. SIXTUS, an Athenian, of a Philosopher became a Christian the Decian and Valerian Persecution yet continuing. But it will not be foreign to our present purpose to go on, as we have begun, to give some account of the other Tyrants, till we come to the true Successour. Victorinus therefore being slain in Gallia, Tetricus a Senator, being at that time Governour of Aquitain, was in his absence chosen Emperour by the Soldiers. But while these things were transacting in Gallia, Odenatus overcomes the the Persians, defends Syria, and  Mesopotamia as far as Ctesiphon. At this time in Ptolemais, anciently called Barce, a City of Pentapo∣lis, there was broach'd a Doctrine, full of blasphemies against God the Father, and against Christ, whom it denied to be the Son of the most high God and the first-born of every Creature, and against the Holy Ghost, whose being it disowned. The Assertors of it were called , from Sabellius the author of this perverse Sect. What shall ISabellius. say of that carnal opinion of Cerinthus? who affirmed, that ChristCerinthus, should personally Reign upon the earth a thousand years, (from whence by the Greeks he was called a Chiliast.) Being himself a man of un∣bounded Lust and Luxury, he feigned a great plenty of delicious Viands and a great variety of beautiful Women to be the principal Ingredients of the happiness of that Kingdom, Of the same opinion likewise was Nepos, a Bishop in some parts of Egypt, who affirmed, that the SaintsNepos. were to Reign with Christ on the Earth, in the highest enjoyment of all sensual delights and pleasures; (from whom his brutish followers were called Nepotiani.) Sixtus had it some time in his mind to baffle and suppress these opinions, but being accused for preaching the faith of Christ contrary to the Emperours Edict, he was taken and led to the Temple of Mars, where he must either offer sacrifice to the Idol, or upon his  be put to death. As he was going forth to punish∣ment, Laurence his Arch-deacon thus bespake him; Whither art thou going, O my Father, without thy Son? Whither, O best of Bishops, art thou hastning without thy Attendants? To whom Sixtus answered, I do not forsake thee, O my Son; there are yet greater conflicts behind which thou art to undergo for the faith of Christ; within three days, thou as a dutiful Deacon shalt follow me thy Bishop; in the mean time, if thou hast any stock lying by thee, distribute it all to the Poor. On the same day with Sixtus, which was the eighth of August, there were executed six Deacons, viz. Felicissimus, Agapetus, Januarius, Magus, Innocentius, Stephanus. And on the third day after, August the tenth, the same Lawrence, with Claudius the Sub-deacon, and Seuerus the Pres∣byter, and Crescentius the Reader, and Romanus the Door-keeper, were
all put to death together, though with several kinds of Tortures; a∣mong which it is said that Laurence was broiled upon a Gridiron. Vincentius, who had been Scholar to Sixtus, being gone into Spain, could not be present at this Martyrdom. Sixtus, during his Pontificate having at two Decembrian Ordinations made four Presbyters, seven Deacons, two Bishops, his body was interr'd in the Coemetery of Ca∣listus in the Via Appia. The other Martyrs lye in the Coemetery of Proetextatus in the Via Tiburtina, Sixtus sat in the Chair two years, ten months, twenty three days. And the See was vacant thirty five days. S. DIONYSIUS. DIONYSIUS, whose original Damasus could not trace, be∣ing of a Monk advanced to the Pontifical Dignity, forthwith allotted to the several Presbyters in the City of Rome their several Churches and Coemeteries, and to others elsewhere  their respective Parishes and Dioceses; that so every one might be con∣fined within his own bounds and limits. His contemporary Emperour I take to have been Claudius, whoClaudius. when by consent of the Senate he had undertaken the Government, made War upon, and with incredible slaughter defeated the Goths who had for fifteen years together wasted Illyricum and Macedonia. Here∣upon it was decreed by the Senate, that in the Council-house a golden Shicld, in the Capital a golden Statue should be erected to his Ho∣nour. But falling sick at Sirmium, he died before the second year of his Empire was compleated. Upon his death Quintillus his BrotherQuintillus. was straightway chosen Emperour by the Army; a person of singular moderation, and the only man who deserved to succeed his Brother; but he also governed a very little time, being slain in the seventeenth day of his Reign. During the Pontificate of Dionysius, Paulus Samosatenus deserting thePaulus Sa∣mosatenus. Orthodox Faith, revived the Heresie of Artemon. This Paul being made Bishop of Antioch in the room of Demetrianus, behaved himself with excessive haughtiness and affectation; for as he passed along he affected to read and dictate Letters, a great throng of Attendants go∣ing before and following him; so that for the sake of his Arrogance, multitudes were very strongly prejudiced against the Christian Religion. But had they lived in our times, wherein Pride and Pomp, not to say Luxury it self, are at their heighth; what would they think to see Prelates led on by so many young Sparks, and brought up by a crowd of Presbyters, all mounted upon high-fed and gay-trapped Horses? Certain I am they would abhor and execrate them, and say, that they were false and hypocritical pretenders to the Religion of the blessed Jesus. But I return to Paul, whom I may more securely reprove. He was highly self-opinionated and ambitious, and denied our Saviours eternal Generation, or that he had a being till his conception of the blessed Virgin. For this reason at the Council of , he was pub∣lickly
condemned by the consent of all the Bishops that were present; but especially by the sentence of Gregory Bishop of Coesarea, a most holy man who was present at the Council, and afterwards suffered Martyr∣dom for the faith of Christ. Malchion also a Presbyter of Antioch dis∣puted and wrote much against this Paul, for the reason that I have already mentioned. Dionysius himself could not be at this Council be∣cause of his great Age, but of all the transactions there he had full intel∣ligence given him by Maximus Bishop of Alexandria. Dionysius dying, was buried in the Coemetery of Calistus; after that at two Decembrian Ordinations he had made twelve Presbyters, six Deacons, seven Bishops. He sat in the Chair six years, two months, four days; and the See was vacant six days. S. FELIX I. FELIX, a Roman, Son of Constantinus, lived in the time of Aurelianus, Who came to the Empire A.U.C. 1027, and being an ex∣cellentAurelianus. Soldier gain'd a great Victory over the Goths at the River Da∣now. From thence passing into Asia, at a place not far from Antioch, by the terrour of his name rather than by fighting, he overcame Zenobia, who from the time that her Husband Odenatus had been slain was pos∣sess'd of the Eastern Empire. Her he led in Triumph together with Tetricus, by his defeating of whom at Chaalons, Gallia was again re∣covered. Yet by the Humanity and Clemency of Aurelianus, Zenobia lived all her time very honourably in the City, from whom the Zeno∣bian Family in Rome derives its Original; and Tetricus being saved, was afterwards made Governour of the Lucani. The Emperour now applying himself to works of peace, repaired the Temple of Apollo, and the Walls of the City with great Magnificence. But not long after raising the ninth Persecution against the Christians, the divine Vengeance meet∣ing with him, he was slain at a small Fort between Constantinople and Heraclea, called Zenophrurium. Felix out of the great regard he had to the honour of the Martyrs, ordained, that upon their account Masses should be celebrated yearly; and that the Sacrifice of the Mass should be celebrated by no other persons but such as were in holy Orders, and in no places but such as were consecrated, cases of necessity being always excepted. But if through the age or loss of Records it were doubtsul concerning any Church whether it had been consecrated or no, he commanded that it should be consecrated anew; saying, that nothing could properly be said to be repeated, of which it is uncertain whether ever it were once done at all. During his Pontificate one Manes a Persian, had the Im∣pudenceManes. to profess himself to be the Christ, and that he might gain the greater credit to his Imposture, he associated to himself twelve Dis∣ciples. But as that Manes was detested and abhorred for his pride and blasphemy, so Anatolius the Bishop of Laodicoea was as much extolled and magnified for his Religion and Learning. At the same time al∣so
Saturninus, relying upon the assistance of his Army, enterpriz'd the building of a new Antioch; but when it appeared that he designed to invade the Empire too, he was slain at Apemoea. Felix, after that at several Decembrian Ordinations, he had made nine Presbyters, seven Deacons, five Bishops, suffered Martyrdom, and was buried in the Via Aurelia, May the 30th. in a Church which he had built, two miles distant from the City. He sat in the Chair four years, three months,  days; and the See was vacant seven days. S. EUTYCHIANUS. EUTYCHIANUS, a Tuscan, his Fathers name Maximus, was in the time of the Emperour Aurelianus. Who being slain was succeeded by Tacitus, a man who bothTacitus. for his Valour and Justice, was certainly very fit for Government, but he was slain in Pontus in the sixth month after he came to the Empire; as was also his Successour Florianus in Tarsus, before he had reignedFlorianus. three months. Eutychianus ordained, that the fruits of the Earth, as Beans and Grapes, &c. should be blessed upon the Altar; and also that no persons should bury the Martyrs in any but Purple Vestments; unless with his knowledg and leave. Some write that in his time Dorotheus the Eu∣nuchDorotheus. flourished, a man questionless of very great skill in the Greek and Hebrew Language; and with whose Learning 'tis said, the Emperour Aurelianus was wonderfully delighted. For in the beginning of his Reign he was such a Favourer of the Christians, that he severely cen∣sured the Sect of Paulus Samosatenus. But being afterwards corrupted by evil Counsels; and, as hath been said, raising a Persecution against the Christians, having sent Dispatches concerning that Affair to the several Governours of Provinces, he was cut off by the Divine Hand. Eusebius when he was young was an Auditor of Dorotheus at his Expo∣sitions of Scripture. At this time also Anatolius an Alexandrian, Bi∣shopAnatolius. of Laodicea, a man of great Learning, wrote several excellent things in Mathematicks and Divinity; and was very severe against the Mani∣choean Heresie which then very much prevailed. These Manichees to their other Errours, brought in two Substances, the one good, the o∣ther evil, and held that Souls flowed from God, as from a Fountain. The Old Testament they all together disown'd, and receiv'd but some parts of the New. Eutychianus, after that at several Ordinations, he had consecrated four∣teen Presbyters, five Deacons, nine Bishops, was crowned with Martyr∣dom, and buried in the Coemetery of Calistus, July the 25th. He sat in the Chair one year, one month, one day; and by his death theSee was vacant eight days. There are some who say he lived in the Pontificate eight years, ten months; but I rather give credit to Damasus, who is the author of the former Assertion.
S. CAIUS. CAIUS, a Dalmatian, the Son of Caius, a kinsman of the Em∣perour Diocletian, lived in the times of Probus, Carus and Carinus. , a person renowned for Military skill, having undertaken theProbus. Government, was very successful in recovering  that had been pos∣sess'd by the Barbarians. He also vanquish'd Saturninus, who was at∣tempting to usurp the Empire in the East, and Proculus and Bonosus at . But this Valiant and Just man was notwithstanding slain in a Tumult of the Soldiers at , in the sixth year of his Reign. After whom Carus Narbonensis entred upon the Empire, and held it two. years. He having admitted his two Sons Carinus and Numerianus to a thare in the Government, and having in the Parthian War taken  and  two famous Cities, was in the Camp slain by a Thunderbolt. Numerianus, who was returning with his Father, was murthered by the fraud of his Father-in-law Arrius Aper. But Carinus a person most dissolutely lewd, was overcome after a sharp and doubt∣ful Engagement, by  in ; and at length suffered the just punishment of his Villanies. Caius stated the several Orders in the Church, by which as by cer∣tain steps and degrees the Clergy were to rise to the Episcopal Dignity. These were the Door-keeper, the Reader, the Exorcist, the Acolythus, the Sub-deacon, the Deacon, the Presbyter, and the Bishop. He also, as  had done before him, allotted several Regions to the Dea∣cons, who were to Register and compile the Acts of the Martyrs. He ordained likewise, that no Laick should commence a Suit of Law against a -man, and that no Pagan or Heretick should have power to accuse a Christian. In his time lived Victorinus Bishop of Poictiers, whoVictorinus.  divers Commentaries on the Scriptures; and was very sharp and severe against the Heresies then prevailing, though he had greater skill in the Latin than the Greek Tongue, as Hierom will have it, who tells us, that the sense of his Writings was great, but the style mean. Pamphilus also a Presbyter and the intimate Friend of Eusebius Bishop. of Coesarea, was so eagerly greedy of divine Learning, that with his own hand he transcribed a great part of Origen's Books; which Books Eu∣sebius affirms himself to have seen in the Library of Coesarea, with as great satisfaction as if he had gained the Riches of Croesus. The same Pamphilus wrote the Defence of Origen, as Eusebius himself also did not long after. But in the Reign of Diocletian, there arising against the Christians a Persecution sharper than ever was before, Caius lay a long time con∣cealed in certain Grotts and Vaults underground; but being at length discovered and taken from thence by the Persecutors, together with his Brother Gabinius and his Niece Susanna, he was crowned with Mar∣tyrdom, and buried in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia,  the 22d. Some write that Lucia, Agatha, and Agnes became Mar∣tyrs not long . Caius sat in the Chair eleven years, four months,
twelve days; in which time at four several Decembrian Ordinations, he made twenty five Presbyters, eight Deacons, five Bishops; and by his death the See was vacant eleven days. S. MARCELLINUS. MARCELLINUS, a Roman, the Son of Projectus, was in the times of Diocletian, a Dalmatian of obscure birth, and Maxi∣mian. Diocletian, A. U. C. 1041. being elected Emperour by the Army,Diocletian. slew that Aper who had murdered Numerianus. But a Commotion a∣rising in Gallia, which was a Sedition rather than a War, thither Diocle∣tian sent Maximianus Herculeus, by whom the Peasants were soon quell'd. But Wars breaking out on every side, Diocletian not being able singly to bear the  of so many dangers, associates Maxi∣mian by the name of Augustus, and Constantius, and Maximian Galerius by the name of Coesars. Maximian Herculeus, after that Carausius was kill'd by the treachery of Alectus, in ten years time makes himself Master of Britain. And Constantius, after one unsuccessful Engagement in Gallia, renewing the Fight a second time, flew several thousand Germans, who were Mercenaries there, and thereby restored peace to that Pro∣vince. In the mean time Diocletian took Alexandria, which being bravely defended by Achilleus, held out a Siege of eight months, and gratified his Soldiers with the plunder of it. But Maximian Galerius ha∣ving behaved himself gallantly in two Fights against Narseus, was at length routed between Galietium and Carroe; and his Forces being  and lost in that unfortunate Battel, he is forced to fly to Diocle∣tian, who received him with such disdain, that it is said, he suffered him in his Imperial Habit to run on Foot several miles before his Char∣riot. Maximian being nettled at so foul a disgrace, undertakes the War afresh, and in the end becomes Victorious. Affairs being thus setled, Diocletian in the East, and Maximian Herculeus in the West, commanded that the Churches should be destroyed, and the Christians tortured and put to death; and so raised the tenth Persecution, which lasted longer, and was more vehement and bloody than any be∣fore. For now Bibles were publickly burnt; all Christians who were in any Office ignominiously cashier'd; Servants who continued constant to their Profession cut off of all hope of being ever made Free, and the Christian Soldiers compell'd either to offer up sacrifice to Idols, or else to lay down their Arms and their Lives together; by an Imperial E∣dict publickly affix'd in the Forum. This Edict, a certain person be∣ing so hardy as to pull down and tear in pieces, he was thereupon or∣dered to be fley'd and to have Vinegar mix'd with Salt poured upon his raw flesh till he died; which he patienty endured being confirmed and encouraged in his sufferings by Dorotheus and Gorgonius two very eminent men. At the same time the Royal Palace at Nicomedia hap∣pening to be on fire, the Emperour groundesly suspecting it to be caus'd by the Christians, commanded multitudes of them to be put to the
sword, and several others to be thrown alive into the flames. The same severity was exercised against them in Mitylene, Syria, Africa, Thebais, and Egypt by the several Governours of those Provinces, and in Palestine and Tyre great numbers of them were expos'd to be devoured by wild beasts. Indeed there was no kind of Torment could be invented which the Christians did not undergo. Some had their flesh scraped and torn off with Potsherds, to others sharp Reeds were thrust under their Nails, and to the Women run up into their privities. A certain City in Phrygia was set on fire and burnt to the ground, because the Citizens, who were kept constant to the Faith by Adauctus a pious Roman, refu∣sed to offer sacrifice to Idols. In the end their inhuman Tormentors came to such a height of Cruelty, that they would first burn out their Eyes with searing Irons, and then wreak the remainder of their fury and rage against them. At this time were also put to death for the profes∣sion of Christianity Anthimus Bishop of Nicomedia, and Lucianus the Learned Presbyter of Antioch, and Pamphilus of Coesarea, and Philoeas an Aegyptian and Bishop of Thmyis; this last being beheaded, because he had written a Book in praise of the Martyrs, and had courage e∣nough to tell his unjust Judges their own. I need not enumerate more Instances, since Damasus affirms, that there were no less than seven∣teen thousand persons of both Sexes who suffered Martyrdom through the several Provinces in the space of thirty days. I shall not mention those who were banish'd to the Islands, or condemn'd to work in the the Mines or melting-Houses, or to dig Sand, or to hew Stones, or to other the like kinds of Servitude, whose numbers were almost in∣finite. But our Marcellinus, being carried to the Heathen Sacrifices, and his Tormentors with menaces urging him to offer, he being overcome with fear submitted to their importunities, and joyn'd with them in their Idolatries. But not long after a Council of an hundred and eighty Bishops being held at Sinuessa a City of Campania, thither goes Marcel∣linus cloth'd in Sackcloth, with all the marks of an humble penitent, and beseeches them to inflict upon him the just punishment of his Co∣wardize and inconstancy. Yet in so numerous a Council there was not a man who would pass any Sentence against him, they all agreeing that he had laps'd only after the same manner that S. Peter himself did, and that by his tears and sorrows he had already sufficiently suffered for his Fault. To Rome returns Marcellinus full of Resentment, hastens to Diocletian, and boldly reproves him for causing him to sacrifice to false Gods. Hereupon, by Diocletian's order he was forthwith led to Execution, together with Claudius, Cyrinus, and Antoninus, three other assertors of Christianity. As he went along, he admonished Marcellus his Presbyter not to submit to the command of Diocletian in matters appertaining to Religion; and forbad him to suffer his Body to be bu∣ried, saying, that since he had denied his Saviour, he was unworthy of the least acts of Humanity. Though indeed by Diocletians order the bodies of all these four Martyrs lay unburied in the High-way the space of thirty six days. Afterwards at the Command of S. Peter the Apostle, who appeared to Marcellus in a Dream, they were buried in the Via  in the Coemetery of Priscilla, near the body of S. Crescention, May the 27. After so long a series of miseries, God at length, as Eu∣sebius
words it, opened his Eyes, and to free the Christians from such a Plague, so wrought upon Diocletian's mind, that he voluntarily resign'd the Empire and retired to a private Life. The same did also Maximian, his Partner in the Government, and as violent a Persecutor as himself, who some years after being  with divers diseases, and after in∣cessant Torment being smitten with distraction, and haunted with the reflections on his guilt, at last laid violent hands on himself. It is the judgment of , that this Calamity befell the Christians by Gods permission, as a just punishment for the great corruption of manners which the liberty and indulgence which they before enjoy'd, had oc∣casion'd among them all in general, but especially among the Clergy, to the hypocrisie of whose Looks, the fraud of their Words, and the deceit of their Hearts, the divine Justice design'd to give a check by this Persecution. Indeed the Envy, Pride, Animosity and Hatred with which they strove among themselves was grown to  an heighth, that it seemed rather a Centention between haughty Tyrants than humble Churchmen; and having forgotten all true Christian Piety, they did not so much perform as prophane the Divine Offices. But what Cala∣mity shall our presaging minds prompt us to expect in our Age, in which our Vices have encreas'd to such a magnitude, that they have  left us any room for Gods mercy. It would be to no purpose for me to mention the great Covetousness of the Clergy, especially of those who are in Authority; their Lust, their Ambition, their Pomp, their Pride, their Idleness, their Ignorance of themselves and of the Doctrine of Christianity, their little Piety, and that rather seign'd than true, and their great Debauchery, so great that it would be abominable even in the prophane (for so they superciliously call the Laicks;) this I say, it would be to no purpose for me to tell, since they themselves do avow their sins so openly, that one would think they judg'd Vice to be a lau∣dable quality, and expected to gain Reputation by it. The Turk (be∣lieve me, though I wish I may prove a false Prophet) the Turk is com∣ing, whom we shall find a more violent Enemy to Christianity than Diocletian or Maximian. He is already at the gates of Italy; while we idly and supinely wait the common ruin, every one consulting rather his one private pleasure than the publick Defence. I come now again to Marcellinus, whom I would to God we might at last imitate, and return to a better mind. For he, as I said before, finding his Errour in falling away from his Profession, came to himself, and did with great con∣stancy sufter Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ; after that at two De∣cembrian Ordinations, he had made four Presbyters, two Deacons, five Bishops. He was in the Chair nine years, two months, sixteen days; and by his death the See was vacant twenty five days.
S. MARCELLUS. MARCELLUS, a Roman, of the Region called Via lata, the Son of Benedict, was in the Chair from the time of Con∣stantius and Galerius, to Maxentius. For Diocletian and Maximian having laid down their Au∣thority, Constantius and Galerius undertake the Government and divideConstantius and Gale∣rius. the Provinces between them. Illyricum, Asia, and the East fell to the share of Galerius; but Constantius being a person of very moderate de∣sires, was contented with only Gallia and Spain, though Italy also was his by Lot. Hereupon Galerius created two Coesars, Maximinus whom he made Governour of the , and Severus to whom he intrusted Italy; he himself holding Illyricum, as apprehending that the most for∣midable Enemies of the Roman State would attempt their passage that way. Constantius, a man of singular meekness and clemency, soon gain'd the universal love of the Gauls, and the rather for that now they had escaped the danger they had been in before from the craft of Dio∣cletian, and the cruelty of Maximian. But in the thirteenth year of his Reign, he died at  in England, and by general consent of all men was placed in the number of the Gods. Marcellus being intent upon the affairs of the Church, and having persuaded Priscilla a Roman Matron to build at her own charge a Coeme∣tery in the Via Salaria, constituted twenty five Titles or Parishes in the City of Rome for the more advantageous and convenient administra∣tion of Baptism to those Gentiles, who daily in great numbers were con∣verted to the Faith, having a regard likewise to the better provision which was thereby made for the Sepultures of the Martyrs. But Ma∣xentius understanding that Lucina a Roman Lady had made the Church her Heir, was so incensed thereat, that he banished her for a time, and seizing Marcellus, endeavoured by menaces to prevail with him to lay aside his Episcopal Dignity and renounce Christianity; but finding his Commands despis'd and slighted by the good man, he ordered him to be confined to a Stable, and made to look after the Emperours Camels and Horses. Yet this ignominious usage did not so discourage the good Bishop, but that he kept constantly to stated times of Prayer and Fast∣ing, and though he was now disabled in person, yet he neglected not by Epistle to take due care for the regulating of the Churches. But before he had been there nine months, his Clergy by night rescued him from this loathsom restraint; whereupon Maxentius being yet more enraged, secured him the second time, and condemned him to the same filthy drudgery again, the stench and nastiness of which at length oc∣casioned his death. His body was buried by Lucina in the Coemetery of Priscilla in the Via Salaria on the sixteenth of January. In time fol∣lowing when Christianity flourished, a Church was built upon the ground where this Stable stood, and dedicated to S. Marcellus, which is to be seen at this day. We read moreover, that Mauritius together with his whole Legion of Christian Soldiers suffered themselves to be tamely cut off near the River Rhone; to whom may be added Marcus,
Sergius, , Damianus, with multitudes more who were slain in all places. Marcellus being in the Chair five years, six months, twenty one days, at several Decembrian Ordinations made twenty six Presby∣ters, two Deacons, twenty one Bishops; and by his death the See was vacant twenty days. S. EUSEBIUS. EUSEBIUS, a Grecian, Son of a Physician, entred upon the Pontisicate when Constantinus and Maxentius were Empe∣rours. For Constantius, Grandson to Claudius, dying, Constantine his Son byConstantine. Helena, whom yet he afterwards divorced to gratifie Herculeus, was with universal consent made Emperour of the West. But in the mean time the Praetorian Guards at Rome in a tumultuary manner declare for Maxentius, Son to Maximian Herculeus, and give him the Title of Augustus. Hereupon Maximian himself being raised to some hopes of recovering the Empire, leaves his Retirement in Lucania and comes to Rome, having by Letter endeavoured to persuade Diocletian to do the same. To suppress these Tumults, Galerius sends Severus with his Army, who besieged the City, but being deserted by the treachery of some of his Soldiers who favoured Maxentius his pretensions, was forced to sly to Ravenna, and there slain. And indeed Maximian himself did very narrowly escape the revenge of his Son Maxentius, who eagerly sought his Fathers life for endeavouring by promises and bribes to gain the good will of the Soldiers for himself. But going into Gallia to his Son-in-law Constantine, he there laid a design to ensnare and circum∣vent him too, till his Plot being discovered by his Daughter Fausta, who revealed the whole matter to her Husband, he betook himself to flight, but was taken and put to death at , thereby suffering the just punishment of his Villanies; or, as others tell us, his condition being desperate, he laid violent hands upon himself. During the Pontificate of Eusebius, on the third of May the Cross ofInventio Cru∣cis. our Saviour was found, and very much adorn'd, and had in great  by Helena Constantine's Mother; Judas also who found it was baptized, and his name being thereupon changed, was afterwards cal∣led Cyriacus. This Bishop admitted Hereticks to the Communion of the Church upon their retractation by the imposition of Hands only. Moreover he ordained that no Laick should commence a Suit against a Bishop. In his time lived Lactantius Firmianus a Scholar of Arnobius.Lactantius. Who being a Professor of Rhetorick at Nicomedia, and discontented that he had so few Scholars in a City of Greece, he thereupon betook him∣self to Writing, wherein he became so excellent that he gain'd a Reputa∣tion next to that of Cicero himself. He wrote many things, but his works that are  extant, are those against the Gentiles, concerning the Creation of Man, and the Anger of God. In his old Age he was Tutor to Constantine's Son, Coesar Crispus, in Gallia. Eusebius also Bishop of Coe∣sareaEusebius. in Palestine, a Partner with Pamphilus in the diligent search after di∣vine
Learning, wrote a vast number of Books; particularly those de Proe∣par. Evangelicâ; an Ecclesiastical History; against Porphyry a violent op∣poser of the Christians; six Apologies for Origen; and three Books of the Life of Pamphilus the Martyr, whose name he added to his own for a sur∣name, as a testimony of the strict friendship there had been between them. But our Eusebius the Bishop of Rome, having at one Decembrian Ordination made thirteen Presbyters, three Deacons, fourteen Bishops, died at Rone, and was buried in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Ap∣pia, October the second. He sat in the Chair six years, one month, three days, and by his death the See was vacant one day. S. MILTIADES. MILTIADES, an African, was Co-temporary with Ma∣xentius, Maximine, and Licinius a Dacian, who for his be∣ing an Excellent Soldier, was admitted by Galerius to a part∣nership in the Empire. These being sensible that Constantine was well belov'd and highly e∣steem'd by all men, did for that reason seem less enraged against the Christians. Yet Maxentius sent his Soldiers about with private Instru∣ctionsMaxentius. to massacre all they could secretly meet with; and taking de∣light in Magick, at the performance of the hellish Rites belonging to that black Art, he would send for great-bellied Women, especially Chri∣stians, and rip them up for the sake of their unborn Infants, whose ashes he made use of in his Sorceries, thereby shewing that Tyranny might be supported and kept up even by Villany. Maximine also exercis'dMaximine. the like rage and cruelty in the East, giving Rewards and Preferments to the Professours and Teachers of Witchcraft and Sorcery; and being himself very much enclin'd to give credit to Auguries and Divinations, became the more bitterly incens'd against the Christians, because they despis'd such superstitions. He commanded likewise, that the decayed Idolatrous Temples should be repaired, and Sacrifices offered to the Gods in them after the ancient manner. Against them Constantine ad∣vancing with his Army, gain'd so perfect a Victory over Maxentius at Pons Milvius, that his grief to be so shamefully defeated, caused him to forget the snares which himself had laid, and so passing over a Bridg which he had deceitfully contriv'd to entrap his Enemies, he himself with the greatest part of his Guards were drown'd in the River. Having also both by Sea and Land, overcome his Sisters Husband Lici∣nius, he forced him at Nicomedia to yield himself, and to live privatelyLicinius. at Thessalonica; a confinement which he justly deserved, because ha∣ving apostatiz'd from the Faith meerly through Envy, he had been a grievous Persecutor of the Christians for the good will they bare to Con∣stantine. As for Maximine, he became manifestly the object of Divine Vengeance; his bowels and entrails being on a sudden so swoln and pu∣trefied, that there appeared no difference between him and a putrid car∣cass; Worms in great abundance breeding in his flesh, and rottenness with intolerable stench overspreading his body. This dreadful punish∣ment
had been long  for by his wicked practises; for he had for∣bidden the Christians to assemble at the Sepulchres of the Martyrs, and had given out that at Antioch an Image had spoke and proclaim'd aloud, that the Christians must be banish'd out of the Cities, when indeed they were certain knavish Priests whom himself had suborn'd, who from their adjoyning private recesses had uttered these words; and moreover, he had distributed Rewards through the several Provinces to the Idol∣priests who were active against the Christians. But at length the Phy∣sician plainly telling him the danger of his condition, the Tyrant began to relent, and by a publict Edict forbad all persons to molest or injure the Christians, and suffered them to enjoy their liberty. But this forced Repentance slood him in no stead; for having been a long time  with grievous pain and disease, at last died this cruel and inconstant man, who had been sometimes an Encourager, sometimes a Persecutor of the Christians. During these Calamities multitudes of Christians were put to death, and particularly Dorothea, a most virtuous and Beauti∣ful Virgin, who chose rather to die than to yield to the Tyrants Lust. Sophronia also having been oftentimes sollicited by Maxentius, like the Noble Lucretia, slew her self to avoid the danger her Chastity was in from him. Miltiades ordained, that no Christian should keep a Fast upon a Sun∣day or Thursday, because those days were observed and kept holy by the Pagans; and the Manichoean Heresie being at that time very preva∣lent in the City of Rome, he made several Constitutions concerning Ob∣lations. These things being setled, he was by Maximine's order crowned with Martyrdom; as were also Peter Bishop of Alexandria, Lucianus a a Presbyter of , a man eminent for Piety and Learning, Timothy a Presbyter of Rome, and divers others both Bishops and Priests. Mil∣tiades was buried in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia De∣cember the tenth. During his Pontificate, he did at one Ordination make seven Presbyters, six Deacons, twelve Bishops. He sat in the Chair four years, seven months, nine days; and by his death the See was vacant seventeen days. S. SYLVESTER. SYLVESTER, a Roman, the Son of Ruffinus, was Bishop in the time of Constantine, A. V, C. 1091. Anno Dom. 339. Under this Prince the Christians, who had been continually harrassed by Tyrants, began to have some respite. For Constan∣tineConstantine. was equal to the best of Princes in all endowments of Body and Mind, very desirous of Military Glory, successful in War, and yet freely granting Peace to them who asked it. When his other great Affairs per∣mitted, he took very much delight in the study of the Arts; by his Boun∣ty and Goodness he gained the love of all men; many good Laws he en∣acted, repeal'd those that were superfluous, and moderated those that were too rigorous. Upon the Ruines of Byzantium he built a City of his own Name, and endeavouring to make it equal in stateliness of
buildings to Rome her self, he ordered it to be called New Rome, as appears from the Inscription under his Statue on Horse-back. This great Prince well weighing and considering all things, when he came to understand the Excellency of the Christian Religion, how it ob∣liges men to be moderate in their Enjoyments, to rejoyce in poverty, to be gentle and peaceable, sincere and constant, &c. he thereupon heartily imbraced it; and when he undertook any War, bore no other Figure on his Standard but that of the Cross, the form of which he had seen in the Air as he was advancing with his Forces against Maxentius, and had heard the Angels near it saying to him   by this do thou overcome; which accordingly he did, freeing the necks of the people of Rome and the Christians from the Yoke of Tyranny, and particularly defeating Licinius, who had expell'd the Christians from City and Camp, and persecuted them with banishment, Imprisonment, and Death it self; exposing some of them to the Lions, and causing others to be hung up and cut to pieces limb by limb like dead Swine. Sylvester having so potent and propitious a Prince on his side, leaves the Mountain Soracte, whither he had been banished by the Tyrants, or, as some say had voluntarily retired, and comes to Rome, where he soon prevailed with Constantine, who was before well enclined towards the Christians, to be now very zealous in deserving well of the Church. For as a particular testimony of the honour he had for the Clergy, he al∣lowed to the Bishops of Rome the use of a Diadem of Gold set with precious Stones. But this Sylvester declined, as not suiting a person de∣voted to Religion, and therefore contented himself with a white Phrygian Mitre. Constantine being highly affected with Sylvesters Sanctity, built a Church in the City of Rome in the Gardens of Equitius, not far from Domitians Baths, which bore the name of Equitius till the time of Da∣masus. Upon this Church the munificent Emperour conferr'd several donations of Vessels both of Gold and Silver, and likewise very plenti∣fully endowed it. While these things were transacting at Rome, at Alexandria a certainArius. Presbyter named Arius, (a man more remarkable for his Person, than the inward qualifications of his mind, and who sought more eagerly after Fame and vain-glory than after Truth,) began to sow dissention in the Church. For he endeavoured to separate the Son from the Eternal and ineffable Substance of God the Father, by affirming that there was a time when he was not; not understanding that the Son was Co-eternal with the Father, and of the same substance with him, according to that assertion of his in the Gospel, I and my Father are one. Now Alexander Bishop of Alexandria having in vain attempted to reclaim Arius from this his Errour, by Constantines Appointment, and at his great Charge,The Council of Nice. a General Council was called at Nicoea a City of Bithynia, at which three hundred and eighteen Bishops were present. The Debates on ei∣ther side were long and warm. For divers persons subtil at Arguing, were favourers of Arius, and opposers of the simplicity of the Gospel; though one of these a very learned Philosopher, being inwardly touch∣ed by the Divine Spirit, all on a sudden changed his opinion, and im∣mediately embraced the sound and Orthodox Doctrine which before he had pleaded against. At length the matter being throughly discuss'd in the Council, it was concluded that the Son should be styled , i. e.
acknowledg'd to be of the same substance with the Father. Of those who were of Arius's Opinion, affirming the Son of God to be created, not begotten of the very Divinity of the Father, there were seventeen. But Constantine, coming to understand the truth of the Controversie, confirmed the Decree of the Council, and denounc'd the punishment of Exile to those who contradicted it. Hereupon Arius with only six more wer banish'd, the rest of his Party coming over to the Orthodox Opinion. In this Council the Photinians were condemned, who hadPhotinians and Sabel∣lians. their name from Photinus a Bishop of Gallogroecia, who taking up the Heresie of the Ebionites, held that Christ was conceived of Mary by the ordinary way of generation; as were likewise the Sabellians, who af∣firmed, that the Father, Son, and holy Ghost were but one Person. In this Council also, the Bishops according to Custom, gave in Bills of Com∣plaint to Constantine, wherein they accused each other, and desired Ju∣stice from him; but the good Emperour burnt all their Accusations, and told them, that they must stand or fall by the Judgment of God only, and not of men. In this Council moreover it was decreed. That no person who upon pretence of allaying the heat of his Lust had castrated himself, should be admitted into Orders; that no new Proselyte, with∣out a very strict Examination should be ordained, and being so, that it should not be lawful for him to co-habit with any other Women than his Mother, or Sister, or Aunt; that none should be promoted to the Order of a Bishop, unless by all or at least by three Bishops of the Pro∣vince; and that one Bishop should not receive any person whether Clerk or Laick who stood excommunicated by another. It was decreed like∣wise, and that very sacredly to prevent all oppression, that there should be a Provincial Synod held every year, whither any who thought them∣selves injured by the Bishop might appeal; and I cannot see why this wholsom Institution should be abolished by the Prelates of our Age, un∣less it be because they dread the Censures of the pious and Orthodox. It was decreed also, that they who in time of Persecution fell away be∣fore they were brought to the Torture, should from thenceforward con∣tinue five years among the Catechumens. Finally, it was decreed, that no Bishop should upon the account of Ambition or Covetousness leave a smaller Church for a greater; a Canon which is quite laid aside in our days, wherein with eager Appetites like hungry Wolves they all gape af∣ter fatter Bishopricks, using all importunities, promises, and bribes to get them. The Constitutions of Sylvester himself were reckon'd these that follow, viz. That the holy Oyl should be consecrated by the Bishop only; that none but Bishops should have the power of Confirmation, but a Presbyter might anoint any person baptized upon the occasion of imminent death. That no Laick should commence a Suit against a Clergyman; that a Deacon while he was doing his Office in the Church should use a Cope with Sleeves; that no Clergyman should plead for others or himself before a Secular Judg. That a Presbyter should not consecrate the Elements upon a Pall of Silk or dyed Cloth, but only upon white Linnen, for the nearer resemblance of the fine white Lin∣nen in which the Body of Christ was buried. He also fix'd the several degrees in the Orders of the Church, that every one might act in his own sphere, and be the Husband of one Wife. But Constantine being desirous to promote the Christian Religion, built the Constantinian
Church (called the Lateran) which he beautified and enriched with se∣veral great Donations, the Ornaments and Endowments which he con∣ferred upon it, being of a vast value. Among other things, he set up in it a Font of Porphyry-stone, that part of it which contains the Water, being all Silver; in the middle of the Font was placed a Pillar of Por∣phyry, on the top of which stood a golden Lamp full of the most preci∣ous Oyl, which was wont to burn in the night during the Easter Solem∣nities. On the edge or brink of it stood a Lamb of pure Gold, through which the Water was conveyed into it; not far from the Lamb was the Statue of our Saviour of most pure Silver. On the other side stood the Image of John Baptist of Silver likewise, with an Inscription of these words, Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the World. There were besides seven Harts placed round about it and pouring Water into it. For the maitenance of this Font he gave several Estates in Land and Houses. Moreover Constantine at the motion of Sylvester built and dedicated a Church to S. Peter the chief of the Apostles, in the Vatican, not far from the Temple of Apollo, where he very splendidly reposited the body of that Apostle, and covered his Tomb over with Brass and Cop∣per. This Church likewise he magnificently adorn'd, and  largely endow'd. The same Emperour also at the instance of Sylvester built a Church, which he enriched and endowed as he had done the former, in the Via Ostiensis, in honour to S. Paul, whose body he entomb'd after the same manner with that of S. Peter; By his order also a Church was built in the Sessorian Atrium, by the name of S. Cross of Jerusalem, wherein he reposited a part of the holy Cross which was found out by his Mother Helena a Lady of ineomparable Piety and Devotion. Who,Inventio Cric∣cis. being promted thereto partly by the greatness of her own mind, and partly by Visions in the Night, went to Jerusalem to seek after the Cross upon which Christ was crucified. To find it was a very difficult task, because the ancient Persecutors had set up the Image of Venus in the same place, that so the Christians might by mistake worship her in stead of their Saviour. But Helena being animated with Zeal, proceed∣ed on to dig and remove the rubbish till at last she found three Crosses ly∣ing confusedly one among another; on one of which was this Inscription in three Languages, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. Macarius, the Bishop of that City was at first mistaken in his opinion which was the right; but at length all doubt concerning it was removed by an Expe∣riment upon the body of a dead Woman, who was raised to life at the application of the true one. From the sense of so great a Miracle, Con∣stantine publish'd an Edict, forbidding any Malefactor to be from thence∣forward punish'd by Crucifiction. Helena having first built a Church upon the ground where this Cross was found, return'd, and brought the Nails with which our Saviours body was fastned to it, as a present to her Son. Of one of those Nails he caused to be made the bit of the bridle with which he manag'd the Horse he us'd in War, the other he wore on the Crest of his Helmet, and the third he threw into the Adria∣tick Sea to suppress the rage and tempestuousness of it. That part of the Cross which the devout Lady brought along with her in a Silver Case set with Gold and precious Stones, was placed in this Sessorian Church. To which Constantine was very liberal and munificent. Some tell us, that the Church of S. Agnes was built at Constantin's Command, upon the request of his Daughter Constantia, and a Font set up in it, where both
his Daughter and his Sister of the same name, were baptized, and which in like manner he largely presented and endowed. The same Empe∣rour built also the Church of S. Laurence without the Walls, towards which he was not wanting to express his usual Beneficence. , in the Via Lavicana he built a Church to the two Martyrs,  the Presbyter, and Peter the Exorcist; not far from which he built a stately Monument in honour to his Mother, whom he buried in a Se∣puichre of Porphyry. This Church also received signal Testimonies of his exemplary Bounty. Besides these Churches in the City of Rome, he built several others also elsewhere. At Ostia not far from the Port, he built a Church in honour to S. Peter and Paul the blessed, Apostles and John Baptist; near Alba he built a Church peculiarly dedicated to  Baptist; at Capua also he built in honour to the Apostles, that which the called the Constantinian Church, all which he enriched as he had done the former. At Naples he built another, as Damasus tells us, but it is uncertain to whom he dedicated it. And that the Clergy of New Rome also might be sharers in the Emperours , he built likewise two Churches at Constantinople, one dedicated to Irene, the other to  Apostles, having first quite destroy'd the Delphick Tripods which had been the occasion of a great deal of mischief to superstitious People, and either demolished the Pagan Temples, or else transferr'd them to the use and benefit of the Christians. Besides all the foregoing instances of Constantine's Munificence, he distributed moreover among the Provincial Churches and the Clergy a certain Tribute or Custom due to him from the several Cities, which Donation he made valid and perpetuated by an Imperial Edict. And that Virgins and those who con∣tinued in Celibacy, might be enabled to make Wills, and so to bequeath by Testament something to the Clergy, (from whence I believe the Patrimony of the Church to have received a great encrease) he repeal∣ed a Law which had been made for the propagating of mankind, by which any Person was rendred uncapable of entring upon an Estate who had lived unmarried till five and twenty years of Age; a Law upon which the Princes had founded their Jus trium liberorum, the Right or Priviledg of having three Children, of which they often took advantage against those who had no Issue. All these things are exactly and fully delivered to us by Socrates and Zozomen the Historians. In the time of Sylvester flourished several persons of extraordinary Note, by whose labour and industry many Countreys and Nations were converted to Christianity, and particularly by the preaching of Julianus, Frumentius and Edisius, whom certain Philosophers of Alexandria had carried thither. The Iberi also a remote People were brought to the knowledg and Be∣lief Christianity a certain Captive Woman, through the Assistance and Persuasion of their King Bacurius. At this time likewise the Authority of Antony the holy Hermite did much towards the Reformation of Man∣kind;Anthony Helena did oftentimes both by Letter and Messengers recom∣mendHermite. her self and her Sons to his Prayers; he was by Countrey an Egyptian, his manner of living severe and abstemious, eating only Bread and drinking nothing but Water, and never making any Meal but about Sun-set; a man wholly rapt up in Contemplation. His Life was written at large by Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria. As for Syl∣vester himself, having at seven Decembrian Ordinations made forty two Presbyters, thirty six Deacons, sixty five Bishops, he dyed and was bu∣ried
in the Coemetery of Priscilla, in the Via Salaria three miles distant from the City, on the last day of December. He was in the Chair twenty three years, ten months, eleven days, and by his death the See was vacant fifteen days. MARCUS I. MARCUS, a Roman, Son of Priscus, lived also in the Reign of Constantine the Great, concerning whom Historians differ in their Writings. For some affirm, that Constantine towards the latter end of his Reign, re∣called Arius from banishment, and became a favourer of his Heresy through the persuasion of his Sister who always insisted, that it was nothing but Envy that had caused his Condemnation. These I believe to be deceiv'd by the nearness of their names, and so to ascribe that to the Father which was the act of the Son. For it is not probable that that wise Prince, who had all along before disapprov'd of the Arian opinion, should now begin to incline to it in that part of his Age wherein men are usually most judicious and discerning. They write moreover, that Constantine was baptized by Eusebius, an Arian, Bishop of Nicomedia. But that this is a mistake appears both from the Emperours great bounty to∣wards the Orthodox, and also from that stately Font upon that occasion erected with wonderful Magnificence at Rome; at which after he had been successful in expelling the Tyrants, he, with his Son Crispus, were in∣structed in the Faith and baptized by Sylvester. They who are of the other opinion tell us, that Constantine deferred so great an Affair till the time that he might come to the River Jordan, in which he had a great desire to be baptized, in imitation of our Saviour; but that in an Expe∣dition against the Parthians, making Inroads upon Mesopotamia, in the thirty first year of his Reign and of his Age the sixty sixth, he died on the way at Nicomedia, before he could reach the River Jordan for the purpose he design'd, and was there baptized at the point of Death. But let these men confound and perplex the matter as they please, we have reason to believe according to the general opinion, that Constantine, who had so often overcome his Enemies under the Standard of the Cross, who had built so many Churches to the honour of God, who had been present at holy Councils, and who had so often joyned in Devotion with the holy Fathers, would desire to be fortified against the Enemy of mankind by the Character of Baptism, as soon as ever he came to understand the excellency of our Religion. I am not ignorant what Socrates, and Zo∣zomen, and most other Writers say concerning it, but I follow the Truth, and that which is most agreeable to the Religion and Piety of this ex∣cellent Prince. The vulgar story of his having been overspread with Leprosie, and cured of it by Baptism, with a previous fiction concern∣ing a Bath of the blood of Infants before prescribed for his Cure, I can by no means give credit to, having herein the Authority of Socrates on my side, who affirms, that Constantine being now sixty five years of Age fell sick, and left the City of Constantinople to go to the hot Baths,
for the recovery of his health, but speaks not a word concerning any Le∣prosie. Besides, there is no mention made of it by any Writer either Hea∣then or Christian; and certainly had there been any such thing, Orosi∣us, Eutropius, and others who have most accurately written the Me∣moirs of Constantine, would not have omitted it. One thing more con∣cerning this great Prince is certain, viz. That a Blazing Star or Comet of extraordinary magnitude appear'd some time before his Death. Marcus applying himself to the care of Religion, ordained that the Bishop of Ostia, whose place it is to consecrate the Bishop of Rome, might use a Pall. He appointed likewise that upon solemn days immediate∣ly after the Gospel, the Nicene Creed should be rehears'd with a loud voice both by the Clergy and People. He built also two Churches at Rome, one in the Via Ardeatina, in which he was buried, the other within the City; these Churches Constantine presented and en∣dowed very liberally. In the time of this Emperour and Bishop livedJuvencus Juvencus a Spaniard of Noble birth and a Presbyter, who in four BooksHispanus. translated almost verbatim into hexametre Verse the four Gospels; he wrote also something concerning the Sacraments in the same kind of Metre. Our Marcus having at two Decembrian Ordinations, made twenty five Presbyters, six Deacons, twenty eight Bishops, died and was buried in the Coemetery of Balbina in the Via Ardeatina, Octob. the fifth. He was in the Chair two years, eight months, twenty days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty days. IULIUS I. IULIUS, a Roman, the Son of Rusticus, lived in the time of Constantius, who sharing the Empire with his two Brethren Con∣stantineConstantius. and Constans, reigned twenty four years. Among the Successours of Constantine the Great is sometimes reckon∣ed Delmatius Caesar his Nephew, who was certainly a very hopeful young Gentleman, but was soon cut off in a Tumult of the Soldiers, though by the Permission rather than at the Command of Constantius. In the mean time the Arian Heresie mightily prevailed, being abetted by Constantius, who compelled the Orthodox to receive Arius. In the second year of his Reign therefore a Council was called at Laodicea a City of Syria, or, as others have it, at Tyre, Thither resort both the Catholicks and Arians, and their daily debate was, whether Christ should be styled , of the same substance with the Father, or no. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria asserted it, and press'd hard upon them with his Reasons and Arguments for it; which when Arius found him∣self not able to answer, he betook himself to Reproach and Calum∣ny, accusing the holy Man of Sorcery, and to procure credit to his Charge, producing out of a Box the pretended Arm of Arsenius, whom he falsly asserted that Athanasius had kill'd, and was wont to make use of that dead Arm in his Incantations. Hereupon Athanasius was violently run down and condemned by the Emperour, but making his escape he lay concealed in a dry Cistern for six years together with∣out
seeing the Sun; but being at length discovered by a certain Servant , when his Enemies were just ready to seize him, by Divine Ad∣monition he  to the Emperour Constans, who by Menaces compelled his Brother Constantius to receive him again. In the mean time Arius, as he was going along in the streets attended with several Bishops and multitudes of people, stepping aside to a place of Easement, he voided his Entrails into the Privy, and immediately died, undergoing a Death agreeable to the filthiness of his Life. Our Bishop Iulius having been very uneasie amidst this confusion of things, at length after ten months banishment returns to Rome; espe∣cially having receiv'd the news of the death of Constantine the younger, who making War upon his Brother Constans, and fighting unwarily near Aquileia, was there slain. But notwithstanding the present face of things, Iulius desisted not from censuring the Oriental Bishops, and especially the , for calling a Council at Antioch without the com∣mand of the Bishop of Rome, pretending it ought not to have been done without his Authority, for the preheminence of the Roman above all other Churches. To which they of the East returned this Ironical An∣swer, That since the Christian Princes came from them to the West, for this reason their Church ought to have the preference, as being the fountain and spring from whence so great a blessing flowed. But Iulius laying aside that Controversie, built two Churches, one near the Forum Romanum, the other in that part of the City beyond Tyber. He erect∣ed also three Coemeteries, one in the Via Flaminia, another in the Via Aurelia, the third in the Via Portuensis. He constituted likewise, that no Clergyman should plead before any but an Ecclesiastical Judg. He appointed likewise, that all matters belonging to the Church should be penned by the Notaries or the Protonotary, whose Office it was to commit to writing all memorable Occurrences. But in our age most of them (not to say all) are so ignorant, that they are scarce able to write their own Names in Latin, much less to transmit the actions of others. Concerning their Morals, I am ashamed to say any thing, since Pandars and Parasites have been sometimes preferr'd to that Office. During the Reign of Constantine and Constantius, Marcellus Bishop of An∣cyra, was a man of considerable Note, and wrote several things, parti∣cularly against the Arians. Asterius and Apollinarius wrote against him, and accused him of the Sabellian Heresie, as did likewise Hilarius, whom while Marcellus is confuting, his very Defence shews him to be of a different Opinion from Iulius and Athanasius. He was opposed likewise by Basilius Bishop of Ancyra in his Book de Virginitate; which Basilius, together with Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia, were the principal men of the Macedonian Party. About this time also Theodorus Bishop of Heraclea in Thrace, a person of terse and copious Elequence, was a considerable Writer, as particularly appears by his Commentaries upon S. Matthew, S. John, the Psalms and Epistles. As for Iulius himself, ha∣ving at three Decembrian Ordinations, made eighteen Presbyters, three Deacons, nine Bishops; he died, and was buried in the Via Aurelia in the Coemetery of Calepodius, three miles from the City, Aug. the 12th. He sat in the Chair fifteen years, two months, six days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty five days.
LIBERIUS I. LIBERIUS, a Roman, the Son of Augustus, lived in the times of Constantius and Constans.Constantius & Constans. For Constantine, as I said before, engaging unadvisedly in a War against his Brother Constans, was therein slain. And Constans him∣self, having fought with various success against the Persians, being forced by a Tumult in the Army to joyn Battel at midnight, was at last routed, and designing afterwards to make an example of his seditious Soldiers, he was by the fraud and treachery of Magnentius slain at a Town called Helena, in the seventeenth year of his Reign, and the thir∣tieth of his Age. Constans being dead, the old Boutefeaus of the Arian Heresie began afresh to make head against Athanasius. For in a Council held at Mi∣lain, all those that favoured Athanasius were banish'd. Moreover, at the Council of Ariminum, because the subtil,  Eastern Prelates were too hard at Argument and  for the honest well-meaning Bishops of the West, it was thought good to let fall the Debate for a time; the Orientalist denied Christ to be of the same substance with the Father. This because Bishop Liberius did at first oppose, and because he refused to condemn Athanasius at the Emperours Command, he was banish'd by the Arians, and forced to absent from the City for the space of three years. In which time the Clergy being assembled in a Synod, in the place of Liberius, made choice of Felix a Presbyter, an excellent person, and who immediately after his choice did in a Convention of forty eight Bishops excommunicate Ursatius and Valens, two Presby∣ters, for being of the Emperours opinion in Religion. Hereupon, at their request and importunity Constans recalls Liberius from Exile: who being wrought upon by the kindness of the Emperour, though he be∣came, as some tell us, in all other things heretical, yet in this particu∣lar Tenent he was on the Orthodox side, that Hereticks returning to the Church ought not to be re-baptized. 'Tis said, that Liberius did for some time live in the Coemetery of S. Agnes, with Constantia the Emperour's Sister, that so through her assistance and intercession he might procure a safe return to the City; but she being a Catholick, and apprehending he might have some ill design, utterly refused to engage in it. At length Constantius, at the Instance of Usatius and Valens, deposed Felix and restor'd Liberius. Upon which there arose so fierce a Persecution, that the  and other Clergy were in many places murthered in their very Churches. Some tell us that they were the Roman Ladies at a Cirque-shew, who by their intreaties obtained of the Emperour this Restauration of Liberius. Who, though he were of the Arian opinion, yet was very diligent in beautifying consecrated places, and particularly the Coemetery of S. Agnes, and the Church which he built and called by his own Name, near the Market place of Livia. During these ca∣lamitous times lived Eusebius Bishop of Emissa, who wrote very lear∣nedly and elegantly against the Jews, Gentiles, and Novatians. Tri∣phyllius also Bishop of Ledra or Leutheon in Cyprus, wrote a large and
exact Commentary upon the Canticles. Moreover, Donatus an African, (from whom the Sect of the Donatists are denominated) was so indu∣striousDonatus. in writing against the Catholick Doctrine, that he infected al∣most all Africa and  with his false Opinions. He affirmed the Son to be inferiour to the Father, and the holy Spirit inferiour to the Son, and rebaptized all those whom he could pervert to his own Sect. Se∣veral of his heretical Writings were extant in the time of S. Hierom, and particularly one Book of the Holy Spirit, agreeing exactly with the Arian Doctrine. And that the Arians might neglect no ill Arts of pro∣moting their Opinions, Asterius a Philosopher of that Faction, at theAsterius. Command of Constantius, compiled divers Commentaries upon the E∣pistle to the Romans, the Gospels, and the Psalms, which were diligently read by those of that Party to confirm them in their Persuasion. More∣over, Luciser Bishop of Cagliari, together with Pancratius the Presby∣ter,. and  the Deacon, were sent in an Embassie from the Bishop to the Emperour; and being by him banished for refusing to renounce the Nicene, under the name of the Athanasian Faith, he wrote a Book against Constantius, and sent it to him to read. But notwithstanding this provocation he lived till the time of Valentinian. 'Tis said also, that Fortunatus Bishop of Aquileia, had been tampering with Liberius just before his , and endeavouring to bring him over to the Arian Heresie.  likewise, who for his great parts had  given him the Surname of Scholasticus, compiled an excellent Book against , nor could all the menaces of the Emperour make him desist from the open Confession of the Truth; but on the contrary, hoping to have rendred Constantius more favourable to Athanasius the Great (so called from the constant and unwearied Opposition which he always kept up against Pagans and Hereticks) into his presence he bold∣ly goes, nor did the Threats of so great a Prince cause him to stir one step backward from his Constancy and Resolution. As for Liberius. having at two Ordinations held in the City of Rome, made eighteen Presbyters, five , nineteen Bishops; he died, and was buried in the Coemetery of  in the Via Salaria, April the 23d. He sat in the Chair six years, three months, four days, and by his death the See was vacant six days. FELIX II. FELIX the Second, a Roman, the Son of Anastasius, was Bishop of  in the Reign of Constantius. Who by the death of Constans, slain by Magnentius.. becom∣ing. now sole Emperour, sent into Gallia to suppress a Sedition arisen there, his Cosin German Julian, whom he had created ; who in a short time by his great Valour and Conduct reduc'd both the Gauls and Germans; whereby he gained so much the Affections of the Army, that by universal  they made him Emperour. At the News of this Constantius, who was engaged in a War with the Parthians, suddenly strikes up a Truce with them, and forthwith marches forward to op∣pose
Julian; but in his March being feiz'd with an Apoplexy, he died between Cilicia and Cappadocia at a Town called Mopsocrene, in the 24th year of his Reign and of his Age the 45th. The Physicians were of Opi∣nion that the excessive grief and anxiety of mind which the Rebellion of Julian had brought upon him, was the occasion of that fatal distem∣per to him. He was, (excepting always the Case of the Christians, against whom he was unjust and cruel) a Person of so great modera∣tion and clemency, that according to the Ancient custom he deserv'd an Apotheosis. Upon his first undertaking the Government, at his entring triumphantly by the Via Flaminia into the City of Rome in his golden Chariot, he did with wonderful condescention take notice of and Sa∣lute the Citizens that went out to meet him, affirming that of Cyneas the Ambassadour of Pyrrhus to be true, that he saw at Rome as many Kings as there were Citizens. In one thing only he was the occasion of laughter to the people, viz. that as he passed through the lofty gates of the City, and the stately Triumphal Arches, though he were a man of a very little Stature, yet as though he feared to hit his head against the tops of them, he bow'd it-down low, like a Goose stooping as she goes in at a Barn-door. Being conducted to view the Rarities of the City, and beholding with admiration the Campus Martius, the Sepulchre of Augustus Coesar, adorned with so many Statues of Marble and Brass, the Forum Romanum, the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, the Baths, the Porticoes enlarged like so many Provinces, the Amphitheatre built with Tiburtine stone of so vast a height that a mans Eye could scarce reach to the top of it, the Pantheon built with stately Arches of a won∣derful Altitude, the Temple of Peace, Pompey's Theatre, the great Cirque, the Septizonium of Severus, so many Triumphal Arches, so many Aquae∣ducts, so many statues erected here and there throughout the City for Ornament; beholding all this, I say, he at first stood astonished, and at length declared, that certainly Nature had laid out all her stock upon one City. At the sight of the famous Horse of Brass set up by Trajan, he desired of Hormisda an excellent Workman, whom he had brought along with him, that he would make such another for him at Constan∣tinople, to whom Hormisda replyed, that the Emperour ought then to build such another Stable (meaning the City of Rome.) The same Hormisda being asked by Constantius, what he thought of the City of Rome, returned an Answer becoming a Philosopher, That all which pleased him in it was, That he understood that there also men were wont to die. Felix, who, as we have said, was put into the place of Liberius by the Orthodox, (though Eusebius and S. Hierom, which I much wonder at, affirm it to have been done by the Hereticks) presently after his entrance upon the Pontificate pronounces Constantius the Son of Con∣stantine the Great a Heretick, and re-baptized by Eusebius Bishop of Ni∣comedia in a little Town called Aquilo, not far from Nicomedia. And hereby may be discovered the Errour of those who accuse Constantine the Great himself of this Heresie; an Imputation which certainly, as appears by History, neither ought nor can be fastned upon that Great Prince, and great favourer of the Christian Religion. While this great Contention which we have spoken  between Liberius and Felix last∣ed, the Arian Heresie branched it self into two Factions. For on the
one side Eunomius (from whom they were called Eunomians) a manEunomius. Leprous both in body and mind, and who had a Falling- as well within as without, affirmed, that in all things the Son was unequal to the Father, and that the Holy Spirit had no Community of Essence with the Father or the Son. On the other side Macedonius, whom the. Orthodox had made Bishop of Constantinople before he became errone∣ous in his Opinions, was renounced by the Arians, for holding the Son to be equal with the Father, though he uttered the same blasphemies against the Holy Spirit that themselves did. 'Tis said, that Felix held a Council of forty eight Bishops, in which it was decreed, that all Bi∣shops should attend in person at every General Council, or else by Let∣ter give a good account why they could not; which Decree was after∣wards renewed in the Council of Carthage. In his time lived Acacius, for his having but one Eye called Monophthalmus, Bishop of Coesarea in Palestine, who wrote largely upon Ecclesiastes, and who by his fair Speech and swimming carriage had gained such an Ascendant over Constantius, that he himself undertook to appoint Felix an Arian to be  in the room of Liberius; this S. Hierom tells us, though I much marvel at it, since, as we have already said, it is evident that Felix was a Ca∣tholick, and a constant Opposer of the Arians. At length, after Felix had done all that in him lay for the propagation and defence of the true Faith, he was seized by his Enemies, and together with many other Orthodox Believers was slain and buried in a Church which himself had built in the Via Aurelia, two miles from the City, November the 20th. He was in the Chair only one year, four months, two days, through the means of a Sedition raised by Liberius (whom I have inserted into the num∣ber of Bishops, more upon the Authority of Damasus, than for any de∣serts of his own.) DAMASUS I. DAMASUS, a Spaniard, Son of Antonius, lived in the Reign of Julian, Who was certainly an extraordinary person, if we regard hisJulian. fitness either for Civil or Military affairs. He had his Education under Eubulus the Sophist, and Libanius the , and made such pro∣ficiency in the liberal Arts, that no Prince was his Superiour in them. He had a capacious Memory, and a happy Eloquence, was bountiful towards his Friends, just to Foreiners, and very desirous of Fame. But all these qualities were at last sullied by his Persecution of the Christians, which yet he managed more craftily than others had done; for he did not persecute at first with Force and Torture, but by Rewards, and Ho∣nours, and Caresses, and Persuasions, he seduc'd greater numbers of them than if he had exercised any manner of Cruelties against them. He forbad the Christians the study of Heathen Authors, and denied ac∣cess to the publick Schools to any but those who worship'd the Gentile Gods. Indeed he granted a Dispensation to one person, named , a most learned man, to teach the Christians publickly; but he
with disdain refused to accept of that Indulgence. He prohibited the conferring Military  upon any but Heathens, and ordered that no Christians should be admitted to the Government or Jurisdiction of Provinces, upon pretence that the Laws of their Religion forbad them the use of their own Swords. He openly opposed and banished Atha∣nasius, at the instigation of his  and South-sayers, with whose Arts he was wonderfully pleased, they complaining to him that Atha∣nasius was the cause why their Profession was in no greater esteem. At a certain time as he was sacrificing to Apollo at Daphne in the Suburbs of Antioch, near the Castalian Fountain, and no Answers were given him to those things concerning which he enquired; expostulating with the Priests about the cause of that silence, the Devils replyed, that the Sepulchre of Babylas the Martyr was too near, and therefore no responses could be given. Hereupon Julian commanded the Galileans, for so he called the Christians, to remove the Martyrs Tomb farther off. This they applyed themselves to with wondrous exultation and chear∣fulness, but rehearsing at the same time that of the Psalmist,  be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols; They hereby so  the rage of Julian, that he forthwith com∣manded multitudes of them to be put to death, which he did not before intend. I much wonder that Julian should act after this manner, ha∣ving had before experience of the vanity of diabolical Arts. For entring once into a Cave in company with a Magician, and being sorely  when he heard the Demons howl, in the surprize he used the sign of the Cross, at which the Demons immediately . Upon this telling his Companion, that certainly there must needs be something miracu∣lous in the Sign of the Cross; the Sorcerer made him this Answer, That indeed the Demons themselves did dread that kind of punishment. By this slight account of the matter Julian became more  than be∣fore, so strangely was he addicted to Magical delusions, though he had formerly, to decline the displeasure of Constantius, seignedly embraced the Christian Religion, publickly read the holy Scriptures, and built a Church in honour to the Martyrs. Moreover, this Emperour on pur pose to spite the Christians, permitted the Jews to rebuild their Temple at , upon their declaring that they could not sacrifice in any other place. By which concession they were so mightily  up, that they used all their endeavours to raise it more magnificent than the for∣mer. But while they were carrying on the Work, the new Fabrick fell down in an Earthquake, by the fall of which multitudes of the Jews were crush'd to death, and the Prophesie a second time verified, That there should not be left one stone upon another. On the following day the very Iron Tools with which the Workmen wrought were consumed by fire from Heaven; a Miracle by which many of the Jews were so wrought upon that they became Proselytes to Christianity. After this Julian undertakes an Expedition against the Persians, of whom he had Intelligence that they were endeavouring a Change in the Government; but before he set forth, he spared not to threaten what havock he would make among the  at his return. But having vanquished the Enemy, and returning Conquerour with his Army, though in some disorder, he died of a Wound given him near . Whether he received it from any of his own men or from the Enemy, is ;
us, that he was pierced through with an Arrow sent no  knew from whence, as also that when he was just expiring, with  lift up to , he cried out, Thou  overcome me, O , for so in contempt he was wont to call our Saviour, the , or the ; upon which was grounded that Answer of a young  to  the Sophist, asking him by way of derision What he thought the Carpenters Son was doing; To whom the youth replyed, That he was making a Coffin for Julian; a witty and Prophe∣tick Reply; for soon after his saying so Julians dead body was coffin'd up and brought away. We are told, that this Emperour had once been in holy Orders, but that afterwards he fell away from the Faith, for which reason he is commonly call'd the Apostate. He died in the  month of his Reign, and in the thirty second year of his Age. Him Jovinian succeeded, who being voted Emperor by the Army, re∣fused to own that Title, till they should all with a loud Voice confess themselves to be Christians. This they having done, and he having commended them for it, he took the Government upon him, and freed his Army out of the hands of the barbarous, with no other composi∣tion but that of leaving Nisibis and part of Mesopotamia free to Sapores the  King. But in the eighth month of his Reign, whether from some crudity upon his stomach, as some will have it, or from the faint and suffocating steam of burning Coals, as others, or by what means soever, certain it is that he died suddenly. Damasus being chosen to the Pontificate, was soon rivall'd in that Dig∣nity by Ursicinus a Deacon, whose Party having assembled themselves in a Church, thither also Damasus's Friends resorted, where the Competi∣tion being manag'd not only by Vote, but by force and Arms, several persons on both sides were slain in the very Church. But not long after the matter was compromis'd, and by the consent both of the Clergy and People, Damasus was confirmed in the Bishoprick of Rome, and Ur∣sicinus was made Bishop of Naples. But Damasus being afterwards accu∣sed of Adultery, he made his Defence in a publick Council wherein he was acquitted and pronounced innocent, and Concordius and Calistus two Deacons, his false Accusers, were condemn'd and excommunicated. Upon which a Law was made. That if any man did bear false Witness against another, he was to undergo the same punishment that the per∣son accused should have done if he had been guilty. The affairs of the Church being at length setled, Damasus taking great delight in study, wrote the Lives of all the Bishops of Rome that had been before him, and sent them to S. Hierom. Notwithstanding which, he neglected not to encrease the number of Churches, and to add to the Ornaments of Divine Worship. For he built two Churches, one near Pompey's Theatre, the other at the Tombs in the  Ardeatina, and in elegant Verse wrote the Epitaphs of those Martyrs whose Bodies had been there buried, to perpetuate their names to Posterity. He also dedicated a Marble Table with an Inscription to the Memory of S. Peter and S. Paul at the place where their Bodies had once lain. Moreover, he enriched the Church which he had built in honour to S. Laurence, not far from Pompeys Theatre with very large donations. He ordained likewise that the Psalms should be sung alternately in the Church; and that at the end of every Psalm the Gloria Patri should be added. And whereas for∣merly
the Septuagint only had been in vogue, Damasus first gave Autho∣rity to  Translation of the Bible, which began to be read pub∣lickly, as also his Psalter faithfully rendred from the Hebrew, which before, especially among the Gauls, had been very much depraved. He commanded also, that at the beginning of the Mass the Confession should be used as it is at this day. But having at sive Ordinations made thirty one Presbyters, eleven Deacons, sixty two Bishops, he died and was buried with his Mother and Sister in the Via Ardeatina, in the Church built by himself, December the 11th. He sat in the Chair nineteen years, three months, eleven days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty one days. SIRICIUS I. SIRICIUS, a Roman, Son of Tiburtius, lived in the time of Valentinian, Who, for his being a Christian, had been very unjustly dealt. withall, and cashier'd from a considerable Command in the Army by Ju∣lian. But upon the Death of Jovinian being by the universal consent of the Soldiers elected Emperour, he admitted his Brother Valens his Collegue in the Empire, and assign'd to him the Government of the East. Afterwards, in the third year of his Reign, at the persuasion of his  and her Mother, he created his young Son Gratian Augustus. And whereas one  had rais'd a  and set up for himself at Constantinople, him with his Adherents the Emperour very suddenly overthrew and put to death. But Valens having been baptized by Eudoxius an Arian Bishop, and. becoming a bigotted , presently fell to persecuting and banishing the Orthodox, especially after the death of Athanasius, who while he lived was a mighty support to the Christian State for forty six years to gether. Lucius also another Heretical Bishop was extreamly violent and outragious against the Orthodox Christians; nor did he spare so much as the Anchorets and Eremites, but sent parties of Soldiers to in∣vade their Solitudes, who either put them to death or else sent them into Exile. Amongst this sort of men they who at that time had the greatest esteem and authority, were the two Macarii in Syria, the Disciples of Anthony, one of which lived in the upper, the other in the lower Desert; as also , Panucius, Pambus, Moses, Benjamin, Paulus , Paulus Phocensis, and Joseph in Egypt. While Lucius was intent upon the banishment of these men, a certain inspired Woman went about crying aloud, that those good Men, those Men of God ought by no means to be sent into the Islands. Moreover Mauvia, Queen of the Saracens ha∣ving by frequent Battels very much impaired the Roman Forces, and har∣rassed their Towns on the borders of Palestine and Arabia, refused to grant the Peace which they desired at her hands unless Moses, a man of most exemplary Piety, were consecrated and appointed Bishop to her People. This Lucius willingly assented to; but when Moses was brought to him, he plainly told him, that the multitudes of Christians condemn'd
to the Mines, banish'd to the Islands and imprison'd through his cruel∣ty, did cry  against him,  that therefore he would never  the imposition of his polluted hands.  Bishops  to consecrate him, he was presented to the , and  a  concluded. But  and  still to  their  against the Orthodox, though  was  more favourable towards  by the Letters of  the .  also  of the  of his people which  for their . In  by his Valour  Conduct  and . But while he was making  a War  the  who had spread  through the two  he died at a little Town called , through a sudden  of Blood. At this time the  their own  had  themselves of all   (having first,  too  and Monks, and  to  in  his Army   An overthrow which  to the  and . into any  from the  to the  Dignity it . That the  of  not be conferred at once, but at certain distances . ,  the  who  in the City, the  of the faithful; but  that upon  and return to the Orthodox Faith they should be  into the Church, upon condition they would undertake a  course of , and  themselves to Fasting and Prayer all  which,  it  that their Conversion ,  at  approach  as their .  but a Bishop should have power to  a ;  whosoever married a Widow, or second  should be degraded from his Office in the Church, and that  upon their Repentance should be received with only the Imposition of Hands. In his time lived  Bishop of , who  twelve Books  the  and one against  not long  he  at .  also an  who had
old Age so great a Proficient in those Arts which most require the assi∣stance of sight, particularly in Logick and Geometry, that he wrote some excellent Treatises in the Mathematicks. He published also Com∣mentaries on the Psalms, and the Gospels of Matthew and John, and was a great opposer of the Arians. Moreover, Optatus an African Bi∣shopOptatus Mi∣levitanus. of Mela, compiled six Books against the ; and Severus Aquilius a Spaniard, who was kinsman to that Severus to whom La∣ctantius penn'd two Books of Epistles, wrote one Volume called . As for our Siricius, having setled the Affairs of the Church, and at five Ordinations, made twenty six Presbyters, sixteen Deacons, thirty two Bishops, he died and was buried in the Coemetery of Priscilla in the Via Salaria, Febr. 22. He was in the Chair fifteen years, eleven months, twenty days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty days. ANASTASIUS I. ANASTASIUS, a Roman, the Son of Maximus, was made Bishop of Rome in the time of Gratian. This Gratian was a young Prince of eminent Piety, and soGratianus. good a Soldier, that in an Expedition against the Germans that were now harrassing the Roman Borders, he did in one Battel at Argentaria cut off thirty thousand of them, with very little loss on his own side. Returning from thence to Italy, he expelled all those of the Arian Fa∣ction, and admitted none but the Orthodox to the execution of any Ecclesiastical Office. But apprehending the Publick-weal to be in great danger from the attempts of the Goths, he associated to himself as a Partner in the Government, Theodosius a Spaniard, a person eminent for his Valour and Conduct; who vanquishing the Alans, Hunns and Goths, re-establish'd the Empire of the East, and entred into a League with Athanaricus King of the Goths, after whose Death and magnificent Burial at Constantinople, his whole Army repaired to Theodosius, and de∣clared they would serve under no other Commander but that good Em∣perour. In the mean time, Maximus usurped the Empire in Britain, and passing over into Gaul, slew Gratian at Lions: whose death so  his younger Brother Valentinian, that he forthwith fled for refuge to Theodosius in the East. Some are of opinion, that those two Brethren owed the Calamities which befell them to their Mother Justina, whose great Zeal for the Arian Heresie made her a fierce Persecutor of the Orthodox, and especially of S. Ambrose, whom against his will the peopleS. Ambrosius. of Milain had at this time chosen their Bishop. For Auxentius an Arian, their late Bishop being dead, a great Sedition arose in the City about chusing his Successour. Now Ambrose, who was a man of Consular dignity, and their Governour, endeavouring all he could to quell that disorder, and to that end going into the Church, where the people were in a tumultuary manner assembled, he there makes an excellent Speech tending to persuade them to Peace and Unity among themselves; which so wrought upon them, that they all with one consent cryed out, that they
would have no other Bishop but Ambrose himself. And the event ans∣wered their desires; for being as yet but a Catechumen, he was forth∣with baptized, and then admitted into holy Orders, and constituted Bishop  Milain. That he was a person of great Learning and extraor∣dinary Sanctity, the account which we have of his Life, and the many excellent Books which he wrote do abundantly testifie. Our Anastasius decreed, that the Clergy should by no means sit at the singing, or reading of the holy Gospel in the Church, but stand bowed and in a posture of ; and that no Strangers, especially those that came from the parts beyond the Seas, should be receiv'd into holy Orders, unless they could produce Testimonials under the hands of five Bishops. Which latter Ordinance is suppos'd to have been occasioned by the practice of the Manichees, who having gain∣ed a great esteem and Authority in Africa, were wont to send their Missionaries abroad into all parts, to corrupt the Orthodox Doctrine by the infusion of their Errours. He ordained likewise, that no person  of body, or maimed, or defective of any Limb or Member should be admitted into holy Orders. Moreover, he dedicated the Crescentian Church, which stands in the second Region of the City, in the Via Ma∣rurtina. The Pontificate of this Anastasius, as also that of Damasus and Siricius his Predecessors, were signaliz'd not only by those excellent Emperours Jovinian, , Gratian, and Theodosius, but also by those many holy and worthy Doctors, both Greek and Latin, that were famous in all kinds of Learning. Cappadocia, as Eusebius tells us, brought forth  Nazianzen, and Bazil the Great, both extraordinary Per∣sons, and both brought up at Athens. Basil was a Bishop of  of , a City formerly called Mazaca. He wrote divers excellent Books against Eunomius, one concerning the Holy Ghost, and the Or∣ders of a Monastick life. He had two Brethren, Gregory and Peter, both very learned Men, of the former of which some Books were extant in the time of Eusebius. Gregory Nazianzen, who was Master to S. Hie∣rom,Greg. Nazi∣anzen. wrote also many things; particularly in praise of Cyprian, Atha∣nasius and Maximus the Philosopher; two Books against Eunomius, and one against the Emperour Julian, besides an Encomium of Marriage and single Life in Hexameter Verse. By the strength of his reasoning and the power of his Rhetorick, (in which he was an imitatour of Polemon a man of admirable Eloquence) he brought off the Citizens of Constanti∣nople from the Errours with which they had been infected. At length being very aged, he chose his own Successour, and led a private life in the Countrey. Basil died in the Reign of Gratian, Gregory of Theodosius. About the same time  Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus,. . a strenuous oppugner of all kinds of Heresies; as did also Ephrem a Deacon of the Church of Edessa, who composed divers Treatises in the  Language, which gained him so great a Veneration, that in some Churches his Books were publickly read after the Holy Scriptures. . having at two Decembrian Ordinations, made eight Presbyters, five Deacons, ten Bishops, died and was buried April 28. He was in the Chair three years, ten days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty one days.
INNOCENTIUS I. INNOCENTIUS, an Alban, Son of Innocentius, was Bishop in part of the Reign of Theodosius, Who with great Conduct and singular Dispatch overcameTheodosius. the Usurper Maximus, and at Aquileia whither he had fled, retaliated upon him the Death of Gratian. A fate which the good Bi∣shop  had foretold to Maximus himself, when he was going against all Right and Justice to invade Italy, having dreined Britain of its Military Forces, and left it an easie prey to the Scots and Picts. Moreover, Theodosius, relying wholly upon the Divine aid, in a very short time defeated not only Andragatius Maximus's General, and Victor his Son, but Argobastus and Eugenius two other Vsurpers; which was the occasion of that strain of the Poet Claudian upon this Emperours success, O nimium dilecte Deo, tibi militat Aether, Et conjurati veniunt ad classica Venti! Englished, Darling of Heaven, with whom the Skies combine, And the confederate Winds in Battel joyn! He was not only a great Soldier, but a very pious and devout man; as appears by his carriage upon the repulse he found at the Church of Milain; for being forbidden entrance by Ambrose the Bishop of it, till he should have repented of a certain Crime committed by him, he so well resented the Bishop's plain dealing with him, that he frankly gave him thanks for it, and completed his course of Pennance for the Fact that had been the occasion of it. By his Empress  he had two Sons Arcadius and Honorius. Being once in a great transport of rage against the Citizens of Thessalonica, for their having kill'd a Soldier, or as others say a Ma∣gistrate of his, all the Clergy of Italy were scarce able to keep him from destroying the whole City upon that provocation. But afterwards coming to himself, and understanding the matter better, being convin∣ced of his Errour, he both bewailed the Fact which he had only willed but not executed; and also made a Law, that the punitive Decrees of Princes should be deferr'd for three days, that so they might have space left for compassion or retractation. It is reported of him, that when at any time he was in a sudden heat of Anger, he would force himself to repeat over distinctly all the Letters of the Alphabet, that so in the mean time his Anger might evaporate. 'Tis said also, that he contra∣cted a great Friendship with one John an Anchorete, whose advice he always used both in War and Peace. But in the fiftieth year of his Age he died at Milain. Innocentius improving the opportunity of such a peaceable state of Affairs, and so propitious a Prince, made several Constitutions con∣cerning matters of the Church. He appointed that every Saturday
should be a Fast, because our Blessed Saviour lay in the Grave, and his Disciples  on that day. He made certain Laws concerning the Jews and Pagans, and for the regulation of Monks. By the consent of Theodosius he banish'd from the City and confin'd to a Monastick life the Cataphrygian Hereticks of the gang of Montanus, Priscilla and Ma∣ximilia. Moreover, he condemned the Heresie of Pelagius and Coele∣stinus, who preferred Free-will before the Divine Grace; and asserted, that men by their own natural strength were able to perform the Laws of God; against whom S. Austin wrote largely. But Pelagius persist∣ing obstinately in his opinions against all Conviction, went into Britain and infected the whole Island with his Errours, being assisted by Julian his Companion and Confederate in that wicked Design. He also con∣secrated the Church of Gervasius and Protasius, erected and beautified at the Cost of a Lady named Vestina, whose Goods and Jewels bequeath∣ed by Will, were sold according to a just appraisement, and employed to that purpose. This Church was endowed with several Estates both in Houses and Land within and without the City, and the Cure of it, and that of S. Agnes, given to Leopardus and Paulinus two Presbyters. In his time lived Apollinarius Bishop of Laodicea, (from whom the A∣pollinariansApollinaris. had their name and original) a man vehement and subtil at Disputation; who maintained, that our Saviour at his Incarnation took only a Body, not a Soul; but being press'd hard with Arguments to the contrary, he at length granted that he had indeed an animal Soul but not a rational one, that being supplied by his Divinity. An Opinion which had been before exploded by Damasus and Peter Bishop of Alex∣andria. But Martianus Bishop of Barcellona, a man eminent for his Chastity and Eloquence, was very Orthodox in matters of Faith, and a great opposer of the Novatian Heresie. Cyril also Bishop of Hierusa∣lem,Cyril. who before had been several times deposed and as often restored; at length under Theodosius the Emperour held his Episcopal Dignity peaceably and without interruption eight years together, and became a great Writer. Euzoius, who in his youth had been Condisciple to Gre∣gory Nazianzen at Coesarea under Thespesius the Rhetorician, took a vast deal of pains in amending and rectifying the corrupted Copies of the Works of Origen and Pamphilus, and was himself a considerable Au∣thor. At the same time Hieronymus a Presbyter living in Bethlehem, was a very successful propagator of Christianity, as appears by his Writings. Now also the Synod of Bourdeaux condemned the Doctrine of Priscillian, an Heresie patch'd up out of the Tenets of the Gnosticks and Manichees, of whom we have spoken above. Our Innocentius, ha∣ving at four Ordinations made thirty Presbyters, twelve Deacons, fifty four Bishops, died and was buried July the 28th. He sat in the Chair fifteen years, two months, twenty five days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty two days.
ZOSIMUS. ZOSIMUS, a Grecian, his Fathers name Abraham, lived du∣ring the Reign of Arcadius and Honorius, who succeeded their Father Theodosius in the Empire. These divided the Government between them, Arcadius ruling in theArcadius and Honorius. East, and Honorius in the West. Though Theodosius had left them to the Tuition of three of his Generals, who as their Guardians and Pro∣tectours were to manage Affairs in their Minority; Russinus in the East, Stilico in the West, and Gildo in Africa. But they moved with Ambi∣tion and a thirst after greatness, and not doubting to get the advantage of the young Princes, set up every one for himself. Against Gildo, who was engag'd in a Rebellion in Afrique, his injured and incensed Brother Mascezel is sent with an Army, and soon defeats and puts him to flight, who not long after dieth either through grief or by poyson. And Ma∣scezel himself, being so puffed up with this success, that he falls into a great contempt of God and cruelty towards men, is killed by his own Soldiers. Russinus also, who endeavoured to possess himself of the Em∣pire of the East, is surprized and punish'd by Arcadius. At this time Rhadaguisus King of the Goths invaded Italy, and lay'd all waste with fire and Sword where ever he came; but by the Roman Army under the Command of Stilico, he was vanquish'd and slain on the Mountains of Fiesoli. Him Alaricus succeeded, whom Stilico, to work his own ambitious designs, very much countenanced and assisted, when he might have conquer'd him. But in the end Alaricus being now at Polentia, on his way to Gaul, part of which Honorius had granted to him and his followers to inhabit, had disturbance given him by one Saul, an He∣brew by birth and Religion, whom Stilico to the foul breach of Articles had sent with a Party for that purpose. It was an easie matter to surprize and disorder the Goths, who little suspected any such Practices, and were peaceably celebrating the Feast of Easter. But the day following Alaricus engaging with them slew Saul, and made an universal slaughter of his men, and then changing his former course towards Gaul, moves against Stilico and the Roman Army. These he overcame, and then af∣ter a long and grievous Siege, takes the City of Rome it self, Anno U. C. MCLXIIII. A. C. CCCCXII. Notwithstanding this Success Alaricus exercised so much Moderation and Clemency, that he commanded his Soldiers to put as few to the Sword as might be, and particularly to spare all that should fly for refuge to the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul. After three days Plunder he leaves the City, (which had suffered less damage than was thought for, very little of it being burnt) and marches against the Lucani and Bruti, and having taken and sacked Cosenza, he there dies. Whereupon the Goths with one consent made his kinsman Athaulphus his Successour, who returning to Rome with his Army, was so wrought upon by the Emperour Honorius's Sister Gal∣la Placidia whom he had married, that he restrained his Soldiers from committing any farther outrages, and left the City to its own Government. He had it certainly once in his purpose to have razed
to the ground the then City of Rome, and to have built a new one which he would have called Gotthia, and have left to the ensuing Emperours his own Name, so that they should not any longer have had the Title of Augusti, but Athaulphi. But Placidia not only brought his mind off from that project; but also prevailed with him to enter into a League with Honorius and Theodosius the second, the Son of Arcadius de∣ceased. Zosimus, notwithstanding all these disturbances made several Eccle∣siastical Constitutions; allowed the blessing of Wax-Tapers on the Satur∣day before Easter in the several Parishes; forbad the Clergy to frequent publick Drinking-houses, (though allowing them all innocent liberty among themselves,) or any Servant to be made a Clergy-man, because that Order ought to consist of none but free and ingenuous persons. Where∣as now not only Servants and Bastards, but the vile off-spring of the most flagitious Parents are admitted to that Dignity; whose Enormi∣ties will certainly at long-run prove fatal to the Church. 'Tis said that Zosimus at this time sent Faustinus a Bishop, and two Presbyters of the City to the Council of Carthage, by them declaring, that no Debates concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs ought to be managed any where without permission of the Church of Rome. During his Pontificate lived Lucius a Bishop of the Arian Faction, who wrote certain Books upon several Sub∣jects. Diodorus also Bishop of Tarsus, during his being a Presbyter of Antioch was a great Writer; following the sense of Eusebius, but not able to reach his style for want of skill in secular Learning. Tiberianus likewise who had been accused together with Priscillian, wrote an Apology to free himself from the suspicion of Heresie. Euagrius, a man of smart and brisk parts, translated into Latin the Life of S. Anthony written in Greek by Athanasius. Ambrosius of Alexandria, a Scholar of Didymus wrote a large Volume against Apollinarius. At this time flourished those two famous Bishops, Theophilus of Alexandria, and John of Constantinople, for the greatness of his Eloquence deservedly surnamed Chrysostom; who so far prevailed upon Theodorus and Maximus two Condisciples of his, that they left their Masters Libanius the Rhetorician, and Andragatius the Philosopher, and became Proselytes to Christianity. This Libanius ly∣ing now at the point of death, being asked whom he would leave suc∣sessour in his School; made answer, that he desired no other than Chry∣sosiom, were he not a Christian. At this time the Decrees of the Coun∣cil of Carthage being sent to Zosimus, were by him confirmed, and thereby the Pelagian Heresie condemned throughout the World. Some tell us, that Petronius Bishop of Bononia, and Possidonius an Afri∣can Bishop, had now gain'd a mighty reputation for Sanctity; that Pri∣masius wrote largely against the Heresies to Bishop Fortunatus; and that Proba, Wife to Adelphus the Proconsul, composed an Historical Poem of our Saviours Life, consisting wholly of Virgilian Verse; though others attribute the honour of this performance to Eudocia Empress of Theo∣dosius the younger. But certainly the most learned person of the Age he lived in, was Augustinus, Saint Ambrose his Convert, Bishop of Hip∣po in Africa, a most strenuous Defender of the Christian Faith both in Discourse and Writing. As for Zosimus, having ordained ten Presby∣ters, three Deacons, eight Bishops, he died, and was buried in the Via Tiburtina, near the body of Saint Laurence the Martyr, December 26th.
He sat in the Chair one year, three months, twelve days, and by his death the See was vacant eleven days. BONIFACIUS I. BONIFACE, a Roman, Son of Jucundus a Presbyter, was. Bishop in the time of Honorius. At this time a great dissention  among the Clergy; for though Boniface was chosen Bishop in one Church of the City  one Party, yet Eulalius was elected and set up against him by a contrary Faction in another. This when Honorius, who was now at Milain, came to understand, at the Solicitation of  Placidia and her Son Valentiman, they were both banish'd the City. But about seven months after  was re-call'd, and confirmed in the Ponti∣fical Dignity. In the mean time Athaulphus dying, Vallias was made King of the ,  being terrified by the Judgments inflicted on his People, restored Placidia, whom he had always used very honourably, to her Brother , and entred into a League with him, giving very good Hostages for the confirmation of it; as did also the Alanes, Vandals and . This I lacidia Henorius gave in marriage to Constantius whom he had declared , who had by her a Son named Valentinian; but she being afterwards banish'd by her Brother, went into the East with her Sons  and Valentinian. Our Bonisace ordained, that no Woman, though a Nun, should touch the consecrated Pall or Incense; and that no Servant, or Debtor should be admitted into the Clergy. Moreover, he built an Oratory upon the ground where S. Felicitas the Martyr was buried, and very much adorn∣ed her Tomb. During his Pontificate flourished divers famous men,   a Presbyter, Son of Eusebius, born at a Town calledS. . , seated in the Confines of Dalmatia and Hungaria, but demo∣lished by the Goths. It is not to my purpose to rehearse how great bene∣fit the Church of God reaped from his Life and Writings, since he is known to have been a person of extraordinary , and his Works are had in so great honour and esteem, that no Author is more read by learned Men than he. He died at Bethlehem on the last day of Septem∣ber in the ninety first year of his Age. Besides him there were also Ge∣lasius, Successour to Euzoius in the Bishoprick of Caesarea Palestinae, a man of excellent Parts; Dexter, Son of Pacianus, who compiled an Hi∣story inscribed to S. Hierem; Amphilochius, who wrote concerning the Holy Ghost in an  style; and , commended by S.   his learned Book of the Destruction of . 'Tis said also that at this time Lucianus a Preshyter, directed by a divine Revelation, found out the Sepulchres of S. Stephen the Protomartyr, and Gamaliel S. Paul's Master, of which he gave an account to all the Churches by an Epistle in Greek, which was afterwards translated into Latin by  a , and sent to Orosius. Some likewise tell us, that John Cassianus and Maximine two very learned Men lived in this Age; but though it be
doubtful of them, it is not so concerning Eutropius S. Austin's Scholar, who in a handsom style Epitomised the Roman History from the building of the City to his own times; and who moreover wrote to his two Sisters, Recluses, concerning Chastity, and the Love of Religion; to whom we may add Juvenal the Bishop of Constantinople, and Heros, a Disciple of S. Martin, the wrongfully deposed Bishop of Arles, both men of great reputation for Sanctity. As for Boniface himself, having at one Ordination made thirteen Presbyters, three Deacons, thirty six Bishops, he died October the 25th, and was buried in the Via Salaria, near the body of S. Felicitas the Martyr. He fat in the Chair three years, eight months, sevendays; Boniface being dead, some of the Clergy recall'd Eulalius, but he either through indignation at his former re∣pulse, or from contempt of Worldly greatness, disdained the revocation, and died the year following. The See was then vacant nine days. CAELESTINUS I. CAELESTINE, a Campanian, lived in the times of Theodo∣sius the younger. This Theodosius, upon the death of that excellent Prince Ho∣norius,Theodosius secundus. creates the Son of his Aunt Placidia, Valentinian, Coesar, and commits to his charge the Western Empire. Who being immediately by the universal consent of all Italy acknowledged their Emperour, and actually entring upon the Government at Ravenna, was wonderfully prosperous in subduing the Enemies of the Roman State, and particu∣larly John the Usurper. In the mean time the Vandals, Alemans and Goths, a barbarous and salvage people, passing over out of Spain into Africa, under the conduct of their King Gensericus, not only miserably depopulated and harrassed that Province with Fire and Sword, but also corrupted the Catholick Faith there with the mixture of Arianism, and banish'd some Orthodox Bishops; during which Troubles S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo died in the third month of the Siege of that City Au∣gust 28. in the seventy seventh year of his Age. The Vandals having taken Carthage, fail'd to Sicily, and made the like havock in that Island; as also did the Picts and Scots in the Island of Britain. In this Extre∣mity the Britains implored the Aid of Aetius a Patrician and a famous Soldier, but he not only denied them his assistance; but having other ambitious Designs to carry on, solicited the Huns to invade Italy. The Britains being thus deserted by Aetius, call over the Saxons or English to their help, whom they soon found more their Enemies than Assi∣stants; for being in a little time over run by them, they lost both their Countrey and their Name. While these things were transacting, Theo∣dosius dying at Constantinople in the twenty seventh year of his and his Uncle Honorius's Reign, Bleda and Attila two Brothers, Kings of the Hunns, invading Illyricum, lay'd waste, and burn'd all places to which they came.
Notwithstanding our Coelestine ordained several Rites appertaining to divine Worship; as that, besides the Epistle and Gospel, before the Mass the Psalms of David should be sung by all alternately. Martinus Cassinas tells us, that the Psalm Judica me Deus, Give sentence with me O God, and defend my cause, &c. which is used at the beginning of the Sa∣crifice, was introduced by him; as likewise the Gradual is ascribed to him. Many other Ecclesiastical Constitutions he made, to be seen in the Archives of the Church. He also dedicated and enriched the Julian Church; At this time Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople endeavoured toNestorius. sow a new Errour in the Church, asserting, that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary a meer Man, and that the Divinity was conferred upon him of Merit. To this impious Doctrine Cyril Bishop of Alexandria and our Coelestine opposed themselves very strenuously. For in a Synod of two hundred Bishops held at Ephesus, Nestorius himself and the He∣resie denominated from him, together with the Pelagians who were great favourers of the Nestorian Party, were by universal consent condemned in thirteen Canons level'd against their foolish Opinions. Moreover, Coele∣stine sent Germanus Bishop of Auxerre into England to oppose the Pela∣gian Heresie, and reduce the Inhabitants to the Orthodox Faith; and Palladius, whom he had made a Bishop to the Scots, who desired to be in∣structed in the Christian Religion. And indeed it cannot be denied but that by his endeavours, and the industry of those whom he employ∣ed to that purpose, a great part of the West were converted to Christia∣nity. 'Tis said, that at this time the Devil assumed humane shape, and pretended himself to be Moses, and imposed upon a multitude of Jews by undertaking to conduct them out of the Island of Crete into the Land of Promise through the Sea as upon dry Land, in imitation of the ancient Miracle wrought for that People at the red Sea. Many of them follow'd this false Moses, and perished in the Waters; those only being reported to have been saved who presently own'd Christ to be the true God. Our Coelestine having at three Decembrian Ordinations, made thirty two Presbyters, twelve Deacons, sixty two Bishops, died, and was buried in the Coemetery of Priscilla in the Via Salaria, April the 6th. He sat in the Chair eight years, ten months, seventeen days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty one days. SIXTUS III. SIXTUS, the third, a Roman, Son of Sixtus, lived in the time of Valentinian. Who, being Governour of the Western Empire, entred into aValentinian. League with Gensericus King of the Vandals, whom he permitted to in∣habit part of Africa, confining themselves within certain Boundaries agreed upon between them. Genseric being afterwards instigated by the Arians, became very zealous in propagating their Errours, and vio∣lently persecuted the Orthodox Bishops. And Valentinian going to Con∣stantinople, and there marrying Theodosius's Daughter, the Vandals in the mean time, under Genseric's Conduct, re-took and sack'd Carthage in
the five hundred eighty fourth year since its first being in the hands of the Romans. While these things weret ransacting in Afric, Attila King of the Huns, not contented to have invaded the two Hungaries, miserably harasses Macedonia, Mysia, Achaia and the Thraces; and then, that he might have no sharer in the Kingdom, puts to death his Brother Bleda. Soon after his growing ambition prompts him to endeavour the gaining of the Western Empire; and therefore getting together in a very little time a great Army, he begins his March upon that Design. This Aeti∣us having intelligence of, forthwith sends Ambassadours to Tholouse to King Theodorick to strike up a Peace; with whom so strict a League was concluded, that they both jointly engage in the War against Attila, at a common charge and with equal Forces. The Romans and Theodorick had for their Auxiliaries, the Alanes, Burgundians, Franks, Saxons, and indeed almost all the people of the West. At length Attila comes upon them in the Fields of Catalaunia; and Battel is joyn'd with great Valour and Resolution on either side. The Fight was long and sharp, a Voice being over-heard, none knowing from whence it came, was the occasion of putting an end to the Dispute. In this Engagement were slain on both sides eighteen thousand men; neither Army flying or giving ground. And yet 'tis said that Theodorick, Father of King Thurismond, was killed in this Action. Sixtus had not long enjoyed the Pontificate, before he was publickly accused by one Bassus; but in a Synod of fifty seven Bishops he made such a Defence of himself, that he was by them all with one consent ac∣quitted. Bassus his false Accuser, was with the consent of Valentinian and his Mother Placidia, excommunicated and condemn'd to banishment, but with this compassionate provision, that at the point of death the Via∣ticum of the Blessed Sacrament should be denied him; the forfeiture of his Estate, was adjudged not to the Emperour, but the Church. 'Tis said, that in the third month of his Exile he died, and that our Bishop Six∣tus did with his own hands wrap up and embalm his Corps, and then bury it in S. Peters Church. Moreover, Sixtus repaired and enlarged the Church of the Blessed Virgin, which was anciently called by the name of Liberius, near the Market place of Livia, then had the name of S. Mary at the Manger, and last of all was called S. Maries the Geeat. That Sixtus did very much beautifie and make great additions to it, appears from the Inscription on the front of the first Arch in these words, Xystus Episcopus Plebi Dei; for according to the Greek Ortho∣graphy the name begins with X and y, though by Custom it is now written Sixtus with S and i. To this Church that Bishop was very libe∣ral and munificent; among other instances adorning with Porphyry stone the Ambo or Desk where the Gospel and Epistles are read. Besides what he did himself, at his persuasion the Emperour Valentinian also was very liberal in works of this nature. For over the Confessory of S. Peter, which he richly adorned, he placed the Image of  Saviour of Gold set with Jewels, and renewed those Silver Ornaments in the Cu∣pola of the Lateran Church which the Goths had taken away. Some are of an Opinion that in his time one Peter, a Roman Presbyter, by Nation a Sclavonian, built the Church of S. Sabina upon the Aventine, not far from the Monastery of S. Boniface, where S. Alexius is interred.  I rather think this to have been done in the Pontificate of Coelestine
the first, as appears from an Inscription in Heroick Verse, yet remain∣ing, which expresses as much. 'Tis said also, that at this time  Eusebius of Cremona and Philip, two Scholars of S. Hierom, both very elegant Writers; as also Eucherius Bishop of Lyons, a man of great Learn∣ing and Eloquence; and Hilarius Bishop of Arles, a pious Man, and of no mean parts. Our Sixtus having employed all his Estate in the build∣ing and adorning of Churches, and relieving the poor, and having made twenty eight Presbyters, twelve Deacons, fifty two Bishops, died, and was buried in a Vault in the Via Tiburtina, near the body of S. Lau∣rence. He was in the Chair eight years, nine days, and by his death the See was vacant twenty two days. LEO I. LEO, a Tuscan, Son of Quintianus, lived at the time when At∣tila, having return'd into Hungary from the Fight of Catalonia, and there recruited his Army, invaded Italy, and first set down before Aquileia a Frontier City of that Province, which held out a Siege  three years. Despairing hereupon of success, he was just about to raise the Leaguer, when observing the Storks to carry their young ones out of the City into the Fields, being encouraged by this Omen, he renews his Batteries, and making a fierce assault, at length takes the miserable City, sacks and burns it, sparing neither Age nor Sex, but acting agreeably to the Title he assum'd to himself of being God's Scourge. The Huns having hereby gain'd an Inlet into Italy, over-run all the Countrey about Venice, possessing themselves of the Cities, and demolishing Milain and Pavia. From hence Attila marching towards Rome, and being come to the place where the Menzo runs into the Po, ready to pass the River, the holy Bishop Leo, out of a tender sense of the calamitous state of Italy and of the City of Rome, and with the ad∣vice of Valentinian, goes forth and meets him, persuading him not to proceed any farther, but to take warning by Alaricus, who soon after his taking that City was by the Judgment of God removed out of the World. Attila takes the good Bishops Counsel, being moved thereun∣to by a Vision which he saw while they were discoursing together, of two men (supposed to be S. Peter and S. Paul) brandishing their na∣ked swords over his head, and threatning him with death, if he were refractory. Desisting therefore from his design, he returns into Hun∣gary, where not long after he was choaked with his own bloud, vio∣lently breaking out at his Nostrils, through excess of drinking. Leo returning to the City, applyes himself wholly to the defence of the  Faith, which was now violently opposed by several kinds of Hereticks, but especially by the Nestorians and Eutychians. Nesto∣rius  of Constantinople, affirmed the Blessed Virgin to be Mother not of God, but of Man only, that so he might make the Humanity and Divinity of Christ to be two distinct persons, one the Son of God, the other the Son of Man. But Eutyches Abbot of Constantinople, that he might broach an Heresie in contradiction to the former, utterly con∣founded
the divine and humane Nature of Christ, asserting them to be one, and not at all to be distinguished. This Heresie being condemned by Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, with the consent of Theodosius, a Synod is called at Ephesus, in which, Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria being President, Eutyches was restored, and Flavianus censured. But Theodosius dying, and his successour Marcianus proving a Friend to the Orthodox Doctrine, Leo calls a Council at Chalcedon, wherein by the authority of six hundred and thirty Bishops, it was decreed as an Ar∣ticle of Faith, that there are two Natures in Christ, and that one and the same Christ is God and Man; by which consequently both Nesto∣rius and Eutyches, the pestilent Patron of the Manichees were condemn∣ed. Moreover, the Books of the Manichees were publickly burnt; and the pride and heretical Opinions of Dioscorus discountenanced and sup∣press'd. In the mean time Valentinian being treacherously murdered, Maximus usurps the Empire, and against her will marries Eudoxia the Widow of Valentinian. Upon this occasion the Vandals being called out of Afric, Genseric being their Leader, force their entrance into the City of Rome, throw the Body of Maximus, who had been kill'd in the Tumult by one Ursus a Roman Soldier, into the River Tyber, plunder and burn the City, pillage the Churches and refuse to hearken to Bishop Leo begging them, what ever spoils they carried away, only to spare the City it self and the Temples. However, on the fourteenth day from their entrance into Rome, they left it, and taking away with them Eudoxia and her Daughter, with a great number of other Cap∣tives, they return'd into Africa. Leo being now very intent upon ma∣king good the damages sustain'd from this People, prevailed upon De∣metria, a pious Virgin, to build upon her own ground in the Via Latina three miles from the City a Church to S. Stephen; and did the same himself in the Via Appia in honour to S. Cornelius. The Churches which had been in any part ruined, he repaired; and those of the sacred Vessels belonging to them, which had been bruised and broken, he caused to be mended, and those which had been taken away to be made anew; Moreover, he built three Apartments in the Churches of S. John, S. Peter and S. Paul; appoint∣ed certain of the Roman Clergy, whom he called Cubicularii to keep and take charge of the Sepulchres of the Apostles; built a Monastery near S. Pe∣ters; introduced into the Canon of the Mass, the Clause, Hoc sanctum sa∣crificium, this holy Sacrifice, &c. and ordained, that no Recluse should be capable of receiving the Consecrated Veils, unless it did appear that she had preserv'd her Chastity spotless for the space of forty years. But while the good man was employed in these things, there started up of a sudden the Heresie of the Acephali, so called because they were a com∣panyAcephali. of foolish, undisciplin'd Schismaticks, or, if it be not a quibble, because they wanted both Brains and Head. These men decried the Council of Chalcedon, denied the propriety of two Substances in Christ, and asserted, that there could be but one Nature in one Person. But our Leo abundantly confuted their absurd Doctrines in his elegant and learned Epistles written to the Faithful upon that Argument. Men of Note in his time, were Paulinus Bishop of Nola, Prosper of Aquitain, a learned man, and Mamercus Bishop of Vienne,; who, as 'tis said, was the first that appointed processionary Supplications, or Litanies, upon the occasion of the frequent Earthquakes with which Gaul was at that
time very much afflicted. To conclude, Leo having ordained eighty one Presbyters, thirty one Deacons, and eighty one Bishops, died, and was buried in the Vatican near S. Peter, April the 10th. He sat in the Chair twenty one years, one month, thirteen days, and by his death the See was vacant eight days. HILARIUS I. HILARIUS, a Sardinian, the Son of Crispinus, continued in the Chair till the time of the Emperour Leo, Who being chosen Emperour upon the death of Marcianus,Leo Empe∣rour. creates his Son, of his own name, Augustus. During his Reign the Ro∣man State suffered very much by reason of certain Ambitious men, who endeavoured to get the Government into their own hands. And Gen∣seric the Vandal King being tempted with so fair an opportunity, sails out of Afrique into Italy with design to gain the Empire for himself. Leo having intelligence hereof, sends Basilicus a Patrician, with a mighty Fleet, to the Assistance of Anthemius the Emperour of the West; These two with joint force and courage meet Genseric near Populonia, and force him to an Engagement at Sea, in which being routed with a great slaughter of his men, he was glad to make an inglorious flight into A∣frica again. In the mean time Ricimer a Patrician, having on the Moun∣tains of Trent conquer'd Biorgus King of the Alanes, and being puff'd up with that Victory, was purposed to attempt the City of Rome, had not  Bishop of Pavia made him and Anthemius Friends. Hilary, notwithstanding this confused state of things, did not neglect the care of Ecclesiastical Affairs. For he ordained, that no Bishop should chuse his own Successour; (a Constitution which belongs as well to all other Ecclesiastical Degrees as that of Episcopacy) he also made a Decretal which he dispersed throughout Christendom; and wrote certain Epistles concerning the Catholick Faith, by which the three Synods of Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon were confirmed, and the Here∣ticks Eutyches, Nestorius, and Dioscorus, with their Adherents, condem∣ned. In the Baptistery of the Lateran Church he built three Oratories, which were adorned with Gold and precious Stones, their Gates of Brass covered with wrought Silver; those he dedicated to S. John Bap∣tist, S. John Evangelist, and S. Cross. In the last of these was reposited some of the wood of the Cross, nclosed in Gold and set with Jewels; and a Golden Agnus upon a Pillar of Onyx. He added moreover the Oratory of S. Stephen, built two Libraries adjoyning, and founded a Monastery. I shall not here recite the almost numberless Donations which he made to several Churches, of Gold, Silver, Marble, and Jewels. Some tell us, that Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bi∣shop of Troyes lived in his time, both great supporters of the Christian cause, which was now very much undermined by the endeavours of   and Pelagians. Gennadius also Bishop of Constantinople did great service to the Church by the integrity of his Life and the excel∣lency of his Parts and Learning. During the Pontificate of our Hilary,
Victorinus of Aquitain, a famous Arithmetician, reduced the Easter ac∣countVictorinus. to the course of the Moon; far out-doing Eusebius and Theophi∣lus, who had attempted it before him. And among those that flou∣rished at this time, by some is reckoned Merline the famous EnglishMerline. Bard, concerning whom we are told more than enough. As for Hi∣lary himself, having performed the duty of a good Bishop, both in build∣ing and adorning of Churches, and also in Teaching, Admonishing, Cen∣suring and giving Alms where need required; and having also ordained twenty five Presbyters, five Deacons, twenty two Bishops; he died, and was buried in the Sepulchre of S. Laurence, near the body of Bishop Sixtus. He sat in the Chair seven years, three months, ten days, and by his death the See was vacant ten days. SIMPICIUS I. SIMPLICIUS, Son of Castinus, born at Tivoli, was Bi∣shop during the Reigns of Leo the second, and Zeno. For Leo the first falling sick, makes choice of Leo the second,Leo II. and Zeno. Son of Zeno Isauricus, and his own Nephew by Ariadne his Sister, to be his Successour; who not long after being seiz'd by a violent Distemper, and apprehending himself to be at the point of death, leaves the Em∣pire to his Father Zeno. In the mean time Odoacer invading Italy with a great Army of his Heruli and Turingians, conquers and takes Priso∣ner Orestes, a Noble Roman, near Pavia, and then causes him to be put to death in the sight of his whole Army at Placentia. Hereupon Zeno pitying the calamitous state of Italy, speedily sends Theodoric King of the Goths, a man whom he had before very much esteem'd, with a mighty force to oppose him, who having in a pitch'd Battel not far from Aquileia near the River Sontio overcome Odoacer's Captains, and having oftentimes the like success against Odoacer himself, at length he besieg'd him three years together in Ravenna, and reduc'd him to that extremity, that, with the advice of John the Bishop of that City, he consented to admit Theodoric as his Partner in the Empire. But the day following both Odoacer and his Son, were contrary to promise and agreement slain; by which means Theodorick possess'd himself of the Government of all Italy without any opposition. In the mean time Simplicius dedicated the Churches of S. Stephen the Protomartyr on Mons Caolius, and that of S. Andrew the Apostle not far from S. Maries the Great; in which there appear to this day some foot∣steps of Antiquity, which I have many a time beheld with sorrow for their neglect, to whose charge such noble piles of building now ready to fall are committed, That this Church was of his founding appears by certain Verses wrought in Mosaick work which I have seen in it. He dedicated also another Church to S. Stephen near the Licinian Palace, where the Virgins body had been buried. He also appointed the Weekly-waitings of the Presbyters in their turns at the Churches of S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. Laurence the Martyr, for the receiving of Pe∣nitents, and baptizing of Proselytes. Moreover, he divided the City
among the Presbyters into five Precincts or Regions; the first of S. Pe∣ter, 2. S. Paul, 3. S. Laurence, 4. S. John Lateran, 5. S. Maria Maggiore. He also ordained, that no Clergy-man should hold a Benefice of any Lay-man, a Constitution which was afterwards confirm'd by Gregory and other Popes. At this time the Bishop of Rome's Primacy was countenanced by the Letters of Acacius Bishop of Constantinople, and Ti∣mothy a learned man, in which they beg him to censure Peter Mog Bi∣shop of Alexandria, an assertour of the Eutychian Heresie. Which was accordingly done, but with Proviso, that he should be receiv'd into the Communion of the Church again, if within a certain time prefix'd he re∣tracted his Errours. Some say, that during his Pontificate lived Remi∣gius Bishop of Reims, who (as History tells us) baptized Clodoveus the French King. Now also Theodorus Bishop  Syria wrote largely against Eutyches, and compiled ten Books of  History in imitation of Eusebius Coesariensis. At this time almost all Egypt was infected with the heretical Doctrine of Dioscorus, concerning whom we have already spoken; and Huneric King of the Vandals, a Zealot  the  Fa∣ction, raised a Persecution against the Orthodox Christians in Afrique. Upon this Eudocia, Niece to Theodosius, a Catholick Lady, and Wife to Huneric, left her heretical Husband upon pretence of a Pilgrimage to Hierusalem to perform a Vow which she had made; but upon so long a Journey, the effect of which prov'd intolerable to the tenderness of her sex, she there soon died. 'Tis said, that at this time were found the bones of the Prophet Elisha, which were carried into Alexandria; as al∣so the body of S. Barnabas the Apostle, together with the Gospel of S. Matthew, written with his own hand. As for Simplicius himself, having by his Constitutions and Donations very muchpromoted the interest of the Church of Rome, and having at several Ordinations made fifty eight Presbyters, eleven Deacons, eighty six Bishops, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church on the second day of March; He was inthe Chair fifteen years, one month, seven days, and by his death the See was va∣cant twenty six days. FELIX III. FELIX, by birth a Roman, Son of Felix a Presbyter was Bi∣shop from the time of Odoacer, whose power in Italy lasted four∣teen years, till the Reign of Theodoric. Who though he made Ravenna the seat of the Empire, yet the CityTheodoric. of Rome was much indebted to his Bounty. For he re-built the Sepulchre of Octavius, exhibited shews to the people according to ancient custom, repaired the publick Buildings and Churches, and indeed neglected no∣thing that became a good and generous Prince. And to confirm and esta∣blish the Empire, he married Andefleda Daughter of Clodoveus King of France, and gave in marriage his Sister to Huneric King of the Vandals, and one of his Daughters to Alaric King of the Visigoths, and the other to King Gondibate.
Felix now fully understanding that Peter Mog the Eutychian, who had been banished for his heretical Opinions upon the complaint and at the desire of Acacius, was by the same Acacius recall'd from Exile, su∣spected that there was a private Agreement between them, and there∣fore excommunicated them both by the authority of the Apostolick See, which was confirm'd in a Synod of the Orthodox. But three years af∣ter the Emperour Zeno testifying that they were penitent, Felix sends two Bishops, Messenus and Vitalis, with full power, upon enquiry into the truth of their repentance, to absolve them. These Legates arriving at the City Heraclea, were soon corrupted with bribes, and neglected to act according to their Commission. Whereupon Felix, out of a just indignation, having first called a Council upon that occasion, excom∣municates them too, as Simoniacks and betrayers of the trust reposed in them. Though Messenus, who confess'd his fault, and begg'd time to evince the sincerity of his repentance, had it accordingly granted him. The same Felix also built the Church of S. Agapetus, near that of S. Lau∣rence, and ordained that Churches should be consecrated by none but Bishops. 'Tis said, that at this time Theodorus a Greek Presbyter wrote against the Hereticks a Book of the Harmony of the Old and new Te∣stament; and some reckon among the men of Note in this Age, the Learned and famous Divine John Damascene, who wrote the Book of Sen∣tences, imitating therein Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, and Didymus of Alexandria, and compiled also certain Treatises of Medicin, in which he gives an account of the Causes and Cure of Diseases. Our Felix having at two Decembrian Ordinations made twenty eight Presbyters, five Deacons, thirty Bishops; died, and was buried in the Church of S. Paul. He sat in the Chair eight years, eleven months, seventeen days, and by his death the See was vacant five days. GELASIUS I. GELASIUS, an African, Son of Valerius, was Bishop of Rome at the time when Theodoric made War upon his Wives Fa∣therTheodoric Clodoveus the French King, for that he had slain his Daugh∣ter's Husband Alaric King of the Visigoths, and seiz'd Gascoigne. They were both allied to him by marriage; but the cause of Alaric seem'd to him the more just, and therefore he preferr'd his Son-in-law, before his Father-in-law. And gaining the Victory over the French in a very important Battel, he recovers Gascoigne, and undertakes the present Government of it, till Almaric the son of Alaric should come to Age. The same Theodoric to his Conquest of Italy added that of Sicily, Dal∣matia, Liburnia, Illyricum, Gallia Narbonensis, and Burgundy. He also walled round the City of Trent, and to secure Italy from a forein In∣vasion, upon the Frontiers of it near Aost placed the Heruli, whose King being yet a Minor he made his adopted Son. Gelasius in the mean time condemns to banishment all the Manichees that should be found in the City, and causes their books to be pub∣lickly burnt near S. Mary's Church. And being satisfied of the repen∣tance
of Messenus, who had given in his Retractation in Writing, at the request of the Synod he absolved him, and restored him to his Bishop∣rick. But having intelligence that several murthers and other notori∣ous outrages were committed in the Greek Churches by the factious fol∣lowers of Peter Mog and Acacius, he forthwith sends his Legates thi∣ther, with Commission to Excommunicate for ever all those who did not immediately recant their Errours; a new and unusual severity, where∣as the Primitive Church was wont to wait long in hopes that Separa∣tists would at length return to her Bosom. At this time John Bishop of Alexandria, an Orthodox Prelate, and who had been very much persecuted by these seditious people, fled for resuge to the Bishop of Rome, who very kindly and courteously received him. The Churches which Gelasius consecrated were, that of S. Euphemia the Martyr in Tivoli, that of S. Nicander and Eleutherius in the Via Labicana, and that of S. Mary in the Via Laurentina, twenty miles from Rome. He had a great love and honour for the Clergy, and was very liberal and charitable to the poor. He delivered the City of Rome from many dangers, and particularly from that of dearth and scarcity. He com∣posed Hymns in imitation of S. Ambrose, published five Books against Eutyches and Nestorius, and two against Arius, made very elegant and grave Orations, and wrote weighty and learned Epistles to his Friends of the houshold of Faith; all which Works of his are at this time to be seen in the publick Libraries. Some tell us that he Excommunicated Anastasius, successour to Zeno in the Eastern Empire, for favouring Aca∣cius and other Hereticks; which is an argument as clear as the Sun, that the Bishop of Rome has power to Excommunicate any Prince who is erroneous in the Faith, if he continue refractary after Admonition. The same course likewise he took with the Vandals and their King, who being infected with the Arian Heresie, proved now very cruel and bar∣barous persecutours of the Orthodox. At the beginning of his Ponti∣ficate lived Germanus and Epiphanius, the latter Bishop of Pavia, the former of Capua; men who by the authority which the Sanctity of their Lives had gain'd them, and by their humble and obliging deportment, wrought so much upon the minds of the barbarous Invadors, that af∣flicted Italy fared the better for their sakes. At the same time also Lan∣nociatus Abbat of Chartres, with Aurelianus and Mezentius of Poictiers, persons of great Piety and Learning, gain'd so much ground in Gaul, that they persuaded Clodoveus the French King, and his Queen Crocildis to be∣come Christians, and to undertake the protection of the Catholick Faith throughout their Dominions; though some attribute this honour to Remigius, as hath been already said. Gelasius having ordained thirty two Presbyters, two Deacons, sixty seven Bishops, died, and was bu∣ried in S. Peter's Church, November 21. He was in the Chair four years, eight months, seventeen days, and by his death the See was va∣cant seven days.
ANASTASIUS II. ANASTASIUS the second, a Roman, Son of Fortunatus, was Contemporary with the Emperour Anastasius. At which time Transamund, King of the Vandals, shut up theAnastasius. Churches of the Orthodox Clergy, and banished one hundred and twen∣ty Bishops into the Island of Sardinia. 'Tis reported also that one O∣lympius, an Arian Bishop, having publickly in the Baths at Carthage declared his detestation of the Doctrine of the Trinity, was immediate∣ly smitten and his body burnt with three flashes of Lightning. And when Barbas, another Bishop of the same Faction, was going to baptize a certain person in this form of words, Barbas baptizeth thee in the name of the Father, by the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, 'tis said, the Water disappeared; which Miracle so wrought upon the man who was to be baptized, that he immediately came over to the Orthodox. It was this Bishop Anastasius, as some Writers tell us, who Excommu∣nicated the Emperour Anastasius for favouring Acacius; though after∣wards being himself seduced by the same Heretick, and endeavouring privately to recall him from Exile, he thereby very much alienated the minds of his Clergy, who for that reason, and also because without the consent of the Catholicks, he communicated with Photinus a Deacon of Thessalonica, and an assertour of the Acacian , withdrew them∣selves from him. 'Tis generally reported, that the divine vengeance pur∣suing him for this Apostacy, he died suddenly, and some say that the par∣ticular manner of his death was, that going to ease Nature he purg'd out his Bowels into the Privy. In his time Fulgentius an African, Bishop ofFulgentius. Ruspoe, though he were among the other Orthodox Bishops of Africa banish'd into Sardinia by Transamund, yet neglected nothing that might contribute to the propagating of the Catholick Faith, whether by Ex∣hortation, Preaching, or Admonition. He likewise published several Books of the Trinity, of Free-will, and the Rule of Faith; and besides the several elegant and grave Homilies he made to the people, he wrote against the Pelagian Heresie. The Learned Egesippus also, who com∣posedEgesippus. Monastical Constitutions, and in an elegant style wrote the Life of S. Severinus the Abbat was at this time very serviceable to the Church. Moreover, Faustus a Gallican Bishop was now a considerable Writer, but among all his Works the most in esteem was his Tract against Arius, wherein he maintains the persons in the Trinity to be Co-essential. He wrote also against those who asserted any created Being to be incorpo∣real, demonstrating both by the Judgment of the Fathers, and from the Testimonies of holy Writ, that God only is purely and properly incor∣poreal. But I shall here conclude the Pontificate of Anastasius, who at one Decembrian Ordination, having made twelve Presbyters, and sixteen Bishops, was buried in S. Peter's Church November 19. He sat in the Chair one year, ten months, twenty four days, and by his death the See was vacant four days.
SYMMACHUS I. SYMMACHUS, a Sardinian, Son of Fortunatus, succeed∣ed Anastasius, though not without great Controversie and af∣ter a long bandying of two contrary Factions. For while one part of the Clergy chuse Symmachus in the Church of S. John , another part of them in S. Maria Maggiore make choice of one Laurence; whereupon the Senate and people of Rome being divided into two Parties, the dissention rose to such an heighth, that to compromise the business, a Council was by mutual consent called at Ravenna; where the whole matter being discuss'd in the presence of Theodoric, he at length determined on the side of Symmachus, and confirmed him in the Pontificate, who by a singular act of Grace made his very Competitour Laurence Bishop of Nocera. Yet about four years after some busie and factious Clergy-men, being countenanced and assisted by Festus and Pro∣binus two of the Senatorian Order, set up for Laurence again; upon which King Theodoric was so highly displeas'd, that he sends Peter Bi∣shop of  to Rome, to depose them both and possess himself of the Chair. But Symmachus called a Synod of an hundred and twenty Bi∣shops, wherein with great presence of mind he purg'd himself of all things  to his Charge, and by a general suffrage obtained the ba∣nishment of Laurence and Peter who had occasion'd all this mischief. Hereupon so great a  arose in the City, that multitudes both of the Clergy and Laity were slain in all parts, not so much as the Mo∣nastick Virgins escaping. In this Tumult Gordianus a Presbyter and a very good man was kill'd in the Church of S. Peter ad Vincula; nor had an end been put to slaughter here, had not Faustus the Consul, in compassion to the Clergy, appear'd in Arms against Probinus the Author of so great a Calamity. After this the Christians having some small respite, Clodoveus banish∣ing the Arian Hereticks, restores the Orthodox, and Constitutes Paris the Capital City of his Kingdom. Symmachus at this time expell'd the Manichees out of the City, and caused their Books to be burn'd before the Gates of S. John Lateran. Several Churches he built from the ground, and several others he re∣pair'd and beautifi'd. That of S. Andrew the Apostle near S. Peters he entirely built, enriching it with divers Ornaments of Silver and Gold; and he adorn'd S. Peters it self and its Portico with chequer'd Marble, ma∣king the steps of Ascent into it more and larger than they were before. Moreover, he erected Episcopal Palaces. He built also the Church of S. Agatha the Martyr in the Via Aurelia, and that of S. Pancrace. He repaired and adorn'd with painting the Cupola of S. Pauls; and built from the foundations the Church of SS. Silvester and Martin; the Al∣tars of which he very richly adorned. He made also the steps that lead into the Church of S. John and S. Paul, and enlarged S. Michaels. He built from the ground the Oratories of Cosmus and Damianus, being assisted in that work by Albinus and Glaphyras, two men of principal Note. Besides this, near the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul, he build∣ed
two Hospitals, making provision of all things necessary for the poor who should dwell in them. For he was in all respects very charitable and sent supplies of Money and Cloaths to the Bishops and other Clergy in Africa and Sardinia, who had suffered banishment for the profession of the true Religion. He repaired the Church of S. Felicitas, and the Cupola of that of S. Agnes which was decay'd and almost ready to fall. He also at his own charge redeemed multitudes of Captives in several Provinces. He ordained that on Sundays, and the The days on which they suffered were anciently so called. Birth-days of the Martyrs the Hymn, Glory be to God on High should be sung, and indeed, left nothing undone which he thought might tend to the Glory of Almighty God. In his time Gennadius Bishop of Marseille, a great imitatour of S. Augustine, did good service to the Church. He wrote one Book against Heresies, wherein he shews what is necessary to every man in order to his Salvati∣on, and another de viris illustribus, in imitation of S. Hierom. As for Symma∣chus, having at several Ordinations made ninety Presbyters, sixteen Dea∣cons, one hundred twenty two Bishops, he died, and was buried in S. Pe∣ters Church July the 19th. He sat in the Chair fifteen years, six months, twenty two days, and by his death the See was vacant seven days. HORMISDA I. HORMISDA, the Son of Justus, born at , lived in the time of Theodoric and Anastasius, as far as to the Consul∣ship of Boethius and Symmachus. These two, upon suspicion of designing against his Go∣vernment, were by Theodoric at first banish'd, and afterwards impri∣soned. Boethius during his confinement wrote several things extant to. this day, and translated and made Commentaries upon the greatest part of Aristotles Works. He was throughly skill'd in the Mathema∣ticks, as his Books of Musick and Arithmetick clearly demonstrate. But at length both he and Symmachus were put to death by the order of Theodoric. Some tell us, that the cause of Boethius his sufferings was the zeal he shewed in opposing the Arians, who were favoured by Theo∣doric; but I think the former Opinion to be more probable. Hormisda, with the advice of Theodoric, held now a Provincial Synod at Rome, in which the Eutychians were again condemn'd by universal consent. He also sent Letters and Messengers to John Bishop of Constan∣tinople, admonishing him to renounce that Heresie, and to believe there are two Natures in Christ, the Divine and Humane. But John conti∣nued refractory, trusting to the interest he had with the Emperour Ana∣stasius, who not long after was struck dead by a Thunderbolt, which was believ'd to be a just Judgment upon him, both for his patronizing so pernicious an Heresie, and especially for his ill usage of the Legates sent to him by Hormisda, whom contrary to the Law of Nations he treated very contumeliously, and sent them home in a shattered leaky Vessel, ordering them to return directly into Italy without touching at any shore in Greece. 'Tis said, that he bid them tell the Bishop, that he
must know it to be the part of an Emperour to Command, not to obey the Dictates of the Bishop of Rome or any other. These Legates were Euodius Bishop of Pavia, Fortunatus Bishop of Catina, Venantius a Pres∣byter of Rome, and Vitalis a Deacon. Anastasius dying in the twenty se∣venth year of his Reign. Justine a Patron of the Catholick Faith suc∣ceedsJustinus. him, who forthwith sends Ambassadours to the Bishop of Rome, to acknowledge the Authority of the Apostolick See, and to desire the Bishop to interpose his Ecclesiastical Power for the setling the peace of the Church. Whereupon Hormisda, with the consent of Theo∣doric, sends Germanus Bishop of Capua, John and Blandus Presbyters, and Felix and  Deacons his Legates to Justine, by whom they were receiv'd with all imaginable expressions and testimonies of Ho∣nour  Respect, John the Bishop of Constantinople with multitudes of the Orthodox Clergy and other Persons of principal Note going forth, in Complement to meet them and congratulate their Arrival. But the followers of Acacius dreading their coming, had shut themselves up in a very strong Church, and upon Consultation what to do, sent Messen∣gers to the Emperour, declaring that they would by no means subscribe to the determination of the Apostolick See, unless an account were first given them why Acacius was Excommunicated. But Justine soon forc'd them out of the Church and City too; and Hormisda dealt in the same manner with the Manichees, who began to spring up afresh in Rome, whose Books he caused to be burn'd before the Gates of S. John La∣teran. About this time Transamund King of the Vandals dying in Afric, his Son , whom he had by the Captive Daughter of Valentinian, suc∣ceeded him in the Kingdom. He inherited none of his Fathers Er∣rours, but following the Counsel of his religious Mother, re-call'd all the Catholicks whom Transamund had banish'd, and permitted them the free exercise of their Religion. At this time also several rich Pre∣sents were sent to Rome for the Ornament of the Churches there by Clo∣doveus King of France and Justine the Emperour. King Theodoric also richly adorn'd the Church of S. Peter; nor was Hormisda himself be∣hind these Princes in bounty and munificence to the Church. Having setled things according to his mind, and ordained twenty one Presby∣ters, fifty five Bishops, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, Au∣gust the 6th, in the Consulship of Maximus. He sat in the Chair nine years, eighteen days, and by his death the See was vacant six days. JOHN I. IOHN by birth a Tuscan, Son of Constantius, was in the Chair from the Consulship of Maximus to that of Olybrius, in the time of King Theodoric and the Emperour Justine, Who out of his great zeal for the Orthodox Faith, and that he might utterly extinguish the name of Hereticks, banish'd the Arians, and gave their Churches to the Catholicks. This was so highly resented by Theo∣doric, that he sends John himself with Theodorus and the two Agapeti
his Ambassadours to Justine to advise him to restore the Arians, or upon his refusal to let him know that he would pull down all the Catholick Churches in Italy. These Ambassadours were at first very kindly and honourably received. But having given an account of their Embassie, and finding Justine wholly averse to grant what they desired, they be∣took themselves to Tears and Prayers, humbly beseeching him to prevent the ruin of Italy and all the Orthodox Christians in it; by which means the good Prince was prevailed upon to recall the Arians, and to grant them a Toleration. Some write that it was in this Bishops time that Symmachus and Boethius were brought back from Exile, imprison'd, and slain by the cruelty and rage of Theodoric. However, certain it is that they were put to death by Theodoric's order; and it matters not much whether it were in the Pontificate of Hormisda or John. Which John returning from Constantinople, Theodoric was so highly incens'd against him for his agreement with the Emperour Justine both in Faith and manners, that it was a chance that he had not taken away his life immediately; but throw him into Prison he did at Ravenna, where through stench and nastiness and want of necessary provision, the good man at length died. A Cruelty for which the divine Vengeance sorely punished Theodoric not long after, for he died suddenly of a fit of an Apoplexy, and his Soul (if you will take the word of a devout Her∣mit who reported it) was cast into the flames of the Island Li∣para. Theodoric was succeeded in the Kingdom by his Daughter Amalasun∣tha, with her Son Athalaric, whom she had by her Husband Eucherius. A Woman who with a prudence above her Sex, rectified her Fathers ill De∣crees, restored the confiscated Estates of Boethius and Symmachus, to their Children, and caused her Son to be instructed in all kinds of good Li∣terature, though she were herein opposed by the Goths, who cried out, that their King was not to be bred a Scholar but a Soldier. Much about this time died Justine, being very Aged, leaving the Empire to his Si∣sters Son Justinian; and Clodoveus King of France, leaving four Sons his Successors in that Kingdon. Persons of Note and esteem at this time were Benedict of Nursia, who setled among the Italians the Rules andBenedict. Canons of the Monastick life; and Bridget a devout Virgin of Scotland,Bridget. and John Presbyter of Antioch who wrote much against those that held that Christ should be worshipped in one Nature only. To these Isidore adds one Cyprignius a Spanish Bishop who wrote elegantly upon the Apocalypse. Our John before he went to Constantinople had repaired three Coeme∣teries, namely that of Nereus and Achilleus in the Via Ardeatina, that of the Martyrs SS. Felix and Adauctus, and that of Priscilla. He also adorn'd the Altar of S. Peters with Gold and Jewels. He likewise brought with him from Constantinople, a Paten of Gold, and a Chalice of Gold set with precious stones, the Presents of the Emperour Justine; but these I suppose to have been lost together with his life. At several Ordinations he consecrated fifteen Bishops. 'Tis said that his Body was brought from Ravenna to Rome, and buried in S. Peter's Church, Ju∣ly the 27th. Olybrius being then Consul. He sat in the Chair two years, eight months, and by his death the Seewas vacant fifty eight days.
FELIX IV. FELIX the fourth, a Sammite, the Son of Costorius, lived in the time of the Emperour Justinian, Whose General Belisarius was victorious over the Persians, and passing into Afric by his singular courage and conduct subdued and almost quite rooted out the Vandals, whose King Gilimer he took Priso∣ner, and brought him home with him in Triumph. About this time Amalasuntha having a long time lived very uneasily with her malecon∣tented Goths, and having buried her wayward and unruly Son Athalaric, associates her kinsman Theodatus in the Government. This Theodatus was so great a Proficient in Greek and Latin Learning, that he wrote an elegant History of his own times, and was throughly skilled in the Platonick Philosophy. And though he were not naturally of an active Martial temper, yet at the desire of Amalasuntha he undertook a War against the Burgundians and Alemanni, and manag'd it very succces∣fully. Felix in the mean while being careful of the affairs of the Church, excommunicated the Patriarch of Constantinople for Heresie, and built in the Via Sacra near the Forum Romanum the Church of S. Cosmus and Damianus, as appears from the Verses yet remaining, wrought in Mosaick work. He also re-built the Church of S. Saturninus in the Via Salaria, which had been consumed by fire. Some write that in this Age lived Cassiodorus, who while he was a Senator wrote severalCassiodorus. things in Politicks, and when he became a Monk composed a Com∣ment upon the Psalms. 'Tis said also that Priscian of Caesarea, the fa∣mousPriscian. Grammarian, now wrote his Book of Grammar. Arator like∣wise a Sub-Deacon of Rome translated the Gospels into Hexameter Verse; and Justinian Bishop of Valence, was had in great esteem for what he preach'd and wrote concerning the Christian Faith. As for Felix himself, having ordained fifty five Presbyters, four Deacons, twen∣ty nine Bishops, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, Octo∣ber the 12th. He was in the Chair four years, two months, thir∣teen days, and by his death the See was vacant three days.
BONIFACE II. BONIFACE the second, a Roman, Son of Sigismund, was also in the time of Justinian, A Prince whose vast Parts and Learning qualified him for that great Work which for the publick Good he undertook, of collecting and methodizing the scattered Roman Laws, and retrench∣ing those which were useless and superfluous. Yet herein he made use of the Advice and assistance of John a Patrician, Trebonianus, Theophilus, and Dorotheus, men of great Learning and Authority. With their help an immense number of near two thousand Volumes of Decrees made from the building of the City to this time, confusedly heaped together, were digested under their respective Titles into fifty Books, which are sometimes called Digests, and sometimes Pandects, because they contain the whole Civil Law. He made also an Epitome of the Laws in four Books, which go under the name of Institutes, or Justinian's Code. More∣over, some tell us that Justinian wrote certain Books concerning the In∣carnation of our Lord, and that at his own charge he built the Temple of S. Sophia, than which there is not a more noble and magnificent Pile of Buildings in the World. In his Reign  was made Bishop of Rome, though not without some opposition; for the Clergy being divided, one Party of them chose Dioscorus into the place of Felix deceased. The Contention about this matter lasted twenty eight days, but the death of Dioscorus put an end to the Controversie. Things being quiet, Boniface applyed himself to the setling of the Church, and decreed, that no Bishop should appoint his own successour, which was afterwards confirm'd by several follow∣ing Bishops of Rome. He decreed also, that upon the decease of any Bishop of Rome, another should be chosen to succeed him, if it might be, within three days, to prevent any bandying or dissention which might be occasioned by delay. He ordained likewise, that the Clergy should be seperated and placed distinct from the Laity at the time of Celebration. At the same time many of the Roman Nobility were so wrought upon by the Sanctity of Benedict that they retired to Mount Cassino and became Monks there; among whom the more eminent were Maurus and Placidius. Other men of Note and esteem were Dio∣nysius the Abbat, famous for the extraordinary Skill and Judgment which he shewed in his Paschal Cycle; Famundus, whose writings against certain Eutychians then springing up were very much commend∣ed; and Martin, who by his Preaching and Writings converted the People of Soissons from the Arian Heresie to the Truth. But Boniface having sat in the Pontifical Chair two years, two days, died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The See was then vacant two months.
JOHN II. the second, a Roman, Son of Projectus, lived in the time of Justinian, and soon after his entrance upon the Pontificate condemned Anthemius an Arian Bishop; some say that he had been Bishop of Constantinople. Justinian, to shew his  to the Roman See, sent Hypatius and Demetrius two Bishops to , both to complement John in his name, and to make to S. Pe∣ter's Church several rich Presents. During this Embassie, Mundus Ju∣stinian's General, took the strong City of Salona, and gain'd a Victory over the Goths, though not without great loss on the Conquering side. For Mundus himself, together with his Son a Valiant and brave young Gentleman, was slain in that Engagement; the news of which misfor∣fortune was extreamly laid to heart by Justinian, he having always had a great value for that Leaders Courage and Fidelity. Our Bishop John, of whom Historians say very little, having at one Ordination made  Presbyters, twenty one Bishops, died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, May 27. He sat in the Chair two years, four months, and by his death the See was vacant six days. AGAPETUS I. AGAPETUS, a Roman, Son of Gordianus a Presbyter of the Church of S. John and S. Paul, being created Bishop by Theo∣datus, who was by him forthwith sent to the Emperour Justi∣nian, was highly incens'd against that King for his having first ba∣nish'd Amalasuntha the Mother of Athalaric into the Island of the Lake of Bolsena, and afterwards caused her to be put to death there. For she was a Woman so well acquainted with Greek and Latin Learning, that she durst engage in Disputation with any profess'd Scholar. More∣over, she was so throughly skilled in the Languages of all the barbarous Invadors of the Roman Empire, that she could discourse any of them without an Interpreter. Her Death Justinian so highly resented, that he threatned to make War upon Theodatus for that reason. Hereupon Agapetus was sent to him, who being receiv'd with great honour and af∣fection, and having obtain'd the peace he was sent to sue for, he was then practis'd with to confirm the Eutychian Opinions. But Justinian finding that the good man utterly detested any such proposal, from de∣siring and  he fell to Threats and Menaces. Upon which Agapetus told him, that he should have been glad to be sent to Justi∣nian, a Christian Prince, but that he found a Diocletian an Enemy and Persecutor of Christians. By this boldness of Speech and Gods ap∣pointment Justinian was so wrought upon that he embraced the Catho∣lick Faith, and having despos'd Anthemius Bishop of Constantinople, who patroniz'd the Eutychian Heresie, put into his place Menas one of the
Orthodox, who was consecrated by Agapetus himself. But not long after Agapetus died at Constantinople, and his body being wrap'd up in Lead was convey'd to Rome, and buried in S. Peter's Church. He sat in the Chair eleven months, twenty one days, and by his death the See was vacant one month, twenty nine days. SYLVERIUS. SYLVERIUS, a Campanian, Son of Bishop Hormisda, was chosen Bishop of Rome at the command of Theodatus, though till this time the Emperours only, not the Kings, had interposed their Authority in that matter. But the Menaces of Theodatus prevail∣ed, who had threatned to put to death every man of the Clergy who would not subscribe his name to the choice of Sylverius. For this reason, and that he might also revenge the death of Amala. suntha, Justinian sends Belisarius a Patrician with an Army into Italy. In his passage thither he first put in at Sicily, and brought that Island to the Emperours devotion. In the mean time Theodatus dying, and the Goths having chosen themselves a King against the will of Justinian, Be∣lisarius quits Sicily that he might deliver Italy from the Tyranny of the Goths. Coming into Campania, and the City of Naples refusing to obey the Emperours Summons, he took it by Storm and plundered it, putting to the Sword all the Goths that were in Garrison there, and a great part of the Citizens, carrying away their Children and what other spoil they could lay their hands on. The Soldiers pillaged the very Churches, violated the chastity of Cloystered Virgins, and committed all the out∣rages which are wont to be acted by an enraged victorious Enemy. Marching hastily from thence with his Army to Rome, and entring the City by night, he struck such a terrour into the Goths, who defended it, that they all left the Gates and the Walls and fled to Ravenna. But Belisarius apprehending that Vitiges might surprize him with a mighty Force, which he should not be able to fight in open Field, with all pos∣sible dispatch fortified the City with Trenches and Bulwarks where occasion was for them. Soon after Vitiges according to his expectation coming towards him with a mighty Army, for it consisted of an hun∣dred thousand men, Belisarius, who had not above five thousand, thought it best to keep within the City. Vitiges encamped between two Aqueducts, the one of which ran towards the Via Latina, the other towards the Via Proenestina, and both met five miles from the City. And that the City might not be supplied with Water, he cut off all the Conduits and conveyances which were fourteen. Moreover, he sent part of his Army who possessed themselves of the Port, and thereby re∣duced the Romans to the double Calamity of War and Famine. In the mean time, at the motion of Vigilius a Deacon and Surrogate of Rome, the Empress Theodora laid her Commands, joined with Threat∣nings, upon Sylverius, to banish Menas from Constantinople, and to restore Anthemius, who, as we have said, had been depos'd for patronizing the Eutychian Heresie. Which when he refus'd to do, she writes to Belisa∣rius,
ordering him to depose Sylverius, and to put Vigilius into his place. But Belisarius being wholly taken up with the defence of the City, left that affair to the management of his Wife Antonina, who upon the de∣positions of certain Witnesses suborn'd by Vigilius, attesting that Sylve∣rius had a design to betray the City into the hands of the Goths, not only compell'd him to quit the Pontificate and to enter into a Monastick life, but also banish'd him to the Island Pontia, where he died, not without the reputation of having been a very holy man. Tis said, that at this time the Gauls dispatch'd Messengers to Benedict, desiring him to send to them any one of his Disciples to instruct them in the Rules of the Mo∣nastick life. Upon which Benedict sent Maurus, who by his own Ex∣ample instructed them in a good and happy course of living, and also set up several Monasteries among them. Vigilius, at the desire of the Roman Clergy, in pursuance of Antonina's determination, was created Bishop of Rome; Sylverius after his possession of the Chair one year, five months, and twelve days, died, as we have already said, in Pontia, and was buried June the 20th. Upon his death the See was vacant six days. VIGILIUS I. VIGILIUS, a Roman, his Father a man of consular Digni∣ty, was likewise in Justinian's Reign created Bishop of Rome, in whose time a fifth Synod was held at Constantinople against Theodorus and other Hereticks, who held that the Blessed Virgin brought forth Man only, not God-man; in this Synod there∣fore it was decreed, that the Blessed Virgin should be styled  i. e. the Mother of God. Belisarius had now defended the City one whole year and nine days, and having in this time received fresh supplies of Men, he resolved to march out and to engage the Enemy in a pitch'd Battel. But Vitiges distrusting his own Force, sets fire to his Tents, and hastens by great Marches to Ravenna. Belisarius with all possible speed follows him, and entring the City, takes Vitiges himself Prisoner with all his Family and a great part of his Nobles; and having recovered almost all Italy, in the fifth year from his arrival there, he carries them with him to Constantinople. The same Belisarius with incredible expedition quell'd the Moors who were harassing Africa, and out of the spoils of that Vi∣ctory he made two very rich Presents to S. Peter's Church in Rome. He built also two Hospitals for Strangers at his own charge, one in the Via Lata, the other in the Via Flaminia; and founded the Monastery of S. Juvenalis at a Town called Orta, endowing it with an Estate in Land for the maintenance of the Monks in it. At this time Theodora was earnest with Vigilius to come to Constanti∣nople, and according to his Promise, to restore Anthemius. But Vigilius denies the doing it, for that unjust Promises are not to be performed, and he was of Opinion that the proceedings of Agapetus and Sylverius against that Heretick were legal, and that therefore their Acts were by
no means to be made void by him. Theodora being hereat enraged, with the assistance of some of her Creatures at Rome, causes Vigilius to be impleaded upon two Accusations; one, that he had fraudulently procur'd the banishment of Sylverius; the other, that by his Order a certain Youth had been beaten to death by his Nephew Vigilius Son of Asterius the Consul. And that he might not escape with impunity, she sends one Anthemius to Rome, with instructions to bring Vigilius by force to her, if he refused to make his appearance. He coming to Rome, in pursuance of his Commission, feiz'd the Bishop in the Church of S. , as he was according to custom distributing Gifts to the People upon his Birth-day; and being assisted by some Romans, conveys him to Constantinople. 'Tis said, that at Vigilius his passage down the River Tyber, the People followed him with Curses, pelting him with sticks and stones, and particularly using this exprobration, Mischievous hast thou been to the City of Rome, and may mischief go along with thee. Being arrived at Sicily, by the permission of those who had him in custody, he ordained several Persons, and among them Am∣pliatus a Priest, and Valentinus a Bishop, who were to have the inspe∣ction of the Clergy and Church of Rome in his absence. Coming near Constantinople, Justinian with a great Retinue went out to meet him, and they both entred the City together, the Clergy going before them, as far as the Temple of S. Sophia. Theodora had now opportunity to tamper with Vigilius, and persuade him to the performance of his Pro∣mise. But he told her, that he had rather suffer the greatest punish∣ment in the World, than change his Resolution in the Case. She there∣fore and her Attendants beginning to menace him, and he saying that he was come to a Diocletian, not as he thought to Justinian, he was thereupon so roughly handled and beaten that it almost cost him his life. And flying from their rage to the Church of S. Euphemia, not far distant, he was from thence drag'd by certain rude People, who put an Halter about his Neck, and led him like a common Rogue publickly through the City till the Evening. After this he was imprison'd, and forc'd for some time to live upon nothing but Bread and Water, which yet he bore with so much patience and temper, that he would often say that he had deserved worse than all this, and was not yet punish'd accord∣ing to his Demerits. Those of the Clergy who had accompanied him from Rome, were some of them banish'd, others condemn'd to dig in the Mines. But at the request of the Romans who had now a better Opinion of him, and upon the importunity of Narses, whom Justinian had sent to Rome to oppose the Goths, Vigilius and all the others who were confin'd, had liberty granted them to return into Italy. But in their passage thi∣ther being come as far as Syracuse in , Vigilius who had out-liv'd so many Calamities and Troubles, died there of the Stone, and his body was carried to Rome, and buried in the Church of S. Marcellus in the Via Sa∣laria. He lived in the Pontificate at Rome and elsewhere seventeen years, six months, twenty six days, and by his death the See was va∣cant three months, five days.
PELAGIUS I. PELAGIUS, a Roman, lived in the time when Totilas KingTotilas. of the Goths advancing with a great Army from Treviso, over∣run and spoiled Italy in such a manner, that from his salvage Cruelty he was called God's Scourge. Coming as far as Mount Cassino, in his way to Campania, though he were in the habit of a common Sol∣dier, yet he was discovered by S. Benedict, who spared not by threat∣ning of divine Vengeance to terrifie him from raging so furiously against the Christians. Moving thence towards Abruzzo, he dismantled , besieged Naples, took Cumoe, where yet he exercised an extra∣ordinary Respect and Civility towards the Roman Women whom he found in it, permitting them to go to Rome to their Friends without any violence or rudeness offered to them. After this having taken Naples, and made himself Master of all that part of Italy which lies towards Si∣cily, he marches to Rome; and having first seized the Port, by which  should come to the City, he reduced them to such extremity for want of Provisions, that some were forced to feed upon Mans-flesh. At length, forcing his entrance at the Gate which leads to Ostia, he pos∣sessed himself of the City, which having plundered, he set on fire. Some tell us, that Totilas designed to save the Buildings of the City, and sent Messengers about by Night to publish his pleasure in that par∣ticular, but his Orders therein were not obeyed. Justinian having In∣telligence of these proceedings, speedily dispatches Narses the EunuchNarses. with a great Army into Italy. 'Tis said, that this Narses was at first a Bookseller, but being advanced to an Office near the Emperour's Person, Justinian finding him to be a man of great merit, raised him to the Dig∣nity of a Patrician. And indeed, in all the accomplishments of Religi∣on, and Vertue, and Clemency, and Generosity, and sweetness of tem∣per, he was a most exemplary and extraordinary Person. Narses, with the addition of some Auxiliary Forces from Alboinus King of the Lom∣bards, advances against the Goths, routs them, and makes a great slaugh∣ter in the pursuit of them. Totilas lost his life ingloriously at Brissello, and Theias who was chosen King in his stead, though he behaved him∣self bravely, yet was slain by Narses not far from Nocera. And thus both the Name and Power of the Goths were extinct together, in the seventy second year after that their King Theodoric first entred Italy. Not long after died Justinian, in the fortieth year of his Reign; a Prince worthy to have his memory perpetuated to all Posterity, and who ac∣cording to the custom of preceding Emperours, deserves the additional Titles of Alemanicus, Gotthicus, Wandalicus, Persicus, Africanus, though he only advised, but did not act in the successful Expeditions made against those Nations. Pelagius, in the midst of these disturbances not neglecting the Af∣fairs of the Church, ordained, that Hereticks and Schismaticks might be suppressed by the Secular Power, when they would not be reclaim'd by Reason and Argument. Being accused that he was the occasion of the Calamities that befell Vigilius, as having a greater interest with Ju∣stinian
than Vigilius had, in the sight of the Clergy and People, he laid his hand upon the Cross and the Gospel, and by a solemn Oath purged himself from that Charge. Narses coming to Rome, made a Procession from the Church of S. Pancras to S. Peter's, with Thanksgiving for his late success; and set himself with all possible application to repair the Damage which the City had receiv'd by the Goths. In conjunction with Pelagius, he ordained that no Person should be admitted to any holy Orders or Ecclesiastical Dignity by the way of canvassing or Birbery. Pelagius making his Notary Valentinus, a very religious person, Trea∣surer of the Church, begins the building of the Church of SS. Philip and James. Some tell us that the learned Monk Cassiodorus, who had been. first Consul, then a Senator, and afterwards renouncing all human Greatness embraced a Monastick life, lived to this time; and that Vi∣ctor Bishop of Capua now wrote a Book concerning Easter, in which he. particularly discovered the mistakes of Dionysius the Roman Abbat, who had with little care and skill composed a Paschal Cycle. Moreover, Sa∣binus Bishop of Canosa, and Gregory Bishop of Langres, and Vedastus a Scholar of S. Remigius and Bishop of Arras were Ornaments to the Pontificate of Pelagius; and Herculanus Bishop of Perugia, who had been put to Death by Totylas, was Canonized. Pelagius, having at two Decembrian Ordinations made twenty six Presbyters, eleven Deacons, thirty nine Bishops, died, and was buried in S. Peter's. He was in the Chair eleven years, ten months, twenty eight days. The See was then vacant twenty six days. JOHN III. JOHN the third, the Son of Anastasius, descended of a Noble Family, lived in the time of Justine, who succeeded Justinian, but was in nothing like him. For he was Covetous, lewd, rapacious, a contemner ofJustine. God and Men to such a degree, that his Vices made him srantick; so that his Wife Sophia managed all affairs till the time of Ti∣berius the second. This Woman, being prompted thereto by some en∣vious persons who hated Narses, recalls him out of Italy in these re∣proachful words, That she would have the Eunuch come home and spin. This he very highly resenting, as well he might, returns answer, That he would spin such a Web, as none of his Enemies should ever be able to unweave. And he was as good as word. For he presently sends and in∣vites Alboinus King of the Lombards, with all his people, then possessed of Pannonia, to come and seat themselves in the more plentiful Coun∣trey of Italy. Alboinus complying with the proposal of Narses, and en∣tring Italy with a vast number of men with their Wives and Children, first possesses himself of Friuli and Marca Trivigiana; thence passing in∣to Insubria, he takes and sacks Milain, and at length makes himself Master of Pavia, after it had held out a Siege of three years. Being thus slush'd with Victory, he goes to Verona, which he constitutes the the Capital City of his Kingdom; where being once at an Entertain∣ment
over-heated with Wine, he compelled his Wife Rosimund to drink out of a Cup which he had made of her own Fathers Skull, whom he himself had slain. Now there was in Alboinus's Army one Helmechild, a very handsom young Gentleman, and an excellent Soldier; and who was Rosimund's particular Favourite. Him she discourses privately, and by proposing to him the hopes of succeeding in the Kingdom, prevail∣ed with him to murder Alboinus. But they were both so hated for the Fact by the Lombards, that they not only failed of their hopes, but were glad to fly for protection to Longinus the Exarch of Ravenna; where not long after they poisoned each other, and died together. At this time Italy, by reason of the Incursions which the barbarous Nati∣ons made into it, was in a very calamitous state; which had been por∣tended by Prodigies, and Apparitions of flaming Armies in the Air, and also by an extraordinary inundation of the River Tyber which had very much damaged the City of Rome. In the mean time our John repaired the Coemeteries of the Saints, and finished the Church of SS. Philip and James which had been begun by Vigilius, and drew Narses, who had been an avowed Enemy to the Ro∣mans for their ill opinion of him and their misrepresenting him to the Empress Sophia, from Naples to Rome; where he not long after died, and his Body was conveyed in a Coffin of Lead to Constantinople. In such a consusion of things the State of Italy must needs certainly have been utterly ruined, if some eminently holy men had not supported and prop'd up the tottering Nation. Among others, Paul Patriarch of A∣quileia, and Felix Bishop of Treviso interceded successfully with Alboi∣nus, when he first entred Italy, in the behalf of the Inhabitants. More∣over, Fortunatus a person of extraordinary Learning and Eloquence, very much civiliz'd and polish'd the Gauls by his Books and Example; compiling a Treatise of Government inscribed to their King Sigebert, and writing in an elegant style the Life of S. Martin. Some write that at this time lived Germanus Bishop of Paris, a person of wonder∣ful Piety, who kept the Kings of France within the bounds of their duty to such a Degree, that each strove to excel the other in Religion and Piety, in Goodness and Clemency. So prevalent is the Example of a good Pastour, such an one as Germanus was, in whom they saw nothing but what was worthy of their imitation. After this one far∣ther Remark, that in our John's time the Armenians were converted to Christianity, I shall say no more of him, but that having been in the Chair twelve years, eleven months, twenty six days, he died, and was  in S. Peters. Upon his death the See was vacant ten months, three days.
BENEDICT I. BENEDICT, a Roman, the Son of Boniface, lived in the time of Tiberius the Second, whom Justine had adopted, and appointed his Heir to the Empire. An Honour which he well deserved, as being a PersonTiberius II. adorn'd with all the Princely Accomplishments of Clemency, Justice, Piety, Religion, Wisdom, Resolution, and unshaken Fortitude. Among his other Vertues he was eminent for his Bounty and Liberality towards all, especially the poor; and God supplied him in an extraordinary man∣ner for it. For walking once hastily in his Palace, and spying the figure of the Cross upon one of the Marble stones in the Pavement, that it might not be trampled under foot, he devoutly caused it to be removed from thence, and laid up in a more decent and honourable place. At it's taking up, there was found under it another stone with the same figure on it, and then a third, under which he discovered such a vast heap of Gold and Silver as was requisite to furnish and maintain his large Boun∣ty; a great part of which Treasure he distributed to the poor. 'Tis said also that he had brought to him out of Italy a great Estate which Narses had got there, which in like manner he employed in Liberality and Munificence. To Sigebert the French King, who had sent Embassa∣dours to him, besides the other Presents that he made, which were very considerable, he sent certain Medals of Gold of very great weight, on the one side of which was the Effigies of the Emperour with this In∣scription, Tiberii Constantini perpetuo Augusti; on the other side was a Charriot with its Driver and this Inscription, Romanorum Gloria. And to complete his Successes, the Army which he had sent against the Per∣sians returning victoriously, brought away with twenty Elephants so vast a Booty, as no Army had ever done in any Expedition before. Thus signally was he rewarded for his good services to mankind in general, for his Religion towards God our Saviour, and for his Beneficence par∣ticularly to the people of Rome; whom he not only protected and de∣sended from their Enemies as much as could be by his Arms, but also at the Prayers and Intercession of our Bishop Benedict, whom he had a wonderful Love and Esteem for, he delivered them from Dearth and Famine by sending a supply of Corn out of Egypt. For the Lombards by a long and tedious War, had so harrassed Italy far and wide, that from their devastations there arose a great want and  of all things. While things went thus in Italy, John Bishop  Constan, inople, by Reading, Disputing, Writing, Admonishing and Teaching, kept the Oriental Church as much as might be right in the Faith, though he met with many opposers therein. The same did also the equally Learned and Eloquent Leander Bishop of Toledo, or as others think of Sevil, who wrote several Treatises both to confirm the Orthodox Doctrine, and to confute the Arian Heresie, which, like a contagious Pestilence, the Vandals, driven out of Africa by Belisarius, had brought with them in∣to Spain. As for Benedict, some write that he laying sadly to heart the  which now befell Rome and all Italy, died of grief; af∣ter
he had been in the Chair four years, one month, twenty eight days. The See was then vacant two months, ten days. PELAGIUS II. PELAGIUS, a Roman, Son of Vinigildus, was from the time of Tiberius, to that of his Son-in-law the Emperour Mau∣ritius, To whom though he were a Cappadocian, yet the Empire was com∣mitted,Mauritius. upon the account of his great Courage, and Ability in the ma∣nagement of Affairs. At this time the Lombards, having after the Death of Alboinus for twenty years  govern'd by Dukes, make Autharis their King, whom they also called ; a Name which was after∣wards used by all the Kings of Lombardy. But Mauritius endeavouring to drive the Lombards out of Italy, hires Sigebert the French King to engage in a War against them; who forthwith raising a great Army of Gauls and Germans, fights Autharis, but with great loss is discomfited. The Lombards being flush'd and heightened by this Victory, march'd on as far as to the Streights of Sicily, possessing themselves all along of the Cities of Italy, and at length besieging for a long time Rome it self; of which certainly they had made themselves Masters, had they not been driven from its Walls by the great Rains, which sell so violently and in∣cessantly, and made such an Inundation, that men look'd upon it as a second Noah's Floud. This was the only cause why Pelagius was made Bishop of Rome with∣out the consent of the Emperour; the City being so closely besieged that none could pass to know his pleasure therein. For at this time the Roman Clergie's Election of a Bishop was not valid unless they had the Emperour's Approbation. Hereupon Gregory a Deacon, a man of great Piety and Learning, was sent to Constantinople to appease the Em∣perour; where having effected what he came for, he neglected not to employ his time and parts, but both wrote Books of Morals upon Job, and also at a Disputation in the presence of the Emperour himself, he so basfled Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople, that he was forced to retract what he had written in a Book of his concerning the Resurrection; in which he asserted, that our Bodies in that glory of the Resurrection should become more thin and subtile than the Wind or Air, and so not tangible. Which is contrary to that of our Saviour, Handle me and see, forLuke 24. a Spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me have. As for Pelagius, ha∣ving at the request of the Citizens of Rome recalled Gregory, turned his Fathers House into an Hospital for poor old men, and entirely built the Coemetery of Hermes the Martyr, and the Church of Laurence the Mar∣tyr, he died of the Pestilence, which at that time was very epidemical throughout Europe, after he had been in the Chair ten years, two months, ten days, and was buried in S. Peter's in the . The See was then vacant six months, twenty eight days.
GREGORY I. GREGORT, a Roman, Son of Gordianus, one of the Senato rian Order, was against his will unanimously chosen Bishop of Rome, Anno Dom. 590. Now because, as I have already said, the consent of the Emperour was required herein, he dispatches Messengers with Letters,  Mauritius that he would not suffer this Election of the Clergy and People of Rome to stand good. These Letters were intercepted and torn by the , and others written, by which the Emperour was requested to confirm him who was by universal suffrage thus chosen. There could nothing be more pleas∣ing and acceptable to the Emperour than the News of this Choice, for the conversation of Gregory, while he was at Constantinople, had been very grateful to him, and moreover he had Christned his Son. Mauritius therefore speedily sends word back to Rome, that he did confirm the E∣lection of Gregory, and that in such a  state of things they should compel that holy man to undertake the Government of the Church. He therefore, not consulting his own inclination, but the  of Mankind, and the honour of God, which, as he was a most de∣vout and religious man, he had ever preferred before all other things, without any regard to Riches, or Pleasures, or Ambition, or Power, takes the burden of the Pontificate upon him. And he behaved him∣self so well in it, that no one of his Successours down to our times has been his Equal, much less Superiour, either for Sanctity of Life, or for  in managing Affairs, or for his Learning and Writings. He composed a Book of the Sacraments; wrote Commentaries upon , and, as I have already said, upon Job, and Homilies upon the Go∣spels; four Books in Dialogue, and that which he called the Pastoral, to  Bishop of Ravenna concerning the way of governing the Church. Moreover, he introduced several Rites, and made several Additions to the Offices of the Roman Church; and particularly he first instituted the greater Litanies or , and appointed a great part of the Stati∣ons. And that the good man might not in any thing be wanting to the Church, he held in S. Peter's a Synod of twenty four Bishops, wherein he took away many things which might prove pernicious, and added many which might be beneficial to Religion. He also  into Eng∣land, Auguscine, Melitus, and John, and with these divers other Monks, all persons of approved lives, by whose Preaching the  were then first entirely converted to Christianity. By his means likewise the Goths returned to the Union of the Catholick Church. We are told by some Writers, that Gregory sent his Dialogues concerning Morals to Theudelinda Queen of the Lombards, by the reading of which she might smooth and polish the rugged temper of her Husband , and bring him to a better sense of Religion and Morality. She was an ex∣cellent Lady, and a zealous Christian, and not only built the Church of S. John Baptist at Monza a Town ten miles distant from Milain, but also furnished it with Vessels of Gold, and liberally endowed it. Tis said, that at the time when  was put to death by
his Father Levigild King of the Goths, because he professed the Catholick Faith, the  Coat of Christ, which fell by Lot to one of the Sol∣diers, was found in the City Zaphat, laid up in a Marble Chest there; Thomas being then Bishop of Jerusalem, John Bishop of Constantinople, and Gregory Bishop of Antioch. In the mean time Mauritius, having in  and Terra di Lavoro, by his General Romanus the Exarch, gain'd the better of the Lombards, who from a confidence grounded upon their former successes were now degenerated into all manner of Vice, makes a Law, that no person who had listed himself in the Roman Army, should be at liberty to withdraw and take upon him a Religious life, till either the War were ended, or the man himself  or disabled. Gregory being moved hereat, admonishes him not to oppose the Religion of that God, by whose bounty he had been raised from a very mean con∣dition to the highest Degree of Dignity. Moreover, John Bishop of Constantinople, having in a Synod which he held, procured himself to be styled the Oecumenical, i. e. Universal Bishop, and Mauritius hereup∣on requiring Gregory to yield obedience to John; He, being a person of great Courage and Constancy, returns answer, That the Power of binding and loosing was committed to Peter and his Successours, not to the Bishops of Constantinople, and therefore warns him to desist from provoking the wrath of God against himself, by being too  in sow∣ing Dissention in the Church. But Mauritius not content with the mischief he had done already, re-calls his Soldiers which were in Italy, and encourages the Lombards to assault the Romans, without any re∣gard to the League they had entred into with them. Hereupon Agi∣lulphus moving from Lombardy, and laying waste all Tuscany through which he passed, invests and very much annoys the City of Rome one whole year; in which time Severus Bishop of Aquileia becoming Here∣tical, was the occasion of many Evils. For after his Death the Patri∣archate of Aquileia was divided into two; Agilulphus King of the Lom∣bards constituting John of Aquileia and our Gregory, Candianus of Gra∣do, Bishops to the people of Friuli. But Agilulphus quitting all hopes of gaining the City,  the Siege, and returns to Milain. Mauritius now began to treat Gregory more respectfully, but it proceeded not from a voluntary but forc'd Repentance; he having heard that a cer∣tain person in the habit of a Monk, with a drawn Sword in his hand, had proclaim'd aloud in the Market-place of Constantinople, that the Emperour should in a short time die by the Sword. The same was con∣firmed to him by a Dream of his own in which he saw himself, his Em∣press, and their Children murdered. And accordingly not long after the Soldiers being discontented for want of Pay, create Phocas, who was a Centurion in the Army, Emperour, and Assassine Mauritius, in the nineteenth year of his Reign. But Gregory, having added what Ornaments he could to the Churches in Rome, and dedicated by the name of S. Agatha the Martyr, the Church of the Goths in Suburra, built by . Ricimerius a man of Consular Dignity, converted his Father's House into a Monastery, wherein he received and entertained Strangers, and supplyed with meat and drink the poor which from all parts slock∣ed to it. He was certainly a person every way praise-worthy, whether we regard his Life and Conversation, or his Learning, or his Abilities in things both Divine and Humane. Nor ought we to suffer him to be
censured by a few ignorant men, as if the ancient  Buildings were demolish'd by his Order, upon this pretence which they make for him, lest Strangers coming out of Devotion to Rome, should less regard the consecrated places, and spend all their Gaze upon Triumphal Arches and Monuments of Antiquity. No such reproach can justly be fastned upon this great Bishop, especially considering that he was a Native of the City, and one to whom, next after God, his Countrey was most dear, even above his Life. 'Tis certain that many of those ruin'd Stru∣ctures were devour'd by Time, and many might, as we daily see, be pull'd down to build new Houses, and for the rest, 'tis probable that for the sake of the Brass used in the concavity of the Arches and the conjunctures of the Marble or other square stones, they might be bat∣tered and defaced not only by the barbarous Nations, but by the Ro∣mans too, if Epirotes, Dalmatians, Pannonians, and other sorry people who from all parts of the World resorted hither, may be called Romans. Now Gregory having used all means to establish the Church of God, died in the second year of the Emperour Phocas, having been in the Chair thirteen years, six months, ten days; and, the loss of him being lamented by all men, was buried in S. Peter's, March 12. By his Death the See was vacant five months, nineteen days. SABINIANUS I. SABINIAN Gregorie's Successour, deserv'd not to have the place of his Nativity remembred; being a person of mean Birth and meaner Reputation, and one who violently oppo∣sed the great things which his Predecessour had done. Parti∣cularly, there being a great  during his Pontificate, and the poor pressing him hard to imitate the pious Charity of Gregory, he made them no other Answer but this, That Gregory was a man who design'd to make himself popular, and to that end had profusely wasted the Re∣venues of the Church. Nay, the ill-natured wretch arrived to such a degree of Rage and Envy against Gregory, that he was within a very little of causing his Books to be burn'd. Some tell us that Sabinian was, at the instigation of some Romans, thus highly incensed against Gregory, because he had mutilated and thrown down the Statues of the Antients which had been set up throughout the City; but this is a Charge as dissonant from truth as that of his demolishing the old Fa∣bricks, concerning which we have spoken in his Life; and considering the Antiquity of these Statues, and the casualties which might  them, and the designs which mens Covetousness or Curiosity might have upon them, 'tis fairly probable that they might be mangled or lost, with∣out Gregorie's being at all concern'd therein. But to go on with Sabi∣nian, it was he who instituted the  of Canonical hours for Prayer in the Church, and who ordained that Tapers should be kept continually burning, especially in the Church of S. Peter. Some tell us, that with the consent of Phocas, a Peace was now made with the Lom∣bards, and their King Agilulphus's Daughter, who had been taken Cap∣tive
in the War, restored to him. At this time appeared divers Prodi∣gies, portending the Calamities which ensued. A bright Comet was seen in the Air, at Constantinople a Child was born with four feet, and at the Island  were seen two Sea-monsters in humane shape. Some write that in the Pontificate of Sabinian, John Patriarch of Alexandria, and  Bishop of Carthage, both persons famous for Piety and Learning, did wonderfully improve the Dignity of those Churches. Moreover,  a very learned man, and an intimate Friend of , wrote very much against Vincent Bishop of Saragoza, who had sallen off to the Arian Heresie; he also wrote to his Sister a Book concerning Virginity, entituled Aureolus. But Sabinian, having been in the Chair one year, five months, nine days, died, and was buried in the Church of S Peter. By his Death the See was vacant eleven months, twenty six days. BONIFACE III. BONIFACE the third, a Roman, with much ado ob∣tained of the Emperour Phocas, that the See of S. Peter the Apostle, should by all be acknowledged and styled the Head of all the Churches. A Title which had been stick∣led for by the Church of Constantinople, through the en∣couragement of some former Princes, who asserted that the Supremacy ought to reside there, where the Seat of the Empire was. But the Roman Bishops alledged that Rome, of which Constantinople was but a Colony, ought to be accounted the chief City of the Empire, since the Greeks themselves in their Writings styled their Prince, , i. e. the Emperour of the Romans, and the Constantinopoli∣tans even in that Age were called Romans, not Greeks. Not to mention that Peter the Chief of the Apostles bequeathed the Keyes of the King∣dom of Heaven to his Successours the Bishops of Rome, and left the Power which God had given him not to Constantinople, but to Rome. This only I say, that several Princes, and particularly Constantine, had granted to the Roman See only, the priviledg of calling and dissolving Councils, and of rejecting or confirming their Decrees. And does not a Church which has with so much integrity and constancy bastled and  all manner of Heresies as the Roman See hath done, deserve think you the preference of others. The same Boniface in a Synod of  two Bishops, thirty Presbyters, and three Deacons, ordained, that upon pain of Excommunication no person should succeed in the place of any deceased Pope or other Bishop, till at least the third day after the death of his Predecessour; and that whoever should by Bribes or by making of Parties and Interests endeavour to raise themselves to the Popedom or any other Bishoprick should undergo the same Penalty. He decreed likewise, that the choice of any Bishop should be by the Clergy and People, and that the Election should then stand good, when it were approved by the Civil Magistrate, and when the Pope had in∣terposed his Authority, in these words,  and Command. An In∣stitution
in part very necessary, for our times especially, so many corru∣ptions daily creeping in. For it is probable, that, the Election being free, the Clergy and People will chuse, and the Magistrate approve of no other, than such an one as deserves and is fit to be Governour in the Church. Though (if I may speak it without offence to any that are good) the truth is, multitudes do now aspire to the Dignity of Bishops, not as they ought to do for the sake of the publick good, but that they may satisfie their own Covetousness and Ambition. For the great Questi∣on is, what any Bishoprick is worth, not how great a Flock there is to take the charge of. But enough of this; I return to Boniface, whose Decrees, as it appears, were extinct with his Life. He died in the ninth month of his Pontificate, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter. The See was then vacant one month, six days. BONIFACE IV. BONIFACE the fourth, born in Valeria a City of the Marsi, the Son of John a Physician, obtained of the Em∣perour Phocas the Pantheon, a Temple so called, because it was dedicated to Cybele and all the Gods, and having cast out all the Heathen Images that were in it, he consecrated it on May the 12th. in honour to the Blessed Virgin and all the Martyrs;  it was afterwards called S. Maria Rotunda, and Virgo ad Mar∣tyres. At this time the Persians, under the Conduct of their King , making an irruption into the Roman Provinces, and having routed Pho∣cas's Army, possess themselves of Jerusalem; prophane and pillage the Churches of the Christians, carry away the Wood of our Saviour's Cross, and take Captive Zacharias the holy Patriarch of that City. Hereupon Phocas falling into contempt with all men, but especially the Senate, was deprived of his Empire and Life by Heraclius General of the Forces and Governour of the Province of Afrique. Now also Ca∣ganus King of the Avares, forcing his entrance through Pannonia and Il∣lyricum into Italy, was so much too hard for the Lombards, that he was very near making himself Master of the Province it self; and through the treachery of Romilda, who was enamour'd of him, he did actually take Friuli, and sack'd it in such a manner that scarce any footsteps of it were left remaining. While things went thus in Italy, John Bi∣shop of Girone proved a great Defence to Christianity both by his Preach∣ingJohannes . and Writings. He being a Goth, born in Portugal, so soon as he came to the years of discretion travelled to Constantinople, and parted thence so well skill'd in Greek and Latin Learning, that at his return in∣to Portugal, he was able easily to  the Arian Heresie which very much prevailed there. For this reason he was by the Hereticks con∣fined in Barcellona. But afterwards upon the death of King Lemungil∣dus, who countenanced those Hereticks, he came back into his own Countrey, and both wrote very much concerning the Christian Religio∣on, and also founded a Monastery, and prescribed Rules of living which
the Monks thereof were to guide themselves by. Eutropius also Bishop of Valentia, was now by his Learning and Example very instrumental to keep the Spaniards sound in the Faith. Moreover, Columbanus an Abbat, a very holy man, by descent a Goth, coming first out of Scotland into Burgundy, built there the stately Monastery of Luxevil; and thence passing into Italy, built another fair one at Bobio. Pope Boniface, that he might not be behind-hand in this matter with either of them, con∣verted his Father's House into a Monastery, and gave his Estate for the maintenance of the Monks in it. But not long after he died, having been in the Chair six years, eight months, seventeen days, and was bu∣ried in the Church of S. Peter; in a time of Dearth, Pestilence, and great Innundation of Waters. By his Death the See was vacant seven months, twenty  days. DEUS-DEDIT I. DEUS-DEDIT, a Roman, Son of Stephen a Sub-deacon, be∣ing unanimously chosen to the Pontificate, proved a great Lover and Encourager of the Clergy. 'Tis reported that he was a person of so great Sanctity, that meeting with a man who had a Leprosie, he cured him of that Disease with a Kiss. He ordained, that the Son should not marry any Woman to whom his Father had been Godfather. At this time Heraclius with a great Army recovered several Pro∣vinces which the Persians had possess'd themselves of; dismounted and slew their General in a single Combat; vanquish'd their King Chosdroës, and took his Son Prisoner, whom having first Christned, he released and sent home again. Entring Persia, he took a strong Tower in which 's Treasure lay, part of which he distributed among his Sol∣diers, and assign'd another part for the repairing of the Churches which the Persians had pillaged and spoil'd. Returning to Jerusalem with se∣ven Elephants loaded with other great Booty, he brought along with him the Cross of our Blessed Saviour which the Persians had taken away, and laid it up in the place where it was before. Those of the Persians whom he had taken Prisoners, he suffered to return into their own Countrey. After this being arrived at Constantinople, and taking delight in study, he applied himself to Astrology. But yet this great Emperour, against all Law both Divine and Humane married his own Sister's Daughter; and to add one Crime to another, as is usual when men once become guilty, he falls off to the Eutychian Heresie. This happened at the time when Anastasius a Persian, being converted to Chri∣stianity, and having entred upon a Monastick Life, was seized by his own Countrey-men, and suffered Martyrdom for the sake of his Re∣ligion; whose body was afterwards conveyed to Rome and reposited in the Monastery of S. Paul. 'Tis said, that at this time Sisebute King of the Goths, reduced several Cities of Spain which had revolted to the Romans; and that by Torment he forced all the Jews which he disco∣vered in his Kingdom to profess the belief of Christianity. This it is
reported he did at the request of Heraclius, who had been fore-warn'd to beware of the Circumcised; but yet afterwards, he being not suffi∣ciently careful to prevent his Fate, was crush'd by the Saracens who observed Circumcision. Thus things went in the East, nor did the West want it's Assertours of the Christian Faith. For Arnulphus Bishop of Metz, by his Piety and Prudence kept Dagobert the French King within the bounds of his Duty; being therein assisted by Amandus, an excellent person, and a vigorous defender of the Christian Religion. Among the Spaniards, Isidore Bishop of Sevil, successour to Leander, wrote several things very beneficial to the State of Christianity; particularly, of the Chief Good, of Famous Men, of Grammar, and Etymology; an History from Adam to the times of Heraclius, the Lives of several Saints, the Hi∣story of the Lombards, and a short Cosmography. Some say that this Isidore was a German, though the Spaniards lay claim to him; but what∣ever Countrey-man he were, 'tis certain that he was a most excellent person, both for his great Learning, and his greater Sanctity. As for Deus-dedit, the time of whose Pontificate, besides what we have already mentioned, was rendred remarkable by an Earthquake, and a Scab so near approaching to a Leprosie that it deformed men beyond each others knowledg, he died in the third year, and twenty third day of his being in the Chair, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter, No∣vember the 8th. By his Death the See was vacant one month, sixteen days. BONIFACE V. BONIFACE the fifth, a Campanian, his Father's name John, was chosen Pope at the time when Eleutherius a Pa∣trician, being sent by Heraclius to Rome, and having re∣veng'd the Death of John the late Exarch of Ravenna, usurp∣ed the Kingdom of Italy. But in his way to Rome he was put to Death by his own Soldiers, and his Head sent to Constantinople. Upon which Isaacius of Constantinople, another Patrician, was made Exarch in his stead. Theudelinda now after the Death of her Husband Adoaldus, go∣verning together with her Son the Kingdom of the Lombards very pru∣dently and justly, maintained a Peace between her People and the Ita∣lians for ten years together; made several Presents and Donations to several Churches, and endowed them with Lands for the better main∣tenance of the Clergy belonging to them. In the twelfth year of He∣raclius, Mahomet an Arabian as some will have him, or as others a Per∣sian,Mahomet. descended of a Noble Family, his Father a Gentile, his Mother a Jewess, was the Author of so much mischief to the Christian State, that I am afraid lest his Sect should utterly extinguish the Remains of Chri∣stianity; especially in our Age, wherein we are grown listless and una∣ctive, and stand still tamely exspecting our own Ruin. His Sect pre∣vails and encreases now more than ever; All Asia and Africa, and a great part of Europe is subject to Mahometan Princes; the Turks press bard upon us by Sea and Land, that they may ferret us like Coneys
out of these Burrows in Europe. In the mean time we sit idly, looking upon one another, as if the whole State of Christianity were not at all in danger. The Clergy expect that so important and necessary a War should be undertaken by the Laity. The Laity expect that the Clergy should expend their Money to bear the Charge of a War for the De∣fence of Religion, and not put it to worse Uses, as most of them are wont to do, laying out their Stock gotten by Alms and Martyr's Bloud upon huge large Vessels of massy Gold and Silver, while themselves in the mean time carry it arrogantly towards Men, are contemners of God, whom they serve only for Gain, and are not at all solicitous for the time to come. But I return to Mahomet, a man of so wily a Tem∣per and so sharp a Wit, that having long conversed among the Chri∣stians, and acquainted himself with all the Sects that had been before him, he introduced a new kind of Superstition, which has, as we see, almost rooted out Christianity. Moreover, having got together a great Army of Arabians, he was so hardy as to encroach upon the Borders of the Roman Empire, but Heraclius soon put a stop to his Motion, ha∣ving by Promises and Bribes prevailed with his Soldiers to make a Re∣volt from him. As for Pope Boniface, he was a person of singular Humanity, Cle∣mency, and obliging Deportment towards all men, and neglected no part of the Duty of a good Bishop. He ordained, that Criminals who fled for Refuge to Churches, should not be taken thence by force; that the Acolythi should not meddle with the Reliques of the Martyrs, that belonging to Presbyters and Sub-deacons; and that in every place those who were guilty of sacriledg should be Excommunicated. He built and dedicated the Coemetery of S. Nicomedes, and was in an extraordinary manner liberal and munificent towards those of the Clergy who led exemplary Lives. At this time Gallus a Scholar of S. Columbanus lived so devoutly, that he deserved to be canonized a Saint even in his life∣time. Eustachius the Abbat followed his Example, and so did S. Aurea, in honour to whom Eligius built a Nunnery. 'Tis said also, that at this time one Basilius was very famous for his Life and Learning, and in both equal to Isidore himself. Our Boniface having been in the Chair five years, ten days, died, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter. By his death See was vacant thirteen days. HONORIUS I. HONORIUS, a Campanian, Son of Petronius, a man of Consular Dignity, entred upon the Pontificate at the time when Theudelinda died, and her Son Adoaldus was deposed, Arioaldus being made King in his stead. At which time Heraclius, who had been victorious over the Persians, was very urgent to have all the Jews who were Subjects to the Empire baptized. Here∣upon the Saracens and Arabians taking up Arms, Anno Dom. 623. gain'd such a Victory over Heraclius's Army, that they rendred that successful Man the most unfortunate. This was done under the Conduct of Ma∣homet,
who pretending himself to be the great Prophet of God, and de∣luding the Asians and Africans by Magical Arts, put such vigour into the people who embraced his new Religion, that he was very near to have ruin'd the Empire; having taken Alexandria, and several impor∣tant Cities of Syria and Cilicia. He had for his followers the Saracens, so called from Sarah Abraham's lawful Wife, as if they were the only legitimate Successours and Heirs of the divine Promise. The crafty man herein followed the Example of Jeroboam, who prescrib'd distinct Rules of Worship to his Tribes, that they might not be subject to the Jewish Government. The same also afterwards did the Greeks who dissented from the Catholicks, not only for the sake of Religion, but Empire, up∣on the score of which they followed the Errours of the Nestorians, Jaco∣bites, and Ebionites. But in the end their pertinacy reduc'd them to that pass, that their Religion and Government were dissolved together, and they brought into the vilest servitude. But Mahomet (as we see in the Alcoran) that he might separate his Disciples as far as possible from Christianity, in composing his Laws followed the Example of several Hereticks, and especially the Nestorians; collecting here and there, and reducing into one Body, many things repugnant to the Law of Moses and the Gospel. 'Tis said that at this time Heraclius, distrust∣ing his own strength, struck up an inglorious Peace with the Saracens, and that being impos'd upon by the Arts of Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, and Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria, he fell off to the Heresie of the Monothelites, a Sect so called from their asserting one Will only in Christ. But these Seducers, at the Instance of Honorius who was very diligent to reclaim Heraclius, were afterwards banished. And Hono∣rius having now some respite from other cares, by his Learning and Example proved a great Reformer of the Clergy. The Church of S. Peter he covered with Brass taken out of the Temple of Jupiter Capi∣tolinus; repaired that of S. Agnes in the Via Nomentana, as appears by an Inscription in Verse therein, and likewise that of S. Pancras in the Via Aurelia; built those of S. Anastasius, S. Cyriacus, seven miles from Rome in the Via Ostiensis, and S. Severinus in Tivoli; all which he made very stately, and adorn'd with Gold, Silver, Porphyry, Marble, and all manner of Ornamental workmanship. He repaired also the Coemetery of SS. Marcellinus and Peter in the Via Labicana, and was at the charge of building other Churches, besides those before-mentioned. More∣over, he ordained that every Saturday a Procession with Litanies should be made from S. Apollinaris to S. Peter's. But having been in the Chair twelve years, eleven months, seventeen days, he died, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter, October the 12th. By his death the See was vacant one year, seven months, eighteen days.
SEVERINUS I. SEVERINUS, a Roman, Son of Labienus, being chosen in the place of Honorius deceased, was confirmed therein by Isaa∣cius Exarch of Italy, the Election of the Clergy and People being at this time reckoned null and void, without the Assent of the Em∣perours or their Exarchs. Now Isaacius having made a Journey to Rome upon the occasion of confirming this Pope, that he might not lose his labour, fairly sets himself to plunder the Lateran Treasury, being assisted in that attempt by several Citizens, though he were resisted for a time, but in vain, by the Clergy of that Church, the principal of which he afterwards banished. The ground of this Action, was Isaa∣cius's Resentment that the Clergy alone should grow rich, without con∣tributing to the Charge of the Wars, especially at a time when the Sol∣diers were reduc'd to the greatest want and extremity. Part of the spoil he distributed among the Soldiers, part he carried away with him to Ravenna, and of the rest he made a Present to the Emperour. Those of the Saracens, who had been listed by Heraclius, being discontented for want of Pay, march'd into Syria, and made themselves Masters of Damascus, a City subject to the Empire. Then joyning with the other Arabians, and being furnished with Provisions and Arms, and heated by Mahomet's Zeal, they over-run Phoenicia and Egypt, and put to the Sword all those who refused to subscribe to their Government, and Ma∣homet's Religion. Advancing thence against the Persians, and having slain Hormisda the Persian King, they ceased not to commit all manner of outrages upon that People, till they had entirely reduced them to subjection. But Heraclius having intelligence of what work these Sa∣racens made, especially upon their taking of Antioch, and searing that they might possess themselves of Jerusalem it self, (which they not long after did,) took care to have the Cross of our Saviour conveyed to Constantinople, that it might not again come into the hands of the Aga∣rens, (for so the Greeks in contempt call the Arabians, as descending from Agar Abraham's Servant.) But Mahomet, as we are told, dying at Mecha, was succeeded in the Command by Calipha, and he by Hali; who being laid aside for his being too superstitious, the Egyptians make another Calipha their Commander. 'Tis said also, that to complete the Calamities of the Roman Empire, Sisebute King of the Goths, did at this time recover out of the hands of the Romans all the Cities of Spain; and so a period was put to the Roman Government in that Countrey. As for , who was a person of extraordinary Piety and Reli∣gion, a Lover of the Poor, kind to those in affliction, liberal to all, and in adorning of Churches very munificent, having been in the Chair one year, two months, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, Au∣gust the 2d. The See was then vacant four months, twenty days.
JOHN IV. JOHN the fourth, a Dalmatian, Son of Venantius, entring upon the Pontificate, forthwith expressed a wonderful Com∣passion, in employing the remainder of the Treasury of the Church which Isaacius had left behind him, for the redem∣ption of a multitude of Istrians and Dalmatians who had been taken Captive. In the mean time Rhotaris, who succeeded Ario∣aldus in the Kingdom of Lombardy, though he were a person eminent for Justice and Piety, yet became a Favourer of the Arians, and per∣mitted that in every City of his Kingdom, there should be at the same time two Bishops of equal Authority, the one a Catholick, and the other an Arian. He was a Prince of great Parts, and reduc'd the Laws, which Memory and Use alone had before retain'd, methodically into a Book which he ordered to be called the Edict. His Excellency in Military Skill appear'd, in that he made himself Master of all Tuscany, and Li∣guria, with the Sea-coast as far as Marseille. But in the sixth year of his Reign he died, and  the Kingdom to his Son Rhodoaldus. 'Tis re∣ported, that a certain Priest entring by night into the Church of S. John Baptist, and there opening the Tomb in which the Body of Rhotaris lay, rob'd it of all the things of value with which the Bodies of Kings are wont to be interred. Hereupon John Baptist, a Saint to whom Rhotaris had been in his life-time very much devoted, appear'd to the Priest, and threatned him with Death, if he ever entred his Church again. The like happened even in our times to Cardinal Luigi, Patriarch of Aqui∣leia, whose Sepulchre was broke open and pillaged by those very men whom he himself had enriched and raised from a mean condition to the Sacerdotal Dignity. Rhodoaldus entring upon the Government of the Kingdom, marries Gundiberga the Daughter of Queen Theudelinda, who imitating her Mother's Devotion, built and richly adorned a Church in Honour to S. John Baptist at Terracina, in like manner as Theudelinda had done at Monza. But Rhodoaldus being taken in Adultery, was slain by the Husband of the Adulteress. Successour to him was Aripertus Son of Gudualdus, and Brother of Queen Theudelinda; he built our Sa∣viour's Chappel at Pavia, and very much beautified and plentifully en∣dowed it. Pope John fearing now lest the Bodies of Vincentius and Anastasius might sometime or other be violated by the barbarous Nations, took care to have them safely conveyed to Rome, and with great Solemnity reposited them in the Oratory of S. John Baptist, near the Baptistery of the Lateran. We are told, that in his Pontificate Vincentius Bishop of Beauvais, and Muardus Arch-bishop of Reims, were in great esteem for their Learning and Sanctity. Moreover, Reginulpha a French Lady was very eminent for Piety, and Renaldus Bishop of Trajetto famous for his Life and Miracles. Jodocus also was not inferiour to any of these, who though he were the Son of a King of the Britains, yet despising worldly Greatness, he became for some time an Hermit, and died at
length in an obscure Village. Pope John having been in the Chair one year, nine months, nine days, died, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter, October the 12th. The See was then vacant one month, thirteen days. THEODORUS I. THEODORUS, a Grecian, Son of Theodorus a Bishop, born at Jerusalem, was no sooner in the Chair, but he applyed him∣self, like a good Bishop, to all those things which he thought might tend to the advancement of the Christian Religion; be∣ing a person obliging to all men, but extraordinarily bountiful to the poor. At this time Heraclius died of a Dropsie in the thirtieth year of his Reign, having a little before made Theodorus, surnamed Calliopa, his Ex∣arch in Italy, in the place of Isaacius deceased. Heraclius was succeed∣ed by his Son Constantine, who in the fourth month after his coming to the Empire was poisoned by the procurement of his Step-mother Mar∣tina and her Son Heracleon, whom, it is said, Pyrrhus the Patriarch prom∣pted to commit that Villany. Heracleon upon the Death of his Brother takes upon him the Government, at that time particularly when Cyrus, Sergius, and Pyrrhus reviving the Heresie of the Acephali, maintained the Opinion of one only Nature in Christ, one Operation, and one Will. Among these Pyrrhus hearing of the Death of Heraclius, and being very desirous to return out of Asrica, whither he had been banished, into his own Countrey, coming to Rome, and making an hypocritical Retracta∣tion of his Errours, was restored by Theodorus, and received from him a Form of Belief. But he lost his Life before he could accomplish the end which he sought to compass by such ill means. For the Senate and people of Constantinople being acquainted with the cause of Constantine's Death, first seize Martina and Heracleon, and having cut off his Nose, and cut out her Tongue, banish them both; then apprehending Pyrrhus who endeavoured to make his escape, they put him to Death. Constan∣tius the Son of Constantine, who had been thus treacherously murdered, they create Emperour; and instead of Pyrrhus make Paul their Bishop; whom yet Theodorus deprived for being in the like kind Heretical, his pertinacy therein being favoured by Constantius, who was unadvisedly fallen into the same Heresie. But the Pope laying aside this Contro∣versie, and applying himself to other cares, caused the bones of the Mar∣tyrs Primus and Felicianus to be removed out of a sandy Grotto in the Via Nomentana to Rome, where he reposited them in the Church of S. Stephen the Proto-martyr, sparing no cost in Ornaments both of Silver and Gold upon their Tomb. He also built and adorn'd a Church in the Via Flaminia, as likewise two Oratories, one near the Lateran Church dedicated to S. Sebastian, the other in the Via Ostiensis to Eupolus the Martyr. Having finished these things, and been in the Chair six years. five months, eighteen days, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, May the 14th. The See was then vacant fifty two days.
MARTINUS I. MARTINUS the first, born at Todi, Son of Fabricius, succeeding Theodorus, forthwith dispatches his Legates to Con∣stantinople, to admonish Paul to quit his Errours, and at length to return into the way of Truth. But he not only disobeyed the Popes Commands, but also, being countenanced therein by Constantius, of∣fered great indignities to these Legates, and then banish'd them into se∣veral Islands. Martinus highly resenting this usage, calls a Synod of an hundred and fifty Bishops at Rome, wherein he renews the Condemna∣tion of Cyrus of Alexandria, Sergius, and Pyrrhus, and excommunicates and deprives Paul the Patriarch with the bitterest Anathemas imaginable. While these things were transacting, the Peace of Italy, which had lasted between the Romans and the Lombards, thirty years, began now to be disturbed. For the Lombards took mightily upon them, and imposed such unjust conditions upon the Romans as they could not sub∣mit to; particularly Rhotaris being himself an Arian, had scarce any City over which he did not set up an Arian as well as a Catholick Bishop. This was an Evil which both Theodorus and Martine had often endea∣voured to remedy, but in vain. For this reason, and also at the in∣stance of Theodorus the Exarch, a War was proclaimed with the Lom∣bards, whereupon they take up Arms, and near Scultenna a River of Modena, a sharp Engagement there was on both sides. But in the end Theodorus was vanquish'd and routed, and lost in the fight near seven thousand of his Men. Rhotaris being flush'd with this Victory, in a short time easily made himself Master of all Liguria. Now Constantius hoping that the change of his General might change his Fortune too, recalls Theodorus, and sends Olympuis his Exarch into Italy, with Instru∣ctions, both to propagate the Sect of the Monothelites throughout Italy, and also either to put Pope Martine to Death, or else to take care to have him sent Prisoner to Constantinople. Olympius coming to Rome, where there had been already a Synod held against this and other the Errours of the Oriental Church, and finding that he could not disperse the Contagion as he thought to do, sends one of his Officers to seize Martine in the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, and either to bring him to him, or else to kill him if he refus'd and made resistance. The Of∣ficer being just ready to execute this Order, was by Miracle suddenly struck with blindness; and so by divine Providence Martine escaped the danger. The Saracens taking heart upon this great dissention between the Eastern and Western Church, set sail from Alexandria with a great Fleet, and arriving at Rhodes, and taking the City, they destroyed the fa∣mous and celebrated Coloss there, with the Brass of which it's said they loaded nine hundred Camels; this Coloss being seventy foot high, the Workmanship of Chares the Scholar of Lysippus. Afterwards having possessed themselves of several Islands in the Archipelago, and thence sail∣ing to Sicily, they very much infested the Inhabitants of that Island. Hereupon Olympius at the entreaty of Pope Martine, makes an Expe∣dition and forces them thence; though not without the loss of many of
his Ships and Men, and even that of his own Life too, for he fell sick in Sicily and died there. But Constantius, who was not in the least bettered by all these Calamities, commands Theodorus Calliopa again into Italy, with express Order, that he should forthwith send Pope Martine bound to him; and to assist him in that Affair, he joins Paulus Pellarius with him, who was to take care to see it done. Theodorus having been ho∣nourably received by the Romans, and going upon pretence of making a Visit to the Pope, seizes and puts him in Fetters, and so sends him to Constantinople, from whence he was afterwards banish'd to the Chersonese, the place where Clemens Romanus had formerly been an Exile. Now Mar∣tine being thus compassed with Calamities, and pinch'd with extreme want, at length dies in Banishment, after he had been in the Chair six years, one month, twenty six days. And because it was long before there came certain intelligence of his Death, the See was vacant fourteen months. EUGENIUS I. EUGENIUS, a Roman, Son of Ruffinianus, succeeded Mar∣tine about the time that in the place of Paul the Heretick, Peter was made Patriarch of Constantinople. Who though he were a little more Orthodox than Paul, yet did not in all things agree in Doctrine with the Roman Church. His Letters sent to Rome, in which he denied two Operations and Wills in Christ, were so explo∣ded, that the Clergy took upon them to interdict the Pope's celebrating Mass in S. Maria Maggiore, till he had first publickly declared his dis∣like of them. In the mean time Grimoaldus Duke of Beneventum, leaving his Son to govern at home, and marching with a great Army into Lombardy, forced Pertheri and Gundibert, the two Sons of Aripertus, to quit Pavia and Milain. Of which Clodoveus the French King having intelligence, he out of compassion to the young Princes, immediately sends a consider∣able Force into Italy, to recover their Right for them. Beyond the Po Battel is joyn'd, and the Dispute managed very briskly on both sides, the young Princes being eager to retrieve their paternal possessions, and he endeavouring as much to keep what he had gain'd by War. At length Fortune inclin'd to Grimoaldus his side, and the French were routed, and driven out of Italy. We are told by some, that the French were out∣witted by the Enemy after this manner; The Lombards dissembled a Flight, leaving their Tents furnished with plenty of all manner of Pro∣visions, and especially of Wine, but not far off they made a halt watch∣ing their opportunity; the French entring their Tents, and thinking they had been really fled, fall to feasting, and eat and drink to such ex∣cess, that the Enemy coming upon them and finding them dead asleep and lying about like beasts, they made such a slaughter of them, that there was scarce one left alive to carry the News to Clodoveus. Grimo∣aldus growing confident upon this Victory, quickly makes himself Ma∣ster of the whole Province. As for Pope Eugenius, who was a person of very great Piety, Religion, Meekness, Humanity and Munificence,
having been in the Chair two years, nine months, he died, and was bu∣ried in the Church of S. Peter, June the 2d. The See was then vacant one month, twenty eight days. VITALIANUS I. VITALIANUS born at Segna a Town of the Volsci, the Son of Anastasius, entred upon the Pontificate at the time when Caesarea the Persian Queen, attended only with a few of her Confidents, and without the knowledg of her Husband, came to Constantinople, in the year 683. She was very honourably re∣ceived by the Emperour, and not long after baptized, for the sake of which it was that she came thither. The Persian King having intelligence hereof, forthwith sends Ambassadours to Constantinople to demand his Wife of the Emperour. To them the Emperour answered, That it was in the Queen's choice to stay or go, and therefore they should enquire of her pleasure. The Queen being ask'd, made Answer, That she would never return into her Countrey, unless the King would become a Chri∣stian. Who being acquainted herewith, comes forthwith in a peaceable manner with forty thousand men to Constantinople; where being recei∣ved by the Emperour with all expressions of kindness, he together with his Soldiers were baptized, and then he returned with his Queen into his own Kingdom. After this Constantius, having associated to himself in the Government his Son Constantine, and prepared a great Fleet, setting sail from Constantinople, arrives at Tarentum, bringing with him in Ships of burden a great Force of Land-Soldiers. From thence he advanced by Land into Abruzzo, with design to besiege Beneventum. But under∣standing that that City was very strongly Garison'd, and plentifully fur∣nished with Provisions by the care of Rhomoaldus, he marched to Lucera, which he took, and plundered, and then levell'd with the ground. Pas∣sing from hence to Acherontia, and not being not able to make himself Master of so well fortified a place, he again attempts the Siege of Be∣neventum, but soon raises it, upon intelligence that Grimoaldus would suddenly be there with a great Army, to assist his Son Rhomoaldus. Hereupon Constantius moving first towards Naples, though very much incommoded in his passage, and having left  a Roman Citizen with twenty thousand men at Formiae to oppose the Enemy, at length he comes to Rome, the Pope, and Clergy, and People in honour to him going six miles out of the City to meet him. And being conducted through the City with great Acclamations to the Church of S. Peter, he there made a very rich Present. In the mean time Rhomoaldus, presu∣ming upon the Supplies he receiv'd from his Father, joins Battel with Saburrus, conquers him, and puts to the Sword a great number of the Greeks. Constantius being enraged and growing almost desperate upon this misfortune, on the fifth day after his entrance into the City, falls a plundering, takes away all the Statues of Brass and Marble set up in the principal parts of the City, and the rich Ornaments of the Churches, and lades his Ships with them; and in seven days did more damage to
Rome, than the barbarous Nations had done before in two hundred and fifty eight years; so that ill men, ignorant of History, have no reason to say, that the Statues and Monuments of Antiquity were demolished by Pope Gregorie's Order. On the twelfth day the vile and perfidious paul∣try Greek  Rome, with a vengeance to him, goes towards Naples, thence to Sicily, being so severe in his exaction of Tribute wherever he came, as to take away Children out of the embraces of their Pa∣rents who could not pay him. But the covetous wretch, staying some time in Sicily, as he was bathing for pleasure at Syracuse, was slain; and Mezentius, who is thought to have been the contriver of his Death, was by the Soldiers made Emperour in his stead. This Constantius, was a person of a strange  and inconstancy of Mind. For at first, hear∣ing that Vitalianus was chosen Pope, he sent his Ambassadours to con∣gratulate him, and to make a Present of the Gospels written in letters of Gold and set with Jewels, to S. Peter. Whereas afterwards his mind being changed, he cast off all regard to God and Man, and turned all things both divine and humane topsy-turvy. But Vitalianus being in∣tent upon sacred things, composed Ecclesiastical Canons, and regulated singing in the Church, introducing Organs to be used with the Vocal Musick. He also sent, with ample Power of binding and loosing, Theo∣dorus an Arch-bishop and Adrian an Abbat, two very learned and pious men into England, that by their Preaching and Example they might keep that people stedfast in the Faith; which the good men did what they could to perform. This Theodorus also wrote a Book, shewing, by what Pennance every sin may be wash'd off; though some ascribe that Work to Pope Theodorus. Now Vitalianus having govern'd the Church as well as lay in his power fourteen years, six months, died, and was buried in S. Peter's, January the 27th. The See was then va∣cant four months, fifteen days. ADEODATUS I. ADEODATUS, a Roman, Son of Jovinian, was of a Monk created Pope, at the time when Lupus Duke of Friuli endea∣voured to posses himself of the Kingdom of Italy. For Gri∣moaldus being (as we have said) called by his Son Rhomoaldus Duke of Beneventum to aid him against Constantius the Emperour, at his depar∣ture commended his People to the care of Lupus, and so, according to the Proverb, left the Sheep to the keeping of the The Au∣thor's quibble upon the name of the Tyrant, Lupus being the Latin word for a Wolf. Wolf. For Lupus taking the advantage of Grimoaldus his absence, involves all Tuscany, Ro∣mandiola, and a great part of Lombardy in tumult and confusion. Here∣upon Grimoaldus by gifts and promises prevails with Caganus to ad∣vance with his Avares against Lupus; which he did, and in the first Engagement had the worst of it. But the next day renewing the Fight, he overcame and slew Lupus, and then sack'd and laid waste all Friuli. Grimoaldus, upon Constantius his leaving Italy, returns in∣to Lombardy, and in his way on the Saturday before Easter takes Forlimpopoli; puts all the Inhabitants of it to the sword, plunders it, and then levels it to the ground, upon the score of an injury which
he had received there from the people of Ravenna, in his passage to the Aid of his Son. Now Arnefites the Son of Lupus, being assisted by the Dalmatians, endeavoured to recover his Father's Dukedom; but near the River Natisone, he was vanquish'd and slain by the Lombards. The Inhabitants of Vderzo had a share in his Misfortune, being forced to quit their Countrey for having countenanced him in his pretensions. At this time Sicily also was in a bad condition; for Soldiers were sent thither out of all the Provinces of Italy to make head against Mezen∣tius by whose treachery Constantius had been murdered. Who being overcome and slain, and the Soldiers again dispersed, the Saracens arriving with a great Fleet surprize Syracuse and possess themselves of the whole Island. After some time they return to Alexandria loaded with spoil, and carry away with them those Ornaments of the City of Rome, which Constantius had brought to Syracuse with design to transmit them to Constantinople. These miseries and Calamities had been portended by a Comet which appeared three months together; by great Rains and frequent Thunders, such as had not been at any time known before. But such is the blindness of Mankind, that though they be warn'd of future Evils, yet they do not, as they ought, provide against them. 'Tis reported, that all the standing Corn which had been lodg'd by the continued Rains, grew yet up again, and came to maturity, especially in Lombardy. In the mean time Adeodatus, being a person of great Piety and Humanity, merciful towards Offenders, bountiful to the poor, hospitable towards strangers, and compassionate towards all in Calamity, repaired and dedicated the Church of S. Peter in the Via Por∣tuensis. He also added to the Building and Revenues of the Monastery of S. Erasmus on Mons Coelius, wherein himself had been a Monk. Moreover, he appointed frequent Litanies upon the account of those Prodigies which we have said appear'd at that time. At length having been in the Chair four years, two months, five days, he died, and was with general lamentation buried in S. Peter's, June the 26th. The See was then vacant four months, twenty days. DONUS I. DONUS, a Roman, Son of Mauritius, was made Pope at the time when Grimoaldus King of the Lombards, drawing a Bow high to shoot at a Pigeon, and thereby straining his Nerves and Veins, though it were nine days after he had been let Blood in the Arm, yet thereupon it fell a bleeding afresh, and could not be stanch'd till he died. There were in this King several excel∣lent Endowments both of Body and Mind. He was a person of great Wisdom and Prudence in all Affairs; and added several things very useful to Rhotaris his Edict, which afterwards receiv'd the Form of a Law. He was of a middle Stature, strong Constitution, had a bald head, and long beard; and was every way fitted for Action. He was buried at Pavia in the Church of S. Ambrose, which he had built
at his own charge. Pertharis, Son of King Aripertus, who as we have said, had been deprived of his Right by Grimoaldus, passing now during his Exile out of France into Britain, was prompted by a Voice which he knew not from whence it came, that Grimoaldus being dead he should seek to recover his paternal Inheritance. Encouraged by this Voice, though the Author of it were uncertain, he returned into Italy, and within three months after Grimoaldus's Death became repossess'd of his Father's Kingdom without any opposition. About the same time died Dagobert the French King, a subtil and crafty Prince, and who was equal∣ly fitted for Counsel and Action; whose Soul, when it had been car∣ried by Devils almost as far as the Island of Lipara, is reported to have been delivered out of their Clutches, by Dennis and Maurice the Mar∣tyrs, and Martin the Confessour, Saints for whom as his Patrons he had all his life-time a great veneration, and had been very liberal in beautifying and enriching their Churches. Now Pope Donus consult∣ing the honour of the Church, paved the Porch of S. Peter's, called Paradise, with Marble, which he took as I suppose from the Pyramide over against Castel S. Angelo. Moreover, he repaired and dedicated in the Via Ostiensis the Church of the Apostles, and in the Via Appia that of S. Euphemia. He also appointed the several degrees of honour and distance to be yielded to the several Orders of the Clergy. And discovering in the Boethian Monastery a Company of Syrian Monks who were of the Nestorian Heresie, them he censured and dispersed into divers other Monasteries, assigning their own to Roman Monks. By his eminent Learning and Piety, and through the submission of Theodorus Bishop of , he reduced to Obedience to the Aposto∣lick See the Church of Ravenna, which had for a considerable time separated it self from that of Rome, and upon that account had got the name of Allocephalis. Some tell us that in his time Projectus a Bishop, underwent the torment and acquired the glory of Martyr∣dom for the cause of Christianity; and that Mezelindis a Woman of incomparable Chastity, being solicited by her Lover Ardenius, and upon her not yielding to his desires put to divers Torments by him, yet prayed so fervently even for her Persecutor, whom God for this Crime had struck with blindness, that upon her Prayers his Sight was restored to him. Our Donus having been in the Chair five years, ten days, died, and was buried in S. Peter's, April the 10th. The See was then vacant two months, sixteen days.
AGATHO I. AGATHO, a Sicilian, was Anno Dom. 702. of a Monk made Pope; a person of great Piety, and who cured a Leper, whom he chanced to meet with, only by a kiss. He was a man of so obliging a temper, that no person went away sad out of his Presence. And being so happy as to have a Contemporary Emperour like himself, he designed to hold a Council vpon the account of the Monothelites. Only he waited the time till Constantine should return from the War, who had vanquish'd the Saracens, and made them tributary to the Roman Empire. But the Bulgarians advancing out of Scythia into Thrace, and the Emperour en∣deavouring to put a check to their motion, he was with great loss routed between Hungary and Moesia. Hereupon, he found himself obliged to strike up a peace with them upon disadvantageous terms, per∣mitting them to inhabit Hungary and Moesia; though that Concession in the event proved a great benefit to the State of Christianity. For these are the men who for this seven hundred and seventy years since have maintained a continual War, and been the Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks. Well, a Peace being upon these Conditions conclu∣ded, Pope Agatho sends to Constantinople his Legates John Bishop of Porto, and John a Deacon of Rome. Them Constantine receiv'd with all expressions of respect, and very affectionately advised them to lay aside all Cavils and sophistical wranglings and Controversies, and sincerely to endeavour the uniting the two Churches. There were present at this Synod two hundred and eighty nine Bishops; and by the Com∣mand of the Emperour there were brought out of the Library of Con∣stantinople those Books, from whence the Opinions and Determinations of the Ancients might be collected. Gregory Patriarch of Constantinople, and Macarius Bishop of Antioch, perverting the sense of the Fathers maintain'd only one Will and Operation in Christ. But the Orthodox pressing hard with their Reasons and Authorities, they thereby reclaim∣ed Gregory; and Macarius adhering obstinately to his Opinion, they  him and his Followers, and made Theophanes, an Or∣thodox Abbat, Bishop of Antioch in his stead. This Affair being thus successfully managed, that thanks might be return'd to God for this Union of the two Churches in heart and mind, John Bishop of Porto, on the Octave of Easter, in the presence of the Emperour, Patriarch and the People of Constantinople, in the Church of S. Sophia celebrates the Mass in Latin, all that were present approving that way, and con∣demning those that thought otherwise. This was the sixth General Council, consisting of two hundred and eighty nine Bishops, held at Constantinople, wherein upon the Authority of Cyril, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory, Dionysius, Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, and Hierom, it was con∣cluded that there were two Wills and Operations in Christ, and their pertinacy was exploded who asserted one Will only, from whence they were called Monothelites. The first General Council, of three hun∣dred
and eighteen Bishops, was, as we have already said, held at Nice, in the Pontificate of Julius and the Reign of Constantine, against Ari∣us, who asserted several Substances in the Trinity. The second at Constantinople of an hundred and fifty Bishops in the Reign of Gratian and the Pontificate of Damasus, against Macedonius and Eudoxus who de∣nied the Holy Ghost to be God. The third in Ephesus, of two hundred Bishops, in the Reign of Theodosius the second, and the Pontificate of , against Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, who denied the Blessed Virgin to be the Mother of God, and made Christs Humanity and Divinity two Persons, asserting separately one to be the Son of God, the other the son of Man. The fourth at Chalcedon, a City over against Constantinople, of six hundred and thirty Prelates, in the Pon∣tificate of Leo and the Reign of Martian, against Eutyches Abbat of Constantinople, who durst affirm, that our Saviour after his Incarna∣tion had but one Nature. The fifth at Constantinople, against Theodo∣rus and all other Hereticks, who asserted the Virgin Mary to have brought forth Man only, not God-man; in which Synod it was con∣cluded, that the Blessed Virgin should be styled , or the Mother of God. Concerning the sixth Synod we have spoken alrea∣dy, in which the Letters of Damianus Bishop of Pavia, and Mansue∣tus Arch-bishop of Milain were very prevalent; the principal Contents of them these, viz. The true Faith concerning Christ, God and Man, is, that we believe two Wills and two Operations in him; Our Sa∣viour says with respect to his Divinity, I and my Father are one; butJohn 10. 30. with relation to his Humanity, My Father is greater than I. More∣over,John 14. 28. as Man he was found asleep in the Ship; as God he commanded the Winds and the Sea. As for our Agatho, (in whose time after two Ecclipses, one of the Moon, another of the Sun, there followed a grie∣vous Pestilence,) having been in the Chair two years, six months, sif∣teen days, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, January the 10th. The See was then vacant one year, five months.
LEO II. LEO the second, a Sicilian, Son of Paul, was as appears by his Writings, a person throughly learned in the Latin and Greek Languages. Having also good skill in Musick, he composed Notes upon the Psalms, and very much improved all Church Musick. He ordained likewise, that at the Ce∣lebration of the Mass the Pax should be given to the people. More∣over, he so vigorously maintained and asserted the sixth Synod, of which we have spoken in the Life of Agatho, that he Excommunicated all those whom in the presence of Constantine that Synod had condem∣ned. He also repress'd the pride of the Bishops of Ravenna, a matter before attempted by Pope Agatho, and ordained that the Election of the Clergy of Ravenna should be invalid, unless it were confirmed by the Authority of the Roman See; whereas before they presuming upon the power of their Exarchs, managed all things arbitrarily, owning no subjection to any, but mating even the Popes themselves. He likewise solemnly decreed, that no person promoted to the dignity of an Arch∣bishop should pay any thing for the use of the Pall, or upon any other score, a Decree which I could wish it were observed at this day, seeing how many Evils have arisen through Bribery. While Leo was busied in these matters, Rhomoaldus Duke of Beneventum, having raised a great Army, possess'd himself of Taranto, Brindisi, and all Puglia, and his Wife Theodata, a devout Lady, out of the spoils of the War built a Church in honour to S. Peter not far from Beneventum, and a Nunnery. Rho∣moaldus dying was succeeded by his Son Grimoaldus, who deceasing with∣out Issue male, left the Dukedom to his Brother Gisulphus. Our Leo, who besides his great Learning and Eloquence, was also an extraordinary person for Devotion and Charity, and by his Doctrine and Example very much promoted Justice, Fortitude, Clemency, and Good Will among all men, having been in the Chair only ten months, died, and June the 28th, was accompanied to his burial in the Church of S. Peter with the tears of all men, who deplored the loss of him as of a Common Father. After his Death the See was vacant eleven months, twenty one days. The time of his Pontificate was short, but the Reputation he gain'd therein so great, that one would think he had lived longer than he did, by the celebrated Name which he had deser∣vedly acquired in so little time.
BENEDICT II. BENEDICT the second, a Roman, his Father's Name John, being from his Youth brought up to the Clergy, was so intent upon the study of Holy Writ, that he became an extraordinary Proficient in Divinity. He was likewise a per∣son of great Compassion, Charity, and good Will towards all, espcially the Poor; Virtues by which he so won the Hearts of men, that he was pitch'd upon as the only person, who by general consent was fit to succeed in the Place of Leo deceased. The Emperour Constantine out of the Veneration he had for this mans Sanctity, sent him a Decree, in which it was established that for the time to come He whom the Clergy and People of Rome should chuse Pope, should be forthwith acknowledged Christ's true Vicar, without expecting the Authority of the Emperour or his Exarchs, according to former usage, when the con∣firmation of the Emperour or his Vicegerent in Italy was necessary to the creation of a Pope. Pertheris now King of the Lombards, in imita∣tion of the Religion and Charity of Benedict, built a Monastery in ho∣nour to S. Agatha at Pavia; and his Wife Rhodelinda prompted by the Example of her Husband built the Church of S. Mary ad Perticas with∣out the Walls of Pavia. This they did out of a Principle of Emula∣tion, understanding that Pope Benedict had with vast expence repaired, beautified and enriched the Churches of S. Peter at Rome, that of S. Lau∣rence in Lucina, that of S. Valentine in the Via Flaminia, and that of S. Mary ad Martyres. Pertheris had designed greater things of this Na∣ture, but he was diverted by Alalchis Duke of Trent, who being pust'd up by a great Victory which he had gain'd over the Bavarians, turns his Arms against his King. But Pertheris raising an Army, at the first Engagement routs him, besieges Trent whither he had fled for Refuge, and though Alalchis had first made his escape thence by night, takes the City. However, Pertheris was a Prince of so great Clemency as to receive him again into favour upon his submission, and to make him Duke of Brescia. Some tell us, that in Benedict's time an extraordinary Star was seen near the Vergiliae several Nights together in a clear Sky be∣tween Christmas and Epiphany. I deny not but that a Comet then ap∣peared, and portended something; but it's Neighbourhood to this Con∣stellation is incoherent, unless we make that prodigious too. For the Vergiliae rise at the Vernal Equinox, when the Sun enters the Sign Aries, about the twenty fourth of March, and begin to set at the Autumnal Equinox. But that out of Vesuvius, a Mountain in Campania, so great a  did at this time burst forth, that it burnt up all the places round about it, may seem less wonderful, considering that Pliny the Natural Historian, leaving the Ships which he commanded under Trajan, and approaching too near it out of curiosity to find out the causes of it's burning, lost his life by that means. However, 'tis certain, that not long after these things there followed Slaughters, Rapines, Fires, the Death of great Men, and particularly of Pope Benedict, who, as he was uni∣versally
beloved in his life-time, so after his Death he was famous for his Piety, and the good Offices he had done to mankind. He was in the Chair only ten months, twelve days, and was buried in S Peter's, May the 15th. By his Death the See was vacant two months, fifteen days. JOHN V. JOHN the fifth, by Nation a Syrian born at Antioch, his Father's Name Cyriacus, was created Pope about the time when the Emperour Constantine died, in the seventeenth year of his Reign, and left the Empire to his Son Justinian the second. The Saracens now invaded Lybia and Africa, and possess'd themselves easily of all the places that lay towards the Sea. But Justinian, having in some measure setled the affairs of his Empire, and raised a competent Army, advancing against these Sara∣cens, struck such a terrour into Abimelech their Chief, that without en∣gaging he sued for a Peace, and was glad to restore all his Acquests in Africa. And a Peace, it is said by some, was granted them for ten years, but upon Condition, that they should pay a thousand pieces of Gold and a Slave of their own Nation on Horseback every day to the Emperour. At this time John, a person of great Piety and Goodness, being by general suffrage chosen Pope in the Constantinian Church, was consecrated in the same manner with Leo the second by the three Bi∣shops of Ostia, Porto and Veletri; a Precedent which so obtained, that it was afterwards constantly practised. His Pontificate was rendred remarkable by two extraordinary persons. Felix the Uncle of Flavia∣nus, and John Bishop of Bergamo, men of such eminent Learning and Sanctity, that they received from Princes themselves marks of the highest respect and Veneration. Pope John, who both before and du∣ring his Pontificate was a sickly man, having written a Book concern∣ing the Dignity of the Pall, died in the first year after his coming to the Chair, and was buried in S. Peter's, August the 2d. By his Death the See was vacant two months, nineteen days.
CONON I. CONON, by birth a Thracian, educated in Sicily, and thence entring into Orders at Rome, was of a Presbyter made Pope. For there happening a Controversie about the Ele∣ction, the Citizens being for Peter an Arch-bishop, and the Soldiers for one Theodorus a Priest: at length after a long Contention both Parties agreed in the Choice of Conon. And indeed he did every way deserve so great a Dignity; being a man of great Learning and very good Life, pious and devout, of a comely Person and most Venerable, or as some called it, Angelical Aspect; of wonder∣ful Simplicity and Sincerity, Modesty and Justice, Resolution and Pru∣dence. For these excellent Endowments of his all persons concern'd with mighty acclamations of Applause immediately confirm'd his Election; as did also Theodorus Exarch of Ravenna, who being deceased, was not long after succeeded in the Exarchate by John Platina, whom I believe to have given the name to the place of my Nativity, called Platina, within the Territory of Cremona. For there being frequent Wars be∣tween the Exarchs and the Kings of Lombardy, it is not improbable, considering that that place was scituated almost in the mid-way be∣tween Ravenna and Pavia, one of which was the Seat of the Lombard Kings, the other of the Exarchs, there might at some time be a Battel fought or a Camp pitched there, from whence we know that names are oftentimes given to places, as particularly in the same Countrey there is Vitelliana, a Town so called from Vitellius his encamping there, and Bebrignano not far from Bebriacum famous for the defeat which Otho there received. I return to Conon, who presently after his entrance upon the Pontificate falling sick, Paschal an Arch-deacon and manager of the Church-stock, endeavours to bribe John the Exarch, to procure him to be chosen Pope upon the Death of Conon. The Exarch took the Mo∣ney, though he afterwards performed none of the promises he had made upon that account. And indeed such a covetous and ambitious wretch deserv'd to be frustrated in his designs, who made a Bribe of that Trea∣sure of the Church, which according to Conon's Will should have been laid out in relieving the poor and repairing of Churches. A Crime to be abhorred in all men, but most detestable in an Ecclesiastick. Such a breach of trust would not have been committed by Hubert, who was now a Bishop in Bretagne, of great Note for his Learning and Piety; nor Leodegarius the Martyr Bishop of Autun, who was put to Death by Theodoric King of France, for his frequent and free reproofs; nor by Au∣doenus Bishop of Roan, a man who was second to none for Knowledg and Sanctity. These were men remov'd from Ambition and Avarice, fixing all their trust in God and Religion, and gaining thereby Reputa∣tion among men in this World, and eternal happiness from God in the other. As for Conon, having been in the Chair only eleven months, and three days, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, September the 21st. The See was then vacant two months, twenty three days.
SERGIUS I. SERGIUS, a Syrian, born at Antioch, son of Tiberius, coming to Rome in the time of Pope Adeodatus, was admit∣ted into the number of the Reman Clergy. Afterwards through his Industry and Improvements in divine Knowledg, advancing gradually he was ordained Parish-Priest of the Church of S. Susanna. He thereupon beginning more and more to frequent the Coemeteries, and there to perform sacred Offices, by this means he gain'd so great a reputation, that upon the Decease of Conon, he was chosen his Succes∣sour, though indeed after a long debate. For the People being divided into two Parties, one stood up for Theodorus, and the other for Paschal the Arch deacon. Theodorus with his Party had forced his entrance into the inner part of the Lateran Palace; the outer from the Oratory of S. Sylvester to the Church of the house of Julia, was possessed by Pas∣chal. But the Contention and debate growing so high, that every one thought they would come to blows, each Party resolving not to give place to the other unless by force compelled thereunto, the principal of the Citizens, Clergy and Soldiery assembled together to consult what were best to be done to lay this Tumult. At length having duly considered the whole matter, and judging it not fit to commit the Popedom to either of those who to  their own ambition had been the cause of so great disorders, by divine direction they make choice of Sergius without the least opposition; and taking him out of the midst of the croud upon their shoulders, they carry him first into the Oratory of S. Caesarius the Martyr, then into the Lateran Palace, breaking open the doors by force, and driving out those who were in it before. Theodorus seeing how all agreed in the choice, salutes Sergius by the name of Pope, and kisses him. Paschal the other Competitour did the same, though sorely against his Will, and being only aw'd thereinto by the armed multitude. For secretly and under-hand he did by Letters, Mes∣sengers and Promises so strongly sollicite John Exarch of Ravenna to perform at length what he had promis'd him for his Money, that the said John comes forthwith to Rome, without sending any advice before, that so he might have the advantage of coming upon them unprovided, and while they were off their guard. But when he understood that Sergius was by universal consent declared Pope, and urg'd the perfor∣mance of what Paschal had promis'd him, upon Sergius's expressing a high dislike and detestation of any such bribery, he violently seizes and carries away several things of value from the Church of S. Peter. As for Paschal, the occasion of this mischief, he being accused and con∣victed of Sorcery, was deprived of his Arch-Deaconry; and for Pen∣nance was confined to a Monastery, whereing after his having continued obstinate for five years, he died. In the mean time Justinian, being strangely inconstant towards God and Men, both attaques the Saracens and Bulgarians contrary to the Articles of Peace he had concluded with them; from whom yet it is certain he receiv'd more damage, than he
did to them; and also returning to Constantinople, being generally hated by the Citizens for his not restraining the cruelty of the City-prefect, he held a Synod, wherein some Decrees pass'd not agreeing with the Orthodox Faith; which also Sergius his Apocrisiary, or Nuntio,, then residing at Constantinople, very foolishly confirmed by his Subscription. But these Decrees being afterwards brought to Rome and there exploded by Sergius, who held that there were two Natures in Christ, and that the Blessed Virgin was the Mother of God, Justinian enraged thereat, sends Zacharias Protospatharius (which we may render the Captain of the Guards) to Rome, to bring Sergius bound to him. Which when the Soldiers of the Exarchate of Italy understood, they immediately took up their Arms, and not only defended the Pope from violence, but were very near having slain Zachary, had he not saved himself by flying for refuge to the Pope, who kept him for some time in his Bed-chamber, and afterwards sent him back privately to the Emperour. While these things were transacted at Rome, Leontius, encouraged by  the Patriarch, having excited the People of Constantinople to take up Arms, and broke open all the Prisons of the City, whereby multitudes of Prisoners were set at liberty, deposes Justinian, and cutting off his Nose banishes him to the Chersonese of Pontus. Abimelech Admiral of the Sa∣racens having intelligence hereof, and hoping to make his advantage of these Tumults, presently invades Africa; whither Leontius with all ex∣pedition sends his Army to check their motion. But not long after a mutiny arising among the Soldiers, they create one Tiberius a Citizen of Constantinople Emperour; who immediately returning with the Army to Constantinople, seizes Leontius, and having retaliated upon him what we have said he did to Justinian, throws him into Prison, reserving him there for future greater ignominy. Moreover, he banished Philip the son of Nicephorus a Patrician, and one who had been assistant to him in getting the Empire, only because he had told his Companions how he dreamt that he saw an Eagle covering his head with her Wings; which Tiberius fear'd might be a presage of the young man's coming to the Empire. While things went thus at Constantinople, Pipin Duke of Austrasia laid the foundation of gaining the Kingdom of France. For understanding that one Bertarius, a mean fellow whom King Theodoric made use of as his chief Minister, was generally hated by all People, he marches with a vast Army into France, and being encountred in his passage by Theodoric and Bertarius, he engages in Battel with them and defeats them. Bertarius saved himself by flight; but Theodoric re∣treating, by agreement upon a Truce constitutes the victorious Pipin Mayre of the Palace, and principal Administratour of his Kingdom. After this Pipin returned to Austrasia upon intelligence that the Germans and Sueves infested his People; and having quell'd them, he sets for∣ward towards France again, upon the News that Theodoric being dead, the Kingdom had fallen to his Brother Childepert. Arriving there, and being very kindly received by the King, after he had put his son into the place of Mayre of the Palace, he again returns enraged at the Sueves and Germans, who were now the second time in Arms. At this time Sergius, having  the banishment of Justinian en∣joyed Peace and Tranquility, repaired the Church of S. Peter, and re∣stored to it its antient beauty. The Front of it he adorn'd with Mo∣saick
work, made the Candlesticks and other Ornaments of it of Gold and Silver; found a part of our Saviours Cross in a little brass Coffer, and because the body of S. Leo had hitherto lain less regarded than his merits required, he reposited it in a more honourable and celebrated place. The Statues of the Apostles defaced with Age he renew'd, and either repaired or made wholly new the Ornaments of many Churches which it would be tedious to enumerate. Moreover, he ordained that at the breaking of the body of our Lord should be sung, O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the World, have mercy upon us; and that on the day of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, and of S. Si∣mon there should be yearly a Procession with Litanies through the City, setting out at S. Hadrian. He made Damianus Arch-Bishop of Ravenna, and Berslauardus Arch-Bishop of Britain. By his Learning and Authority he brought over to the Truth the Church of Aquileia, which before consented not wholly to the fifth Synod. Some tell us, that at this time Lambertus a Person of great Sanctity suffered Mar∣tyrdom at Liege, because he was so hardy as to reprove Pipin for slighting his Wive's Bed and keeping Alpais a Whore. The author of his Death is said to have been her own Brother, who afterwards died of the lousy Disease. 'Tis written also that by the exemplary Sancti∣ty of Sergius the Saxons were now first wrought upon to embrace Christianity. The good man having by these means gained a great reputation; and having been in the Chair thirteen years, eight months, twenty three days, he died, and was with the lamentation of all men, who wept as at the loss of a common Father, with great Solemnity buried in the Church of S. Peter, September the 8th. The See was then vacant one month, twenty days. JOHN VI. JOHN the sixth, a Grecian, was elected Pope at the time when Theophylact the Exarch in his passage to Italy arri∣ved first at Sicily. Which being known to the Italian Sol∣diers, who having of late times usually sided more with the Popes, than the Emperours, were afraid that his coming might betoken some ill, they resolved to kill him at his entrance into Rome. But by the Authority of Pope John, who made himself Umpire between them, Theophylact was protected, and all things being made up and accommodated, he goes for Ravenna. In the mean time Gisulphus Duke of Beneventum, taking heart upon this disagree∣ment of the Exarch and Soldiers, invades Terra di Lavoro, possesses himself of Sora and Arpino, burns Villages, makes the Villagers his Prisoners, and drives away their Cattel. The Pope being deeply sen∣sible of this Calamity, sends his Ambassadours to Gisulphus, to admo∣nish him to quit those places which he had no Right to, and to re∣turn into Abruzzo; which if he refus'd to do, he should soon feel the vengeance of Almighty God upon him. Gisulphus being terrified here∣by,
restores the Towns he had taken, and returns to Beneventum. Of those which were carried away Captive, Pope John redeemed all he could sind out, as  as the Treasure of the Church would reach for their ransom. At this time , who, as we have said, had been banish'd by Leontius to the  of , making his escape thence comes to Cacanus King of the Avares, who at first treated him with the greatest respect and kindness, and promised him his Daughter in marriage; but afterwards being corrupted with bribes by Tiberius, he design'd to be∣tray his Guest and Son-in-law into his hands. Justinian having notice hereof, flees to Trebellius Prince of the Bulgarians, by whose aid he was in a little time after restored to the Empire. While  things were transacted in Europe, the  being possessed of Libya and Africa, set sail from Septa, and passing over into Spain, made themselves Ma∣sters of it all, except that part inhabited by the Asturians and Bis∣cains; who as they had been the last People of Spain who were sub∣dued to the Roman Empire, and the last who revolted from it, and the only People who shook off the Yoke of the Visigoths; so now having received the Christian Faith, they were the men who continued sted∣fastly with the greatest resolution to defend themselves by Arms against the perfidious Saracens. So then, Africa, which being recovered by Belisarius General to Justinian the first, had been subject to the Ro∣man Empire an hundred and seventy years, and also Granada in Hispa∣nia , being at this time seiz'd by the Saracens, have been obedi∣ent to their Laws and Customs now this seven hundred and forty years, to the great reproach of Christianity; the Spaniards, who are wont to boast of their Wit and Valour, not being able to drive them out of Europe. Some tell us that Bede, who lived in these times, by. Letters written to several Christian Princes did very much bewail this Calamity, that thereby he might excite them to enter into a War against these Enemies of God and Men. This  was not only extraordi∣narily well skill'd in the Greek and Latin Tongues, but also for his eminent Piety and Modesty, gain'd the surname of . He wrote many things upon the Acts of the Apostles, and upon S. Luke; he published a Book of Chronology, and several Homilies, which are much used by the Gallican . Moreover, of Strabo and Haymo, two very learned men, said to be Bede's Brethren, one composed di∣vers elegant Homilies, and the other commented upon Genesis. As for Pope John, having repaired the Church of S. Andrew in the Vatican, and the roof of that of S. Mark, and adorn'd with Pillars on each hand the Altar of S. Peter's, in the third year and third month of his Pon∣tificate he died, as some think, a Martyr; but by whom he suffered Martyrdom, does not sufficiently appear. 'Tis said he was buried in the Coemetery of S. Sebastian in the Via Appia. By his Death the See was vacant one month, nineteen days.
JOHN VII. JOHN the seventh a Grecian, Son of Plato, enter'd upon the Pontificate at the time when Justinian being return'd to , caused Tiberius and Leontius, by whom he had been deposed, to be publickly put to Death. Many of his Enemies he cut off by sundry kinds of Death, and many he imprison'd; some one or other of which he would every day order to be kill'd, when the wiping of his Nose put him in mind of the injury that had been done him. Moreover, having caused the eyes of Callinicus the Patriarch of Constantinople to be put out, he banish'd him to Rome; and made Cyrus an Abbat, who had main∣tain'd him in Pontus, Patriarch in his stead. Being acted by the same foolish humour, as he had been before his loss of the Empire in the time of Pope Sergius, he sends to Rome two Metropolitans, to persuade Pope John to hold a Synod, wherein they of the Western Church might confirm the truth of what those of the East believed concerning the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father; sending to him the Ar∣ticles to which he would have him Subscribe. The Pope sends the Men back again to the Emperour without doing any thing in the mat∣ter; but yet he did not by his Censures and Interdicts correct the erro∣neous  concerning God, as it was fit he should, and as it would have become a steady and resolute Pope to have done. Some write, though without good authority, that Arithpertus King of the Lombards from a religious Principle, gave the Cottian Alpes and all the Tract that reaches from Piedmont to the Coast of Genoa to the Church of Rome. Others say, that this Donation was only confirmed by A∣rithpertus. But since there is no certainty concerning the Donation it self, and the Lawyers call it the Chaff, because it yields no Corn, and it appears in no respect to have been the Gift of Constantine, how can there be any evidence of its Confirmation? I return to Pope John, a Person who spake and lived very well, and who built an Oratory in the Church of S. Peter in honour to the Blessed Virgin, upon the Walls of which on each hand were wrought in Mosaick Work the  of several of the holy Fathers. Moreover, he repaired the Church of S. Eugenia, which had long before been decayed through Age. He adorn'd also the Coemeteries of the Martyrs Marcellinus and Marcus, and Pope Damasus. Finally, he beautified divers other Churches with the Pictures and Statues of the Saints, wherein the Painters and Statua∣ries had so well imitated the Gravity and Majesty of his own aspect, that whosoever looked upon them thought they saw the Pope himself. Having been in the Chair two years, seven months, seventeen days, he died, and was buried October the 18th. in the Church of S. Peter before the Altar of the Blessed Virgin which himself had built. The See was then vacant three months.
SISINNIUS. SISINNIUS, or (as others call him) Sozimus, a Syrian, his Fathers name John, lived in the Pontificate no more than twenty days in which time 'tis said the body of S. Benedict was by stealth conveyed away from Mount Cassino, by reason of the solitude of the place, and carried into France. Now Sisinnius, though he were so afflicted with the Gout both in his Hands and Feet, that he could neither walk nor feed himself, yet he took such  both of the City and Church of Rome, as to leave nothing undone which became a good Pope. He had already prepared all materials for the raising the decayed Walls of the City, and the repairing and beauti∣fying of the old ruined Churches; but he died suddenly, and was bu∣ried in S. Peter's February the 6th. The See was then vacant one month, eighteen days. CONSTANTINE I. CONSTANTINE, another , his Father's name likewise John, was created Pope at the time when there happened to be a Famine at Rome which lasted three years; in which exigence he was so charitable to all, but especially the poorer sort, that men thought him to have been sent down from Heaven for their relief. In the mean time  out of the hatred he bore to the name of Pontus, sends Mauritius one of the Patrician Order, and Helias one of his Guards, with a Fleet to the Chersonese where he had been in Exile, with Commission to put all above the age of fourteen to the Sword; which, to glut the Emperours Rage, they accordingly put in execution. And that we may not think that Cruelty was his only Vice, he became guilty of so great Ingratitude as in an hostile manner to surprize King Trebellius, by the Aid of whose Forces he had been restored to the Empire, at a time when he was engaged in a War with the Thracians; But Trebellius not only bore the Choque, but also forced him to retreat with Loss. There was no alteration from his former course of Life wrought in him by the Cala∣mities he had underwent, in any thing save in this, that he now vene∣rated and defended the Apostolick See contrary to  he had for∣merly used to do. For when Felix, having been consecrated Arch-Bi∣shop of Ravenna by the Pope, was required according to custom to send in writing his ackowledgment of the Papal Authority and Money to Rome, which he stifly refused to do; Justinian, upon knowledg of the matter, presently sends order to Theodorus, a Patrician, his Admi∣ral, with the first opportunity to leave Sicily and go against the Ra∣vennates. He obeying the Emperours Order, and having in
gain'd a Victory over them, exercises the greatest cruelty towards them, and sends Felix bound in Chains to Constantinople; whom Justinian af∣terwards banish'd into Pontus, having first deprived him of his sight, after this Manner; He caused him to fix his Eyes long upon a red∣hot Concave-vessel of Brass, out of which there issued a firey Py∣ramid, which easiy overcame his Eyes and blinded him. Yet Constan∣tine did by no means approve of this Cruelty, being more desirous of his , than his Punishment. While the Pope and Emperour were thus employed, Aisprandus en∣deavouring with the Aid of the Bavarians to recover the Kingdom of his Ancestours, comes into Italy, and engaging in a pitch'd Battel with Arithpertus, vanquishes him, and gains the Kingdom of the Lombards; Arithpertus himself by a too fearful and hasty flight being drown'd in a swift River. But Aisprandus not long after dying, did with gene∣ral approbation leave his Son Luithprandus Successour to his King∣dom. Justinian being now very desirous to see Pope Constantine, having sent Ships to convey him safely, makes it his request that he would come to him. Constantine yielding thereunto, and approaching now near to Constant inople. Tiberius, Justinian's Son, with a Princely Retinue, and Cyrus the Patriarch with all the Clergy, in honour to him go out eight miles to meet him; and being dress'd in his Pontificalibus, they conduct him with solemn Pomp into the City, and lead him into the Palace. Going from thence to Nicomedia, whither also the Emperour was to come from Nice, he was received there after the same manner as at Constantinople. Justinian entring the City soon after,  only embraced the Pope, but also kiss'd his Feet in sign of honour. Having on the days following discoursed of several Affairs between themselves, and Justinian having confirmed the Popes Decrees, Constantine at his taking leave advises him not to proceed too severely against Philippi∣cus, then an Exile in Pontus, apprehending some mischief might arise thereupon, because he understood that Philippicus was a Person of great Fortitude and Prudence. But Justinian not following the Popes good Counsel, sends a Fleet to Pontus with design to dispatch Philippicus; who upon a Revolt of the Soldiers to him, with the same Fleet makes towards Constantinople, and at twelve miles distance from the City en∣gaging with Justinian and Tiberius, got the Victory and slew them, and with universal Acclamation was declared Emperour. This Phi∣lippicusPhilippicus. afterwards banishing Cyrus the Patriarch into Pontus, for his consenting in belief with the Pope, puts one John a Monk and an Arch∣Heretick into his place; whose Opinions he forthwith sent in writing to Rome, requiring all to subscribe their Assent to them. But Constan∣tine holding a Synod, not only condemned the Opinions of Philippicus and John the Monk, but also appointed the Images of those holy Fa∣thers, who had been present at the Councils universally approved of, to be painted in the Portico of S. Peter's, upon Intelligence that in a way of Contempt they had been rub'd off from the Walls of S. Sophia, by Philippicus his Order. Moreover, the same Pope ordained, That the name of no Heretical Emperour should be inserted in any Publick or Private Writings, or impress'd upon Brass or Silver or Lead. But Anasta∣sius,Anastasius. surnamed Arthemius, by force of Arms deposes Philippicus, in the first
year and sixth month of his Empire, and seizing him, puts out his Eyes. This  sends Letters to Pope Constantine, in which he promises to be a zealous Defendour of the Catholick Faith, and the sixth Sy∣nod.Tbeodosius. But he also, within three years, being flighted by the Soldiers was deposed, and compelled by Theodosius, who succeeded him, to take Holy Orders, that so he might never afterwards pretend or aspire to the Empire. Theodosius, a Catholick Emperour, forthwith gave order for the restoring of the Images of the Holy Fathers, which, as we have said, had been destroyed by Philippicus. And Felix, who had been banished into Pontus, quitting his former Obstinacy, returned home and was restored to his See, of which he had been deprived. At this time also it was declared, that the Bishop of Pavia was subject only to the See of Rome, and not to the Arch-Bishop of Milain; concerning which matter there had been a great and long Controversie between the two Prelates. Some write that two Kings of the Saxons, under the Obligation of a religious Vow, came now to Rome, and that they there died, as I think, of the Pestilence. Not long after them died Constantine, having been in the Chair seven years, twenty days, and was buried in S. Peter's, February the 11th. The See was then vacant one month, eleven days. GREGORY II. GREGORY the Second, a Roman, Son of Marcellus, en∣tring into Holy Orders in the time of Sergius, was upon the Reputation of his great Fidelity and Integrity made the Popes Almoner and Library-keeper. Being afterwards or∣dained Deacon, he attended Pope Constantine to Constanti∣nople, where there being a warm Debate concerning some Articles of Religion, he disputed so smartly, that all men admired his Learning, Wit, and Eloquence, by which he easily confuted those who held any erroneous Opinions. Soon after his being created Pope, he re-built the Walls of the City which in several places were fallen down through age; and repaired the decayed Churches of S. Peter, and S. Laurence without the Walls, laying in the Water anew, by mending the battered and disjoyned Pipes which formerly had conveyed it into them. He repaired also, and enriched with Presents of Gold and Silver divers other Churches, which it would be tedious to enumerate. Yet I will not pass by in Silence his reviving a Monastery in the Via Ostiensis not far from S. Paul's, whose Ruines are yet to be seen, and also that of S. Andrew, setling Monks therein who were to be continually employed in the exercise of Devotion. Moreover, it was the peculiar Commendati∣on of this Pope, that through his means the Germans were converted to Christianity; he having sent among them Boniface a Monk, to bring them out of darkness by setting up the light of the Truth. Of these Germans a great number came to Rome, and were baptized with the Popes own Hands. He also by his Authority compelled Luithprandus,
who at first resused it, to confirm the Donation of Arithpertus, of which we have spoken before; which Luithprandus did at the beginning of his Reign both possess himself of a great part of Boiaria, and also besiege and take . In the time of this Pope there was such an Inundation of the River Tiber, which flowed into the City through the Porta del popolo, that in the Via Lata the Water was almost a mans height, and from Ponte Molle to the Steps of S. Peter's men rowed about in large Boats. This Inundation continued seven days to the great Loss and Damage of the Citizens, it having born down Houses, and rooted up Trees, Corn, Plants and Herbs. The Moon also being now in an Ecclipse, appeared of a bloody colour till midnight; and there was seen a Comet, with its Tail extending towards the North, betokening some future Calamity. Whereupon Gregory, that he might avert the displeasure of Almighty God from the Christians, ordered frequent Litanies in Procession through the whole City. While the Pope was thus employed at Rome, there came Advice, that the Lom∣bards under the Duke of Beneventum had surpriz'd the Fort of Cuma; at which Gregory being very much disturbed, sends to admonish them to restore this Fort which contrary to the Articles of Peace they had unjustly possess'd themselves of, or otherwise they would soon feel the Indignation of Almighty God upon them. But after several Messages of the like nature they not quitting it, he encourages the Neapolitans, upon the promise of a sum of Money, and the sending some Roman Sol∣diers for their assistance, to recover it by Force. Theodunus the Arch∣Deacon having the management of this Affair, the Neapolitans set briskly to the Work, and re-take the Fort, killing three hundred of those who were in Garrison therein, and taking five hundred Priso∣ners, whom they carried to Naples, where the Soldiers forthwith re∣ceived the reward which had been promised them. Gregory now en∣joying Peace, applyed himself to Church-work. For he repaired the Church of S. Cross in Jerusalem, which had long lain neglected, and new∣arch'd and roof'd the Porches on every side of it; he built from the foundations the Oratory of S. Susanna on Mount Coelius; and after the Death of his Mother dedicated his Fathers House to the honour of S. Agatha, building it into a Monastery, which he plentifully endowed for the maintenance of the Monks therein. The Saracens now encouraged by the Discord they observed among the Christians, setting sail from Septa in Afrique, and arriving in Spain, ravage all the Countrey, except Granada which was inhabited by those of their own Nation already, and at length with their Wives and Chil∣dren pass as far as Aquitain, designing to possess themselves of that Pro∣vince also. Charles Martell the Son of Pipin was at this time famousCharles Martell. throughout the World. This Pipin, after the Death of Grimoald, had two other Sons left, Caroloman and Charles Martell; which Charles, this Brother also dying, gain'd afterwards to himself the Kingdom of France, though not without great opposition, especially of Eudo Duke of Aqui∣tain and Chilperic whom some of the French upon the Death of Theo∣doric had set up to be their King. But Martell having passed the River Seine, and advanced to Orleans, at the first Attaque puts them to flight, and becomes sole Possessour of the Kingdom of France. After this he passed the Rhine, and conquered the Saxons, Alemans, Sueves and Boi∣arians.
But having Intelligence that the Saracens had been invited by Eudo into France, by great Marches he comes forth against them, and obliging them to fight, gains a mighty Victory not far from Tours. Historians write that in this Battel there were slain of the Saracens three hundred and sixty thousand, but of the French only one thou∣sand one hundred and fifty, and 'tis said, that Eudo hereupon came over to Martel's side. The Saracens being by this means through Martel's Valour diverted from any farther Attempts upon the Spaniards and French, turn all the Rage and Indignation which upon so great an Over∣throw had been raised in them, upon the Constantinopolitans, whose City they besieged by Sea and Land the space of three years. But suffer∣ing all the extremities of War, being pinched with Hunger and Cold, and a Pestilence moreover raging among them, they raised the Siege, and return'd home. 'Tis said, that of this Plague there died in Constan∣tinople three hundred thousand. As for the Affairs of Italy, the Lom∣bards now under the Conduct of Luithprandus after a long Siege took and sack'd Ravenna, carrying away from thence to Pavia all things of considerable value, and amongst the rest, as I believe, the famous Statue on Horseback in Brass. Thus according to the usual Vicissitude of hu∣mane Affairs, it so fell out, that what Theodoric and other Kings of the Goths, and after them the Exarchs, had taken from Rome and carried to Ravenna, was by others afterwards scattered about and dispersed into several places. In the mean time there was at Rome a Plot laid by some seditious people against the Pope; the Heads of the Conspiracy being Basilius, Jordanus a Notary, John a Sub-deacon surnamed Lurion and Marinus an Officer of the Guards, who at this time was Governour of Rome under the Emperour. But upon the Emperour's recalling Marinus, the business was deferred to another time. The Conspiratours tampe∣red also with Paul the Exarch, being willing in a matter of so great importance to have him to head them. The whole Design being at length discovered by the people of Rome, they appear in Arms, kill John Lurion, and dissipate the other Conspiratours. Basilius was con∣fined to a Monastery, where he died. The forementioned Paul being highly enraged at the Pope for prohibiting his levying new Taxes, did by the Emperour's Order seek all ways, both secret and open, of taking away the good mans life; but the Romans and Lombards taking up Arms defended him. The Emperour Leo hereupon publishes an Edict, commanding all those who were Subjects of the Roman Empire to rase out and take away all the Pictures and Images of Saints, Martyrs and Angels out of their Churches; with design, as he ptofessed, thereby to prevent Idolatry; and declaring, that whosoever refused so to do should be accounted a publick Enemy. But Gregory not only not obeyed this Order, but also encouraged all Catholicks to stand up stoutly against it. Whereupon the people of Italy were so animated, that they were near chusing another Emperour, had not Gregory by his authority in∣terposed to prevent it. Notwithstanding which there arose such a Dis∣sention at Ravenna, some pleading for Obedience to the Emperour, others to the Pope, that Paul the Exarch, together with his Son, was slam in the Tumult. To succeed in whose place the Emperour sends Eutychius an Eunuch, who by Gifts and Promises was to endeavour to break the Friendship and Alliance between the Lombards and the Pope.
But that Attempt having been often made in vain, was drop'd for a time; and the Pope being freed of this trouble, began to visit the Hospitals and Churches, and to repair those of them which through age or neg∣lect had fallen to decay. Moreover, he made a Peace between the King of the Lombards and the Dukes of Spoleto and Beneventum, which that King had intended to crush; but having marched in a peaceable manner as far as Rome to confer with the Pope about the matter, Gre∣gory by his Christian Counsel so mollified his mind, that laying aside all thoughts of War, he offered up his Sword, and other Arms, in the Church of S. Peter. The Emperour Leo now in another wild humour, commanded all the Images, either of Wood, Brass or Marble to be brought to him, which he forthwith caused to be burnt; and seiz'd upon and put to Death those who refused to bring them. Germanus the Patriarch, who vigorously opposed it, he banished, and put into his place Anastasius an Heretick; whom Gregory afterwards in a Sy∣nod deprived, and interdicted the Exercise of sacred Offices, if he re∣fused to return to the Catholick Faith. Furthermore, as became a pious Prelate, he oftentimes by Letters admonished the Emperour to quit the erroneous Opinions into which some ill men had se∣duced him, and at length to embrace the Truth, and to cease the de∣stroying of the Images of the Saints, by whose Example and Me∣mory men might be excited to the Imitation of their Virtues. Some write that in this Popes time Boniface came out of Britain to Rome, and for his sanctity was of a Monk made a Bishop, and sent into Ger∣many, that by his Preaching and Example he might confirm that People in the Faith; which he performed so well, that he was deservedly made Bishop of Mentz; but passing thence into Africa, he was for his preaching the Word of God put to Death by the Enemies of Chri∣stianity. 'Tis said also, that S. Aegidius, a Grecian, was now famous for the holy Life he led, and the miracles he wrought; and that Pe∣tronax, a Citizen of Brescia, did by Vow repair at his own Charge the Monastery of S. Benedict, which was almost quite left desolate. As for Gregory, who by his good Example excited all men to the pra∣ctice of Piety and Virtue, having been in the Chair sixteen years, nine months, eleven days, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, Fe∣bruary the 11th. By his Death the See was vacant thirty five days. He is said to have consecrated during his Pontificate one hundred for∣ty eight Bishops.
GREGORY III. GREGORT the third, a Syrian, his Fathers name John, was unammously elected Pope in the Year seven hundred fifty nine. He was a Person of singular Learning, very well skill'd in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and of such an Insight into the Sense of Holy Writ, that no man was more ready at the expound∣ing of the abstruse and difficult places in it. Nor  he work upon the People merely by his Preaching and Eloquence, but in all respects he gave them such a prevailing Example, that it is difficult to deter∣mine whether he spake or lived better. He was so valiant a  of the Catholick Faith, that he thereby contracted the displeasure and hatred of the greatest Princes; but by no Force, or Power, or Menace was removed one step from his Resolution. Finally, his good∣will towards all men was such, that he cherished and relieved the Poor, redeemed Captives, releas'd insolvent Debtours, and asserted the Cause of Widows and Orphans against potent Oppressours in such a manner, that he deserved the Name of a common Father and . Soon after his entrance upon the Pontificate, with the Consent of the Clergy of Rome he excommunicated and deposed the Emperour Leo for his having rased the Pictures of the Saints out of the Churches and destroyed their Images, and also for not being Orthodox in O∣pinion concerning the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father. In the mean time Luithprandus King of the Lombards, from an ambi∣tious desire of enlarging his Dominions, having possess'd himself of all the Towns round about, lays Siege to Rome it self; whereupon Gre∣gory forthwith dispatches Messengers by Sea, it not being safe for them to pass by Land, to Charles Prince of the French, to pray him that he would speedily aid the distressed City and Church of Rome. Indeed formerly the Popes when they were in any great Danger from abroad, had been wont to seek for succour from the Emperour of Constanti∣nople; but Gregory now declined it, both for the Causes we have just before mentioned, and also especially because Leo was now hard put to it to defend Constantinople it self against the Saracens, and therefore little able to protect others. By which means it came to pass, that the Constantinopolitan Emperours being for the time to come unap∣plied to, the Protection of the Church was from henceforward put in∣to other hands. Upon Gregorie's Request Charles undertaking the Church's Patronage, desires Luithprandus as his Friend, and particular∣ly upon the account of his Son Pipin his near Allie, to quit his En∣terprize, and not give the Pope any disturbance; whereupon Luith∣prandus raises the Siege. The  of Italy being thus composed, Charles turns his Army with success against the Burgundians; crushes the Idolatrous Prison's; takes Lions, Arles, and Marseilles from the , who thereupon invite to their Aid Athimus the King of the Saracens. Who passing the Rhone takes Avignon by Storm, intending to make use of the convenience of that place for a Citadel. But Charles
upon Intelligence hereof, hastens thither with his Army, and re-takes Avignon, putting to the Sword all the Saracens who were in Garrison in it. From thence he marched to Narbonne, whither he understood that Athimus had fled. But having advice that Amoreus, another Sa∣racen King of Spain was coming with a great Army to the Aid of Athi∣mus, he quitted the Siege of Narbonne, and march'd to the Valley of Corbiere, not far off, wherein there was a fair Plain very commodious to joyn Battel in. Amoreus thinking that Charles having been routed had fled thither, enters the Valley, and prepares to engage; which Charles did not decline, though the number of the Adversaries Army was incredibly great. The  having continued for some time very warm, and Amoreus himself having been slain at the beginning of the Engagement, at length the Saracens were forced to betake them∣selves to slight, and a great part of them were kill'd in the Fens and  thereabouts. Athimus, as good luck would have it, making his Escape by Sea towards the farther part of Spain, in Rage and De∣spair, lay'd  by Fire and Sword all the Islands which he arrived at in his passage. Much about this time the Body of S. Augustine, which two hundred and fifty years before, when the Vandals wasted A∣frica, had been carried away from Hippo into Sardinia, was by the care of Luithprandus translated thence to Pavia, and reposited in a very honourable place of Interrment. The Saracens being now pretty well tamed, kept themselves within the Pyrenean Hills; upon which all the Visigoths who possessed the hither parts of Spain and part of France, being not able to defend themselves, were subdued by Charles; and so that People who had domineer'd for almost three hundred years were utterly extinguished, except some few who were saved by the People of Barcelona. Some write that Charles was in this War assisted by Luithprandus with Men, who after the Victory returned home laden with Booty. In the mean while Pope Gregory not neglecting to im∣prove the time of Peace he now enjoyed, applyed himself to Church∣work. The Altar of S. Peter's he made more stately by erecting a Row of six Pillars of Onyx on each hand of it, where as many of the same magnitude and figure had formerly stood, but were now decayed through . Upon these Pillars were Architraves gilt with Silver; on which he set up the Images of our Saviour and the Apostles at equal distances. He built also an Oratory in the same Church, in which he reposited some of the Reliques of almost all the Saints, and ordered Mass to be therein daily performed, in the Canon of which he added these words, which were engraven upon the Marble round the Oratory, Quorum Solennitas in conspectu tuoe Majeslatis celebratur, Domine Deus noster, toto in Orbe terrarum. &c. i. e. Whose Anniversaries are celebrated in the sight of thy Majesty, O Lord our God, throughout all the World, &c. which Clause is not in the general Canon now used. Moreover, he gave to this Church several Vessels of Silver; and caused to be made at his own Charge the Image of the Blessed Virgin with our Saviour in her Arms, of Gold, which he placed in the Church of S. Mary ad Proesepe. He also repaired the Roof of the Church of S. Chry∣sogonus, appointing Monks for the daily performance of divine Service therein, and setling an Estate for their Maintenance. Several Monaste∣ries he either repaired, or built from the ground, to the Recluses where∣of
he prescribed Rules of strict and holy living. He re-built also the ruined Walls of the City of Rome, and in like manner those of the al∣most desolate Civita Vecchia. Furthermore, he ordained the Celebra∣tion of Mass in the Church of S Peter almost without Intermission, both by the Priests in Weekly Attendance, and by the Monks; upon which account we may observe the Cells of the Monks and the Houses of the Secular Priests to be in several places contiguous, each of them striving to out do the other in diligence at their Devotion, Our Gre∣gory having well discharged his Duty towards God and Men, died in the tenth year, eighth Month and twenty fourth day of his Pontifi∣cate, and was with general lamentation buried in S. Peter's November the 28th. The See was then vacant only eight days. ZACHARIAS I. ZACHARIAS, a Grecian, the Son of Polychronius, is rec∣koned in the number of the best Popes. For he was a Person of a very mild Disposition, and wonderfully sweet Conversation; every way deserving; a Lover of the Clergy and People of Rome; slow to Anger, but very forward to exercise Mercy and Cle∣mency; rendring to no man evil for evil, but in Imitation of our Sa∣viour overcoming evil with good, and that to such a degree, that after his arriving to the Papal Dignity he preferred and enriched those who had envied and hated him. At the beginning of his Pontificate find∣ing Italy enflamed in War, in order to procure a Peace he forthwith sends Legates to Luithprandus King of the Lombards, who now made War upon Transamundus Duke of Spoleto. But these Legates not ef∣fecting the Design, he himself goes in person, accompanied with the Roman Clergy, into Sabina; and 'tis said that in sign of honour the King met him eight miles from Narni, and alighting off his Horse, ac∣companied him on Foot into the City. The day following, while they were at Mass, the Pope made publickly an Elegant Oration, wherein he set forth the Duty of a Christian King both in the time of Peace and War; and 'tis reported that the King was so wrought upon by it, that he presently put the sole Power of accommodating matters into the Pope's hands. The King had already deposed Transamund, and invested Agrandus, his Nephew, in the Dukedom. Yet at the Pope's Intercession Transamund was received into favour; but he quitting all Pretensions to the Dukedom, entred into holy Orders. All the Towns which had been taken in Sabina were restored; as also Narni and Anco∣na, and whatever places the Lombards had for thirty years past made themselves Masters of in Tuscany. Moreover, all who had been made Prisoners during the War were set at Liberty. Luithprandus, having been treated by the Pope with all imaginable expressions of Indear∣ment and Respect, marched thence peaceably with his Army, and not long after died, in the thirty second year of his Reign. He was a person who deserved that Kingdom both for his extraordinary Wisdom
and Prudence, and also for his Valour and warlike Temper, in which no man excell'd him; so eminent also for Justice and Clemency, that it is hard to judg whether of these two Vertues were more conspicuous in him. His Nephew, Aldeprandus, succeeded him in the Kingdom, which having held only six months he also died; and Duke Rachis, a Prince whose Piety and Integrity deserve the highest praise, was unanimously chosen in his stead. By him also a League was renewed with the Pope, to whose Legates the devout and religious King graciously granted whatever they desired. But having reigned four years, he quitted his Government, and betook himself to a Monastick Life, encouraging his Wife and his Sons to do the like. His Brother Aistulphus succeeded him, whose crafty and fierce Temper threatned disturbance to all Italy, but especially to the Pope and the Romans, whom he designed by Force to bring under his Jurisdiction. In the mean time Charles Martel, be∣ing seiz'd with a violent sickness, at the persuasion of his Friends divi∣ded his Acquests between his two Sons; of whom Caroloman, the elder, had Austrasia and Suevia, and  Burgundy and part of France. And so that valiant and wise man died at Cressey sur Serre, in the thirty fifth year of his Office of Mayre of the Palace, and was buried at Paris in the Church of S. Dennis. He had had by a former Wife another Son named Grypho, whose rapacious Temper suited with his Name; he pre∣vailed with the warlike Saxons to assist him in making War upon his Brethren. But  and Pipin entring Saxony with an Army, force their Prince Theodoric to submission. After this Expedition Caroloman comes to Rome, and there renouncing the Pomp and Glory of Empire, he goes to Mount Cassino, and takes the habit of a Monk of S. Bene∣dict. But Pipin being of an aspiring Mind, sends Ambassadours to the Pope, desiring that by his Authority he would confirm to him the Kingdom of France. The Pope upon the score of former good Services performed by his Family, and the ancient Friendship which had been between them and the Popes his Predecessours, yields to his Request, and accordingly confirms him, An. Dom. 753. and so from Mayre of the Palace, who was the first Officer of the Kingdom, Pipin was advanc'd to the Kingdom of France it self, from whom the succeeding Kings de∣rive their Original. 'Tis reported that Caroloman, who, as we have said, had taken the habit of a Monk, came now, with others of the same Order, from Mount Cassino to Pope Zachary, desiring that by his mediation they might gain leave to remove the Body of S. Benedict, which had by  been carried away to the Abbey of Fleury in the Kingdom of France. The Pope granted their Desire, and there∣upon sent a Message to King Pipin, who upon Information in the mat∣ter, freely gave way to it. Zachary now enjoying Peace on every side, set himself to the repairing of several decayed Churches. The Tower and Portico before the Lateran Church he built from the ground, made the Windows and Gates of Brass, and upon the Frontispiece of the Portico caused a Map of the World to be delineated. He renewed the defaced Images of the Saints; enlarged and beautified the Lateran Palace; repaired the Palatine Library, and assigned to every Church a Revenue for the maintenance of Oyl for their Lamps. He gave to S. Pe∣ter's an Altar-Cloth embroidered with Gold and set with Jewels, having the Essigies of our Blessed Saviour wrought upon it. He built the
Church of S. George in Velabro, and reposited the head of that Saint therein; as also the Church of S. Coecilia, in the Via Tiburtina, six miles from the City, and in it an Oratory in honour to S. Cyrus the Abbat; setling a maintenance for the Priests that ministred in it. He re-built the Roof of the Church of S. Eusebius, which happened in his time to tumble down. He also gave order that his Servants should daily di∣stribute and give out at the Lateran Palace Alms to the Poor of all sorts. Moreover, he forbad the Venetians, upon pain of Excommunica∣tion, the selling of Christian Slaves to Saracens and Heathens, which those Merchants were before wont to do. Finally, that we may not think that his Advancement to so great a Dignity made him neglect his Studies, he translated out of Latin into Greek four Books of Gregory in Dialogue; that so the Grecians might be instructed in the Rules of good living. But having with such Integrity to the Satisfaction of all men governed the Church ten years, three months, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, March the 15th. By his Death the See was vacant twelve days. STEPHEN II. STEPHEN the Second, a Roman, Son of Constantine, from one Degree in the Church to another, ascended at length to the Papal Dignity; although upon the Death of Zachary the People presently made Choice of another Stephen a Priest; who on the third day of his Pontificate awaking out of Sleep, and be∣ginning to settle his domestick affairs, was suddenly seiz'd with a fit of an Apoplexy, of which he died. After whom our Stephen the Se∣cond, (for we reckon not his short-liv'd Predecessour of that name in the List) was unanimously elected by the Clergy and People in the Church of S. Mary ad Proesepe, and being highly beloved by all was carried upon mens shoulders to S. Saviour's, called also the Constanti∣nian Church, and from thence into the Lateran Palace. He was a Per∣son of extraordinary Piety and Prudence, a Lover of the Clergy, a Re∣pairer of Churches, a diligent Preacher and Writer of the Doctrine of Christianity, a Father of the Poor, a zealous Defender of Orphans and Widows, and in going through with any thing he undertook, hardy and resolute, but not obstinate. For Aistulphus now making Inrodes upon the Borders of the Romans, he at first endeavoured by Persuasions and Presents to bring him off. But that covetous Prince requiring the payment of a Tribute of so much a head yearly from the People, the Pope thereupon was forced to seek for help from abroad, and accord∣ingly he sent Nuntio's to Constantine the Emperour of Constantinople, to desire Aid of him against Aistulphus, who gave disturbance to all Italy, and had already taken Ravenna the Seat of the Exarchate, and a great part of Romagna. But finding no hope of succours from him, he re∣solves to go to Pipin of France; and therefore sends to that King to desire that he would prevail with Aistulphus to permit him safe passage through his Countrey; which Aistulphus at Pipin's Request consented
to. Stephen now reaching the Borders of the Kingdom of France, Pipin's Son Charles, who from his mighty Atchievements was afterwards surnamed the Great, in token of honour goes forth an hundred miles to meet him. Pipin himself met him three miles from the City, & alighting off his Horse kiss'd his feet and led the Horse upon which he rode by the Bridle till he had conducted him into the City, and brought him to his Apartment. Ai∣stulphus now fearing that the Pope was practising against him, sends Caro∣loman a Monk to his Brother Pipin, to persuade him not to make War upon the Lombards in Stephen's Quarrel; which Pipin not only refused to grant, but also confined the Monk to a Monastery in Vienne, where not long after he died of Grief. But it not being a fit season of the year to undertake an Expedition, and Pipin allowing much to the an∣cient Friendship there had been between them, he sends Ambassadours to Aistulphus, to advise him to restore the Places he had taken, or other∣wise to let him know that he should be obliged in a short time to re∣cover them by force of Arms. Aistulphus hearkned not to this good Counsel; whereupon Pipin, the Spring now approaching, advances with an Army against the Lombards; and having sent before some light-har∣nessed Soldiers to force Aistulphus's Guards to quit the Passes of the Alps, he marches down into the Plain of the State of Milain, and ha∣ving without any opposition sacked and harassed all places he came to, at length he invests Pavia the Seat-Royal of the Kings of Lombardy, which Aistulphus and those that were in Garrison with him defended. But Stephen moved with Compassion at the numerous Calamities which this obstinate man had brought upon himself and his People, volunta∣rily offers Aistulphus a Peace, upon condition he would restore what he had taken; which Aistulphus at length consented to, and promised upon Oath more than was demanded. Pipin reckoning that the Pope had now satisfaction, raises the Siege, and returns into France, leaving Varrenus the Arbitratour of this Peace between them. Stephen and Varrenus go to Rome, not doubting but that Aistulphus would in a little time perform his promise; instead of which he presently mustering up from all parts what Forces he could, with a tumultuary Rout rather than a just Army, follows them, and besieges Rome, laying waste and burning the Suburbs and Places adjacent, insomuch that the People of Rome suffered more Damage by the Outrages he then committed, than they had received in three hundred forty four years before from the declining of the Empire. Hereupon Pipin being again sued to by the Pope to aid the distressed City of Rome against the Perfidiousness and Cruelty of Aistulphus, he with all possible expedition raises an Army for that purpose. In the mean time the Turks willing to mend their Quarters, over-run and conquer the Alanes first, then the Colchians and Armenians, after them the People of the Lesser Asia, and lastly the Persians and Saracens, An. Dom. 755. Some Writers tell us, that these were of the Race of those Scythians whom Alexander the Great kept within the Hyperborean Mountains with Iron-Bars, meaning by that Metaphor, that he had shut up that wild Nation there as into a Prison. But after much mischief done and received on both sides, a Peace be∣ing concluded between the Saracens and Turks, it was agreed that the Turks which dwelt in Persia should be called Saracens; and by this means the Saracens did more patiently suffer the Turks to bear sway
in Asia, especially apprehending moreover that they might soon be brought to embrace the Mahumetan Religion. But we return to Pipin, who coming again with his Army into Italy, was met by Gregory principal Secretary to the Emperour Constantine the fourth; who desired him in his Master's name, that is he should prove victorious over the Lom∣bards, he would not give the Exarchate of Ravenna to the Pope or the Romans, it belonging of right to the Emperour. To which Pipin answered, that he came into Italy to do the Pope and People a kind∣ness, and that he should consult their advantage to the utmost of his Power. After this he marched to Pavia, and reduced Aistulphus to such extremity, that he was forced to accept of the former Conditions of Peace. Hereby the Exarchate was restored to the Romans, together with all the Tract contained between the Po and Apennine, from Pia∣centino to the Gulf of Venice, and whateyer lies between the River Isa∣ra, the Apennine and the Adriatick, with all that Aistulphus had taken in Tuscany and Sabina. Pipin stayed at the Foot of the Alps till Con∣ditions should be performed, having left Holcadus an Abbat with part of his Army to oblige Aistulphus to perform what he had promis'd, and moved no farther till he understood that Aistulphus had died of an Apoplexy while he was hunting, before the surrendry was fully made. Upon his Death, Desiderius, Duke of Tuscany, forthwith raises an Army of Lombards, with design to possess himself of the Kingdom. The same also did Rachis, Aistulphus's Brother, who had before, as we have al∣ready said, taken the habit of a Monk; and indeed the Lombards ge∣nerally, except those of Tuscany, were on his side. But Desiderius by making large Promises to the Pope and the Romans, wrought them into a favour of his Pretensions; and accordingly they with all speed sent Ambassadours, and among them Holcadus the Abbat to Rachis to re∣quire him to lay down his Arms, and submit to Desiderius. And so Faenza and Ferrara were at last delivered to the Pope, and the name of the Exarchate, which had continued from the time of Narses to the taking of Ravenna by Aistulphus an hundred and seventy years, was ex∣tinguished. Things being now peaceably setled, and the Jurisdiction of the Church greatly encreased, Stephen holding a Synod, takes an ac∣count of his several Flocks and their Pastors; gently chastises those who had offended; directs such as had gone astray; teaches and in∣structs the ignorant; and finally sets before them the Duty of a Bishop, of a Presbyter, and of all Orders in the Clergy. Moreover, he ap∣pointed Litanies for the appeasing of the Divine Anger; the Procession on the first Saturday to be to S. Marie's ad Proesepe, on the second to S. Peter's in the Vatican, on the third to S. Paul's in the Via Ostiensis. He also repaired several Churches which had been damaged by Aistul∣phus while he layed Siege to the City; yet he did not recover the Re∣liques of the Saints which that King had carried with him to Pavia, and there reposited not dishonourably in divers Churches. The good man having by these means proved serviceable to God, his Countrey, and the Church, died in the fifth year and first month of his Pontificate, and was buried April the 26th, with general lamentation as for the loss of a Common Father. The See was then vacant thirty two days.
PAUL I. PAUL, a Roman, son of , Brother of Stephen the se∣cond, became well skill'd and practiced in all things belong∣ing to a Churchman by his having been educated in the La∣teran Palace under Pope Gregory the second, and Pope Za∣chay, by which latter he was, together with his Brother, ordained Deacon; and when upon the Vacancy of the Popedom by the Death of Stephen, some persons proposed Theophylact the Arch-Deacon for his Successour, yet others stood for Paul, as one who both for the Integri∣ty of his Life, and great Learning, deserved to succeed his Brother in that Dignity. After a long Dispute therefore Theophylact was rejected, and Paul by general suffrage chosen, in the time of Constantine and Leo. This Paul was a person of an extraordinary meek and merciful Temper, and who in Imitation of our Saviour never returned to any man evil for evil, but on the contrary by doing good to them he overcame those ill men that had oftentimes injur'd him. He was of so kind and com∣passionate a Nature, as that he would go about by night with only two or three Attendants to the Houses of poor sick people, assisting them with his Counsel, and relieving them with his Alms. He also frequently visited the Prisons, and paying their Creditors, discharged thence multitudes of poor Debtours. The Fatherless and Widows that were over-reach'd by the tricks of Lawyers he defended by his Authority and supported by his Charity. Moreover, having assembled the Clergy and People of Rome, he did with great solemnity translate the Body of S. Petronilla S. Peter's Daughter, with her Tomb of Marble upon which was this Inscription, Petronilloe Filioe dulcissimoe, from the Via Appia into the Vatican, and placed it at the upper end of the Church dedicated to her Father. At this time the Emperour Constantine having in all places plucked down the Images, and put to death Constantine Patriarch of Constantinople for opposing him therein, and made Nicetas an Eunuch, his Abettour in the Sacriledg, Patriach in his stead, the Pope consulting by all means the Interest of Religion, sends Nuntios to Constantinople to advise the Emperour to restore and set up again the Images he had taken away, or upon his refusal so to do, to threaten him with the Censure of Excommunication. But Constantine persisting obstinately in what he had done, not only despised this good Counsel, but also granted Peace to Sabinus King of the Bulgarians, because he also made the like havock of Images with himself, though he were before engaged in a War against him. Having also associated to himself into part of the Empire his Son Leo the fourth, whom he had married to the most beau∣tiful Athenian Lady Irene, he enters into a League with the Saracens, thereby to despite and provoke the Orthodox Christians. In the mean time Pipin entirely subdues Taxillo Duke of the Bojarians, and admits of a League with the Saxons, but upon this Condition, that they should be obliged to send three hundred Horsemen to his Assistance as often as he should have occasion to make an Expedition. Against the Aqui∣tains
he maintained a tedious War, which at length he committed to the management of his young Son Charles, himself being so worn out with Age that he could not be present at it. This War being ended, Charles takes by Storm Bourbon, Clermont, and several other Towns of Auvergne. But Pipin, who as we have said was now very old, not long after dies, leaving in the Kingdom his two Sons Charles and Caroloman. Some tell us that Aistulphus King of the Lombards, who, as is above declared, had carried away the Bodies of divers Saints from Rome to Pavia, died at this time; and that he had built Chappels to those Saints, aud also a Cloister for Virgins. in which his own Daughters became Nuns. He was an extraordinary Lover of the Monks, and died in their Arms, in the sixth year and fifth month of his Reign. At the be∣ginning of his Government, he was fierce and rash, in the end mode∣rate; and a person of such Learning, that he reduc'd and form'd the E∣dicts of the Lombards into Laws. He was, as has been said, succeeded by Duke Desiderius; the Valour of the Lombards beginning now to dis∣solve and lose it self in Luxury. Our Paul, having repaired some old decayed Churches, died in S. Paul's in the Via Ostiensis, in the tenth year and first month of his Pontificate; and his Body was with very great Solemnity carried into the Vatican. The See was then vacant one year, one month. STEPHEN III. STEPHEN the third, a Sicilian, Son of Olibrius, entred upon the Pontificate, A. D. 768. a learned man, and in the management of Affairs, especially those belonging to the Church, very active and steddy. Coming to Rome very young, by ap∣pointment of Pope Gregory III. he took Orders and became a Monk in the Monastery of S. Chrysogonus, where he was inured to the stricter way of living, and instructed in Ecclesiastical Learning. Being after∣wards called by Pope Zachary into the Lateran Palace, and his Life and Learning generally approved of, he was constituted Parish-Priest of S. Caetilia; and for his great Integrity and readiness in Business both Zachary and his Successours, Stephen and Paul would always have him near their Persons. But upon the Death of Paul, whom our Stephen never deserted to his last Breath, Desiderius, who, as we have said, was by the Assistance of Stephen II. made King of Lombardy, being by Pipin's Death rid of all fear, encourages Toto Duke of Nepi to promote his Brother Constantine to the Pontificate by force of Arms, if he could not compass it by canvassing and bribery. He accordingly marches to Rome with an Army, and with the Assistance of some whom he had corrupted and made his Friends by Gifts and Promises, gets Constantine to be elected Pope. Indeed there were those who set up one Philip against him, but he was presently forced to quit his Pretensions, and Gregory Bishop of Praeneste compelled to initiate Constantine, who at the time of his choice was a Laick, into holy Orders, and then to consecrate
him Bishop; the hands of which Gregory are said thereupon by Miracle to have so withered that he could not reach them to his Mouth. But Constantine having persisted to exercise the Papal Function for one year, was at length in great Rage and Disdain deposed by the People of Rome, and Stephen unanimously chosen in his stead. Upon which Con∣stantine being brought into S. Saviour's Church, and the sacred Canons read, he was publickly and solemnly divested of the Pontifical Habit, and commanded to lead a private life in a Monastery. After this, Ste∣phen being consecrated by three Bishops in the Church of S. Adrian, and saluted as the true Pope by all the Clergy and People of Rome, ap∣plied himself to the censuring and suppressing of the Practices of some ill men who endeavoured to break the Unity of the Roman Church. Therefore calling a Council, he writes to Charles desiring him to send to Rome, as soon as might be, some Bishops of France, by their Learn∣ing and Integrity well qualified for the Affair. The same also he writes to the other Christian Princes; who all complying with him therein, a Council is held in the Lateran Church, where the Fathers having dis∣coursed among themselves divers things tending to the setling of the Church, they ordered Constantine to be brought before them. For the underhand-dealings of Desiderius King of the Lombards, and Paul A∣phiarta having occasioned frequent tumults among the People; Desi∣derius endeavouring all he could to alienate the Affections of the Ro∣mans from Charles to the Emperour; hereupon several were killed on both sides, and Constantine, the occasion of all the mischief, had his Eyes put out by the contrary Faction, though Stephen declared against it, and did what he could to prevent it; but there is no opposing a furious, enraged Multitude. Constantine appearing before the Council, and being accused that he had usurped the Apostolick See not being in any holy Orders, lays all the fault upon the People, and especially upon some particular Persons who forced him against his Will to take the Pontificate upon him. Then prostrating himself upon the floor, and humbly begging Pardon, the persons present moved with Compassion, ordered him to be dismissed, and put off the Debate of his whole Case to the next day, intending then more maturely to deliberate what ought to be done in the matter. But the next day Constantine returning to the Council, was quite of another mind, and remonstrated that he had Precedents of former Prelates for what he had done; that Sergius Arch∣Bishop of Ravenna, and Stephen of Naples, had been of Laicks conse∣crated Bishops. The Fathers resenting this Impudence, caused him to be cast out with Disgrace, and having nulled his Decrees, applied them∣selves to the setling of the State of Christianity. Among other things it was unanimously decreed by them, That no Laick, but such only as had pass'd through the several Degrees in the Clergy, should presume to take the Popedom, upon pain of Excommunication. It was ordained likewise, that those who had attained to the Episcopal Dignity in the time of Constantine, should renounce that Character, and fall back into the same Rank and Order which they were of before; but with this Reserve, that if their Life and Doctrine were approved by the People, it then pleased the Council, that upon their application to the Apostolick See, they might be consecrated anew. The same was judged meet con∣cerning Presbyters and Deacons; yet it was forbidden that any of them
should arrive to the greater Degrees, upon a Jealousie, as I believe, lest some Errour or Sect might thence arise, as from a Seminary of Discord and Sedition. Moreover it was decreed, that all the sacred Offices which Constantine had performed, should be deemed null, except only Baptism and Confirmation. Finally, having made void the Constanti∣nian Synod, in which the Greek Prelates had decreed that the Pictures and Statues of the Saints should be defaced and thrown out of Churches, it was ordained that those Images should be in all places , and an Anathema pass'd upon that execrable and pernicious Synod, by which the condition of the Immortal God was rendred worse than that of Men; it being allowed us to erect the Statues of men who have de∣served well of the Publick, both for the expressing of our Gratitude, and the raising our Emulation of their brave Deeds, but forbidden to set up the Image of our Saviour, whom we ought if it were possible to have always before our Eyes, whether we consider the mighty Ob∣ligations he has laid upon Mankind, or the Dignity of his Divine Na∣ture. These things having thus pass'd according to the Popes mind, it was Decreed, that on the following day there should be a Solemn Procession, both to return thanks to God, and also in order to the averting of his Displeasure. This Procession was made from the Lateran Church to S. Peter's, with universal great Devotion, the Pope himself, with all that were present, walking Bare-foot. But in our times Piety and Devotion are grown so cold, that such Expressions of Humility are not only laid aside, but men are so proud as  to vouchsale to pray at all. Even the more eminent and dignisied persons, instead of weeping at Procession or at Mass, as these holy Fathers were wont to do, are employed in indecent and shameless laughter;  of sing∣ing Hymns, which they disdain as a servile thing, they are breaking . and telling Stories among themselves to make each other merry. What should I say further? the more petulant and full of Buffoonry any one is, the more he is commended in such a corrupt Age. Our present Clergy does dread severe and grave Men; as being more de∣sirous to live thus licentiously, than  be obedient to good Admoni∣tions. and subject to wholesom Restraints; by which means the  Religion does daily suffer and decline. I return to Stephen, who when the Procession was over, forthwith caused the Acts of the Coun∣cil to be first openly pronounced by his Commissary, and then pub∣lished in Writing, threatning Excommunication against any who should presume to oppose what the Holy Synod had decreed. But not long after Sergius Arch-bishop of Ravenna dying, Michael, Register of that Church, with the Assistance of King Desiderius and Maurice Duke of Rimini, whom he had corrupted with Bribes, though a meer Laick, possesses himself of the See, in opposition to Leo the Arch-deacon whom the Clergy were very desirous to chuse. Yea these Abettours of his pre∣sumed so far. as to send Ambassadours to Pope Stephen to bribe him into the Consirmation of this Michael. But Stephen not only resused their offers of Money, but also published an Excommunication against him, if he resigned not the See which he had against all Right usurped. However, he forcibly kept possession of it so long as he had any thing , either of his own or belonging to the Church, whereof to make a  to greedy . Upon which the Pope sending his Nun-tio's,
and King Charles his Ambassadours to Ravenna about that Affair, who declared the Popes pleasure therein, Michael was forthwith de∣posed, and Leo chosen, and confirmed by the Pope. Who being for that Reason secretly despited and mischief'd by Desiderius, begs Charles to oblige Desiderius to cease injuring him any farther. This Charles performed with great diligence, though he were not in a condition to restrain the Lombard by Force, because upon the Death of his Brother, who had reign'd jointly and amicably with him for two years, he was necessarily engaged in several Wars at once. The Aquitains, against whom his Father had begun a War, he brought into subjection, and subdued the Gascons inhabiting part of Aquitain. Then passing the Pyrenean Hills, he routed the Saracens, pursuing them to the River Betis, as far as Granada, the part of Spain wherein the Saracens are now seated. In the mean time Stephen, a most vigilant Pastor, and true successour of Peter and imitatour of Christ, having been in the Chair three years, five months, twenty seven days, died and was buried in S. Peter's. The See was then vacant nine days. ADRIAN I. ADRIAN the first, a Roman, Son of Theodorus one of the prime Nobility, entring upon the Pontificate, degenerated not at all from his Ancestours; being a Person who for his great∣ness of Mind, Prudence, Learning and Sanctity may be com∣pared with the best of Popes; and of whose Interest and Authority De∣siderius King of the  had such Apprehensions, that he present∣ly sent Ambassadours to treat of a Peace and Alliance with him. But Adrian being acquainted with the extream Perfidiousness of that King, deferred the concluding any thing therein to another time. Now after the Death of Caroloman, his Relict Bertha, out of Envy towards the Grandeur of Hildegarda the Great Charles's Consort, by the Advice of one Adoarius flies with her Sons into Italy to King Desiderius; who re∣ceived her very kindly and honourably, both because he thought he should by this means be less in danger from the Power of France, and also reckoned that the French upon setting up Caroloman's Sons would the sooner appear in Arms against King Charles if he should give him any Disturbance. But not being able by Intreaties to prevail with A∣drian to anoint these sons of Caroloman Kings, he applies himself to forcible means, and invading the State of Ravenna, which was under the Popes Jurisdiction, he takes Faenza and Comacchio. Ravenna was at this time under the Government of its Arch-bishop and three Tribunes, who forthwith desired Aid of Adrian. The Pope at first sends to Deside∣rius, admonishing him to contain himself within his own Territories, and not to invade the Rights of the Church. But understanding after∣wards that this King had also possess'd himself of Urbin, Senigaglia, and Eugubio, he then began to threaten him with the Approach of Divine Vengeance towards him for the Violation of Peace. To which the
Lombard made no other Reply, than that Adrian ought to quit the In∣terest of the French King, and to be of His side. For it was his great Design to make a Breach between Chorles and the Pope; which when he could not obtain by Solicitations and Promises, he threatned to be∣siege Rome it self within a little time. He was already come to Spoleto, with Aldagasius Caroloman's Son; but intended to march from thence to Rome, though in a peaceable manner, and, as he pretended, out of De∣votion. But Adrian having caused the Reliques of all the Churches without the Walls to be brought into the City, sends three Bishops to Desiderius to forbid him entring the Confines of Rome upon pain of Excommunication; who thereupon fearing lest he might incurr the di∣vine Displeasure, presently returned into Lombardy. In the mean time Charles receiving from Adrian Intelligence of the injury which had been done him, sends Ambassadours to Desiderius to persuade him to re∣store what he had wrongfully taken from the Pope, or otherwise to let him know that he would soon visit him with such an Army as should oblige him to it. Desiderius notwithstanding all this refuses it; and so on both sides great Armies are prepared. But Charles having sent some part of his Forces before to  the Passes of the Alpes, with wonderful Expedition leads the main Body of his Army over Monte Cenisio into Itely, where encountring Desiderius, he vanquishes and puts him to flight, and then takes and spoils his whole Countrey. Desiderius after so great an Overthrow despairing to get the better in a pitch'd Battel, retreats to Pavia, having sent his Wife and Children to Verona. And the people of Spoleto, Ricti, and all the Lombards inha∣biting those Parts, hearing his Misfortune, betake themfelves to Rome, and commit their Persons and Estates to the Popes Protection, taking an Oath of Fidelity to him, and shavfng their Heads and Beards, which among that People was the greatest sign and Token of a perfect Sub∣mission to his Power and Jurisdiction. By their Example those of Ancona, Osimo, and  did the like. Now to such of these Lom∣bards as were unwilling to return into their own Countrey, the Vati∣can Hill was granted them to inhabit and seat themselves in; whither afterwards there was from all parts a great concourse of other their Countrey-men, who chose to live there. But Charles leaving his Cou∣sin-German Bernardus at the Siege of , marches with part of his Army to Verona, which City upon the inclination of Bertha and Caroloman's Sons to the French side, in a little time after surrendred to him; though Aldegisius, Desiderius his Son, escaping thence fled to the Emperour of Constantinople. Almost all the Cities of Lombardy beyond the Po, having in like manner yielded to Charles, he goes towards Rome, that he might there celebrate the Feast of Easter with the Pope. At his Approach to the City, he was in Complement met by three thousand Judges, as  tells us, calling them Judges who were not Handycrafts-men or did not exercise any mean Trades. Adrian with his Clergy expected him at the Steps of S Peter, and at his com∣ing embraced him with all imaginable Affection, but could not restrain the humble King from kissing his Feet. The usual Salutations and Re∣spects having pass'd on both sides, they entred the Church, and being come up to the Altar, Charles and the Pope, the Romans and the French, took a mutual Oath to maintain a perpetual Friendship, and to be Ene∣mies
to the Enemies of each other. After which, Charles making his Entrance into the City, devoutly visited all the Churches, and made several Presents to them. Four days after his being there, he by Oath confirmed, and amply enlarged the Donation of his Father Pipin to Gre∣gory the third, containing, according to Anastasius, in  all that reaches from the long since demolished City Luna to the Alpes, the Isle of Corfica, and the whole Tract between Luca and Parma, together with Friuli, the Exarchate of Ravenna, and the Dukedoms of Spoleto and Benevent. These Affairs being thus setled, Charles taking his leave of Adrian returns into Lombardy, and becomes Master of Pavia on the sixth month after the investing of it. Towards Desiderius howe∣ver he was so favourable, as that though he berest him of his Kingdom, yet he spared his Life, and only confined him with his Wife and Chil∣dren to Lyons. Advancing thence again Arachis Duke of Benevent, who was Son-in-law to Desiderius, and had been an Abettour of his rash Proceedings, he soon forced him to sue for a Peace, and recei∣ved his two Sons for Hostages. After this in his Passage farther he religiously visited Mount Cassino, and confirmed all the Grants which had been made by other Princes to the Monastery of S. Benedict. And so the Affairs of all Italy being composed, and strong Guards left in the most important places of Lombardy, he returns with great Spoil and mighty Glory into his Kingdom or France, carrying with him his Brother Caroloman's Relict and Sons, whom he always treated with Respect and Honour; and also Paul a Deacon of the Church of Aqui∣leia, a Person for his Parts and Learning highly belov'd by Desiderius, to whom he gave his Freedom, and had for some time a great Esteem for him. But understanding afterwards that the man was assisting to a Design of Desiderius's his Flight, he banish'd him into the Island of Tremiti; from whence after some years making his Escape, and com∣ing to Arachis, at the Request of Adelperga Daughter to Desiderius and the Wife of Arachis, he added two Books to the History of Eutro∣pius, giving an account of what passed from the time of the Emperour Julian to that of Justinian the first. After the Death of Arachis, he betook himself to the Monastery of Cassino, where leading the remain∣der of his life very devoutly, he oftentimes wrote elegant and obliging Letters to Charles, and received again the like from that King, who had preserved him for the sake of his Learning. Thus ended the Kingdom of the Lombards, in the two hundred and fourth year after their coming into Italy, and in the year of our Lord seven hundred se∣venty six. Charles now without any delay marches against the idola∣trous Saxons, who during his absence in Italy had rebelled; uttterly subdues that People, with whom he had been engaged in War for thirty years before, and compells them to receive Christianity. Then turning his Army against the Spaniards, who were also fallen away from the Faith, he took the Cities of Pampelona and Saragoza, and per∣mitted his Souldiers to plunder them; not granting a Peace to these Spaniards, but upon condition they would entirely embrace the Chri∣stian Doctrine. After this returning into France, matters having went according to his mind, as he passed the Pyrenean Hills he fell into an Ambuscade of the Gascons, in engaging with whom though he gallantly defended himself, yet he lost Anselmus and Egibardus two brave Com∣manders.
Some tell us that in this Encounter Rolandus, Charles's Si∣ster's Son, perished, after he had made a great slaughter of the Enemy; though whether he died of Thirst, as is commonly said, or of the wounds he received, is uncertain. At length these Gascons were vanquished by Charles, and received from him the deserved Punishment of their Revolt and Perfidy. At this time Taxillo Duke of Bojaria, Desiderius's Son-in-law, having gained the Huns to be on his side, made an Attempt of War against the French, which yet Charles by his great Expedition al∣most made an end of before it was quite begun; and to him also, upon Hostages given, he granted a Peace. While these things were transacting in France, Constantine Emperour of the East, was seized with a Leprosy, (from whence perhaps arose the groundless Opinion of the Leprosy of Constantine the Great, through the confusion of their Names) and dying left Leo the fourth his Successour; who so strangely doated upon precious Stones, that robbing the Church of S. Sophia of its Jewels, he made with them a Crown of a vast weight and value, which he wore so often, that either through the Weight, or from the coldness of the Stones in it, he shortly fell sick and died. The same I believe to have happened in our Time to Paul the Second, who so effeminately prided himself in such Ornaments, almost exhausting the Treasury of the  to purchase Jewels at any rate, that as often as he appeared publickly, instead of wearing a plain Mitre, he looked like the Picture of Cybele with Turrets on her Head; from whence, what with the weight of the Jewels and the sweat of his gross Body, I am apt to think arose that Apoplexy of which he died suddenly. After the Death of Leo, his Relict Irene and his Son Constantine managing the Em∣pire, in a Council of three  and fifty Bishops held the second time at Nice, it was , that whosoever mantained that the Images of the Saints were to be destroyed, should be censured with perpetual Excommunication. But young Constantine, through the per∣suasion of some ill men about him, treading in the Footsteps of his Fa∣ther, soon after revoked this Constitution, and wholly deprived his Mother of any share in the Administration of Affairs. Then putting away his Wife, he received to his Bed, and caused to be crowned Em∣press, Theodora one of her Maids. Moreover, he gave Order to those Commanders he had in Italy, to give disturbance to their Neighbours; but they were at the first Message terrified from any Attempts by the prevailing Authority of Charles, who at this time was advancing with his Forces against the Sclaves and Hunns, (or we may call them Hunga∣rians) because by their Incursions they had molested all the Countrey about the Danow; whom having vanquished, he marched into Franco∣nia the Countrey of his Ancestours, from whence the Franks or French derive their Name; which Province he having with ease brought to his Devotion, two years after Theophylact and Stephen two Bishops of great Note held a Synod of Frank and German Bishops, wherein that which the Greeks called the Seventh Synod, and the Felician Heresie touching the Destruction of Images, was condemned. Adrian being now by the Interest and Power of Charles secured from the fear of any warlike In∣cursions, applies himself to the repairing the City, beautifying the Churches, restoring the Aqueducts, and such like publick Works, which I need not particularly enumerate, performed at his vast Expence. But
while he was employed in these matters, there happened such an Inun∣dation of the River Tyber, as bore down a principal Gate, and Bridg, and several Buildings of the City, and did otherwise great Damage. In this Extremity Adrian took care to send Boats to convey Provisions to such as while the Waters were so high could not stir out of their Houses. And afterwards he comforted with his Advice, and support∣ed with his Charity, the principal sufferers in that Calamity; nor did he spare any Cost in repairing the publick Loss. In short, Adrian left nothing undone, that became a good Prince and excellent Pope; de∣fending the Christian Religion, maintaining the Roman Liberty, and as∣serting the Cause of the Poor, the Orphans and Widows. After he had held the Chair with great honour, twenty three years, ten months, he died, and was buried in S. Peters, December the 27th. LEO III. LEO the third, a Roman, Son of Azzupius, was upon the ac∣count of Merit advanced to the Pontificate, having been from his Youth so throughly educated and instructed in Ecclesiastical Learning, that he deserved to be preferred be∣fore all others. A modest, upright, and well-spoken Per∣son, and such a Favourer of learned Men, that he encouraged them by the Proposal of generous Rewards to resort from all Parts to him, and was wonderfully pleased with their Conversation. Moreover, to visit and exhort the sick, to relieve the Poor, to comfort the dejected, and, to reduce the erroneous by his Preaching and Admonition, in which through his Art and Eloquence he had gained a great Perfection, was his peculiar Provi∣dence. He was naturally of a meek Temper, a Lover of all Man∣kind, slow to Anger, ready to commiserate, eminent for Piety, and a vigorous Promoter and Defender of the Honour of God and his Church. Hereupon he was (as I have said) unanimously elected to the Papal See on S. Stephen's day, and the day following with general Acclama∣tions seated in S. Peter's Chair. At this time Irene, Mother of Con∣stantine the Emperour, not being able to bear her Son's ill Courses, and being instigated thereto by certain of the Citizens, returns to Con∣stantinople, puts out his Eyes, and throws him into Prison, where as an undutiful Son he miserably ended his days. In the mean time Charles having Disturbance given him on many sides, sends his Son Pi∣pin against the Hungarians, whom having worsted in several Engage∣ments, he at length totally subdued. Adelphonsus likewise King of Asturia and Gallicia, having received Auxiliary Forces from Charles, vanquished the Saracens and took Lisbon; upon the hearing of which Victory of his, the Garrison of Barcelona forthwith yielded up to Charles. Moreover, the Bavarians, who made Inroads upon the Inhabitants of Friuli, were now overcome by Henry, Charle's Lieutenant there. At this time Leo, with the Clergy and People, being employed in the Solcmn Procession  by Pope Gregory, he was through the trea∣chery
of Paschal and Campulus two of the principal Clergy, seized near the Church of S. Sylvester, stripped of his Pontifical Habit, so cruelly beaten and misused that it was thought he had been deprived both of his Sight and Speech, and then closely imprisoned in the Monastery of S. Erasmus. From whence yet soon after by the diligence of Albinus, one belonging to his Bed-chamber, he made his Escape, and was secret∣ly conveyed to the Vatican; where he lay concealed till Vinigisius Duke of Spoleto, being privately invited thereunto, came and with a  Guard of Soldiers to secure him on his way from any Violence which his Enemies might offer to him, carried him off safely to Spo∣leto. The Factious being not now able to wreak their malice upon the Persons of Leo and Albinus, express their Rage in pulling down their Houses; nay so hardy and daring were they, as to go to Charles, who was now making War upon the Saxons, and to whom they understood Leo had repaired, on purpose to complain of and accuse the Pope. But Charles deferring the debate of the matter to another time, sends the Pope to Rome with an honourable Retinue, promising that himself would be there in a little time, in order to the composing of the Af∣fairs of Italy. Leo in his passage being come as far as Ponte Molle, was there in Honour met by the Clergy and People of Rome, who con∣gratulated his Return, and introduced him into the City. And Charles without making any long stay, passing through Mentz and Noremberg into Friuli, severely chastises the Citizens of Treviso for having put to Death Henry their Governour; and having constituted another to suc∣ceed him in that Office, he thence goes first to Ravenna, and presently after to Rome, where his Presence was earnestly desired and expected. At his Entrance into the City all imaginable expressions of Honour, as good reason was, were made to him. On the eighth day of his being there, in the presence of the People and Clergy, assembled in S. Peter's Church, he asked all the Bishops, who had come thither out of all the parts of Italy and France, what their Opinion was concerning the Life aud Conversation of the Pope. But Answer was made by all with one Voice, that the Apostolick See, the Head of all Churches, ought to be judged by none, especially not by a Laick. Hereupon, Charles laying aside any farther Enquiry into the matter, Pope Leo, who extreamly wished that he might be put upon that way of purging himself, going up into the Pulpit, and holding the Gospels in his hands, declared up∣on his Oath that he was innocent of all those things which were laid to his Charge. This was done on the thirteenth day of December, A. D. 800. While things went thus at Rome, Pipin by his Fathers Order advancing against the Beneventans, who under Grimoald's Conduct made Inroads upon their Neighbours, and having given them so many Defeats, that at length they were scarce able to defend themselves within the Walls of their City; he left the farther management of that War to Vinigisius Duke of Spoleto, and returned to his Father, who was now in a short time to be crowned Emperour. For the Pope, that he might make some Requital to Charles who had deserved so well of the Church, and also because he saw that the Emperours of Constanti∣nople were hardly able to maintain that Title; upon which account Rome and all Italy had suffered great Calamities; after Mass in S. Pe∣ter's Church, with the Consent and at the Request of the People of
Rome, declares with a loud Voice the said Charles to be Emperour, and put the Imperial Diadem upon his Head, the People repeating thrice this Acclamation, Long Life and Victory to Charles Augustus, whom God has Crowned, the Great and Pacifick Emperour. Then the Pope an∣nointed him, and his Son Pipin, whom in like manner he pronounced King of Italy. Charles being now invested with Imperial Power, gave Order that Campulus and Paschal, the Conspiratours against the Pope, should be put to Death; but the Pope, who was all Clemency, obtain∣ed a Pardon of their Lives, and they were only banished into France. After this, there were some who would have persuaded Charles to ex pell all the Lombards out of Italy. But that not appearing to be a safe course, because they had mingled in Bloud and Affinity with mul∣titudes of Families in Italy, it was determined both by Charles and Leo, that the Name of Lombard should remain there only, where that Nation had chiefly had their Seat. Pipin being now returned to Bonevent, and having continued the Siege of that place for several months without success, he turns his Arms against the City Chieti, of which having after some Opposition made himself Master by Force, he plunder'd and burnt it. Upon the terrour whereof at his marching thence he had the Cities of Ortona and Luceria surrendred to him, and in the latter he took Grimoald Duke of Benevent; who not long after died of Grief. In the mean time, the Empress of Constantinople send∣ing Ambassadours into Italy, enters into a League with Charles, their several Pretensions to Italy being thus adjusted, viz. Irene was to have that Part which beginning on the one side from Naples, and from Si∣ponto (a City now called Manfredonia) on the other, lies extended be∣tween the two Seas, Eastward, together with Sicily; all Italy beside, only excepting always those places which were under the Jurisdiction of the Church, were by the Articles of Peace adjudged to be Charle's own. But Nicephorus a Patrician stomaching to submit to the Domi∣nion of a Woman, having craftily seized Irene, and banished her into Lesbos, by his Ambassadours renews the League before entred into with Charles. Which Charles at this time compelled the Saxons, who had so often revolted, to remove with their Wives and Children into France, following them close in their Passage with his Army to pre∣vent their committing any Disorders as they went along. Pope Leo, being perpetually disturbed by one Sedition after another, leaving Rome, goes to Mantua, to see the Bloud of Christ which was now in great esteem for the Miracles said to be wrought there by it. Having been received with great Respect and Affection by the Mantuans, and approved it to be indeed Christ's Blood upon frequent Trial of the miraculous Effects of it, he makes a Journey to Charles, who was very desirous to know the Truth of this matter, that he might cer∣tifie him concerning it, and also that he might discourse with him a∣bout setling the Affairs of Italy. Returning then to Rome, and being assisted by King Pipin who had his Father's Order therein, he proceed∣ed to a gentle punishment of some of the chief Plotters and movers of Sedition. Charles being now very aged; having intelligence that Pi∣pin was dead at Milain, declares Lous, his younger Son, King of A∣quitain and his Successour in the Empire, and Bernard his Nephew
King of Italy, to whom he gave Charge that he should in all things be obedient to Louis. To the Extent of the Empire he set these bounds; in Gallia the Rhine and the Loyre, in Germany the Danow and the Saw; and to these Provinces he added Aquitain, Gascoigne, a great part of Spain, Lombardy, Saxony, both the Pannonia's, Istria, Croa∣tia, and Dalmatia, excepting only those parts of it scituate on the Sea∣coast, which were subject to the Emperour of Constantinople. Having thus setled Affairs, while he was at Aken for the recovery of his Health by the use of the hot Baths there, he died of a Feaver and Pleurisie, in the seventy second year of his Age, January the 28. An. Dom. 815. His Body was with all imaginable Pomp and Solemnity interred in the Church of S. Mary which himself had built at Aken, with this Inscription on his Tomb, MAGNI CAROLI RE∣GIS CHRISTIANISSIMI, ROMANORVMQVE IMPERATORIS CORPVS HOC SEPVLCHRO CONDITUM JACET. He was indeed, whether we regard his management of Civil or Military matters, so illustrious and excel∣lent an Emperour, that none of his Successours have either excelled or equalled him. Moreover, when leisure from other weighty Af∣fairs permitted him, he took such delight in the study of Learning, that it was he who, at the persuasion of Alcuinus, first made Paris an University. Of three Tables of Silver which he had, one, on which was engraven the City of Constantinople, he gave to the Church of S. Peter; another, on which the City of Rome was described, to the Church of Ravenna; the third, which some tell us was of Gold, on which was a Map of the whole World, he left to his Sons. As for Pope Leo, having repaired the Roof of S. Paul's, which had fallen down in an Earthquake; built from the ground a very capaci∣ous Hospital for Strangers near S. Peters's; and ordained Litanies on the three days before Ascension-day; on the first of which the Pro∣cession was to be from S Marie's ad Proesepe to the Lateran Chruch; on the second, from the Church of S. Sabina to S. Paul's; and on the third, from S. Cross to S. Laurence's without the Walls; in the twenty first year of his Pontificate he died, which year there appear'd a Co∣met, thought by some to have been a Presage of so great a calamity. He was buried in S. Peter's, June the 12th. and the See was vacant ten days.
STEPHEN IV. STEPHEN the fourth, a Roman, Son of Julius, in the third Month of his Pontificate went into France to the Empe∣rour Lewis; though the reason of his Journey is not certainly known. Some conjecture that it was to secure himself from the Reliques of the Faction and Conspiracy of Campulus, which upon the Death of Leo prevailed afresh. The Emperour Lewis, surnamed the Godly, was now at Orleans, who assoon as he had intelligence of the Popes coming, forthwith sends all the Persons of principal Quality to meet him; and among others particularly Theudolphus Bishop of Or∣leans, with the Clergy, and a great part of the People. And Louis Himself going forth a whole Mile for the same purpose, assoon as he saw him alighted off his Horse, and after mutual Salutations had pas∣sed between them, introduced him very honourably into the City, the Clergy going before and after repeating the Hymn, called Te Deum Laudamus. For Stephen was not only a Person of Noble Extraction, but of such Learning and Integrity, that he easily gain'd a general Ve∣neration for Sanctity, having been well instructed by an advantageous Education under those two pious Popes Adrian and Leo. Being entred into the City, supported by the Emperour because of the croud of the People who press'd out of a desire to see him, he was conducted to the Apartment appointed for him in the Palace; where he often had Con∣ferences with the Emperour about the composure of the Affairs of Italy, besides the other frequent mutual Entertainments and Civilities that pass'd between them.  would have detained the Pope longer with him, had he not now been engaged in such important Wars, that it was necessary he should oppose the Enemy in Person. For both the Ga∣scons had revolted, whom in a short time he reduc'd; and those of Bre∣taigne began to endeavour a change of Government, whom in like manner by his Arms he kept in Obedience; and moreover at an As∣sembly held at Aken, he granted Peace to the Ambassadours sent from the Saracens inhabiting Saragosa. Stephen being now upon his depar∣ture, in Imitation of our Saviour, who spared even his Enemies, obtain∣ed of Louis, that all those whom Charles had punished with Banishment or Imprisonment for their Conspiracy against Leo, might have their Liber∣ty. He also carried with him a Cross of great Weight and Value, made at the Charge of Louis, and by him dedicated to S. Peter. But return∣ing to Rome, he died in the seventh month of his Pontificate; and was buried in S. Peter's; and by his Death the See was vacant eleven days.
PASCHAL I. PASCHAL, a Roman, Son of Bonosus, was created Pope without any Interposition of the Emperours Authority. Where∣upon at his first Investiture in that Office, he forthwith sends Nuntio's to Louis, excusing himself, and laying all the blame up∣on the Clergy and People of Rome, who had forcibly compell'd him to undertake it. Louis accepting this for Satisfaction from Paschal, sends to the Clergy and People, admonishing them to observe the ancient Con∣stitution, and to beware how they presum'd for time to come to in∣fringe the Rights of the Emperour. Also, in the Assembly held at Aken, he associated to himself in the Empire his eldest Son Lotha∣rius, and declared Pipin his second Son King of Aquitain, and Louis his third Son King of Bavaria. But Bernardus King of Italy, having upon the Instigation of certain Bishops and seditious Citizens, revolt∣ed from the Empire, and compelled some Cities and States to swear Allegiance to himself, Louis being hereat incensed, sends a strong Army into Italy; whose Passage over the Alpes Bernardus endeavouring to oppose, he was vanquished. The Heads of the Rebellion being taken were presently cut off, and Bernardus himself, though he very sub∣missively begg'd forgiveness, was put to Death at Aken, Those Bi∣shops who had been Authors of the mischief were by a Decree of Synod confined into several Monasteries. This Tumult, for so it was rather than a War, being thus composed, Louis moves with his Army against the Saxons, rebelling now afresh, and overcomes and slays Vi∣romarchus their hardy Chief, who aspired to the Kingdom. After this, he sends his Son Lotharius, whom he had declared King of Italy, to the Pope; by whom he was anointed in the Church of S. Peter's; with the Title of Augustus. But there arising great Commotions in Italy, and Lotharius seeing himself unable to withstand them, he goes to his Father in order to provide greater Force. Upon which Theo∣dorus the Primicerius, and Leo the Nomenclator, having had their Eyes first pull'd out were murdered in a Tumult in the Lateran Pa∣lace. There was some who laid the blame of this Disorder upon Pa∣schal himself; but he in a Synod of thirty Bishops did both by Con∣jectures, and by Reasons, and by his Oath purge himself of it. Louis rested himself satisfied herewith, and as Anastasius tells us, that no fu∣ture Disturbance might arise from uncertain Pretensions, writing to Paschal, he declared in his Letters what Cities of Tuscany were subject to the Empire, viz. Arezzo, Volterra, Chiusi, Florence, which had been repaired and enlarged by his Father Charles the Great, Pistoia, Luca, Pisa, Peragia, and Orvieto; the others he allowed to be under the Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome. He added moreover Todi in Umbria, and Romagna beyond the Appennine, with the Exarchate of Ravenna. The same Anastasius says, that Louis granted to Paschal a free Power (the same which he also tells us was given by Charles to Pope Adrian) of chusing Bishops, whereas before the Emperours were
wont to be advised, and their consent and Confirmation desired in the Case. Our Paschal, who for his Piety and Learning had been by Pope Stephen made Prior of the Monastery of S. Stephen in the Vatican, be∣ing now in the Chair, both caused the Bodies of several Saints which before lay neglectedly to be conveyed into the City with great So∣lemnity, and honourably interred; and also by paying their Credi∣tors procured the Release of divers poor Prisoners. He also built from the ground the Church of S. Praxedes the B. Martyr, not far from the old one, which through Age and the Clergy's neglect was run to Ruin. This Church having consecrated, he oftentimes celebrated Mass in it, and also reposited therein the Bodies of many Saints which lay about unregarded in the Coemeteries. In the same Church was an Oratory dedicated to S. Agnes, which he made very stately and ornamental. Moreover, he built the Church of S. Cecily (as appears still by an In∣scription on the Nave of it) in which he in like manner reposited the Bodies of that Virgin her self and her affianced Husband Valerianus, as also of Tiburtius and Maximus, Martyrs, and Urban and Lucius, Bishops of Rome, adorning it with all kinds of Marble, and enriching it with Presents of Gold and Silver. He also repaired the Church of S. Mary ad Praesepe, that had been decayed by Age, and alter'd the Nave of it to advantage. In fine, having been very exemplary for Re∣ligion and Piety, Good Nature and Bounty; after he had been in the Chair seven years, two months, seven days, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's. The See was then vacant only four days. EUGENIUS II. EUGENIUS the second, a Roman, Son of Boemundus, was for his Sanctity, Learning, Humanity and Eloquence unanimous∣ly chosen into the Pontificate, at that time particularly when Lotharius coming into Italy, made choice of a Magistrate for the Administration of Justice, and Execution of the Laws among the People of Rome, who after a long and heavy Servitude had enjoyed some Liberty under the Emperour Charles and his Sons. In the mean time Louis after he had for forty days been spoiling and laying waste the Countrey of Bretagne with Fire and Sword, having received Ho∣stages, he goes to Roan, and there gives Audience to the Ambassadours of  Emperour of Constantinople, who came to consult what his Opinion was concerning the Images of the Saints, whether they were to be utterly abolished and destroyed, or kept up and restored again. But  referred them to the Pope, who was principally concerned to determine in the Matter. After this he marched against the Bul∣garians who were now making Inrodes into the Pannonia's, and at first repelled them; but Haydo Governour of Aquitain, upon confidence of  Forces from Abderamann King of the Saracens, having rebel∣led, he was obliged to quit this War; and so the Bulgarians, in an hostile manner march'd without controll through the middle of the
hostile manner march'd without controll through the  of the Pannonia's into Dalmatia. But before Louis advanced , a great part of Spain had revolted to Haydo, who sent out a  which annoyed the Sea-port Towns all about. Only  of Barcelona, though he had disturbance given him  Land, yet continued firm to the Emperour. Our  in the Gifts of Body and Mind, and despising the  Fortune, applyed himself to Works of Bounty and  and particularly took so much care in the matter of Provision,  sorts of it and especially Grain was no where cheaper than at . Moreover, he supported the Lives, and defended the Cause of the Poor, the Fatherless and Widow in such a manner, that he deserved∣ly gain'd the name of the Father of the Poor. The same course  living he also took before his Pontificate; both while he was a  of S. Sabina in the Aventine, which Church when he came to be Pope he beautified, and also while he was Arch-Priest of the Lateran Church, from which place he was afterwards for his great Merit by an unanimous Choice advanced to the Papal Chair. By his Pro∣curement and Intercession likewise all the Prisoners and Exiles in France returned at  to Rome; who being strip'd of all they , were relieved and supported by his Charity. Nor was it his fault that Sico Duke of Benevent did not quit the Siege of , which he at this time reduced to great Straits, and carried from thence the Body of S. Ianuarius to Benevent, where he honourably  in the Great Church with Desiderius and . For the Pope  voured to persuade Sico to undertake an Expedition against the Sara cens, who had already possess'd themselves of Palermo in Sicily.  good Man having after this manner continued four years in the , died lamented of all, who grieved for themselves rather  for him, to whom Death was a welcom Passage into  was buried in S. Peter's.
VALENTINE I. VALENTINE, a Roman, son of Leontius, being only a Deacon, not a Priest, was yet for his extraordinary Sanctity deservedly preferred to the Pontificate. Nor will it appear strange, if we consider that having from his Youth upwards been instructed in Learning and Piety by chose good Popes Paschal and , he did not give his Mind to Pleasures and Sports, as most young men are wont to do, but applied himself to the acquiring of knowledg by the reading of the Antients, and the Rule of good living from the Example of holy Bishops. He was more∣over a Person of such ready Parts, and prevailing Eloquence, that he had a great Facility in persuading to, or against, what he pleased; without offering any thing that was not found, learned, and decent. Finally, both in his private Station, and while he was Pope, he came  none of his Predecessours, in Devotion, Mercy, and Charity. For these Reasons he was unanimously elected to the Chair; but  as a punishment upon the sins of that Age, he died on the fortieth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Peter's; all People lament∣ing that they were bereft of such a Man, who if he had lived would have been an almost impregnable Support to the Roman Liberty and the Christian Religion. While the See was vacant, Sicardus Duke of , who after his Father's Death ruled tyrannically, for the want of a Bride which he expected, cast Deus-dedit Abbot of Monte Cassino into Prison, where he died with the Reputation of being a Holy Man. GREGORY IV. GREGORY the fourth, a Roman, Son of John, and Cardinal of S. Mark, entred upon the Pontificate at the time when the Saracens possess'd of Asia shut up the Passage to the Holy Land from the Christians, and the Moors passing with their Fleet into , wasted a great part of that Island, having (as is already said) made themselves Masters of Palermo. Nor could the Venetians, though at the Desire of Michael Emperour of Constantinople, they sailed thither, check their Proceedings; the Moors having more Ships and Men than they. The State of Venice was now in its Increase, having had it's Original from the Veneti, at the time when Attila with his  took and destroyed Aquileia, Concordia, Altino, with other Cities of the Province anciently called Venetia; that People having no other  against the Cruelty of the , but only the Fens and .  Patricius was now Duke of Venice. whose  chuse to mention, because in his time the Body of
S. Mark was by some Venetian Merchants brought from Alexandria to Venice, where that Saint is now had in great Veneration, a most mag∣nificent Church being in the principal part of the City built and dedi∣cated to him, and adorned and enriched with very great Donations. And srom hence it was that the Venetians first bore upon their Stan∣dards and Banners the Picture of S. Mark, as the Patron of their City. But Gregory understanding that the Venetians were not able to expel these Barbarians out of the Island, sends to Louis and Lotharius, de∣siring them to send Aid to the Sicilians at the first Opportunity. They were very shy of the Business, allcdging that that War belonged to Michael Emperour of Constantinople; but yet declared themselves ready to  their share of Men and Moneys for the undertaking of it. But in the mean time, while Ambassadours were sent srom one to the other about that Assair, Boniface Earl of Corsica, with his Bro∣ther Bertarius, and the Assistance of some of the People of Tuscany, sailing into Asrica, engaged four times with the Enemy between Vti∣ca and Carthage, where he made so great a Slaughter, that the Moors were forced, as formerly in Scipio's time, to re-call their Forces from Sicily to the Succour of their own Countrey in Distress, and by this means Sicily was delivered from them. Boniface then returns with his victorious Fleet, laden with vast Spoils, from Africa into Corsica. Some there are that write, that during this  in Italy, the Emperour Lotha∣rius envying the preference that his  Louis did in all matters give to his youngest Brother Charles, afterwards surnam'd the Bald, he put him in Prison, but soon after set him sree; and that the Barbarians taking hold of the opportunity, embark'd in a great Fleet from Asrica for Italy, and arriv'd at Centum Celloe, which City (since call'd Civila∣vecchia,) some will have to be demolish'd by'em; and that from  marching to Rome, they took that City: but this is not probable. What is said concerning Centum-Celloe I shall not deny, and I doubt not but that they attempted the taking of Rome it self, but Guy Marquess of Lom∣bardy defended it so stoutly, that having burnt the Suburbs and the Churches of SS. Peter and Paul in the Via Latina, they withdrew to Monte-Cassino, where they destroy'd the Town of S. German and the Mo∣nastery of S. Benet which slood on the Hill, and going down to the Sea∣side near the River Garigliano (whither their Fleet was brought from Ostia) they invaded Tarentum and Sicily; and, as I said before, were re∣called home by their own Countrey-men at that time broken in War by the Valour of Boniface. I take it to be about this time, that the Body of the Apostle S. Bartholomew was translated from Lipari in Sicily to Beneventum by Sicardus Prince of that place (who was personally pre∣sent in this great War) lest the Body of the Holy Apostle should fall into the hands of the Enemies of the name of Christ. But to return to Gre∣gory. He was a person of so much Modesty, that though he were cho∣sen as well by the Clergy as People of Rome, yet he would not take upon him the Office of Pope, till he was confirmed by those Am∣bassadours of the Emperour Louis, who had been dispatch'd by him to Rome that they might  an Election of so great moment. This was not done by Louis out of Pride, but with respect to the Preservation of the Imperial Prerogative, he being naturally very kind and gracious, and one that always took care of the Dignity and Pri∣vileges
of the Church. For he ordain'd that they who should take upon 'em a Religious Life should be exempt from all secular services, and that every Church should be endowed with such a certain income, as that the Priests might live without being forced for want of necessaries to forsake the Divine Service or to take up any Trade. Beside in the Year 830. he held a Synod of a great many Bishops, designed for the honour of God and the advantage of the Church, wherein it was ordained, that noither Bishops nor  degree soever should  in sum∣ptuous and gaudy Apparel,  Silk,  or embroidered; nor that they should wear on their Fingers any precious stones (except Pre∣lates at Mass) nor that Gold or  should be used on their Girdles, Shooes or Pantosles, which  is far from all Religion and a mani∣fest sign of great  and vanity. Would to God, Lewis, thou mightest live in our times. Thy holy Institutions, thy Censures are wanting in the Church at this present, when the Clergy let themselves loose to all manner of luxury and pleasure. You may see now not only the Men in Scarlet and Purple, which perhaps would be no great mat∣ter, but even their Horses and Beasts of Carriage; and when they march in State, a number of Footmen must go before them, and they must be follow'd by another retinue of Priests, not riding upon Asses, as Christ did (who was the Author of our Religion and the only pattern of well living on earth) but upon Steeds pamper'd add betrapped as if they came in triumph  a vanquish'd Enemy. 'Twould be to no purpose to speak of their Silver Vessels, their choice Houshold-stuss and Dishes of Meat, when in comparison of them the dainties of Sicily, the most magnificent Apparel and the Plate of Corinth would be thought of no value. What will be the effect of this Exorbitance I shall not determine here, lest I should seem to pry into the decrees of Hea∣ven. I return to Lewis, who by these means taking care as well for Religion as the Public  died in the 36. year of his Empire and lies buried in the Church of S. . He was not long after follow'd by our Pope Gregory, remarkable for his birth, famous for his sanctity, notable for Learning and Eloquence, and worthy of admiration for his care and diligence in both Spiritual and Civil affairs: For he did after an extraordinary manner consult the good of the People, by containing the wealthy in their duty, by feeding the poor, comforting the hopeless, and reducing those that went astray into the right way by wholesom admonitions; he also restor'd many Churches which time had ruined. Those that were  to H. Orders he kept to their duty as long as he liv'd by his advice and example. This holy Pope translated the Body of S. Gregory, and very much adorning it he placed it where now it lies, where many people in those times either out of devotion or for the sake of some Vow, were wont to keep watch.  said that the Bodies of S. Sebastian and Tiburtius were also translated by him from the Cemeteries in which they lay before, to the Church of S. Peter. Some Authors say, that Gregory at the request of Lewis instituted the Feast of All-Saints on the first day of November, which act of his was much commended both in Prose and Verse by Rabanus a Monk. a famous Divine; for in both those ways of writing that learned Man was excellent, especially con∣sidering the Age he liv'd in. The same  also wrote Commenta∣ries on the Books of Chronicles and . He made eloquent Ser∣mons
to the people, but that of his is chiefly celebrated which he made upon All-Saints day. Gregory died in the 16. year of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, after which the See was void 15. days. SERGIUS. SERGIUS the second, a Roman, whose Father was nam'd Sergius, of the fourth Ward, came to the Popedom at the same time that Michael Emperour of Constantinople died. 'Tis said that this Sergius was surnamed Bocca di Porco or Hogs-mouth, which for shame of it he changed for Sergius, and that from thence came the Cu∣stom down to our times, that when any one is made Pope he laid by his own name and took one of some of his Predecessours; though all have not observ'd it. However it was, 'tis certain,  Sergius came of a noble Family and degenerated not from his Ancestors, being assisted in his good Inclinations by Leo III. Stephen IV. Eugenius II. and Gregory IV. under whose tuition he lived so well, that upon the Death of Gregory he alone was thought worthy of the Pontifical Dignity. At that time there was so great a feud between the Sons of Lewis, about the division of the Empire, that Lewis and Charles gave their Brother Lotharius Battel in the Countrey of Auxerre near Fontenay, where many on both sides were slain; Lotharius losing the day, fled first to Aken, but being forc'd from thence by the pursuing Enemy, he convey'd himself with his Wife and Children to Vienna. Hither also he was follow'd by his Brother with their Army, to whom not only many of the great men of the Empire came, but several also were sent by Pope Sergius to endeavour to make Peace between them, the chief of whom was George Arch-Bishop of Ra∣venna, who having been before to make up the matter, was present with Lotharius in the second Battel, and the Victory inclining to  and Lewis, he lost all his Train there (of 300 Horsemen) and hardly escap'd alone from the slaughter. But these men at last looking with pity upon the misery and ruin under which the whole Empire lay, pro∣cur'd a Peace upon these terms, viz. That the Western part of the Em∣pire which reach'd from the British Ocean to the Maese, should be subject to Charles, and the name of Franks should continue to the Inhabitants: That all Germany as far as the River Rhine, and so much on the other side of it as his Father had been possess'd of, should be allotted to Lewis; and that Lotharius should with the title of Emperour hold the City of Rome with Italy and that part of France which was formerly call'd Gallia Nar∣bonensis, now Provence. To this they added, that Countrey lying be∣tween the Rivers Scheld and Roan, which as I suppose now took the name of Lotharingia [Lorain] from Lotharius. Matters being thus composed, Lotharius sends his Son Lewis, whom he had taken into a Partnership in the Empire, into Italy with a mighty Army, giving him for Companions Drogon Bishop of Metz, and others of the Clergy eminent for Prudence and Gravity, by whose advice he was to govern himself.
But the young man being puss'd up with his great fortune wheresoever he march'd, sill'd the Countrey with slaughter, rapine, and destruction. Yet when he approach'd the City and the Citizens of Rome came out of respect to meet him, laying by his Gaulish sierceness he grew more mild, because contrary to his expectation he found that he might enter the City without force of Arms. The Religious also came a mile out of the City to meet him with their Crucifixes singing, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the Highest. Thus they accompa∣nied him as far as the steps of S. Peter's Church, where meeting the Pope they reciprocally kissed and greeted each other and went toge∣ther to the Silver Gates which were not opened. Then said the Pope, If thou comest hither with peaceable and friendly intentions, and if thou, hast more regard to the advantage of Christianity than to the pleasure of exercising cruelty and rapine, then with my good will thou mayest enter; if thou art otherwise minded, touch not these Gates, for over thy head hangs a Sword, which will certainly avenge any such wickedness. But when he had given the Pope assurance, immediately the doors were thrown open. Hereupon a multitude of Romans and Franks entring pel-mel, as soon as they came to the Altar of S. Peter, they all kneel∣ing down together gave thanks to God Almighty and to the Prince of the Apostles, that matters had been carried according to their minds without hurt to any body; this was done upon the Monday after Whit∣son-day. But soon after the Suburbs were sack'd by the Soldiers, and it wanted little but that they had got into the City for the same end, so that the eighth day aster their coming the Pope anointed Lewis with the holy Oil, crown'd him and declar'd him King of Italy. Soon after came Siconolfus Prince of Beneventum to congratulate him, and then the multitude was such that the Trees were lopt, the Beasts driven away and even the standing-Corn cut down, that their Horses might not want Provender. The Pope therefore easily agreed to all their requests, if they were reasonable, that he might the sooner rid the City of them: and the Romans being now delivered from the fear of their tyrannical Barbarity celebrated their Pope as the true Vicar of Christ and the only Father of his Countrey. He betaking himself to the beautifying of Churches, reslor'd that of SS. Sylvester and Martin which time had ruin'd, and in it together with those of the two Confessors, he plac'd the Bodies of Fabianus, Stephanus, Sotherius, Asterius, Cyriacus, Maurus, Smaragdus, Anastasius, Innocentius, Quirinus, Leo, Arthemius, Theodorus and Nicander. He built also near that Church from the foundation a Monaslery dedicated to SS. Peter and Paul, where Mass was incessantly sung. But at last this holy Pope having manag'd the assairs of the Church with great integrity and success, in the third year of his Ponti∣sicate, died and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was vacant upon his death fifteen days.
LEO IV. LEO the fourth, a Roman, son of Radulphus, was in the year 848. by a general consent elected Pope, and very deservedly; for he was one that whilst he liv'd a private life, was very eminent for Religion, Innocence, Piety, Good Nature, Li∣berality and especially for Ecclesiastical Learning. He was a per∣son of so much Prudence and Courage that as the Gospel directs, he could, when it was necessary imitate either the Wisdom of the Ser∣pent or the Innocence of the Dove. So general was the good Report of him that Pope Sergius II. was persuaded to create this pattern of Virtue a Priest from a Sub-deacon and to give him the Title and Church Sanctorum quatuor Coronatorum, from whence upon the death of Sergius he was brought to the Lateran Church and plac'd in S. Peter's Chair, being universaily saluted as Pope, all that were present, accord∣ing to ancient Custom kissing his feet. There are some of opinion, that by the prayers of this good man it was, that God was mov'd to repress the rage of the Saracens by drowning their Fleet as they were returning home laden with Spoil. For they having overcome Theodo∣tius, Admiral to the Emperor Michael in a Sea-fight near Tarentum, they ravag'd far and near through Italy without opposition, and having ta∣ken and sack'd Ancona and harass'd the Coast of Dalmatia, when they were returning triumphantly to their own Countrey, it pleased God they were cast away at Sea by storm. So that Leo being free from his fear of the Saracens, betook himself to publick works, and caused Benches of Marble to be plac'd in the entrance to the Lateran Cloister and finish'd the Gallery which Leo III. had begun. This good Prelate ordain'd that yearly in the Church of S. Paul, on the Birth-day of that Apostle Vesper's should be said by all the Clergy. He prohibited all Lay-men entrance into the Chancel during Divine Service. About this time at his command solemn Supplications were made to avert Gods anger, which the frequent Earthquakes seem'd to threaten. He adorn'd after an extraordinary manner the Cross which Charles the Emperor had given to the Basilica Constantiniana, which had been pilfer'd of the pre∣cious stones that belong'd to it. 'Tis sure he was a man of so great sanctity, that by his Prayers he drove away out of an Arch in S. Lucie's Church, a Basilise (call'd by the Latins Regulus) which with its breath and poison had kill'd many; and by the sign of the Cross he stop'd a great fire, which had burn'd down the quarter where the Sa∣xons and Lombards liv'd, and reach'd very near S. Peter's Church. This happened the eighth day after the Assumption of our Lady, which day was afterward kept as a Festival without the walls not far from S. Lau∣rence's Church, where stood a Church dedicated to the B. Virgin, to which this munificent Pope had made many donaries of Gold and Silver. Beside this he finished the Mosaic work in the Churches of SS. Martin and Silvester in montibus, and the Pargetting which Scrgius had begun, as the Inscription shews which is all that is lest; the painting being long
since perish'd either for want of care or by time and rottenness. He took care also that the Cross of Gold which uses to be born before the Pope, was deck'd with precious stones, and neglected no manner of Ornament that might contribute to the honour of the Christian name. He re-edified the City-Walls and Gates that had suffer'd by Age, and raised from the Ground fifteen Forts  the defence of the City; of which two were very necessary, one  the right,  other on the left hand of the Tiber below the Hills Janiculus and Aventinus, to hinder the Ships of any Enemy from entring the Town. He by his diligence found out the Bodies of the Sancti quatuor coronati, and built a Church to them after a magnificent manner; and reposited their bodies under the Altar, viz. Sempronianus, Claudius, Nicostratus, Castorius; to which he added those of Severus, Severianus, Carpophorus, Victorinus, Marius, Felicissimus, Agapetus, Hippolytus, Aquila, Priscus, Aquinus, Narcissus, Marcellinus, Felix, Apollos, Benedict, Venantius, Diogenes, Liberalis, Fe∣stus, Marcellus (the head of S. Protus) Cecilia, Alexander, Sixtus, Se∣bastian, Praxedes. But while he was diligently intent upon these Af∣fairs, as became so holy a man, news was brought that the Saracens were coming with a huge Fleet to sack the City, and that the Neapoli∣tans and the Inhabitants upon that shore would come to his assistance; whereupon with what forces he could raise he march'd to Ostia, and summon'd thither the Auxiliaries, designing upon the first opportu∣nity to fight the Enemy. But first this holy Pope exhorted his Soul∣diers to receive the Sacrament, which being devoutly perform'd, he prayed to God thus, O God whose right hand did support the blessed Peter when he walk'd upon the Waves, and sav'd him from drowning, and delivered from the deep his fellow-Apostle Paul when he was thrice shipwrack'd, hear us mercifully and grant that for their merits the hands of these thy faithful ones fighting against the Enemies of thy holy Church, may by thy almighty arm be con∣firm'd and strengthened; that thy holy Name may appear glorious before all Nations in the Victory that shall be gained. Having pro∣nounc'd this, by making the sign of the Cross he gave the signal for Battel, and the onset was made by his Souldiers with great briskness as if they had been sure of Victory, which after a tedious Dispute was theirs, the Enemies being put to flight; many of them perish'd in the fight, but most were taken alive and brought to Rome; where the Citi∣zens would have some of them hang'd without the City for a  to the rest, very much against the mind of Leo, who was very remark∣able for Gentleness and Clemency, but it was not for him to oppose the rage of a multitude. Those that were taken alive Leo made use of in  those Churches which the Saracens had heretofore ruin'd and burnt, and in building the Wall about the Vatican, which from his own name he call'd  Leonina. This he did lest the Ene∣my should with one slight assault take and sack the Church of S. Peter, as heretofore they were wont. The Gates also had his Prayers, for upon that which leads to S. Peregrin this was graven in Marble, O God, who by giving to thy Apostle S. Peter the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven didst  upon him the Pontifical Authority of binding and loosing, grant that by the help of his intercession we may be delivered from all mischievous Attempts, and that this City which
now with thy assistance I have newly founded may be free or ever from thine anger, and may have many and great Victories over those Enemies against whom it is built. And on the second Gate near S. Angelo that leads into the fields were these words, O God, who from the beginning of the World didst vouchsafe to preserve and establish this holy Catholick and Apostolical Church of Rome, mercifully blot  the hand-writing of our iniquity, and grant that this City which we assisted by the Intercession of the Apostles Peter and Paul have new∣ly dedicated to thy holy name, may remain secure from the evil ma∣chinations of its Enemies. The third was on the front of the Gate by which we go to the Saxons School in these words, Grant we beseech thee, almighty and merciful God, that crying to thee with our whole heart, and the blessed Apostle Peter interceding for us, we may obtain thy favour. We continually beg of thy mercy, that the City which I thy servant Leo IV. Bishop of Rome have dedicated anew and cal∣led Leonina from my own name, may continue safe and prosperous. This City he began in the first year of his Pontificate and finish'd in his sixth, and gave it to be a habitation for the men of Corsica, who had been driven out of that Island by the Saracens, to each of whom also he as∣sign'd a piece of ground for his maintenance. But I wonder now that another Inscription is to be read on these Gates in dull Hexameter Verse, which I cannot by any means think to be Leo's, though it go under his name. Of the Spoils of the Saracens he made several donations of Gold and Silver to the Churches of Rome. Some write that 'twas by his com∣mand that S. Mary's Church in the new street and the Tower in the Va∣tican next S. Peter's now to be seen, were built. Beside he restor'd the Silver-door of S. Peter which had been pillag'd by the Saracens. He held a Synod of 47. Bishops, wherein Anastasius Presbyter Cardinal of S. Marcellus was by the Papal Canons convict of several Crimes, upon which he was condemned and excommunicate, the chief allegation being that for five years he had not resided in his Parish. Moreover he brought Colonies from Sardinia and Corsica (which now upon the repulse of the  had some respite) and planted them in Hostia, which partly by reason of the unhealthiness of the Air and partly by being so of∣ten  was left without Inhabitants. Lastly, he fully satisfied Lotharius, who having been inform'd that Leo was upon a design of translating the Empire to the Constantinopolitans, came himself to Rome. But the Informers being caught in Lies received condign punishment, and the friendship was on both sides renewed. 'Tis said that Johannes Scotus, a learned Divine, liv'd at this time, who coming into France, by the command of K. Lewis, translated S. Dionysius's Book de Hierar∣chia out of Greek into Latin, but was soon after (as they say) stab'd with a Bodkin by some of his Scholars: but the occasion of this villa∣nous act is not any where recorded. 'Tis said too, that now Ethel∣wolph K. of England, out of devotion, made his Countrey tributary to the Church of Rome, by charging a penny yearly upon every house. Our holy Pope Leo having deserv'd well of the Church of God, of the City of Rome and of the whole Christian name for his Wisdom, Gravity, Diligence, Learning and the Magnificence of his works, died in the eighth year, third month and sixth day of his Pontificate, on the 17. day of July, and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then void two months and fifteen days.
JOHN VIII. JOHN, of English Extraction, but born at Mentz, is said to have arriv'd at the Popedom by evil Arts; for disguising her self like a Man, whereas she was a Woman, she went when young with her Paramour, a learned man, to Athens, and made such progress in Learning under the Professors there, that coming to Rome, she met with few that could equal, much less go beyond her, even in the knowledge of Scriptures; and by her learned and ingenious readings and disputations, she acquir'd so great respect and authority, that upon the death of Leo, (as Martin says) by common consent she was chosen Pope in his room. But suffering afterward one of her Domesticks to lie with her, she hid her big-bel∣ly a while, till as she was going to the Lateran Church between the Colossean Theatre (so call'd from Nero's Coloss) and S. Clement's, her travail came upon her and she died upon the place, having sat two years, one month and four days, and was buried there without any pomp. Some say, the Pope for shame of the thing does purposely de∣cline going through that street when he goes to the Lateran, and that to avoid the like Error, when any Pope is first plac'd in the Porphyry Chair, which has a hole made for the purpose, his Genitals are hand∣led by the youngest Deacon. As for the first I deny it not; but for the second, I take the reason of it to be, that he who is plac'd in so great authority may be minded that he is not a God but a man, and obnoxious to necessities of Nature, as of easing his body, whence that Seat hath the name of Sedes stercoraria. This story is vulgarly told, but by very uncertain and obscure Authors, and therefore I have re∣lated it barely and in short, lest I should seem obstinate and pertina∣cious if I had omitted what is so generally talk'd; I had better mi∣stake with the rest of the World; though it be certain, that what I have related may be thought not altogether incredible. Some say, that at this time the Body of S. Vincent was brought by a Monk from Valentia in Spain to a Village in Albigeois in France. They say too, that Lotharius being now aged, taking on him a Monastic habit,  the Empire to his Son Lewis, who passing into Germany by his presence composed matters there which otherwise threatned a War.
BENEDICT III. BENEDICT the third, by birth a Roman, Son of Peter; he was deservedly called Benedictus for the Sanctity of his Life and his knowledg in Divinity. For while he lived un∣der Gregory, he was made by him Sub-Deacon, and thence∣forward led so exemplary a life, that upon the death of Leo, he onely was thought worthy to succeed so great a Pope. To him there∣fore they address themselves, as to a kind Angel by God sent down to them, and presently declare him Pope. He weeping and calling God and his holy Saints to witness profess'd himself utterly unworthy of so high a dignity. But the Election being universally lik'd and applauded, he at last unwillingly accepted of the Office, was brought to the Lateran and plac'd in S. Peter's Chair, whence he was led upon a white Horse to the Church of S. Mary maggiore, where he spent three days in Fasting and Prayer, begging God to grant that he might govern his Church with integrity and holiness. The third day past, the People came thi∣ther again, and according to custom, kissed his feet, especially those of the faction of Rhodoardus Bishop of Porto, who the day before had at∣tempted to set up instead of Benedict one Anastasius an obscure man, who had been turned out of his Bishoprick by Leo; but now finding their error, they asked pardon, and becoming of the right opinion, they also made the usual adoration to this holy man. As likewise did the Embassadours sent to Rome by the Emperor Lewis to confirm the Electi∣on of the Clergy and Laity. The next day he was attended by the People to S. Peter's Church, where being according to custom and an∣cient tradition, publickly consecrated, he received the insignia of his Office with unanimous shouts and acclamations. For he was a man of so sweet a temper and so great modesty both in his mind and aspect, that as well in his publick managements as in his private station he gain'd the love and respect of all men. And now setting his mind on the ser∣vice of God he repair'd many Churches almost tottering with age, and increased their Treasures. He ordain'd that the Pope and Clergy should accompany the funerals of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as well to ho∣nour their Corps as to pray for their Souls; and that the Clergy should in like manner attend the Funerals of Popes; and what he had thus or∣dain'd himself observ'd punctually as long as he liv'd, for he was al∣ways present at the burials of the Priests. He was a frequent visiter of the sick, a nursing Father to the poor, a comforter of the miserable and hopeless, a zealous patron of the Widow and Fatherless. And in thus doing having spent a most holy life, late enough for himself, but too soon for the people of Rome, he died, having sate two years six months and nine days, and was buried before S. Peter's Church-doors. The Sea then was vacant fifteen days.
NICOLAS I. NICOLAS the first, a Roman born, Son of Theodosius, was ingenuously and religiously educated from his Childhood and made first Sub-deacon by Sergius, then Deacon by Leo. In which Order he stood, when with great piety and many tears he laid the body of Benedict in the Grave, whose Exequies being perform'd, it was necessary to think of a Successor, and the People here∣upon press'd the Divine Majesty with prayers, watchings and fastings, that he would vouchsafe them as good a Pope as him they had lost. After a long consultation in the Church of S. Denys Pope and Confessor (where they convened for this purpose) they chose this Nicolas Pope; but he was absent and upon hearing the news fled into the Vatican, and there hid himself to avoid the Dignity, where at length they found him, brought him to the Lateran, and plac'd him however unwilling in the Apostoli∣cal Chair. Being consecrated in S. Peter's Church and agreeably to cu∣stom having put on the Pontifical Mitre, he concerted several affairs with the Emperor Lewis relating to the Popedom and to the Empire. Lewis afterwards leaving Rome, staid at a place the Romans call Quinto, whether 'tis said Nicolas went attended by the great men of the City, and was honourably received, for the Emperor came a mile to meet him, and alighting took his Horse-bridle in his hand and led him into the Camp. And indeed he was a man of so great veneration and ma∣jesty, and of so much learning and eloquence, that like the Deity, he  respect from all men. After some repast, they held a long and private Conference, and then having kiss'd each other, the Pope return'd to Rome; which he found so overflow'd by an extraordinary rise of the Tiber, that there was no passing from street to street but in boats. S. Laurence's Church and the Monastery of S. Sylvester, with all the low part between Via lata, Campidoglio and the Aventine was so much under water, that another deluge was feared; many houses were born down by it, Trees forc'd up by the roots and Corn that was sown was quite wash'd away; and the same happened again the same year in December. To make up these losses or to make them more to∣lerable, the Pope omitted no manner of good Office or kindness to the Citizens. At this time Michael Son of Theophilus Emperor of Constan∣tinople sent Embassadors with Presents to Rome, to visit the Apostolick Sea and his Holiness. The Presents were a large Paten and Chalice of Gold with precious stones of great value. This was that Michael, who having taken Basilius to be his Partner in the Empire, was murdered by him, that he might reign alone. His Embassadors were kindly recei∣ved and sent home with Presents. Nicolas being earnestly intent upon the Conservation of the Pontifical Dignity, deprived John Arch Bishop of  for  to obey a Citation from the Apostolic Chair to answer some accusations. Whereupon he goes to Pavia, and pro∣cures of the Emperor Lewis commendatory Letters to the Pope, and to his Embassadors, that they should get leave that Arch-bishop John
should have a safe conduct to come to Rome and plead his own Cause, which the Pope readily granted: And John in a great Convention of Prelates being allow'd liberty of Speech, onely confess'd himself guilty, and beg'd pardon of the Pope and of all that were present. By which Confession and the Intercession of the Auditors the Pope was persuaded to receive him into favour upon these Conditions; That he should  his Error before the Synod; that he should promise to come to Rome once a year, if possible; that he should not be capable of conse∣crating any Bishop in Romagna, however canonically elected, without leave first obtain'd from the Sea Apostolick; and that he should not hinder any of those Bishops from coming to Rome as often as they pleas∣ed; that he should not introduce any exaction, custom or usage con∣trary to the sacred Canons; and lastly, that under the penalty of Ana∣thema he should not alter or meddle with the treasure of holy Church without the consent of the Pope, nor should without the same allow∣ance receive any thing secular. These holy Institutions were so highly approved by the whole Synod, that thrice they all shouted, Righte∣ous is the judgment of the supreme Prelate, just is the decree of the Universal Bishop; All Christians agree to this wholsom Institution. We all say, think and judg the same thing. Then John in the sight of them all took his Oath and gave it under his hand, that he would observe the Articles. Thus the Convocation was dissolved and John return'd to Ravenna. The Pope having overcome this trouble rebuilt the Church of our Lady (then call'd the Old, afterwards the New Church) and adorned it with excellent Paintings. He by Letters and good Admonitions converted the King of Bulgaria to the Chri∣stian Faith with all his Realm, to whom he sent Bishops and Priests to confirm the young , driving out Photinus who had craftily disseminated erroneous Opinions among them. He procured a Peace between Lewis the Emperor and Andalisio Duke of Benevent and repel∣led the Saracens who had made an Incursion as far as the same Be∣nevent. Lastly, with the consent of the Emperor he decreed that no Emperor or other Lay-man should thrust himself into any Convoca∣tion of the Clergy, except the debate was concerning matters of Faith, and then his Opinion was that they might reasonably be present. 'Tis said, that at this time S. Cyril brought the body of S. Clement from the Chersonese in Pontus to Rome, and plac'd it in the Church now called S. Clement's, where a little while after, himself also was buried. Nicolas now, who was a great exemplar of all the Virtues one man could be endued with, died the seventh year, ninth month, and thirteenth day of his , and was buried according to his last Will in S. Peter's Church porch. Some Authors say that the Sea was then va∣cant eight years, seven months, and nine days.
HADRIAN II. HADRIAN the second, a Roman, Son of Talarus a Bishop, was a familiar friend of Pope Sergius, who having once given him forty Julio's, when he came home he gave them to his Steward to give to the Beggers and poor strangers that were at his door; which the Steward going to do, saw the number was so great, that 'twould not serve a quarter of them, and so he return'd and told Hadrian: Who hereupon takes the money and coming to the poor folks gave every one three Julio's and reserv'd to himself as many for his own use; at which Miracle the Steward being astonish'd, Dost thou see (says Hadrian) how good and bountiful the Lord is to those that are liberal and charitable to the Poor? By this and other Virtues he grew into so high estimation with all men, that when the Consultation was held for making a new Pope, they unanimously elected him, and brought him against his will from the Church of S. Mary ad Proesepe to the Lateran, and immediately created him Pope, nor regarding the consent of any person in a proceeding so tumultuary: which gave great offence to the Embassadors of the Emperor who came on purpose upon this occasion, but could not (as they ought) interpose the Imperial Authority in this Election. But satisfaction was made to them by re∣monstrating that it was impossible in so great a tumult to moderate the violent inclinations of the multitude; they were desired therefore to concur with the Clergy and People and according to custom to congratu∣late as Pope this excellent man whom they had chosen; This at last the Embassadors did, though they saw plainly, that the Clergy and People did arrogate to themselves the full power of creating a Pope, without expecting the consent of any Temporal Prince; and this perhaps in order to enlarge the Liberties of holy Church by making it a Custom. Soon after arriv'd Letters from Lewis highly applauding this action of the Romans, and commending them that they had proceeded so reli∣giously and sincerely in this Affair; without waiting for the approba∣tion of any one, whose ignorance of the fitness of the Canditates might render them incompetent Judges in the case. For how (said he) can it be, that one that is a Foreiner and a Stranger should be able in another Countrey to distinguish who is most worthy? To the Citizens therefore does it properly belong and to those who have had familiarity with, and knowledg of the Competitors. Hadrian then being made Pope, took diligent care of all matters relating to Religion, and by word, example and authority both of himself and his Predeces∣sors exhorted all men to good and holy lives, particularly he shew'd himself a strenuous desender of those that had been oppressed by Inju∣stice and the power of great men. He caused a Council to be called at Constantinople, where Photius a seditious person was deposed and Ig∣natius restor'd who had been wrongfully turn'd out before. In this Council a long debate was held, whether the Bulgarians (whose Embas∣sadors were present) should be subject to the Roman or Constantinopo∣litan
Sea; And by the favour of the Emperor Basilius they were ad∣judged to the Sea of Rome, whereupon the Bulgarians making their  to Hadrian, that some man of good life and ability might be sent into their Countrey, by whose authority and example they might be retain'd in the Christian Faith, he sent three most religious men with plenary power to settle the Churches there as they should see fit. They were Sylvester the Sub-deacon, Leopardus of Ancona, and Dominic of Trevisa, who soon composed the whole Affair to the Popes mind; though 'twas not long ere the Bulgarians corrupted with gifts and promises by the Constantinopolitans, expel'd the Latin Priests and receiv'd the Greeks; and this Sedition gave occasion to many quarrels betwixt the Greeks and Latins. Hadrian still opposing himself to all the Enemies of the Church as much as was possible, when he was about to anoint Charles Emperor in the room of Lewis now deceased, died himself in the fifth year, ninth month and twelfth day of his Popedom. A little before his death it rain'd bloud for three days together at Brescia, and France was miser∣ably wasted with Locusts; both certain presages of his much lamented death. JOHN IX. JOHN the ninth, a Roman, Son of Gundo, as soon as he was made Pope, declared Charles (surnamed the Bald, who came to Rome for that purpose) Emperor, which so enraged the Sons of his elder Brother Lewis King of Germany (Charles surnam'd the Gross and Caroloman) that levying an Army, they invade Italy, resolving to deprive their Uncle of his Crown and Life. Charles hereupon makes haste towards Verona with his forces, intending to cut off the passage of his Nephews by Trent, but was taken ill at Mantua and there poisoned (as 'twas thought) by one Zedechias a Jew, whom he made use of for a Physician. Upon this news Pope John used his utmost endeavour, that Charles his Son Lewis (surnamed the Stamme∣rer) King of France might be made Emperor; but the great men of Rome opposed it, desiring rather that Charles III. King of Germany might succeed, who with his Brother Caroloman had now over-run a great part of Italy. So great was the Sedition, that though many favour'd Lewis, yet they took the Pope and clap'd him in prison. But by the help of some Friends he soon made his escape into France to Lewis, where he slaid a year, anointed him King, and ended some Controversies depend∣ing between the Ecclesiastics. For Gibertus Bishop of Nismes had by force turn'd Leo an Abbot out of his Monastery. This Monastery was dedicated to S. Peter and in it lay buried the body of S. Giles, it is si∣tuate in a place call'd Flaviano, from a Valley of that name given to S. Giles by a certain King nam'd Flavius, and he built there a Mona∣stery to the honour of SS. Peter and Paul. The Pope in the presence of many Bishops and Judges heard the Cause, and adjudg'd the Monastery to Leo. This was done at Arles, from whence John departing with the approbation of Lewis he held a Council at Troyes, where he made
several Decrees about religious affairs, and appointed a Bishop for the Flemings, who having left their Woods and fastnesses now betook them∣selves to an orderly way of living. But Italy all this while being har∣rass'd by the Saracens, who had taken and plundered the Monastery of Monte-Cassino, John was call'd home to Rome, and with the help of some Christian Princes drave the greatest part of them out of Italy and Sici∣ly: and at last that he might live the more quietly in the City, he plac'd the Imperial Crown on the head of Charles III. who quickly after marching against the Normans then infesting the borders of France and Lorain, defeated them so, that their King Rothifredus was forc'd to sue for peace and to become a Christian, the Emperour himself being his Godfather and taking him into favour. This writes Anastasius the Ro∣man Library-keeper, who was then highly in vogue, being so skilful in both Tongues, that by the persuasion of the Emperor Charles he translated out of Greek into elegant Latin the seventh General Council and Dionysius the Areopagite's Book de Hierarchiâ, with the lives of several Saints. Some say, that this Charles built many Monasteries and was liberal to the Church; but 'tis certain that it was his particular commendation, that he put many learned men upon writing, for Milo a Monk of S. Amand wrote the Life of that Saint very exactly, and Jo∣annes Scotus did very solidly and acutely handle many points of our Religion: nor was our Pope John without desert in the same way, ha∣ving while he was Deacon excellently composed the Life of Gregory I. in four Books. When he had sate ten years and two days he died and was buried in S. Peter's Church. MARTIN II. MARTIN the second, a Frenchman, Son of Palumbus, suc∣ceeded John. Some perhaps deceiv'd by the likeness of the names call him Marinus. This Martin (the story of whose Life is so short because of the small time he held the Chair) was Pope at the time when the Sons of Basilius, Leo and Alexander, were Emperors in the East, and Charles III. in the West, who we told you, was crowned by John VIII. and who broke the forces of the Nor∣mans infesting France in so many Battels, that he forced them to sub∣mit to him and receive the Christian Faith. Some write, that 'twas this Martin that with his tricks (of which somewhat will be said in the Life of Formosus) did so plague Pope John with Seditions, as to get him thrown into prison and force him to fly. But having by ill means gotten the Popedom, he soon died, having sate but one year and five days, and in that time doing nothing remarkable, either because his time was short, or because no occasion offered it self from whence he could acquire repute; except we may suppose it to be the Will of God, that those who attain to Power by indirect means should lose that true glory, which is the chief aim of every good Prince.
HADRIAN III. HADRIAN the third, a Roman, Son of Benedict, was a man of so great a Spirit, that immediately upon his entrance on the Popedom, An. Dom. 895. he proposed to the Senate and People, that a Law should pass, that no regard should hereafter be given to the Authority of the Emperor in the creation of any Pope, but that the Election of the Clergy and People should be free; this Institution was rather attempted than begun before by Nicolas I. as was said; but I be∣lieve Hadrian took now the opportunity, when the Emperor Charles was march'd with his Army out of Italy against the Rebellious Normans. He went with a design utterly to extirpate that unquiet people; but perceiving that would be difficult, and not to be done without great slaughter of his own men, he granted them that part of Prance to live in, which lies beyond the River Seine, and is still call'd from the name of the people, Normandy. They were bound to pay a yearly tribute to the Crown of France, to mind them that they stood possess'd of the Countrey, not by their own power, but by the bounty of the Emperor Charles. At this time William surnam'd the Godly, Duke of Aquitain and Earl of Auvergne, not having any Heirs male, began magnificently to build the Monastery of Clugny in his Fathers Mannor in a Village of Burgundy, and made Berno Abbot of the place, having set out an In∣come for the maintenance of the Monks: But he dying left it unfinish'd, having constituted Ebbo Earl of Poictou his Heir, who should take care according to his Last Will of the whole matter. And now Hadrian, of whom, for his courage and haughty Spirit, the Clergy and People of Rome had conceived so great hopes, died in the first year and second month of his Popedom, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, with the general lamentation of the People for the unseasonable loss of such a Father. STEPHEN V. STEPHEN the fifth, a Roman, Son of one Hadrian of the Via lata, was made Pope at the time when the Normans assist∣ed by the Danes contrary to their Treaties had well-nigh over∣run all France. For fear of these Invaders the body of S. Martin was carried from Tours to Auxerre, and plac'd in the Church of S. German; which begot a feud among the Monks, who could not agree by the name of which of the two Saints the Church should be call'd; to solve this doubt, they took this way; They set a Leper in the midst between the two Saints Bodies, who grew whole onely on that side which was to∣wards S. Martin, and then turning the other side towards him, he was quite healed. This Miracle determin'd the Controversie, which S. Ger∣man is thought to have suffered his new Guest to perform,  it should
be thought that the Body had lost any of its Sanctity by being transla∣ted. Authors say, that during this Popes time Charles the Gross, who had been Emperor twelve years was deposed by his Nobles for his sloth and dulness, and Arnulphus his Nephew was set up in his stead, who was the seventh Emperor from Charles the Great. This troublesom state of things tempted the Huns a Scythian Nation (according to Vincentius and Martinus) to make a descent into Tannonia, where joyning their Brother-Tribe, the Hungari, they possess'd themselves of the Countrey driving thence the Gepidi and Avares: and from hence marching with their forces into Germany, they pierc'd as far as Burgundy, destroying all with fire and sword. Stephen in this confusion of Affairs, was yet not a little comforted with the sanctity of Luithprandus Deacon of Pavia, Wal∣drad of Bavaria, and Bernard of Picardy, by whose lives and conversation the Christian Religion got so great Reverence that many Monasteries and Churches were sumptuously built throughout France. In the sixth year and eleventh day of his Papacy, he died, and the Sea was vacant five days. FORMOSUS. FORMOSUS Bishop of Porto succeeded Stephen, and in the beginning of his Pontificate adorned S. Peter's Church with some slight Paintings. This Formosus had formerly for fear of Pope John, left his Bishoprick and fled to France; and denying to re∣turn when he was recall'd, he was anathematized, and then coming to Rome he was depriv'd of all his Preferments Ecclesiastical, and put on profane manners with his secular habit. Some think the reason that Formosus was thus persecuted was for that he was a Party, if not Ring∣leader of the Faction that put John into Prison. However Formosus was so enraged at this hard usage, that he swore he would never return either to Rome or to his Bishoprick; but Pope Martin, who succeeded John, absolv'd him from his Oath, and restor'd him to his Countrey and to his former Dignity, whence not long after he came to the Popedom, rather by bribery than for the sake of any good that was in him, many men op∣posing his Election. Arnulphus now, the seventh Emperor from Charles the Great, as we said before, marching valiantly against the still rebel∣lious Normans gave them several Overthrows, but was too much puffed up with his success and became so intolerably imperious to all men, espe∣cially to the Clergy, that it pleased God, he died soon after of the lousie Disease. In whose room Lewis was put up for Emperor, but we read not that he was ever Crowned, for (as Martinus writes) Berengarius Duke of Friuli descended of the old Kings of Lombardy, renewing his claim to the Kingdom of his Ancestors, and bringing his pretensions to the decision of War, though at first he was overcome by Lewis, yet gi∣ving him Battel again at Verona, Lewis was vanquished and with great slaughter of his men being taken Prisoner had his eyes put out. And thus the Empire which the Franks had enjoy'd almost 100 years, was trans∣ferred to the Lombards, Constantine the Son of Leo being Emperor of the
East. I know not how it fell out, that at this same time that the Em∣perors shewed so little Courage, the Popes too were as greatly want∣ing in Virtue and Integrity, which render'd those times very miserable, Subjects being very apt (as Plato says) to follow the Examples of their Princes. I return to Formosus, whose times (left they should have been the most unhappy that ever were) were honour'd with the Learning and good Life of Remigius of Auxerre, who wrote divers Commenta∣ries, especially upon the Gospel of S. Matthew and S. Paul's Epistles. Some say indeed, that Author was not the person of whom I speak, but Remigius of Rhemes; however that be, 'tis certain they were both very learned men. Formosus died in the fifth year and sixth month of his Pontificate, and the Sea was vacant two days. BONIFACE VI. BONIFACE the sixth, a Tuscan, was created Pope in the room of the deceased Formosus, but how long he continued in the Papacy is a great question, for some Writers say longer, others say shorter. I am of opinion with the most, that he sate but twenty six days, and that which makes me think so is, that Histo∣rians make little or no mention at all of him; and how can it be, that (as some say) he should sit twelve years in the Chair of S. Peter, and yet his Reign be past over unregarded? I have plac'd him therefore in the Catalogue of Popes, not for any thing done by him, for he did no∣thing (indeed what could be expected to be done in so short a time?) but because he was regularly and canonically elected Pope. He died, as I said before, in the 26. day of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Peter's Church. STEPHEN VI. STEPHEN the sixth, a Roman, Bishop of Anagni being made Pope, persecuted the memory of Formosus with so much spite, that he abrogated his Decrees and rescinded all he had done, though 'tis said that 'twas Formosus that conferred the Bishoprick of Anagni upon him. But this I take to be the effect of his Ambition; the Clergy being come to that pass, that they were so far from needing compulsion, as formerly, to take upon them the Pontificate, that now they sought it with bribery; and hence it was that Stephen, because Formosus had hindred him before of this desired Dignity, exercised his rage even upon his dead body; for Martin the Historian says, he hated him to that degree, that in a Council which he held, he ordered  Body of  to be drag'd out of the Grave, to be strip'd of his Pontifical habit and put into that of a Lay-man, and then to be  among secular persons, having first cut off those two Fingers of his right Hand, which are principally used by Priests in Consecration, and thrown them into the Tiber, because contrary to his Oath, as he said, he had
return'd to Rome and exercised his Sacerdotal Function, from which Pope John had legally degraded him. This prov'd a great Controversie and of very ill example; for the succeeding Popes made it almost a constant Custom either to break or abrogate the Acts of their Predecessors, which was certainly far different from the practice of any of those good Popes whose Lives we have written. In our own time Paul II. a Venetian had like to have taken upon him the name of Formosus, (which would have been agreeable enough to him, being a proper man and of a ve∣nerable aspect) but that the Cardinals remembring this story dissuaded him, lest that should happen to him after his Death, which did to this Formosus; but Paul was hardly wrought upon, as thinking nothing but this Name to be wanting to his Felicity. Mean time the Emperor of Constantinople taking occasion from the sloth of the Popes, sends one Symbaticus, a Nobleman, his Sword-bearer with an Army into Italy, who after a Siege of three months takes Beneventum, after it had been in the possession of the Lombards 330 years; but three years after Guy of Lombardy retook it and drove out the Greeks, and so it fell to the Lombards again. But to return to Stephen; he died in the first year and third month of his , and the Sea was vacant three days after his death. ROMANUS. ROMANUS a Roman, as soon as he was got into the Pon∣tificate, disavowed and rescinded all the Acts and Decrees of Stephen. And indeed these . . 1551. Popelings studied nothing else but to extinguish the memory and honour of their Predeces∣sors, than which nothing is more mischievous or a more certain sign of a narrow Soul; for they that trust to such tricks as these are onely such as wanting all manner of Virtue endeavour to rob the well-deser∣ving of that Fame which themselves can never attain to. Indeed you shall never find any man envying the good name of another, but one that being obnoxious to all manner of reproach is hopeless of rendring his own name honourable to Posterity. Such men as these maliciously, falsly and craftily backbite, slander and find  with those that have deserv'd well of Mankind, like useless and cowardly Dogs that dare not seize a wild , but will venture to snap at them when they are fast chain'd. I was oblig'd however at least to mention this Pope Ro∣manus, because he obtain'd S. Peter's Chair after the ordinary manner, in which after he had sate three months he died. THEODORUS II. THEODORE the second, a Roman, follow'd the steps of these Mutineers, for he restor'd the Decrees of Formosus and  his Friends. Arnulphus (according to some Writers) still rul'd in Italy, and in France Charles the Simple, Constantine
the Son of Leo being Emperor of the East, at which time the Saracens invading Apulia, possess'd themselves of Mount S. Angelo, and took abun∣dance of Men and Cattel; but the Italians hastily got together an Army, set upon them and recovered all with  slaughter of the Enemies. While Affairs went thus in Italy, William Earl of , surnamed Sector-ferri, of the linage of Charles the Bald, ordered the Reliques which had been taken from the Chartreux Fryers at the time of the Norman Invasion to be restor'd, for now that the Normans were quieted, he  there would be some uproar about them, if they were not restor'd. Who the Normans were is not on all hands agreed: but they are said to have come into France from Norway. Theodorus in the 20th day of his Papacy died, leaving through the shortness of his time nothing memorable of himself. JOHN X. JOHN the tenth, a Roman, was next created Pope, and immediately reasserted the cause of Formosus, a great part of the People of Rome being against it, who raised such a tumult, that it wanted little of a Battel. He therefore re∣mov'd to Ravenna, where calling a Synod of seventy four Bishops, he damns all that Stephen had done and restores the Decrees of Formo∣sus, declaring it irregularly done of Stephen to re-ordain those on whom Formosus had conferred Holy Orders. These Popes by their constant inobservance of all Apostolical Practices were the occasions (in my Opinion) of these turmoils, especially joyning with that the Cowardize and Negligence of the Princes of Christendom; whose in∣terest it was that the Ship of S. Peter should labour with Tempests, that so the Master being unable to animadvert upon them, might not throw them like naughty Mariners overboard. Arnulphus was immers'd in pleasures and Charles King of France was truly worthy of his Surname of Simple or rather Blockhead. So that the Hungari a fierce and wild people tempted by this prospect of things, with a formidable Army invade first Italy, then Germany and France, without any considerable resistance, con∣suming all with fire and sword, and sparing no Sex or Age wherever they march'd. The Moors too invaded Calabria, of a great part whereof they possess'd themselves, but whilst they besieg'd Cosenza, their King was killed by Thunder from Heaven, whereupon they were dispersed and re∣turn'd home. Thus God himself punish'd with his own hand the Ene∣mies of the name of Christ out of pity to his people who were miserably forsaken by the Princes of the Earth, which if he had not done, the name of Italy and the Holy Church had been no more, Such sluggish and sorry fellows were the Potentates of those times. John died after he had been Pope two years and fifteen days, leaving nothing behind him worthy notice, but that he renew'd some old quarrels which had been almost forgotten.
BENEDICT IV. BENEDICT the fourth, a Roman, for his good nature and mildness was made Pope, but nothing was done in his time worthy of any great commendation. In his Age it happen'd, as to others it does sometimes, that a strange negligence of all manner of  had possess'd mankind, no incitements being applied by which the minds of men should be stir'd up to Actions that are praise∣worthy, which yet are never wanting under good Princes or well con∣stituted Governments. At this time (as I said before) Lewis the Son of Arnulphus endeavouring to recover his Fathers Empire was taken and kill'd at Verona by Berengarius; and then the posterity of Charles the Great first lost their Titles to France and the Empire of Germany. So true it is that which Salust says, Every rising hath its setting and every in∣crease its wane. The Empire which had arrived to so great a height lost its splendor by the sluggishness of the great men and people of Rome, when they once grew remiss in the exercises of Virtue, and emasculated their bodies with Luxury and with studied softnesses. And this we may say, was the case of the Papacy, for at first the Pontifical Dignity (with∣out Wealth and among Enemies and furious Persecutors of Christianity) was illustrious with a holiness and learning not to be attain'd without great pains and a consummate Virtue; but now the Church of God was grown wanton with its Riches, and the Clergy quitted severity of man∣ners for lasciviousness; so that there being no Prince to punish their ex∣cesses, such a Licentiousness of sinning obtain'd in the World as brought forth these Monsters, these Prodigies of wickedness by whom the Chair of S. Peter was rather seiz'd than rightfully possess'd. Yet this may be said for Benedict, that in this debauch'd Age he carried himself with gravity and constancy, and died in the third year and fourth month of his Pontificate, after which the Sea was vacant six days. LEO V. LEO the fifth, whose native Countrey Historians mention not, succeeded him, but was soon taken and thrown into Prison by one Christopher a Chaplain of his own, who aspir'd to the Pope∣dom, which was not done without great tumults and the loss of many mens lives. How lightly the Papal Authority was now esteem'd (by fault of former Popes) may be seen in this, that a private person should in a moment be able to seize so great a Dignity. But that saying is certainly true, that great places receive more honour than they confer upon the persons that supply them, as appears in the Roman Censorship, which at first was slighted as a mean Office, but when several of the Nobility had once condescended to execute it, the Office became so ho∣nourable, that the Nobleman who had not once in his life been Censor
was look'd upon as very unfortunate. Leo had sate but forty days when Christopher got into the Chair, which Indignity he laid so to heart, that in a little while after he died for grief, deeply resenting it that he should be rob'd of his Dignity by one that had eat of his bread; according to that of Theocritus, Nurse up a Wolf, and he'l devour you. CHRISTOPHER. CHRISTOPHER, whose Countrey and Family is, (be∣cause of the meanness of his extraction) not known, having got the Popedom by ill means lost it as ill; for after seven months he was justly deposed and forc'd to take on him a Monastic life, the onely refuge of men in trouble, for at that time Clergy-men that had deserv'd ill were as it were banish'd into Monasteries by way of punishment. There are those that say, Christopher was deposed in the Reign of Lewis III. while others ascribe him to the times of Berengarius, who (we told you) was from Duke of Friuli created Emperor, as de∣scending from the Longobardian Kings of Italy, and as being the onely man in whom for his valour and nobility they could place any hopes of seeing the honour of the Empire retriev'd. And that I should suppose Berengarius to have reign'd at this time I am persuaded by considering the short lives of the Popes before-going (who, as Monsters, were soon snatch'd away by a divine Power) and  length of the Reign of that Emperor, who having vanquish'd Guido Duke of Spoleto and slain Am∣brose Count of Bergomo, who were his first Adversaries, was crown'd Emperor by Formosus, and liv'd nine years after. What became of Christopher after his being deposed, shall be spoken in the Life of Sergius. SERGIUS III. SERGIUS the third, a Roman, Son of Benedict, entring up∣on the Pontificate, re edified the Lateran Church which was then ruined, and taking Christopher out of his Monastery, put him in Prison; and then setling his Affairs he took a Journey to France; after his return from whence, being now strengthen'd with the favour and friendship of the French King Lotharius, he totally abo∣lish'd all that Pope Formosus had done before, so that Priests who had been by him admitted to Holy Orders were forc'd to take new Ordi∣nation. Nor was he content with thus dishonouring the dead Pope, but he drags his Carcase again out of the Grave, beheads it as if it had been alive, and then throws it into the Tiber, as unworthy the honour of humane Burial. 'Tis said that some Fishermen finding his Body as they were fishing brought it to S. Peter's Church, and while the Funeral Rites were performing, the Images of the Saints which stood in the Church bow'd in veneration of his Body, which gave
them occasion to believe, that Formosus was not justly prosecuted with so great ignominy. But whether the Fishermen did thus or no, is a great question: especially it is not likely to have been done in Sergius's life∣time, who was a sierce Persecutor of the favourers of Formosus, because he had hindered him before of obtaining the Pontificate. And now, Reader, pray observe how very much these Popes had degenerated from their Predecessors: they, good men, refused this dignity when it was freely offered them, chusing rather to spend their time in Study and in Prayer: these on the contrary, sought the Papacy with ambition and bribery; and when they were got in, slighting the Worship of God,  animosities among themselves with the violence of the fiercest Ty∣rants; to the end that when no one should be left to animadvert upon their Vices, they might the more securely immerse themselves in plea∣sures. 'Tis my opinion, that Sergius acted thus, by the instigation of Lotharius,  'twas by Formosus's means that the Empire was trans∣lated from the French to the Lombards. Sergius leading his life after this rate died in the seventh year, fourth month and sixteenth day of his Papacy, several fiery Apparitions and blazing Stars with unusual moti∣ons having been seen in the Heavens a little before. Soon after the Hungari invaded Italy with an Army, and several defeats were on both sides given and taken. ANASTASIUS III. ANASTASIUS the third, a Roman, came to the Chair at the time when Landulphus Prince of Benevent fought a fierce Battel with the Greeks and defeated them in Apulia. For Patricius General of Leo Emperor of Constantinople had invaded Italy, and threatned a general ruin, if they did not immediate∣ly acknowledg Subjection to Leo: but (as was said) by the valour of Landulphus his  and his rage came to nothing, though Berenga∣rius also was bringing an Army together to meet him; but they made rather a terrible shew than were truly of force. But Anastasius not act∣ing any thing worth mention, died after he had been Pope two years and was buried in S. Peter's Church. This Pope we may commend in this one instance, that he did not persecute with ignominy and scandal the memory of any of his Predecessors; for he lived quietly and soberly, and had nothing chargeable upon him that was blame-worthy. LANDUS. LANDUS, a Roman, succeeded Anastasius; but his life was so obscure, that some do not reckon him for a Pope, especially Vin∣centius the Historian. But Martin, and Cusentinus are of ano∣ther mind, together with Gothifredus who writes, that this Lan∣dus  his Authority hindred a Battel between Berengarius and  Son of Count Guido; though others say, that Rodulphus
overcame Berengarius near Verona, and enjoy'd the Empire three years. There was indeed at this time a great contention for the Empire be∣tween the Italians, Germans and French, which was the cause of many cruel Wars which were not ended without great destruction of men and mischief to each Countrey. The Romans and Italians labour'd might and main to preserve the Empire in their own Countrey against the Power of those barbarous people, but they wanted some man that could lead them on in so great an Enterprise; for those noble Spirits, who had rendred the name of Italy famous through the World, were now not onely extinct, but even those virtuous Inclinations were quite sti∣sled which gave life to such glorious actions. Landus died in the sixth month and twenty first day of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Pe∣ters's Church. JOHN XI. JOHN the eleventh, a Roman, natural Son to Pope Sergius, in the year 909. succeeded. He was before Arch-bishop of Ravenna and had been deposed by the people in a Tumult; but upon the death of Landus, he obtain'd the Papal Chair, and shew'd more of the Spirit of a Soldier than of a Clergy-man. In∣deed the Church and all Italy had then need of such a Pope: For the Greeks (as we said before) being vanquish'd by Landulphus, had call'd the Saracens into Italy, who marching through Calabria and Apulia in∣to Lucaia and Campania threaten'd sudden destruction to the City of Rome. The nearness of the danger alarm'd Pope John, who taking Al∣bericus Marquess of Tuscany to his assistance, musters up an Army, fights the Saracens and gets the better, and beats them out of the territories of the City; but not looking upon his Victory as considerable, except he follow'd the pursuit, he attaques them at Minturnoe upon the shore of the River Garigliano, and conquers them with so great a slaughter, that they resolv'd to leave Italy, onely burning first all those places on that shore which were in their hands. But they alter'd their minds af∣terward and fortifying Mount Gargano they harass'd the Countrey there∣about with their Incursions. Mean while John taking all the honour of this action to himself makes his entrance into Rome after the manner of a Triumph, which gave so great distast to Albericus, that a Tumult arose upon it, in which Albericus was repulsed and flying to Orta, for∣tified the Town and Castle, and enticed the Hungari into Italy, who brought more destruction and ruin upon the Countrey than the Sara∣cens had done before, for they carried away the Youth of both Sexes, killing all that were stricken in years; nor did they spare the very Tus∣cans, for whose indemnity Albericus had agreed in the Treaty with them; nay they were more cruel to them than to other Italians, for they burnt and demolish'd all the Towns they had possess'd. 'Tis my Opi∣nion, that Berengarius (who then held Lombardy onely) gave them li∣berty of passage into Tuscany, upon condition they march'd quietly through his Countrey without hurting his Subjects. But the Hungari
having once tasted the sweet Spoils of Italy, did frequently visit it af∣terward; which Calamities so much enraged the Romans, that not be∣ing able to wreak their spite upon the Enemy who was too mighty and fierce for them, they took Albericus and beheaded him. John also in a Mutiny of the Soldiers, was by the followers of Count Guido taken and put in Prison. In his room another John was put up; but because he seiz'd the Chair by force and was soon deposed, he de∣serves not to be among the Popes. LEO VI. LEO the sixth, a Roman, was canonically elected Pope, acted nothing tyrannically in his whole life, but liv'd soberly and modestly, taking care of Religion as far as an Age of so cor∣rupt manners would bear. For he made it his endeavour to quiet the minds of the Citizens, (who through the rashness and folly of former Popes were inclining to Tumults) to compose the Affairs of Italy, to make Peace with forein Enemies and to drive the Barbarians from the skirts of his Countrey, than which nothing could be done to better purpose or more commendably in so short a time; for in the seventh month and fifteenth day of his Pontificate he died, and was buried in S. Peters's Church, to the great grief of the Citizens of Rome. STEPHEN VII. STEPHEN the seventh, a Roman, (according to some Au∣thors) came to be Pope at the time when the Hungari who were over-running Germany and Saxony were by Henry King of Germany overcome with a great slaughter near Merspurg. 'Tis said also that at this time Rodulphus King of Burgundy made his descent into Italy with a great Army against Berengarius II. who by the treachery of his own men was driven out of his Kingdom and fled to the Hun∣garians for refuge, who taking up Arms in his cause, the third year after his expulsion, under the conduct of one Salardus invade Italy with huge forces and take Pavia by storm, destroying the greatest part of it with fire and sword. The Italians hereupon finding Rodulphus to want strength and courage, call in Hugh Count of Arles. It was not without contention that Rodulphus gave place to him, but his Ene∣mies bearing hard upon him, he retreated into Burgundy. After this  finding occasion to mistrust those Persons that call'd him in, ba∣nish'd many of them; who fled to Arnoldus Duke of Bavaria, a man  of Rule, and persuade him to make War upon Italy. He passes the Alpes and is immediately receiv'd within the Walls of Verona by the Citizens with great kindness and friendship, but Hugh marching a∣gainst him, beats him in a pitch'd Battel and soon re-takes Verona. Mean while Berengarius dies in Bavaria, or as others say, in , and Berengarius III. Grand-son of Berengarius I. by his Daughter, comes
into Italy and in the year 935. gets the Empire. Some there are that ascribe these Actions I have mention'd, to the time of this Pope; but I would rather assign them to some of those Popes that preceded and suc∣ceeded; because, though I have set them down in short, yet they must needs require a long time to be brought about. But in so great a diversity of opinions concerning times, I chose rather to place them somewhere than utterly to omit things which were certainly once done, for the uncertainty of Writers. For the sake of Posterity we would not be so superstitious as to disbelieve that which various Authors have here or there thought good to record. To the times of this Pope may justly also be ascribed S. Ugibert a Nobleman of Lorain, who in a short time at his own charge built the Monastery of Gemblours after a mag∣nificent manner. At this time also 'tis said that Spireneus Duke of Bo∣hemia first received the Christian faith. Those that were then call'd Dukes being now, upon the encrease of their wealth and strength, en∣titled Kings of Bohemia. But Stephen having led a peaceable and a re∣ligious life died in the second year, first month and twelfth day of his Popedom, and was buried in S. Peter's Church. JOHN XII. JOHN the twelfth, a Roman, Son (as some say) of Pope Sergius, came to be Pope when a Fountain at Genoa streamed blood in great quantities (as Vincentius and Martinus relate) a sure presage of the ensuing Calamities; for soon after Genoa was taken and sack'd by the Saracens who came from Afric, and the Hungarians entring Italy utterly destroy'd all things far and near: but as they passed laden with Prey by the Confines of Sulmona, the people of Tagliacozzo on a sudden taking Arms, they were routed by them and lost their lives and plunder together. Racherius, who of a Monk had been made Bishop of Verona, was now a great Writer, but was banish'd to Pavia by King Hugh, because he inveigh'd against his manner of living with too great freedom. John died after he had been Pope four years, ten months and fifteen days. The Sea was vacant twelve days. LEO VII. LEO the seventh, a Roman, was created Pope during the reigns of Hugh and Lotharius in Italy, but did nothing worthy  mentioning. But his time was made famous by the Lives of Spireneus (according to Martinus) Duke of Bohemia a man of signal Devotion and Justice; and of his Son Wenceslaus who de∣generated not at all from his Father, killed by his Brother  who desired to reign. This Wenceslaus was afterwards justly canonized for a Saint, upon proof made of the holiness of his Life and of Miracles wrought by him both while he liv'd and after his death. Leo after he had sate three years, six months and ten days, died and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then vacant 3 days.
STEPHEN VIII. STEPHEN the eighth, a German, coming to the Papacy was so molested by the Romans with Factions, that he could do nothing remarkable; nay, (as Martinus relates) they wounded him so foully in one Tumult that he was a∣sham'd to appear abroad: King Hugh prepared to avenge his quarrel but died in the mean time, to whom succeeded his Son Lo∣tharius, but he made no mention of the matter, either because he had a kindness for the Citizens of Rome, or because his Reign was short, for he out-liv'd his Father but two years. Otho King of Germany did now undertake to revenge the murther of Winceslaus King of Bohemia upon Boleslaus his Brother who had killed him, and marching against him, after several Battels won and lost at last took him Captive. Ste∣phen died when he had been Pope three years four months and twelve days. The Sea was vacant ten days. MARTIN III. MARTIN the third, a Roman, imitated the meekness and peaceable carriage of Stephen, for being made Pope he laid aside thoughts of War, and employ'd his mind in reli∣gious matters, repairing Churches that were ready to fall with age, and relieving the poor with his Charity. Not but that in his time Europe was very much torn with cruel Wars: For Otho attempting to enter Italy against the will of Lotharius much blood was spilt on both sides, but Pope Martin persuaded them to lay down their Arms, because (among other reasons) there was a great famine in the Land, by reason the Trees were felled, the standing Corn trodden down, and even the Husbandmen with their Cattel were in this grievous War taken away. At Constantinople also were great Tumults, the Citizens making their Emperor a Prisoner, and shaving his head, banish'd him to a cer∣tain Island; but soon after Constantine Son of Leo getting the Empire, punish'd these sactious Citizens after the same shameful manner and ba∣nish'd them to the same Island. Martin died in the third year, sixth month and tenth day of his Popedom and was buried in S. Peter's Church; the Roman Sea was vacant twelve days. AGAPETUS. II. AGAPETUS the second, a Roman, was created Pope at a time when Italy was full of Warlike hurly-burly; for the Hun∣garians having invaded Italy with a  Force had over-run all the Countrey beyond the River Po, Henry Duke of Bavaria takes
up Arms immediately and getting an Army together marches against them, and in two fierce Battels routs them, though not without great damage to the Inhabitants thereabouts, and seizes all the Country from Aquileia to Pavia; from whence yet he soon departed into Austria, when he heard that Berengarius was coming against him with a great Army. Berengarius being therefore now Master of Italy takes to himself the name of Emperor, and calls his Son Albertus King of Italy, casting in∣to Prison Alunda, Lotharius's Brothers Daughter, lest she should lay claim to the City of Pavia which was her Dowry. Pope Agapetus and the great men of Italy, (observing the arrogance of Berengarius and that he made pretensions to every thing without regard to right and justice,) sent for Otho King of Germany into Italy, who entring by the way of Friuli with fifty thousand men quickly dethron'd Berengarius and Albertus and taking Alunda out of Prison, married her, of whom he had a Son, afterwards succeeding him by the name of Otho II. And now Otho leaving Italy, shew'd a great deal of moderation by permitting to Berengarius and his Son the Government of a Province and making Peace between him and the Pope. This Otho assisted Lewis King of France with a great Army against Hugh Earl of Paris, though his Bro∣ther-in-law, who with the help of some of the great men of that Coun∣trey had well-nigh outed him of his Kingdom. But Albertus Son of Berengarius, who then was Governour of Ravenna, aided with some Forces and Ships from Comachio, pirated upon the Merchants of Venice much against the mind of Pope Agapetus; at which the Venetians were so enraged, that they immediately rigg'd out a Navy and took Coma∣chio and burnt it. Whilst these things were doing, Pope Agapetus a harmless man and a great lover of the Church, died in the ninth year seventh month and tenth day of his Pontificate; about the same time that Otho Abbot of Clugny also slept in the Lord; whose Disciple Do maielus is supposed to be, that wonderfully holy man and great resto∣rer of Monastic Discipline. JOHN XIII. JOHN the thirteenth, a Roman, by the power of his Father Albericus of the Via lata gets into the Chair. His name was before Octavian; he was one that from his youth up had been debauch'd with all manner of Vice and wickedness; and if he had any time to spare from his lusts, he spent it in Hunting and not in Prayer. The Romans had at this time two Consuls annually and one Prefect, who was a Judg among the Citizens. Out of the People were created twelve Decarchons, who were instead of the Se∣nate; neither were the Romans without some kind of Dominions; for the neighbouring Towns of Tuscany between Orvieto and Todi; and all that lies between the City and Benevent, Naples, Tagliacozzo and Riete, were subject to the City of Rome. What lies beyond was possessed part∣ly by the Greeks and partly by the Saracens. It is not altogether cer∣tain, who then held Marca di Ancona and the Dutchy of Spoleto. In
the City thus free Octavian favour'd by the power of his Father assumes the Papal Dignity, a weight for which his shoulders were very unfit; which gave so great offence that two Cardinals who were nettled at it, sent to Otho, beseeching him to come and deliver the Clergy and the People of Rome out of the hands of Berengarius and this Pope John, otherwise telling him that the Christian Religion and the Empire too would both be ruin'd. Otho was at that time great in the estimation of all people, having (as we said before) conquered Boleslaus King of Bohemia, and routed the Hungarians, that  Germany, in three fierce Bat∣tels, taking three of their Princes, who were hanged up by the Germans, against the mind of the Emperor. While Otho was expected, the whole design was betray'd to John, who took both the Cardinals, and cut off the Nose of the one and the hand of the other. This mov'd Otho to hasten his march into Italy, where first he took Berengarius and his Son Albertus Prisoners, and banish'd one to Constantinople, the other into Austria; and soon after entring Rome, he was splendidly received even of John himself, and Crown'd (as some write) Emperor of Germany and Hungary, the Empire being now first translated to the Germans. There are Authors yet that place this to the times of Leo VIII. of whom we shall speak hereafter; whose Opinion is follow'd by Gratian in his Decree; though Ricardus and Cuseulinus disallow not the former: but the Lateran Library-keeper writes that Otho came to Rome in John's time, but says not a word of his Coronation; so perplex'd and con∣fused are the Affairs of those times by the carelesness and neglect of their Writers. Otho however having somewhat setled the State of the City, had some conference in private with John, dissuading him kindly from his naughty way of life and exhorting him to reform; but when he found fair words would not avail, he made use of threats and de∣clar'd for a General Council, convening all the Bishops of Italy to judg of the way of life of this wicked Fellow. The Censures of these good Men he apprehended would be heavy, and therefore fled to Anagni, sculking up and down in by-places like a wild Beast: So that Otho by the persuasion of the Clergy creates Leo, a Roman, a keeper of the Ar∣chives in the Lateran, Pope. But upon the departure of the Emperor, the Kinsmen and Friends of John turn out Leo, and recall him, who within few days after was struck dead (as was thought) from Heaven, lest the Church of God should be ruin'd by so pernicious a Sedition as was then growing on. Some indeed write that this wicked Wretch, or Monster rather, was taken in Adultery and there stabb'd. However this put not an end to the Schism; for the Romans upon the death of John put up Benedict in his room, and were earnest with the Emperor (who was then at Spalato) to confirm their choice. But the Emperor was highly displeased, and not onely denied their request as unjust, but (as shall hereafter be told) compelled them by force of Arms to abrogate Benedict and receive Leo. Many Prodigies are said to have been seen at this present time in Italy; for in a mighty tempest of wind and rain there fell a stone of a wonderful  from the Sky; and in the garments of many persons the figure of a bloody Cross ap∣peared miraculously; which portents were look'd upon to  great Slaughters and calamities to the Church. This John who was certainly the most pernicious profligate Fellow of any that preceded him in the
Pontifical Chair, died in the ninth year, third month and fifth day of his Popedom; upon whose death during the Sedition the Sea was vacant twelve days. BENEDICT V. BENEDICT the Fifth, a Roman, in the Sedition was of a Deacon made Pope chiefly by the assistance of the kinred and Dependents of John, to whom the Preferment of Leo by Otho gave great disgust. But the Emperor disapproving this Election, flatly the confirmation of it to the Romans who ear∣nestly sought it, and wasting the territories of the City with fire and sword, forced them not onely to turn out, but to yield up Benedict, and submit to Leo, with an Oath not to attempt any alteration in what the Emperor had establish'd in the affair of the Popedom. Matters thus composed in Italy, Otho goes back for Germany, taking Benedict with him, who soon after died at Hapspurg, whither he was banish'd. He held the Papacy six months and five days. The Sea was after vacant thirty days. LEO VIII. LEO the Eighth, the Proloscriniary (as I said before) upon the expulsion of John was created Pope by the Clergy and People of Rome. For when John led such an abominable and exorbitant life, that the Romans urg'd the Emperor to depose him and set up another Pope, he answered that the Election be∣long'd to the Clergy and People; and let them chuse a Man they took to be most fit, he would confirm him immediately. Hereupon when they had chosen Leo, and the Emperor had confirm'd him, soon after altering their minds, they deposed him and put up Benedict, which so angred Otho that he compelled them by force of Arms to yield up Be∣nedict and accept of Leo again, who was so teiz'd with the mutinous humour of the Romans, that he transferred the whole power of elect∣ing of Popes from the Clergy and People to the Emperor. But he liv'd not long after, dying in the sixteenth month of his Popedom.
JOHN XIV. JOHN the Fourteenth, Bishop of Narni, a Roman, Son of John a Bishop, succeeded Leo. But the Romans having got the trick of expelling their Popes, vex'd this Man also with seditions; for having call'd to their assistance Geffrey Lord of Terra de Lavoro, they broke into the Lateran Palace and feiz'd upon John, whom they first cast into the Prison of Castle S. Angelo, and soon after banish'd to Capua; but Geffrey with his onely Son being slain by John Prince of Capua, the Pope return'd straight to Rome in the eleventh month of his Exile. Otho also upon notice of the Pope's distress, together with his Son Otho and a good Army by long journeys came to Rome, and im∣mediately threw the Consuls, the Praetor and the Decarchons into Prison in order to a Trial for their Treason; who being by torture forced to confess, the Consuls were banish'd into Germany, the Decarchons were hang'd up, and Peter the Praetor, the cause and Ring-leader of all the mischief, was several times drag'd most ignominiously and whipt with Rods through the most publick places of the City and then sent Prisoner to Germany. Others say, his Punishment was thus, Being delivered to suffer at the will of the Pope, his Beard was first shav'd off, then he was hang'd by his hair upon the head of the Statue of Constantine's Horse, for the terror of all such ill Men; from whence being taken, he was set upon an Ass with his face backward and his hands tied under his tail and so led through the City, being as he went whipt almost to death with Rods; and then banish'd into Germany. The like severity (for examples sake) was used by the Emperor against Count Geffrey and his Son, who were kill'd (as I said before) by John Prince of Ca∣pua, their carcasses being drag'd out of their Graves and denied Chri∣stian burial. At this time the Selavi, who (when Hadrian III. was Pope, under Sueropylus Prince of Dalmatia had received the Christian Faith, cross'd the Sea into Italy, gave the Saracens a great rout at Monte Gargano and drove them thence; and the Hungarians by their example so broke their remaining force by recovering Cosenza out of their hands, that it became easie for Otho Son of the great Otho, (who came for that purpose with his Army) to make a perfect Conquest of them; nor was he content to have vanquish'd the Saracens, but he subdued too the Greeks who had made a League with the Moors, and drove them out of almost all Apulia and Calabria. Some say indeed that  made this War up∣on the Greeks, because Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople had denied to give him to Wife his Daughter, who had been espoused to him before. This is certain, that Otho, who was a generous young Man, deposed Ni∣cephorus, and made his Son John Emperor, himself marrying his Sister Theophania, who together with her Husband were crown'd by this Pope in the Lateran Church with an Imperial Diadem, by the consent of Otho the Father, who had made his Son his Partner in the Empire. During. the great and universal rejoycing upon this occasion, Pope John raised the Church of Capua to a Metropolitan Sea. But Otho  worn with
old Age returning into Germany, died at Vienna; whom John also fol∣low'd not long after, he dying after he had sate six years eleven months and five days, after which the Sea was vacant thirteen days. BENEDICT VI. BENEDICT the Sixth, a Roman, succeeded John in his Office and in his troubles, for being taken Prisoner by Cincio a potent Citizen, he was put into Castle S. Angelo, a Jail for Malefactors, or rather for innocent persons, where in a little while he was strangled, or (as Cusentinus says) famish'd. I cannot but admire that the actors of so great an outrage were never punish'd nei∣ther by the Citizens of the adverse Party, nor by the Emperor Otho, who was reputed an excellent Man and a stout defender of the Church of Rome. But I am afraid Cincius did not worse by him than he deserv'd; not but that how faulty soever Benedict might be, it was ill done of Cincius to lay violent hands upon the Pope, since the censure of him did not belong to a private Man. But see the turn of humane affairs; The Popes of our times make nothing to clap up Citizens into the same place and there starve 'em, whether they deserve it or are onely a little too powerful than they desire. I believe Otho was too much taken up with other business, so that he could not help him. He died when he had been Pope one year and six months. DONUS II. DONUS the Second, a Roman, a Man of great moderation, and though there were nothing done by him worthy of high com∣mendation, yet he was never charg'd with any injustice or dis∣honourable action. There were however many memorable actions of great of holy Men which render his times not altogether obscure. For in his time Baianus a great Magician, Prince of the Bulgarians, so harrass'd with War Basilius and his Son Constantine Emperor of Constan∣tinople, that he narrowly miss'd of taking the Town, which by the neg∣ligence of the Greeks was left almost empty; but at last upon hard terms a Peace was concluded between 'em. Adalbertus also a Bohe∣mian, Bishop of Prague, flourish'd now, who was a Man of so great San∣ctity, that he (by the impulse of the Divine Spirit) travell'd into Hungary, and baptiz'd the King thereof, and by his good life and godly example taught the Bishops of the Country to seek the grace of God; from whence passing into Prussia, preaching the Gospel of Christ with great diligence, he was there crown'd with Martyrdom. At this time too S. Edward King of England, was for his Sanctity in great honour; but was murthered by the fraud and villany of his Stepmother. Ri∣chardus the Historian adds to these S. Maiolus Abbot of Clugni, who
left a great Name behind him for his Miracles and holy life. Donus died in the first year of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, whereupon the Sea was vacant two days. BONIFACE VII. BONIFACE the Seventh, whose Family and Country (I suppose because of their baseness) Writers mention not, got the Popedom by ill arts and lost it as ill; for he was no sooner got into the Chair, but the honest part of the Citizens confederating, he was forc'd out of the City, ta∣king with him the most precious things out of the Church of S. Peter, and fled to Constantinople, where he onely tarried till by the sale of what he had so sacrilegiously got, he had amass'd vast sums of Mony, with which he returns to Rome, not doubting but by the help of that to retrieve his dignity, by bribing the Citizens. He met yet with great opposition from all good Men, but especially from John, a Deacon Car∣dinal, whom by the assistance of some wicked Bravo's, he caught, and put out his Eyes. But his Enemies encreasing about him, whether for fear or remorse for his great wickedness, this Author of so many mis∣chiefs miserably ended his life. Observe, I beseech you, how these Popes did degenerate from their Predecessors, who left the Church so ample and magnificent at the expence of their blood. The Pope of Rome the Father and Protector of things sacred, does himself steal 'em away, and he that should punish sacriledg is the Author of it; but thus it must needs fall out in any Government where the Pride and Cove∣tousness of ill Men shall prevail over the Virtue and Wisdom of the good. To great benefices none of the Clergy ought to be chosen, but such of whose Life and Learning there is a certainty; not those who ha∣ving nothing of Virtue or Religion seek by Ambition and Simony to get into places of Power. Boniface lived seven months and five days in his Pontificate, and then the Sea was vacant twenty days. BENEDICT VII. BENEDICT the Seventh, a Roman, as soon as he was made Pope he call'd a Council, in which he restored Ar∣nulphus Bishop of Rhemes who had been expell'd in a Sedi∣tion. At this time Otho II. having conquer'd Henry Duke of Bavaria, who had endeavoured some Alterations in the State, march'd against Lotharius, who had possess'd himself of Lorain, a Province of the Empire, and laid waste the Territory of Aken: and gaining a Victory over him, he over-ran the Country of Soissons and set fire to the Suburbs of Paris; but upon his retreat with his Forces he re∣ceived some damage near the River Aisne. After this raising a greater Army, he brought it into Italy against Basilius and Constantine, the Greek
Emperors, who had seiz'd Calabria and that part of Italy that lies to∣ward Sicily, but receiving a defeat at Basanello, he was forced to make his escape by Sea, where he was by chance taken by Pirates, and carried into Sicily. The Sicilians paid his Ransom, and sent him to Rome, and soon after caught the Pirates and put them to death. Otho now gets his Army together again and design'd to chastise severely the Romans and Beneventans, because they occasion'd the loss of the Battel at Basa∣nello, by flying first; but it was not thought safe to begin with the Ro∣mans, and therefore he turns against Benevent, which he takes and con∣sumes with fire, translating from thence the body of S. Bartholomew, and placing it at Rome, in an Island of the Tiber, formerly called Ho∣stia Jovis Lycaonia, which was of the shape of the poop of a Galley. Nay even to this day, as you view it from Tivertino, the Island resembles a Galley, so made, I suppose to represent that which brought Aesculapius to Rome; there is also to be seen engraven in stone the Serpent (in the form whereof that God is said to have arriv'd) and the Ribs of the Galley: so studious were the excellent Men of those times to bring Na∣ture to Art as well as Art to Nature. But to return to Otho; he soon after the aforesaid translation of the Body of S. Bartholomew, died at Rome, and was honourably buried in a Porphyry Tomb, still to be seen on the left hand as you go in, in the Portico of S. Peter's Church (call'd Paradise). Whilst Consultations were held about chusing a new Em∣peror, some insisting upon Otho III. Son of Otho II. Others standing up for Henry Duke of Bavaria, Otho's Nephew by his Brother, the Italians being earnest for one Crescentius of Lamentana, an eminent Man; the Germans on the sudden, of whom there were many then at Rome, chose Otho III. The Pope, good man, all the while urging them, that in their Election, they would have a regard to the Church of Christ, which needed a Governour of great ability and diligence; but at last to pre∣vent tumults, he approv'd of what the Germans had done. He died af∣ter he had been Pope eight years and six months, upon which the Sea was vacant five days. In his time Valdericus Bishop of Hamburg was famous for his great Learning and Sanctity. JOHN XV. JOHN the Fifteenth, a Roman, or (as some will have it) a Pavian, had not been Pope three months but he was taken by the Romans and put into the publick Jail of Castle S. An∣gelo, where he pin'd away so long with the stink of the Pri∣son, want of necessaries and trouble of mind, that he died. Some write that he was made away by Ferruccio Father of Boniface VII. a Man of great Power, because he had been an Enemy to his Son in his Pontifi∣cate. However that be, 'tis certain he died in Prison and was buried in S. Peter's Church. Whether he was deposed for his Tyranny and Arrogance, or by the malice and envy of seditious people, is not cer∣tain, so confused are the Accounts we have of those times. In his time lived Odo Abbot of Clugnis and Berengarius of Tours, Men famous for Learning and holy Lives, though 'tis said of Berengarius, that through
his confidence in his vast Learning he err'd in the Faith, holding a wrong Opinion of the Eucharist, which in a General Council holden at Rome he afterward recanted, and leaving off his study of controversial mat∣ters, though he were Arch-Deacon of Anjou, he gave all that he had to the poor, and got his living by the labour of his hands. JOHN XVI. JOHN the Sixteenth, a Roman, Son of Leo a Priest, born in the Ward of Gallina bianca, being got into the Popedom, hated the Clergy strangely, and was deservedly for the same mutually hated of them, and more especially because what∣ever he could get either of things sacred or profane he gave to his Kin∣red and Relations, without any regard to the glory of God or the ho∣nour of the Church, and this evil humour has descended to his Succes∣sors, even to our own times, than which naughty custom nothing can be more pernicious, when our Clergy seem not to seek the Popedom for the sake of Religion and the Worship of God, but that they may with the profits of it satisfie the luxury and avarice of their Brethren, Nephews or Domesticks. They write that a Comet appeared about this time portending the coming Calamity, for there follow'd a long Pestilence and Famine, and both Benevent and Capua suffered much by an Earth quake: and these were generally look'd upon as judgments for the Pride and rapacious temper of the Pope, and his contempt of God and Man. But it pleased God, that after a Pontificate of eight months he died and was buried in S. Peter's Church. JOHN XVII. JOHN the Seventeenth, a Roman, succeeded when Otho was Emperor, but had not yet been Crown'd. He was a Man of great Learning, and (as Martinus Writes) was the Author of several elegant things. He was so teiz'd with Seditions by Crescentius the Consul of Rome, who claim'd to himself an absolute Power in the City, that he gave place to the Mans Ambition, and with∣drew into Tuscany. But Crescentius understanding that John was so ex∣treamly enrag'd, that he had sent for Otho and his Army into Italy, he dispatch'd all the Pope's Kinsmen and Friends that were left in Rome, to him to desire him to lay by all thoughts of bringing Otho to his as∣sistance, but to come to the City there to exercise his most ample Power, promising perfect obedience in all matters. John, being mov'd with the intreaties of his Friends and partly fearing lest if Otho should enter Italy with his Army, he might do more hurt than good, went to Rome, where Crescentius with all the Magistrates and a multitude of Citizens meeting him, he was brought to the Palace of Lateran, in the Porch whereof Crescentius and all the heads of the Faction kiss'd his feet and begg'd his Pardon; and thus matters being composed they afterward
lived quietly together. At this time Henry Abbat of Loby in Lorain, Adolfus Bishop of Utrecht who wrote much in praise of the Blessed Virgin and of the Holy Cross, and Albo Abbat of Fleury (who after∣ward in Gascoign suffer'd Martyrdom for the faith of Christ) Men fa∣mous for Learning, Religion and Sanctity are said to have flourish'd. This John died after he had been Pope ten years, six months and ten days; and the Sea was vacant six days. GREGORY V. GREGORY the Fifth, a Saxon, Son of Otho, before call'd Bruno, by the Authority of Otho III. for Kinred sake was made Pope. But upon the return of Otho into Germany, be∣ing vex'd by the Roman factions, he fled first into Tuscany, and thence into Germany to the Emperor. Mean while the Romans vest Crescentius with an absolute Consular Power, who immediately creates Pope, John, a Greek, Bishop of Piacenza, not more wealthy than learn∣ed; whose name, I confess, is by some left out of the Catalogue of Popes, as not regularly created; but others make him John XVII. because he was chosen by the Clergy and People of Rome, to whom of right the Election belongeth. Crescentius upon the news of Otho's approach with his Army, fortifies the Walls and Gates of the City with all diligence; he fortifies too the Castle S. Angelo, and places strong Guards in every Post that required, so that for some time after it was called Crescentius's Castle, taking the name of him that fortified it instead of that of the Builder. At length the Emperor arriv'd and investing the City, when the Romans perceived themselves unable to withstand so great Forces, trusting to the clemency of Otho, they opened their Gates to the Ger∣mans. And now Crescentius and John being without Friends and at their wits end, fled into Castle S. Angelo, and defended themselves well; till upon hopes of Pardon coming forth to address themselves to the Emperor, Crescentius receiving many wounds from the Multitude, was kill'd; but John having his Eyes first put out, lost both his Popedom and life together; and Gregory after he had been expell'd nine months, was restored. He taking notice of the weakness of the Empire and the uncertainties of Chance, and being willing to preserve the Empire among the Germans, and that he should be preferred before other who excell'd in worth and Virtue, with the consent of Otho, he made a Decree con∣cerning the Election of an Emperor, An. Dom. 1002. which has conti∣nued in force to this day: To wit, that it should belong to the Ger∣mans alone to chuse a Prince who should be Coesar and King of the Ro∣mans, till the Pope should have confirm'd him, and then to have the Titles of Emperor and Augustus. Ptolemy writes that at first the power of Election of Emperor was in the Arch-bishop of Mentz for Germany, the Arch-bishop of Triers for France, and the Arch-bishop of Cologn for Italy. To these were added four Secular Princes, the Marquess of Bran∣denburgh, who after the Election, is Chamberlain to the Emperor, the Count Palatine, who is chief Sewer, the Duke of Saxony, who is Sword∣bearer, and the King of Bohemia, the seventh Elector, (and Cup bearer,)
was added, they say, to prevent discord between parties, for if the rest were equally divided, his Vote turned the Scale. This, 'tis said, gave distaste to the French; but because the Line of Charles the Great being extinct in Lewis the Son of Lotharius, that Realm was fallen into the hands of Hugh Capet the chief Minister at that time (the great af∣fairs of that Kingdom for some time not being manag'd by Kings) they wav'd all thoughts of retrieving the Empire; but the main reason was that the new Possessors were well enough yet satisfied with their for∣tune, and dar'd not attempt any thing further, 'till they were certain that their late acquir'd Regal Power stood upon a good foundation. Ro∣bert the Son and Successor of the Great Hugh is much and deservedly praised for his Courage, Justice, Modesty and Religion; for though he exercised himself very much in the Art Military, yet he found time so often to frequent the Churches of God and to celebrate the Divine Ser∣vice, as if he had been in holy Orders. He is said to have made the Hymn, Sancti spiritûs assit  gratia; and by these Arts not less power∣ful than his Arms he gain'd the hearts of the People, and drew those honourable respects to his Family which they had before given to that of Charles the Great. Robert a certain Bishop of Chartres is about this time said to have been in great repute for Learning and Sanctity; he having written much and reduced the singing in Churches to a better method. Gregory died after he had been Pope two years and five months. The Sea was vacant fifteen days. JOHN XVIII. JOHN the Eighteenth, Bishop of Piacenza, by the power of Crescentius the Consul (as we said) whom he had cor∣rupted with his Money, in the time of Gregory V. was made Pope by a Faction; for he brought so much Money with him from Constantinople, that even the good Men might be brib'd to serve his ill ends, much less might he prevail with the Covetousness and Ambition of Crescentius. I wonder that Histo∣rians place this John in the number of the Popes, he having got into the Chair while Gregory was alive; unless that in writing the Lives of Popes it may be thought fit, as in a continued History, to set down the outrages of Usurpers and Tyrants as well as the worthy Actions of good and lawful Princes, that Readers may observe the difference be∣tween good and bad, and upon the sight of examples of both be deter∣red from vitious, and encouraged to virtuous practices, and lead a bles∣sed and happy life in the Earth. Which blessedness and felicity John wanted; for being a Robber and a Thief in his Pontificate, and coming not in, as he ought, by the Door, He died with ignominy enough in the tenth month of his Usurpation. The Sea was vacant twenty days.
SYLVESTER II. SYLVESTER the Second, before called Gilbert, a French Man, got the Popedom (as they say) by ill Arts. When he was young he was entred and sworn a Monk of Fleury in the Diocese of Orleans; but he left the Monastery to follow the Devil, to whom he had wholly delivered himself up, and went to Sevil in Spain to study humane Sciences; being extreamly greedy of Know∣ledg and Learning, in which he made such progress, that of a Scholar he soon became an excellent Master. Martinus writes, that the Emperor Otho, King Robert of France, and Lotharius a Man of noble birth and great learning, afterward Arch bishop of Sens were his Scholars. Gil∣bertus therefore full of Ambition and push'd on with the diabolical de∣sire of Rule, by Simony first gets the Arch-bishoprick of Rhemes and then of Ravenna; at last the Devil helping him with an extraordinary lift, he got the Popedom, upon this Condition, that after his death he should be wholly the Devils, by whose assistance he had arriv'd at so great a Dignity. Being greedy of Rule, he ask'd the Devil once, how long he should enjoy the Pontificate, the Enemy of mankind answer'd (as he is wont) ambiguously, that he should live long, if he came not near Jerusalem. So that when in the fourth year, first month and tenth day of his Papacy he was at Rome at Mass in the Church of Holy Cross in Jerusalem, it came into his mind that now he must die; where he heartily repenting confess'd his fault before the people, exhorting them all to lay aside Ambition and to withstand the Stratagems of the Devil, betaking themselves to a holy and pious life: then he desired them, that after his death they would lay the trunk of his Body however torn and dismembred, as it deserved to be, in a Cart, and there to bury it where the Horses should of their own accord carry it: and then (as 'tis said) that wicked Men might see that yet there was some room for pardon left with God for them, if they at any time repent, by the Divinc Will and Providence, the Horses of their own accord went to the Church of the Lateran, where his body was buried. Martinus writes beside, that as well from the clattering of this Pope's bones, as from the Sweat or rather moisture of his Tomb, People are wont to gather Presages and those most manifest of the approaching death of any Pope, and that this is hinted in the Epitaph on his Tomb. Whether it be true or no, let the Pope's, whom it concerns, look to't.
JOHN XIX. JOHN the Nineteenth, whose Surname and Family because of their baseness are not recorded, died four months and twenty days after he was made Pope. So that because of the shortness of his Pontificate there was nothing memo∣rable done either by himself or any other in the time: unless that many Prodigies, Apparitions and Comets were seen, and many Towns ruin'd by Earth-quakes, foreshewing the Calamities that were to come: Some ease in which yet was given by Hugh, the Vice∣roy of Italy under Otho and Governour of Tuscany; for he manag'd his Province with so great Justice and Integrity, that no one complain'd for want of an excellent Prince. Who afterward dying at Pistoia, the Tuscans universally bewailed him as a publick Parent, not suffering any manner of Respect to be wanting to his Funeral. In this place I there∣fore thought good to mention the deserv'd praises of Hugo, that Gover∣nours of Countries may know, that it is much better by a just and generous administration to acquire glory and honour, than by unjust ways to heap up Riches with everlasting shame and ignominy. JOHN XX. JOHN the Twentieth, a Roman, of the Ward of Port-Metro∣politan, being made Pope, indulg'd himself in an easie way of living, and did nothing worth mentioning: But Robert King of France deserv'd the highest commendations, who at this time led a Life as devout as Kingly, excelling all the cotemporary Christian Kings in Knowledg and religious living, and being himself excell'd by no Man in controversial Learning; he not owning that Opi∣nion which the Princes of our times have embrac'd, that it is not worth a Potentates while to be learned; but that it behoves them that are to rule the Nations, to take their rules of Government from the precepts of others, which yet cannot be done without reading and study. What else indeed is an illiterate Prince, but the Image of a Lion command∣ing the other beasts? 'Tis necessary they should be able to moderate their own passions as well as the peoples, who would be thought fit to govern others. With great reason therefore it is that we speak well of Robert, whose devotion was such, that as ost as he had leisure from his warlike Employments, he would sing the canonical hours with the Priests; and so great were his merits in this way, that once when he had beleaguer'd a Town of his Enemies, and neglected the Siege to attend the canonical hours, the Walls miraculously sell down and his Men immediately rushing in, took the place. But John (according to some Authors) having sate in the Chair four years and four months died and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then vacant nineteen days.
SERGIUS IV. SERGIUS the Fourth, a Roman, Son of Martin, suc∣ceeded; a Man of a most holy life and sweet conversation both before and in his Pontificate. He was charitable to the poor, chearful among his Friends and Acquaintants, merciful to those who were faulty, and mild even with the perverse. Beside he was so prudent, that in all the time he sate in the Chair, nothing was committed which could reflect any charge of negligence upon his Government. For placing all his thoughts in Hea∣ven (which all Popes ought to do) and having a mind imbued with much natural goodness he brought about all things to his mind. By his counsel and advice the Princes of Italy entred into a League for dri∣ving the Saracens out of Sicily, and accordingly made equal prepara∣tions of Men. There were then in Italy most of the Sons of Tancred the great Duke of Normandy, among whom was William surnam'd Fer∣rebach, a Man of so great courage, that taking for his Companion in the Expedition, Malochus General of the Forces of Michael Catalaicus Em∣peror of Constantinople, he in a short time clear'd that Island of Saracens, the Princes of Capoua and Salerno lending some assistance. Afterward Malochus using injustice in the division of the Spoil, William thought good to dissemble for the time, but returning into Italy with forty thou∣sand Normans who were just come from the Holy War, he seizes upon all Apulia which was subject to the Greeks, and at Melfi meets Malo∣chus with his Army, fights and defeats him: and thus by the valour of William the Kingdom of Apulia was transferred from the Greeks to the Normans; for he dying without Heirs his Brother Drogo succeeded him, and to him succeeded Humfrey a younger Brother, from whom de∣scended Robert Guiscardi and his Brother Roger. While this past in A∣pulia, Italy and almost all the World too labouring under a Famine and Pestilence, the holy Man Sergius died in the second year and fifteenth day of his Popedom, and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then vacant eight days. BENEDICT VIII. BENEDICT the Eighth, born at Frascato, his Father's name was Gregory, as soon as he was made Pope Crown'd Henry I. of Bavaria, Emperor in the room of Otho III. de∣ceased, according to the Decree of Gregory V. Some say, that Otho died at Rome and that his body was carried into Germany; others say 'twas buried in S. Peter's Church. However that may be, 'tis certain, that Henry Duke of Bavaria, who was an excel∣lent and a most holy person was now created Emperor, and that he had an Empress equally praise-worthy for Charity, Devotion and Affabili∣ty.
But whilst he was employed in composing the affairs of Germany, the Saracens entred Italy, took Capua, and besieg'd Bari, the Inhabitants whereof being reduced to extremity for want of Provisions, the Vene∣tians with their Fleet reliev'd them, and with the assistance of the Greeks, set upon the Saracens who sate before it, and with great slaughter of them, raised the Siege, An. Dom. 1008. at the same time that Jerusalem was taken by the Turks, without any violation of the Holy Sepulchre, the Church of Mount Sion or Bethlehem. The Venetians had a design to have reliev'd Jerusalem too, but that they were with held by their Enemies of Zara, to whom yet at Loreto they gave so total a rout, that they durst never after by War molest any of their Neighbours. But Henry having setled the state of Germany, coming to Rome, received the Imperial Crown, and then marching to Capua, drove the Saracens out of it, and carried on the War against Bubagano a General of the Greeks, who favour'd the Moors, with so much vigour, that he dispossess'd him of Troy, a City he had built in the confines of Apulia, in a place where Hannibal was said heretofore to have encamp'd. The Emperor Henry and his Wife Cunigunda are reported to have led such chast and holy lives, that they grew famous for working Miracles, omitting no action which might contribute to the glory of God. He founded the Bisho∣prick of Bamberg, and married his Daughter to the King of Hungary, by whose means that King and all his Subjects received the Christian Faith; but Henry died in the eighth year of his Empire, to the great loss of his Subjects. He being dead, of whom in all exigencies Bene∣dict made use as his Protector, he was expell'd by a Faction and ano∣ther Pope chosen in his room, though he soon after agreed the matter with his Adversaries, who turn'd out again the Pseudo-Pope, and restor'd Benedict with honour. He died in the eleventh year, first month and thirteenth day of his Popedom and was buried in S. Peter's Church. 'Tis said, that a certain Bishop walking in a solitary place, Benedict ap∣pear'd to him sitting upon a black Horse, whereupon the Bishop ask'd him the reason of his appearance in that manner; he answer'd, that his business was to desire him to take some Money which he had hid in a certain place to which he directed him, and to give it to the poor, as from him; for that the Money had been of no profit to him, it consist∣ing of what had been given of Alms or gotten by Rapine. The Bishop executed his request, and immediately surrendred his Bishoprick and led a Monastic life. Vincentius writes, that Gerard Bishop of Canobio was in great account about this time for his Learning and exemplary Life; as also was Gutherus Bishop of Prague, who for his great abilities and holi∣ness suffered Martyrdom from the Enemies of the Christian Religion. At this time also so great a Pestilence raged in the World, that 'twas thought fewer surviv'd it than died of it: which Calamity was fore-shew'd by a Well of wholesom Water in Lorain being turn'd into blood.
JOHN XXI. JOHN the twenty first, a Roman, Son of Gregory, was, as some will have it, Bishop of Porto, though others say, he ne∣ver was in holy Orders at all; he was made Pope at the same time that Conrade of Schwaben was by a just suffrage elected Emperor in the room of Henry, who had been dead three years. In this Interregnum I suppose it was, that several Cities of Italy revolted from the Empire and stood up for their liberty; wherefore Conrade, who was a great Soldier and had been for many years in great Command in the Wars under Henry, raising an Army speedily enters Italy, and marching first against the Milaneses, the chief Authors of this defection, he sits down before the Town, burns the Suburbs and breaths forth nothing but utter ruin to the City; but quickly raises his Siege, by the persuasion of the Arch-bishop of Cologn, who assured him, that as he was at Mass, S. Ambrose appear'd to him, and threaten'd destruction to them all, except they departed from the City of which himself was Patron. Conrade therefore holds on his Journey to Rome, where at the hands of Pope John he receiv'd the Imperial Crown, and then march'd against the Hungarians and Sclavonians, who had assisted the rebellious Italians and soon subdu'd them. Rodolphus also Duke of Burgundy being vex'd by the Seditions of his Subjects, put himself un∣der the protection of Conrade, and therefore Burgundy has been ever since  for a good part of it, a Province of the Empire. It is said of Conrade, that he made several very useful Laws; among which one was, that it should be death for any Prince of the Empire to di∣sturb the peace of it; and upon that account he was a fierce Persecutor of Leopold a German Count, who was a Ring-leader of some distur∣bances in his Country. He sent Ambassadours to charge the Greeks and Normans (who were quarrelling about the Kingdom of Apulia) to lay down their Arms; and threaten'd ruine to the Romans, if they per∣sisted, as they had begun, to teize their Pope with Seditions. In his time Religion was adorn'd in France by the strict life and holiness of several Abbats, and Himericus Son of S. Stephen King of Hungary had great reputation for his Miracles. But John who is very much to be praised for his life, died after he had been Pope eleven years and nine days. The Sea was then vacant eight days.
BENEDICT IX. BENEDICT the Ninth, as some say, the Nephew of John, born at Frascati, Son of Albericus, came to the Ponti∣ficate when Canutus a King of England, out of devotion and for performance of a Vow came to Rome, which having done, as he return'd home he married his Daughter to Henry the Son of Conrade. Soon after Conrade dying, his Son Henry II. succeeded his Father, and raising an Army gives battel to Uldericus King of Bohemia; but the Victory being doubtful, he renew'd the fight, overcame him and took him Prisoner, but setting him under Tribute he discharg'd him from his imprisonment; then marching against the Hun∣garians who were contending about the Crown, he restor'd Peter to his Throne who had been driven out by Alboinus. In the mean time the Romans deposed Benedict, who was a sluggish Fellow and good for no∣thing, and set up in his room John Bishop of Sabina, by the name of Sylvester III. who also after a Popedom of nine and forty days was turn'd out and Benedict restor'd; and he finding himself still liable to the same danger again, of his own accord resign'd the Chair to John Arch-deacon of S. John at Port Latin, afterward called Gregory VI. though some af∣firm that he sold it to him. Wherefore Benedict was ill spoken of by all Men deservedly and condemn'd by the divine judgment; for 'tis cer∣tain that after his death he was seen in a most monstrous likeness, and being ask'd, why having been Pope, he appear'd in such a horrid shape? Because (says he) I led my life without Law or Reason, it is the will of God and S. Peter, whose Seat I defiled with all manner of wicked∣ness, that I bear the shape rather of a Monster than of a Man. After he had by intervals held S. Peter's Chair ten years, four months and nine days, he died, upon which the Sea cannot be said to have been vacant at all, because he sold it. Historians write, that at this time Gerard, a Ve∣netian, Bishop of the Hungarians, an excellent Man and of great Learn∣ing, chearfully suffer'd Martyrdom by the Enemies to the name of Christ; being bound to a Cart, and from a high Hill let down upon a Precipice and torn to pieces. SYLVESTER III. SYLVESTER the Third, a Roman, Son of one Laurence, was substituted into the room of Benedict when he was ex∣pell'd, but held it not long, for after nine and forty days Benedict was restor'd by his own Faction. The Popedom was now brought to that pass, that he who was most ambitious and would give most for it, not he who was most religious and learned surely obtain'd this high Office, to the great oppression and discourage∣ment of all good Men; a naughty custom which I wish were laid by
even in our own times; and yet this mischief is not so great, but that I fear (except God avert) we shall see much worse. I return to Sylvester, who being Cardinal of Sabina, was made Pope not by the College of Cardinals, for that had been tolerable, but meerly by Simony, as some write; and soon after justly deposed, having entred like a Thief and a Robber, not by the Gate, but by the back door. Benedict indeed was restor'd, but the City continued in a hubbub, sometimes desiring this Man and then another to be put up; which uses to be the case of a Mo∣bile who wanting a Governour to steer their giddy humours generally prefer the worse to the better Men. GREGORY VI. GREGORY the Sixth, Arch-deacon of S. John at Port∣Latin, receiv'd (as we said) the Chair of Benedict. But the Emperor Henry II. hearing of these miscarriages, with a great Army enters Italy, and calling a Council, causes Benedict IX. Sylvester III. and Gregory VI. all to be depo∣sed for so many wretched Monsters, and creates Syndegerus Bishop of Bamberg, Pope, by the name of Clement II. Yet Gilbertus the Histo∣rian, affirms this Gregory to have deserv'd very well of the Church, ha∣ving by his Authority and great Spirit in a short time reasserted the digni∣ty of the Sea Apostolick, which had been much weakned in its Powers by the negligence of some of his Predecessors; for he recovered the Patrimony of the Church, and first with Excommunications and Curses and (when they avail'd not) with downright force of Arms he de∣stroy'd the Banditi who lurking near the City, would cruelly murther Pilgrims as they came to Rome, for devotion sake. For this reason some wicked Rogues slander'd him commonly with the names of Mur∣therer, Simoniac and Blood-thirsty; nay even some Cardinals would say so too; which so mov'd Gregory, that whilst he lay ill of that sick∣ness of which afterward he died, he sent for those Cardinals and re∣buk'd them sharply for finding fault with that which was done with so much justice and honesty; And that you may know, (says he) whe∣ther I have done that which is right or no, when I am dead, carry my Corps to the Church-doors, which first let be lock'd up, and if they do miraculously open, then think that I am an honest Man and wor∣thy of Christian burial; if not, that both Soul and Body is damn'd, and you may cast out my Corps where you please. The Cardinals did ac∣cordingly, and the doors were thrown open by a strong Wind that rose on a sudden, and the Body brought in, to the admiration of all Men and to the great reputation of his Sanctity. This is the substance of what various Authors write of Gregory, who sate in the Chair two years and seven months, during the Schism.
CLEMENT II. CLEMENT the Second, before call'd Syndegerus, Bishop of Bamberg, was made Pope in the Council, by the consent, or rather Authority and Command of Henry II. who having received at this Popes hands the Imperial Crown, caused the Romans to take an Oath after a form he prescribed, not to meddle in the Election of any Pope, except by a command from him; for the Emperor saw things to be come to such a height of Licentiousness, that any factious and potent fellow, however ignoble, could arrive at that Dignity by purchasing the suffrages of the Electors, which ought not to be conferr'd but by the Spirit of God upon those that excell'd in Learning and a holy life. From hence he went to , where he settled all things and having listed those Soldiers, who had so stoutly resisted the Saracens, he return'd by Rome for Germany. He was no sooner gone (as some write) but the Romans contriv'd to poison the Pope, be∣cause made so without their assent, in the ninth month of his Pope∣dom; nay some Authors say, the venemous Potion was prepared for him by that Stephen, who by the name of Damasus II. succeeded him, at the time when Odo, Abbat of Clugny a Man of extraordinary holi∣ness dying, Hugo was made Abbat after him, a noble Personage, pious, devout, affable and learned, Henry II. at this time reigning in France, Alphonsos in Spain and Michael with his Son Constantine being Emperors of Constantinople, which Empire was now in great weakness and distress. DAMASUS II. DAMASUS the Second, a Bavarian, surnam'd Bagnario or Pepone (as some say) seiz'd the Papal Chair by force, without any consent of the Clergy and People. So deep root had this licentious custom taken, that any ambitious fellow durst invade the Seat of S. Peter. But the just God avenged himself upon this Villain, that he might be an example to the rest, who should seek by ambition and Simony that which ought to be the reward of Virtue; for on the 29th day of his Pontificate he died. Some would not have this Man put in the Catalogue of Popes, because he came not regularly to that Dig∣nity, and admire that the Romans were not mov'd with the villany of the action, contrary to their Oath to Henry, to compel him to lay down his Office; but because he liv'd so short a time, that the Citizens could not so soon bethink themselves what to do, I think they are not to be blam'd. We shall then pass to Leo.
LEO IX. LEO the Ninth, a German, An. Dom. 1049. was made Pope after this manner. The Romans having sent Embassadours to the  to intreat him to send them a good Pope, he immediately nominated to them Baunon Bishop of Toul, a good Man and of great integrity. Who taking his journey towards Rome in his Pontifical habit, was met by the Abbat of  and Hil∣debrand a Monk, born at Soana, who persuaded him to lay by his Pon∣tifical habit, and to enter Rome, for that Henry had no power from God to create a Pope, but it belonged of right to the Clergy and People of Rome. With these words Leo was so mov'd (and because as he came along he had heard a Voice saying, Ego cogito pacis cogitationes, non afflictionis,) that he laid by his habit and entred Rome as a private Man, accusing himself that he had chosen to obey the Emperor rather than God. The Roman Clergy then by the persuasion of Hildebrand elected Baunon Pope, and so much the more readily, because he had prosess'd the right of electing Popes ought not to be in the Emperor, but in the Clergy. And yet the Vices of several Popes were (as we have said) so great, that it seem'd to be done by the judgment of God, that this Power should be taken from the Clergy, that they might a∣mend their flagitious lives and sinful inclinations, and that the Church of Christ might not suffer ruin in the hands of such evil Prelates. Thus Baunon having got the Papacy, and having chang'd his name to Leo IX. he immediately created Hildebrand a Cardinal-Deacon and gave him the Government of S. Paul's Church; so that it seem'd as if they had divided the Pontifical charge between them, one ruling the Church of S. Peter, the other that of S. Paul. In the mean time Drogo Chieftain of the Normans in Apulia dying, his Brother Gisulphus succeeded him and possess'd himself by force of the City of Benevent which was the Popes by surrender; for when the Emperor Henry having built a Church at Bamberg to the honour of S. George, and had a great mind it should be made a Cathedral, Benedict VIII. consented upon condition the said Church should pay yearly, as a kind of Tribute, a hundred Marks of Silver, and a white Horse with his caparisons; which year∣ly payment Leo IX. remitted to the Church of Bamberg, receiving of the Emperor in lieu thereof the City of Benevent. Leo therefore streng∣thened with the justice of his Title and the Emperor's Forces, marches against Gisulphus with an undisciplin'd Army, and is by him defeated and taken Prisoner; but was soon remitted to Rome with an honourable retinue. Tis storied that in his time Robert Guiscardi bringing an Army out of France into Italy, and driving the Greeks and Saracens be∣fore him, possess'd himself of Apulia, where he chanc'd to find a Statue, with these words engraven in a brass Circle round the head, The first day of May at Sun-rising I shall have a golden head; which words being well considered by a certain Saracen who was Robert's Prisoner, a skil∣ful Magician, he mark'd how far the shadow of the Statue extended,
and on the first day of May at Sun-rise having dug up the place he found a great Treasure, with which he bought his liberty of Robert. But to return to Leo, who was certainly a Man of great devotion, in∣nocence, benignity and religion, particularly so eminent sor hospita∣lity, that his Palace was always free for Pilgrims and poor People; nay once when he found a poor Leper at his door, he with pity ordered him to be taken in and laid in his own bed; but in the Morning when the Door-keeper opened the door, the Leper being not to be found, it was thought that it was Christ himself that lay there as a poor Man. In matters relating to the Faith he used great diligence and industry, for in a Council holden at Vercelli he condemned Berengarius for a Heretick, and by his Monitories put the Emperor of Constantinople up∣on repairing the holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, which had been spoil'd by the Barbarians. At this same time lived Theobald a noble French-man famous for his holy life at Vicenza, and Vincentius Bishop of Liege, a person remarkable for Learning and Piety, wrote many things skilfully and acutely concerning the Quadrature of the Circle to Hermannus, a Man of an excellent Wit. Leo died when he had been Pope five years two months and six days. VICTOR II. VICTOR the Second, before called Glaberdus, a Bavarian, succeeded Leo rather by the favour of the Emperor Henry, than by a free Election; For the Clergy and People of Rome stood in great fear of the Power of Henry, whom they had before offended by putting up new Popes, and therefore lest contrary to their Oath they should seem to make any Innovations, they propose this Victor, and by Hildebrand their Embassadour to Henry all things were managed to both their satisfactions. Victor being by universal consent plac'd in the Chair, with the approbation of the Emperour he called a Council at Florence, where he depriv'd a multitude of Bishops of their Bishopricks for Simony and for Fornication, and admonish'd the Clergy of their duty, threatning severity against those that should transgress the Canons. Some write, that Victor made a Visit to Henry, and that he was splendidly entertain'd by him; but I am of opinion, that Hildebrand onely went thither, who by vertue of his Legantine power, created Henry III. the Son of Henry, Coesar. Capua was now be∣sieg'd by the Saracens, which strook terror into all the neighbouring Cities, but Robert Guiscardi taking up Arms, set upon the Saracens and defeated them, thereby delivering at once Capua from a Siege and their Neighbours from their fears. Of what extraction this Robert was is not certain, some accounting him a French-man, others a Norman; however it be 'tis sure he was a person of a noble Spirit and an excellent understanding, so that he deserv'd the Crown he held of Apulia. Pope Victor, whose life we are upon, died in the second year, third month and fourteenth day of his Pontificate; after which the Sea was vacant eleven days.
STEPHEN IX. STEPHEN the Ninth, before nam'd Frederick, a Lo∣rainer, Abbat of Monte-Cassino, was no sooner made Pope, but he took care that the Church of Milan, which for al∣most two hundred years had withdrawn its subjection to that of Rome, was now at length reduc'd to obedience thereto, as to the Mother and Nurse of all Churches, which obedience she has since persevered in, as becomes true Daughters to do to a pious Mother. Near about this time Henry III. succeeded his Father de∣ceased, and Alexius succeeded Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople; Robert Guiscardi also in a mighty Battel overthrew the Greeks and drove them out of Calabria, leaving none but Greek Priests, who even to our times kept their own Language and Customs: Indeed the Constantino∣politan Empire was now so broken by the Saracens, that they had much ado to preserve Thrace, Galatia, Pontus, Thessaly, Macedon and Achaia, and even out of these either the Turks or Saracens every day cantled out one place or other. But Stephen, when he had been Pope seven months and eight days, died at Florence, where he was honourably buried, as Martinus writes. Some say that Pope Stephen accused the Emperor Henry of Heresie for endeavouring to diminish the Papal Authority, without regard to Religion and the immortal God. BENEDICT X. BENEDICT the Tenth, a Capuan, before named Nun∣tius, Bishop of Veletri, was by a faction of Noblemen created Pope, at the same time that Agnes Mother of Hen∣ry III. constituted Gilbert of Parma, a Man of great abili∣ties, Viceroy of Italy. There was then in Italy also, Godfrey the Husband of the Countess Mathild a most noble Lady, who was very powerful; for Beatrix the Mother of Mathild had been Sister to the Emperor Henry II. and had married one Boniface a potent Man and of an honourable Family, of the City of Lucca in Tuscany; up∣on whose death all his Estates fell first to Beatrix, and after her decease were devolv'd upon Mathild and her Husband Godfrey; so that they stood possess'd of Lucca, Parma, Reggio, Mantua and that part of Tus∣cany now call'd S. Peter's Patrimony. But to return to Benedict; he was deposed by Hildebrand, because he came not in by the right way, but by force and Simony: for the generality of the Clergy had pass'd their words to Arch-deacon Hildebrand, when he went to Florence, that they would not proceed upon any Election of a new Pope, till his re∣turn to the City. When he was come back therefore, together with Gerard Bishop of Florence, he inveigh'd most bitterly against them all, especially against those who had promised to stay till his return. But
there arising great contention upon this matter, many approving of Be∣nedict, as a very good and prudent Man, though they disallow'd that Election of him, with great clamours that it was irregularly and ille∣gally done; yet at last by the persuasion of Hildebrand, Gerard, a Man worthy indeed of so high a Dignity, was by a majority of Votes crea∣ted Pope, and Benedict turn'd out. Some will have this Election to have been made at Siena, because a free choice could not be had at Rome, by reason of the partialities of some Men in Power there. Benedict was deposed after he had sate nine months and twenty days, and then was confined to Veletri. NICOLAS II. NICOLAS the Second, a Provençal, at first nam'd Ge∣rard, Bishop of Florence, for his Virtue and excellent spirit, upon the expulsion of Benedict, (who was not regularly so created) was made Pope at Sienna, and immediately thereupon withdrew to Sutri, where An. Dom. 1059. he called a Council, whither came not onely the Bishops, but many of the Noblemen of Italy, where he forc'd Benedict to resign the Office and Habit of Pope and to retire to Veletri: from hence he went to Rome, where in the second Lateran Council he procur'd a Law to be enacted, very wholesom for the Church of Rome, which is to be seen among the , to this purpose, That if any one either by Simony, or by the favour of any powerful Man, or by any tumult either of the People or Soldiery shall be placed in S. Peter's Chair, he shall be re∣puted not Apostolical, but an Apostate, one that transgresses the rules even of common Reason; and that it shall be lawful for the Cardi∣nals, Clergy and devout Laity, with Weapons both spiritual and ma∣terial, by Anathema's and by any humane aid him to drive out and depose; and that Catholicks may assemble for this end in any place whatsoever, if they cannot do it in the City. In the same Council Berengarius Deacon of the Church of Anjou, was reclaim'd from his Er∣ror concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in the Bread and Wine whereof he affirm'd the true and intire Body and Blood of Christ was not present, but onely by a sign, figure or mystery; which Error at the instance and persuasion of Nicolas and Albericus a Deacon, a very learn∣ed Man, he recanted, affirming the Eucharist to be the true and intire Body and Blood of Christ. We have said that this Error was con∣demned by Leo IX. but never amended, the praise of which belongs wholly to Nicolas, as Lanfranc writes, a Man at that time very learn∣ed, who in an excellent Work of his confuted the Tenets of Berenga∣rius. While these things were acted at Rome by Pope Nicolas, Godfrey the Norman, who succeeded his Brother Drogo in the Earldom of Apulia and Calabria, dying, left his Son Bagelardus his Heir, which Robert Gui∣scardi his Brother (as some will have it) not liking, he drove out his Nephew and seiz'd upon the Earldom, taking in Troia also which had long been Subject to the Sea of Rome. At this the Pope was not a lit∣tle
enraged at Robert, till by his invitation taking a journey into Apu∣lia, whatsoever the Church had lost was return'd again, and then he not onely took Robert into favour, but making him a feudatary of the Church, he was constituted Duke of Calabria and Apulia. After this receiving of him a great assistance of Forces and returning to the City, he subdued the Prenestines, Tusculans and Nomentans, who had revolted from the Church; and crossing the Tiber, he sacked Galese and took in other Castles of Count Gerard as far as Sutri, rendring the territo∣ries of Rome hereby much more secure. Tis written also that Hen∣ry III. was crown'd by Nicolas with the Imperial Diadem, and out of gratitude for it, all his time never attempted any thing against holy Church. But Nicolas having concluded this life with great praise of all Men, died when he had been Pope, three years six months and twenty six days. The Sea was then vacant twelve days. ALEXANDER II. ALEXANDER the Second, whose name at first was Anselm, a Milanese, Bishop of Lucca, upon the death of Nicolas, though absent, was for his good temper, affability and Learning elected Pope. But the Bishops of Lombardy thinking for the honour of their Country, that it was just a Pope should be chosen out of their number, Gilbert of Parma at that  very powerful taking their parts vigorously, they obtain'd of the Emperor Henry, against the mind of his Wife Agnes, that they might set up an other Pope. Whereupon the Bishops holding a consult made one Cadolus Pope, who was Bishop of Parma, to whom all Lombardy straightway submitted, except Mathild a noble Lady who had great reverence for the Roman Sea. Cadolus being soon after called to Rome by the Adversaries of Alexander, both Parties engag'd in Battel in the Prati di Nerone at the foot of the Hill Montorio, in which fight many were slain on both sides. Alexander and Godfrey the Husband of Ma∣thild staid in the Lateran Palace, not knowing where to trust them∣selves, all places were so full of treachery; though some say, that A∣lexander to avoid the bloody sight, did before the Battel retire to Lucca and lived there securely for some time, which kind Protection from the Luccheses he gratefully acknowledged by granting both to their Church and City very notable Priviledges. Cadolus was repulsed at Rome, but rested not long at quiet in his Country, being invited again by some Citizens, (who found that to satisfie their Avarice it was their Interest that the City should be kept in confusion) and getting together a grea∣ter Army than before, he comes to Rome and by force seizes the Citta Leonina and S. Peter's Church. But the Romans with the Forces of Godfrey falling forth, strook such a sudden terror into the Enemy that they betook themselves to their heels, and Cadolus narrowly miss'd being taken having been forsaken by his Friends, but Cincius Son to the Prefect of Rome, with a strong Squadron carried him safe through the whole adverse Army with great disficulty into Castle S. Angelo;
where being besieged for some time and seeing little hope of getting out free, he corrupted the Besiegers with three hundred pounds in Silver, and mounting a lean Horse he escaped all alone. In the mean while Otho Arch bishop of Cologn before Henry the young Emperor charg'd his Mother Agnes with meddling too much with the affairs of State in Christendom, to the great dishonour of the Empire, whereupon a Com∣mission was given to him to compose the Church-divisions according to his discretion, and he coming to Rome at first rebuk'd Alexander with very hard words, for entring upon the Papacy without the consent of the Emperor contrary to Law and Custom; but Arch-deacon Hilde∣brand took him up and stiffly defended what the Pope had done, proving that both by Law and antient Usage the Election of Popes belong'd to the Clergy, and convinc'd Otho so far, that the Emperor Henry being also at last conscious of his Error, desir'd Alexander to call a Council and promised to come thither himself. The City of  was pitch'd upon as most fit; and thither every one came who was concern'd for the safety and protection of the Church; where all things being settled, the Emperor himself not onely got the favour of the Pope, but begg'd and obtain'd of him a Pardon for Cadolus who submitted to him, and for Gilbert, the Author (as we said) of all this mischief, the Arch-bi∣shoprick of ; The first of these the Pope easily agreed to, by the example of our Saviour, who even pray'd for his Persecutors; but the second he granted much against his will, and not till tir'd with the importunity of Henry, fearing what fell out afterward, that it would be very pernicious to the Church of Rome. The Pope depart∣ing from Mantua and passing through Lucca consecrated the great Church there, of which he had been Bishop, with great solemnity, in∣tending to stay there till Arch-deacon Hildebrand had settled matters a little in Apulia; who having received some auxiliary Forces of the Countess , not only opposed the Power of Richard and William, but forced them to restore what they had taken from the Church: And then Alexander came to the City and after a Pontificate of eleven years and six months he died, and was buried in the Church of S. John in the Lateran, no manner of Pomp being spared, (that could be at the funeral of a Pope) either by the Clergy or People. In his time flou∣rish'd John Gualbertus a Monk of  and first of the Order, a most holy Man and famous for Miracles. GREGORY VII. GREGORT the Seventh, formerly called Hildebrand, a Florentine of Soane, whose Father's name was Bonicius, was chosen Pope by consent of all good Men: The words of the Election are these; We, the Cardinals, Clerks, Aco∣lytes, Sub-deacons and Priests, with the Bishops, Abbats, and many others both of the Laity and Clergy, do chuse this day, (April 22. at the Church of S. Peter in chains in the year 1472.) as Christ's true Vicar, Arch-deacon Hildebrand, a Man of much learning, piery, pru∣dence
justice, constancy, religion, modesty, sobriety and contincncy: who governs his Family very well, is hospitable to the poor, having been ingenuously brought up in the bosom of our holy Mother the Church, whom we think sit to govern the Church with the same Authority as St. Peter by God's commandment formerly did. And when he had gotten the Popedom, he immediately admonished Henry the Emperour, that he should not for the time to come take any bribes, and  Bishopricks or Benefices in a Simoniacal manner; for, if he did, he and those that bought them should suffer the severity of Ec∣clesiastical Censures. But Henry was so far from obeying his Admo∣nitions, though they were very grave, that he deprived Agnes the Em∣press of all her share in the Government for telling him soberly what ought to be done in point of Religion. And she upon that went to , where she lived not long ere she died for grief: At last after many Embassies to and fro, the Emperour and Gregory were reconcil'd, and Gregory was by him confirm'd in his Pontificate, as then it was the custom for Emperours to do. But when Henry, who was fickle in good, and obstinate in ill resolutions, persisted in his Simony, though often admonished, the Pope laid an Anathema upon all those, who had gain'd Bishopricks and Benefices by bribery. And that he might not seem to have done it in an heat, he called a Council in the Lateran (at which many Bishops were present, particularly Gilbert, Arch-Bishop of Parma, born at Ravenna) where he gave a reason why he laid such Censures upon Simoniacks, and said, He would do the same to the Emperour unless he alter'd his mind. Gilbert, when the Council was dismiss'd, having gotten a fair occasion to accuse Gregory, and withal being ambitious of the Popedom, incensed Cincius, a Roman Citizen (Son to Stephen, who was Governour of the City) no less rash than seditious against the Pope; and promised him great things in the Em∣perour's name, if he would do as he would have him. Thereupon Cin∣cius laid wait for the Pope, and whilst he was saying Mass upon Christ∣mas day at midnight in St. Maries the Great, he broke in upon him with others of his gang; took him as he was just administring the Eucharist, haled him away and shut him up in a well fortified Tower. The next day the people of Rome, when they knew of it, took up Arms against Cincius, set the Pope at liberty, demolish'd his House, and the Tower, and expell'd all his Family out of the City with their Noses cut. But Cincius himself who was the Author of all that Roguery, escaped, and got through by ways to the Emperor in Germany. Gilbert, who was the contriver of that Stratagem, seeing his Design frustrated, dissembling his  to him got leave of the Pope to retire to Ravenna, meaning there to set on foot much worse intrigues. For he induced Theobald Arch Bishop of Millain, and many other Prelates of Lombardy to conspire against Gregory; besides Hugo Candidus, a Cardinal, who though he had done the same before, and was reconciled too, yet at this time he seem∣ed to be ill affected. For he endeavour'd all he could to instigate the Emperour and the Normans, who were at variance about the Empire, to make a Peace with one another and joyn against the Pope. Which when Gregory understood, he called a Synod in the Lateran, and giving his reason for so doing, deprived Gilbert and Hugo of their Dignities and laid a Curse upon them. Whilst these things were transacted at
Rome, Henry who had fought with his Enemies, the Saxons, very suc∣cessfully, was so puss'd up with his good fortune, that he call'd an As∣sembly at Wormes, of which Sigifred Arch-Bishop of Mentz was Presi∣dent, where he was so bold as to prohibit all people from obeying the Pope in any case whatever. And from that Assembly came Romandus a Clerk of Parma, by Henry's order, to Rome, where he publickly inter∣dicted Gregory from doing any thing for the future, that belong'd to the Office of a Pope: commanding the Cardinals to leave Gregory and come to him, for they were like to have another Pope. Gregory not able to endure such an affront upon God and the Church, deprived Sigifred and the rest of the Clergy that took Henry's part, of all their dignities and preferments; and likewise laid a Curse upon the Emperour him∣self, after he had degraded him from his Imperial Honour. And of this Degradation or Deprivation, the form was as followeth; Blessed Peter! Prince of the Apostles! I beseech thee hearken unto me, and heat thy servant, whom thou hast educated from my infancy, and preserved to this day from the hands of wicked men, that hate and persecute me for the faith I have in Thee. Thou art my best Wit∣ness, Thou and the holy Mother of Jesus Christ, together with Paul thy fellow Martyr, that I did  enter upon the Papacy without reluctance: not that I thought it robbery lawfully to rise into thy Chair, but I was more willing to spend my days in Pilgrimage, than at that time to supply thy place for ostentation and vain-glory. I must needs confess, that it was thy goodness and not my deserts that brought me to the Cure of Christendom, and gave me the power of loosing and binding; and therefore in confidence of that, and for the honour and safety of the Church, I do deprive King Henry, son to Henry who was formerly Emperour, of all Imperial Power, in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for that He so boldly and rashly laid violent hands upon thy Church: and I absolve all his Christian Subjects from their Oaths, that bind 'em to pay Allegi∣ance to true and lawful Kings. For it is fit that he should lose his honour, who would diminish the Honour of the Church. And fur∣thermore, because he has contemn'd mine (or rather thy) admoni∣tions concerning his own and his peoples salvation, and separated himself from the Church of God, which he would fain destroy, I set him under a Curse, as being well assured, that thou art Peter, upon whose Rock, as a true foundation, Christ Jesus our King has built his Church. There were at that time a great many that talk'd of Peace, when the Execration was past: to whom Gregory made answer, that he did not  conditions of Peace, if Henry would first make his peace with God. You, said he, must needs know, what injury he has done the Church, and how often I have admonished him to reform his life and conversation. And this I did in respect to Henry his Father's me∣mory, who was my very good Friend, but to no purpose, he having entertain'd principles quite contrary to his Father's. Nevertheless some of those that were present continu'd to urge him, and persuade him that a King ought not to have been anathematiz'd so hastily. To whom the Pope reply'd; When, said he, Christ committed his Church to Peter and said, Feed my sheep, did he except Kings? No, when he gave Peter the power to bind and loose, he excepted none, nor exempted any
man from his Authority. Wherefore he that says, He cannot be bound by the Churches power, must needs confess, he cannot any more be absolved by it: now whosoever is so impudent as to affirm this, makes himself a perfect Separatist from Christ and his Church. When Henry heard what Gregory had done, he wrote many Letters to several Nations, complaining that he was condemn'd by the Pope against all Law and Reason.  Gregory, on the other hand de∣monstrated not only by words and Letters, but also by Reason and Witnesses in the face of the World, that he had done nothing but what was just and right. But in the mean time part of the Kingdom revolt∣ed from Henry, and the Saxons prepared for a War against him: upon which the German Princes, fearing some misfortune might  their Country, decreed in a publick Assembly, that if Gregory would come into Germany, Henry should humbly beg his pardon: and the King swore he would do it. Thereupon the Pope, who was induced by the pro∣mises and prayers of the Arch-bishop of Treves, Henry's Embassadour, was going on his journey toward Augst, but when he came to Vercelli, was privately inform'd by the Bishop of that place, who is Chan∣cellour of all Italy, that Henry was coming against him with an Army. At which the Pope forbare to go any further, but went to Canosso, a Town near Rheggio, under the Countess Matilda. Henry also made thither as fast as he could with his whole Army, and laying aside his regal Habit, he went barefoot to the gate of the Town (to move the Townsmens pity) and desired to be let in. But he was deny'd en∣trance, and took it very patiently, or at least seemed so to do, though it were a sharp Winter, and all things bound up in frost. Notwith∣standing he tarried in the Suburbs three days, and begg'd pardon con∣tinually, till at last by the intercession of Maude, and Adelaus an Earl of Savoy, together with the Abbat of Clugny he was introduced, absolved and reconciled to the Church; having sworn to a Peace, and promised future obedience. The form of the Kings Oath was this: I King Henry do affirm that I will keep all the conditions and engagements that are in the Peace, which our Lord, Gregory the Seventh, has drawn up according to his mind: and will take care, that the said Pope shall go where he pleases without the least molestation either to Him or his Attendants, especially through all our Dominions, and that I will be no hinderance to him in the exercise of his Pontifical authority in any place whatsoever; and this I swear I will observe. Done at Canosso January the 28. Indiction the 15th. But when he had succeeded according to his wish, and all people were gone to their se∣veral homes, Henry moved toward Pavia, but lost Cincius by the way, who dy'd of a Fever: and yet Henry (though that Villain was gone) did not desist from innovation. For he broke the Peace, and thereby vexed the German Princes to such a degree, that they declared Rodol∣phus Duke of Saxony King, and rejected Henry. That moved Henry to petition the Pope, that he would disposses Rodolphus of the Kingdom by Excommunication. But seeing he could not obtain so great a favour, he betook himself to his Arms, and engaged him in a bloody Battel, where the Victory was uncertain on both sides. And then they each sent Embassadours to the Pope, to beg of him, that he would assist 'em: to which he made no other answer, but that he would have 'em quit
their Arms. But notwithstanding Henry and Rodolphus fought a second time without any odds: and therefore when they had engaged the third time, and kill'd a great many men on both sides, Henry (who seemed to have a little the better of it) would not hear Rodolphus's Embassa∣dours that came to him for Peace, but wrote to the Pope again, that he would please to Anathematize Rodolphus, who endeavour'd to get possession of his Kingdom. Which Gregory refusing to do, Henry was so angry, that he studied day and night to ruin the Pope. In the mean while, lest Sedition should be wanting in Christendom, Michael and Andronicus his Son, who had been by force depriv'd of the Empire of Constantinople by Nicephorus Bucamor, came for refuge to Gregory; who not only excommunicated Nicephorus, but employ'd Rogerius a feudatary of the Roman Church to restore Michael, with whom he discours'd at Cepe∣rano, to the Empire. In pursuance of which command he got a Navy, and leaving his younger Son Rogerius in Italy, he took Boëmund his other Son along with him; and sailed first to Valona, but pitch'd his Camp near Durazzo, resolving to make sure of that City which was so con∣venient for the carrying on of the War. But Dominick Sylvius, Duke of Venice, who was of Nicephorus's party, beat Rogerius from the Siege, with great loss on both sides. But not long after Nicephorus was betray'd by Alexius Mega, General of his Forces and made a Prisoner, the City being given up for three days to be plunder'd by the Soldiers, accord∣ing to compact. Nicephorus himself was taken in the Church of Sancta Sophia, but his life  upon condition, that he would take upon him the habit of a Monk for as long as he lived. Gregory seeing that Henry was incited against the Church by some seditious Bishops, cal∣led a great Synod, and forbad Gilbert Arch-bishop of Ravenna (for his pride and malice) the exercise of his Episcopal or Priestly function, un∣der pain of an Anathema or Curse. For when he was summon'd to ap∣pear before the Sea Apostolick, being conscious of his crimes he would not obey the Citation, for which alone he deserv'd the penalty of an Anathema. He likewise censured Roland of Treviso, for that when he was Legat in order to a Peace between him and Henry, he sowed the seeds of discord and not unity, to get a Bishoprick by the bargain.  did he spare Hugo Cardinal of St. Clements, who had seditiously and here∣tically conspired with Cadolus Bishop of Parma. In fine, he chose three at the same Assembly, to wit, Bernard the Deacon, the other Bernard Abbat of Marseilles, and Odo Arch-bishop of Treves, to go Legates à Latere from the Sea Apostolick to compose all differences between Hen∣ry and Rodolphus. For the wise Pope saw, that such a quarrel, unless it were timely ended, would occasion great calamities one time or other to Christendon. But because he well knew that there would not be lacking such mischievous men as would endeavour to hinder it (because it was their interest to foment rather than remove the dissention) he gave the Legates Letters Apostolical to the several Princes and States, written after this manner: We taking notice of the weakness, cove∣tousness and ambition of mankind, do charge all manner of persons, whether Kings, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Dukes, Counts, Marquesses, or Knights, that either out of pride, cunning or covetousness they give no hindrance to our Legats, whilst they negotiate the Peace. And whosoever shall be so rash, as to contravene this Order (which I hope none will,) and shall hinder our Legats from composing a Peace, I bind
him under an Anathema both in Spirituals and Temporals, by Aposto∣lick Power; and take away from him the advantage of any Victory he has gain'd, that he may at least be confounded and be converted by a double penance. He likewise commanded the Legates to call a Diet in Germany, and deliberately examine who of the two Kings had the right, and accordingly by the consent of all good Men to assign him the Kingdom, whose cause was justest: and that He, when he should hear what they had determin'd, would confirm it by the authority of God and S. Peter, than which there cannot be greater. But in the mean while Gregory, lest the Church of Rome should suffer by Simony, called a Council, and therein confirm'd the Decrees of his Predecessors made to put a stop to that evil, in these words: We, following the example of our Predecessors, as we have formerly in other Councils, do decree and ordain by the authority of Almighty God, that whoever for the future accepts of a Bishoprick, an Abbacy, or any other Ecclesiastical preferment from a Layman, shall not by any means be esteemed a Bishop, an Abbat, or a Clergy man; nor let the same person dare to approach the Apostolical Sea, before he has repented and left the place that he gain'd by ambition and contumacy, which is the sin of Idola∣try. And under the same Censures we bind Kings, Dukes, and Princes, who shall dare to confer Bishopricks or other Ecclesiastical Dignities upon any person against Law and Reason. Furthermore, we confirm the sentence of Anathema which was justly given against Theobald Arch∣bishop of Milan and Gilbert Arch-bishop of Ravenna, as also against Roland Arch-bishop of Treviso; and we lay the same Censure upon Peter, who was formerly Bishop of Redona, but is now an Usurper in the Church  Narbonne. Moreover, we deny S. Peter's favour, and entrance into the Church to all such, till they have repented and sa∣tisfied for their offences; be they Normans, Italians or any other Na∣tion, who have in the least injured, or violated the Marcha di Termo in Ancona; the Dutchy of Spoleto, Campagna di Roma, Sabina, Tivoli, Palestrina, Frascati, or Alba, or the parts that lie toward the Tuscan Sea. Add to these the Monastery of St. Benedict, and all the Country of Cassino, as also Benevent in Abruzzo. But if any one pretends a just cause for taking what he has not yet restored, let him demand justice of us or our Officers; and if they are not satisfied, we grant them leave to take back as much as will satisfie them; not excessive∣ly, like Robbers, but as becomes Christians, and such Men who only retake what is their own and desire not other mens goods; fearing the anger of God and the Curse of S. Peter. After that he confirmed the Curse against Henry afresh in these words: Blessed Peter! and thou Paul, Doctor of the Gentiles, I beseech you to hearken un∣to me a little, and hear me in mercy; for you are Disciples and Lo∣vers of Truth; and what I say, is true. I undertake this cause for Truths sake, that my Brethren whose salvation I desire, may obey me more willingly, and that they may know how I rely upon your assistance, next to that of Christ and his Virgin Mother, whilst I re∣sist the wicked, and am a present guard continually to the faithful. For I did not ascend this Sea willingly, but against my inclinations, even with tears in my eyes, that they should think such a worthless Man as me fit to sit in such a lofty Throne. But this I say, because
I did not chuse you, but you me, and imposed this heavy burden up∣on my shoulders. But the Sons of Belial are risen up against me since I have ascended the Mount, because I cry aloud and tell the people of their crimes, and the Sons of the Church of their sins, and have laid violent hands upon me even unto blood. For the Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Princes of the World, with some Ecclesiasticks and others have conspired against the Lord, and me his Anointed; say∣ing. Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their yoke from us, and this they did, that they might either kill or banish me. Of these one was King Henry, as they call him: Henry, I say, Son to Henry the Emperour, who exalted his horns, and lifted up his heel too proud∣ly against the Church of God, in a conspiracy with many Bishops of Italy, Germany, and France, whose ambition your authority has yet opposed. This same person came to me in Lombardy, when he was rather forced by necessity than sober in his resolutions, and begg'd to be absolv'd from his Anathema: and accordingly I receiv'd him, be∣cause I thought him a Penitent; but only admitted him to the Com∣munion of the Church, not restored him to his Kingdom from which I had justly expelled him in the Council at Rome; nor did I give the Subjects of the Kingdom leave to pay him their former Allegiance. And this I did, that if he delay'd his reconcilement with the neigh∣bouring Nations whom he had always vexed, and should refuse to restore as well Ecclesiastical as Secular Estates, according to his word, he might be forc'd to his duty by Anathema's and Arms. Some Bishops of Germany made use of this opportunity, as also certain Princes who had been long tormented by this wild beast, thought fit to chuse Rodolphus for their King and Governour, since Henry had lost his Throne by his flagitious actions. And truly Rodolphus like a modest and just King sent Embassadours to let me know, he was forced to take the Government into his hand, though he was not so desirous of Dominion, but that he would rather obey us than those that had chosen him to the Kingdom. That he would always be at Gods and our disposal, and that we might believe him he offered his Sons for hostages for his performance. Thereupon Henry began to rage, and first to desire us, that we would use our spiritual Sword to depose Rodolphus. I answered him, That I would see who had most right, and would send Agents thither to examine the matter, and then I my self would judg whose cause was the juster. Henry would not suffer our Legates to determine the matter, but kill'd a great many men both Ecclesiastical and Laick, plunder'd and prophan'd Churches, and by this means made himself obnoxious to an Anathema. Where∣fore I trusting in Gods mercy and judgment, in the patronage of the blessed Virgin, and relying upon your Authority, do lay Henry and his accomplices under a Curse; and once more deprive him of his re∣gal Power, interdicting all Christians (whom I absolve from all Oaths of Allegiance to him) from obeying Henry in any case whatever; but command 'em to receive Rodolphus as their King, whom many Princes of the Realm have chosen, since Henry was deposed. For it is fit, that seeing Henry is deprived of his Power for his pride and contu∣macy, Rodolphus who is beloved by all should be invested with the Kingly power and dignity, for his Piety and Religion. Go to then
ye Princes of the holy Apostles, and confirm what I have  by your authority, that all men at last may know, that if you can bind and loose in Heaven, that We also upon Earth can take away and give Kingdoms, Principalities, Empires, and whatsoever is in the posses∣sion of Mortals. For if you can judg of things divine, what may we think of things prophane here below? And if you may judg of Angels that govern proud Princes, what may you not do to their Servants? Let all Kings and Princes of the World take notice by his example what you can do in Heaven; how God esteems you, and then let 'em not contemn the Decrees of the Church. And I  you suddenly to execute judgment upon Henry, that all may see, that son of Iniquity did not lose his Kingdom by chance, but by your permission and consent. And this I have requested of you, that he may repent, and be saved in the day of Judgment by the help of your prayers. Given at Rome the 5th. of March, Indiction III. After that he degra∣ded Gilbert (the Author of all this discord and Schism) from the Church of Ravenna, and commanded all Priests belonging to that Church, to pay no obedience to him, who was the cause of all their misfortunes, and therefore Anathematized. And that the people might not want a Governour, he imitated Peter (who used to send  in his own room, upon occasion) and sent 'em another Arch bi∣shop with full power, to extirpate Gilbert's Faction and confirm mens minds in the faith. But then Henry (who was rather provoked than chastized by these Censures, and had taken the Bishop of Ostia then Le∣gate, as he return'd home,) called a Council of the disaffected Bishops and chose Gilbert, formerly Arch-bishop of Ravenna, Pope, and called him Clement. But being teazed by the  he left his new Pope for a time, and went against them, where he engaged and received a great overthrow. Rodolphus though he was Conquerour yet was found dead at a little distance, of a wound which he received. They say, Henry was so affrighted at that bloody ingagement, that he could scarce be found in seventeen days, and that the Germans in the mean time had put his Son Henry in his room by the name of Henry IV. Both these coming after with an united Body of Men into Italy to settle their Pope Clement in the Pontificate, and to turn  Gregory, they easily subdu'd Maude who came to meet 'em with a small Army. This same Maude, when her first Husband died, not long before that time was mar∣ried to Azo Marquis d'Este, her former Husbands near kinsman by blood and related to her in the third degree of Affinity. But when the matter was known she was divorced from Azo, at Gregory's persuasion. Henry having conquer'd Maude at Parma, march'd to Rome, and her Hus∣band Azo after an hostile manner, and pitch'd his Camp in the Prati di Nerone, and going into the Borgo di Sancto Pietro, he and his Pope Clement prophaned St. Peter's Church, and demolish'd the Portico, and did the like by St. Pauls. But seeing he could not get into the City, he went to Tivoli, from whence as from a Castle he made daily incur∣sions upon the Romans, till by wasting all that came near him, he reduced them to such necessity that they desired Peace upon any terms, of which notice being given to Henry by some deserters who got out of the Town, he drew his men up and entred in; whereupon the Pope, who could not trust the People, betook himself into the Castle St. Angelo,
where he was besieged for some time, they within maintaining the place stoutly. Gregory's Nephew had not the like fortune, who retreated to the Sittizonio di Severo, and wanting courage to defend it, basely deli∣ver'd it up. But Henry hearing that Guiscard Duke of Puglia was com∣ing to assist Gregory, he thought it no time to dally, and therefore con∣trived this stratagem: He sent the Bishop of Clugny to Gregory in the Castle, to offer him, that if he would crown him in the Lateran, he would return into Germany with his Army immediately: and the Ro∣man people requested him to do it too. Gregory answer'd he would do it, if Henry would amend his errors and beg pardon. This he not only refused to do, but hearing that Guiscard was near with his Army, he crown'd Clement the Anti-Pope with the Pontifical Crown publickly in the Lateran, the Bishops of Bologna, of Cervia and Modena attending at the . After which he went to Siena and took Clement along with him. But Guiscard breaking in at the Porta del popolo, burnt the City all along to Domitian's Triumphal Arch, though the people did what they could to resist him. The Citizens had fortified the Capitol, and defended themselves briskly against Guiscard, who had already ta∣ken the Lateran. From whence there were a great many skirmishes and sallies made on both sides, and that part of the City which lies between the Lateran and the Capitol was demolish'd, and the Capitol it self at length taken by storm and laid almost even with the ground. Ha∣ving thus made himself Master of Rome, and given the Citizens goods as plunder to his Soldiers, he march'd to Castle St. Angelo, where the Pope lay besieged, and freeing the miserable man at last from all his foes, he carried him along to Cassino and Salerno with him. Where in a short time after he made a godly Exit, after he had sate in S. Pe∣ter's Chair twelve years, one month, and three days. He was a Man, no question, that God loved, prudent, just, merciful, a Patron of the poor, the Widows and the fatherless, and the only Champion of the Church against Hereticks and wicked Princes who strove to make themselves Masters of the Churches patrimony by Violence. VICTOR III. VICTOR the Third, before called Defiderius, Abbat of Mount Cassino, being chosen Pope immediately took example by Gregory. And therefore I suppose it was that Henry and he were Enemies, by whose contrivance he was taken off with Poison, conveigh'd into the Chalice as he was administring the Eucharist (as St. Martin writes,) though Vincentius says on the con∣trary, that he died of a Dysentery, which may possibly seem not alto∣gether unlike poysoning, since those that are poison'd do sometimes fall into a Dysentery by the corruption and relaxation of the Intestines. But Guiscard would have revenged so great a Villany, if he had not chanced to die too soon; for when he had subdued the Greeks he went to Corfu and died; to whom (because Boemund was absent) Roger his younger Son succeeded in the Dutchy of Puglia. At that time
there was a famine throughout most part of the World, by means where∣of the King of Gallitia took  from the Saracens after he had be∣sieged it many years, and gave it to the Christians. But Henry had ill success against the Saxons in Germany, being defeated with the loss of four thousand Soldiers, God permitting this calamity, that he might at last desist from harassing the Church. There are who say that there appeared a great many Prodigies at that time; as, that the domestick birds, as Hens, Geese, Pigeons, and Peacocks fled into the Mountains and grew wild; that Fishes in general both in Rivers and in the Sea died; and that some Cities were so shaken with Earth-quakes, that the great Church at Syracuse fell down at Vespers and kill'd all those that were in it, saving only the Deacon and Sub  who were miracu∣lously saved. 'Tis said, the body of St Nicolas was translated to Bari by the Merchants about this time, and there much honour'd; as Mar∣tin Scotus a Man of great Learning and singular Morals tells us in his History. But Victor, by whose procurement Deusdedit reduced the book of Canons into method, died in the first year and fourth month of his Pontificate, not without suspicion of being poison'd. URBAN II. URBAN the Second, before called Otho, or Oddo, at first a Monk of Eboina, and after that Cardinal of Ostia, was at last deservedly made Pope about five months after Victor's death. For he was a very learned and an holy Man, and fit for any great Employment. At that time Roger took his opportunity (now Gregory was dead and a new Successor come in∣to the place) to take Capua and all places that belong'd to them be∣twixt that and Tiber, from the Pope and the Romans. Thereupon Urban who could hardly trust the Romans, by reason of their former inclinations to Novelty, went to Melfi. Where being resolv'd to call a Synod, it was convenient to secure all people in their passage to it; and therefore he commanded Roger and Boemund who were at variance about the Dutchy of Puglia, to quit their Arms; upon this condition, that Roger should let Boemund have part of Puglia, and himself enjoy all the rest of his Father's Dominion. And when he had thus settled the Italian affairs to his mind, and put the Church in a good condition (as far as was possible in such an hurry) he went to Toia, to enquire what the Clergy of that place did, and to correct the errors of some ill-livers among 'em. But in the mean time Boemund, whilst his Brother Roger made War in Sicily against the Saracens, took Melfi by surprise. Where∣upon Roger returning from Sicily, besieged his Brother Boemund at Melfi with twenty thousand Saracens which he hired to come along with him, though those within the City defended it very stoutly. The Pope, seeing he could have no quiet in Italy, design'd a Journey into France, but first held a Council at Piacenza, in which he wonderfully curb'd the licentiousness of some Clergymen. From thence he went into France, and began a thing very memorable. For he call'd a Council
at Cleremont, wherein he so far animated the Princes of France toward the retaking of Jerusalem, which had been so long in the hands of the Sa∣razens, that in the year 1484. three hundred thousand Men enrolled themselves as Soldiers under Christ's Banner. After which he return∣ed to Rome, with an intention, that when he had composed things in Italy, he would excite the Italians also to the same end. In the mean time King Henry wicked man, ceased not to affront Robert Earl of Flanders and provoke him to Battel, that he might divert him from the holy Expedition. Notwithstanding many followed one Peter an Eremite, who was a man of incomparable sanctity, and travelling through Germany and Hungary, arrived at Constantinople, then the common Seat of War. And they were not long after followed by Eustathius, and Baldwin sur∣named of Bulloign, men famous for feats of Arms. But besides these there was the Bishop of Pois, Raymund Earl of St. Giles, Hugo Magnus King Philip of France's Brother, and the two Roberts (whereof one was Earl of Normandy and the other of Flanders) together with Stephen Earl of Chartres, who passing over the Alps into Italy came first to Rome. Where when they had visited the SSts. Tombs and Shrines, and received the Pope's Benediction, they went to Brundusium with an intent to go from thence into Albania. But because one Port would not hold'em all, some went to Bari and some to Otranto. But Boemund, who, we told you, had taken Melfi, being desirous of glory, left Melfi, and went upon the same Expedition with twelve thousand choice and young Italians. And this his Valour so prevail'd with his Brother Roger, that he laid down his Arms and promised that for the future all things betwixt him and his Brother should be equally shared: and presently sent his Son Tancred, who was desirous to go into the War along with his Bro∣ther. By this time Peter the Eremite was come to Constantinople, and pitching his Camp in the Suburbs, did so much damage to the Citizens, not voluntarily, but through the licentiousness of his Soldiers, that the Greeks wish'd 'em all cut off. Alexius the Emperour was very much concerned for the injuries which his Subjects suffer'd, and therefore forced Peter for want of forage to pass the Bosphorus before he was wil∣ling. However being compelled to it Peter and his Men went over, and first going to Nicodemia, and then to Nicopoli, attaqued that City though it was well guarded by the Saracens. But they wanting provi∣sions to maintain the Siege, and the Christian Soldiers dying apace, they were worsted by the Sarazens, and forced to raise their Siege; but besides that, received such damage in their flight, that Reginald General of the Germans renounced the Christian faith, and surrender'd himself to them; and Peter went as it were back, like an Ambassadour to Constantinople without any Soldiers to attend him. This was welcome news to Alexius, who hoped, that the Christians, upon such a discomfiture, would quit that Expedition. But in the mean while other supplies came in, and Alexius finding that he could not beat 'em back with open force, he set upon 'em in the Night time as they were pitching their Camp in the Suburbs of Constantinople, but to no purpose; for they that were posted there maintain'd their Camp with great courage, till the rest of the Soldiers awaked got to their Arms. They fought too the next day with small damage on either side. Then Boemund was sent to Alexius in the name of the Army, and partly by Menaces, partly by Promises induced him
to enter into a League upon these terms: That they should not onely pass through his Territories with safety, but have all necessaries sup∣ply'd, and that whatever they took from the Saracens should be his, ex∣cept Jerusalem. When he had so done, he repassed the Bosphorus, and arrived first at Nicomedia, and then at Nicopolis, which was briskly de∣fended by the Turks within: Both Saracens and Turks being Allies at that time, in the War against the Christians, sixty thousand Turks who lay upon the adjacent Mountains, made signs to the Townsmen to sally out, while they set upon the Christian Camp; but were so briskly re∣pulsed that they return'd to the Mountains without doing any execu∣tion. Yet it was difficult to take the City, because all kind of Provi∣sions were carried into it by a Lake that joins to it, till the Lake being fill'd with small Vessels from Constantinople, the Townsmen were so streightned for want of necessaries, that fifty two days after the begin∣ning of the Siege they surrender'd; the Turks, who were in Garrison there, being permitted to march out with their Arms and Baggage. After which the Christians fortified Nicopoli and then left it: and being forced to travel through Deserts, they divided their Army into two parts. But it so happen'd that Boemund sound out a  place near a certain River, where designing to stay and refresh his Men who were weary of travelling; on a sudden the Turks and Saracens under the conduct of Soliman, set upon him, and had certainly overpower'd him with multi∣tudes, had not Hugo and Godfrey with forty thousand Horse come to his aid  as they heard of it. They fought very smartly and a great while on both sides, nor could the Battel be ended but by the Night coming upon them: and in that fight it was found next day, that there were forty thousand men slain, either Turks, Medes, Syrians, Chal∣deans, Saracens or Arabians. But nevertheless Soliman made all the haste possible from thence, and bragging in all places that he was Victor, he met ten thousand Arabs who were acoming to the Army; whom he carried with him into Lycaonia to intercept the Christians passage and hinder Provisions from being carry'd thither. But the Christians being supply'd by the Corn then almost ripe upon the ground, arrived first at Iconium (the chief City of that Country) and having taken that by sur∣render, possess'd themselves of Heraclea, and Tarsos with the same success. Then Baldwin, a Man of great Courage and Wit, first got a Signiory in Asia; for he had Tarso and all that he took in that Country bestowed upon him: and not long after made himself Master of Edessa and Ma∣nista. From thence the bigger Army went into Cilicia, now called Ar∣menia minor, which submitting upon the first Onset, they made Pali∣nurus an Armenian who had fought on the Christian side, Governour of it. Afterward they took Coesarea in Cappadocia, and then march'd on toward Antioch over the high Mountains. At that time Cassianus was King of Antioch, formerly called Reblata: but that same King who formerly govern'd all Asia double wall'd it, and called it by his own name; and built about it four hundred and sixty Towers. Here was also once St. Peter's Sea; and here were born Luke the Evangelist, and that Theophilus, to whom Luke directs his Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles: and here Men that were regenerate by Baptism were first called Christi∣ans, and lived there a thousand years under Christian Government. Moreover, it appears that there were one hundred and sixty Bishops under the Patriarch of Antioch before the Barbarians took it: and that
there were in it three hundred and sixty Parish Churches. In the year therefore of our Redemption 1491. Antioch began to be besieged with great application. At which time Urban, who was vexed with tumul∣tuous insurrections, shut himself up for two years in the House of one Peter Leo a noble Citizen, near St. Nicolas's Church. But when John Paganus, a most seditious Fellow, was dead, he was a little more at li∣berty, and then he applied himself to settle the State of the Church. For he received into favour the Arch-bishop of Millain (before deposed, be∣cause he had been consecrated by one Bishop against the Canon and custom of Holy Church) he having by way of penance changed his habit and lived in a Monastery voluntarily and holily upon that account. And when he petition'd with all humility to send him a Pall he did it, and re∣stor'd him to his Authority in this form of words: We are persuaded by thy Letter to send thy Brotherhood a Pall together with the Bles∣sing of the Sea Apostolick; which kind of Honour was never before conferr'd upon any person absent from us. After that he gave a Pall and several priviledges to the Arch bishop of Toledo (who came to Rome and swore fidelity to the Pope) and made him Primate of all Spain. But he laid a Curse upon the King of Portugal and all the Diocese of St. James: because he had thrown the Bishop of that Province into Prison without hearing what he had to say for himself. About the same time Henry Bishop of Soissons came to Urban at Rome, and freely quitted his Bishoprick which he had received from the King of France, without any hopes of Restitution. Whereupon Urban (lest his Diocese should suf∣fer for want of a Bishop) restored him to his Bishoprick, though he were unwilling to take it; but he was sworn in this manner: I for the fu∣ture will not communicate with any that are excommunicated by this Sea, wittingly and willingly: nor will I ever be present at the Conse∣crations of those that accept of Bishopricks or Abbies, against Law and Reason, from Laymen; and, so help me God, and this holy Gospel, I never intend to break my resolution. So also they say he dealt with the Bishop of Bellay: Nor can any one say he was pertinacious for do∣ing so; for he knew how and when to alter his mind upon occasion, which every good Man should do. For when he had admitted a Clerk, whom Gibert the Anti-Pope had made a Sub deacon, to second Orders, he chang'd his mind, because it was a thing of ill Example, and like to be of very pernicious consequence. He confirm'd the Order of Cister∣cians which was first set up in Burgundy; and some say, the Carthusians began their Order in his time: though others say it was in the time of Victor III. But when Urban had settled the Church of God, not onely by his pains and Example, but by his Writings too which he set forth against the Hereticks, he died near St. Nicolas's in the House of Peter Leo, an eminent Citizen, twelve years, four months, and nineteen days after he came to the Popedom, upon the 28th. of August. His Body was carried over Tiber, to avoid the contrivances of his Enemies, who would have done him an injury (if possible) after death, and buried very honourably in St. Peter's at the Vatican.
PASCHAL II. PASCHAL the Second, before call'd Raynerius, an Ita∣lian of Romagna, whose Father's name was Crescentius, and his Mother Alphacia, was chosen Pope about that time when the Christians fought in Asia and took Antioch, into which they were lett by Pyrrhus, an eminent Citizen. For he admired Böemunds valour so much that he promised to surrender the City to 'em, if the rest of the Christians would let Böemund be Go∣vernour of it. The Christians when they enter'd the City, spared al∣most all, but onely that they were severe upon the Saracens: and Cas∣sianus their King who fled to the Mountains, was kill'd by the Arme∣nians. They had taken all but the Castle; which whilest Böemund at∣taqued, he was shot through the thigh with an Arrow, which pained him so, that he was fain to desist from the Siege for several days. But when Corbanes the King of persia's General came up, with Sensadolus Ca∣stianus's Son, to retake Antioch, Böemund was by that time well of his Wound, met and would have engaged 'em. But the Enemy kept up in the Mountains and could not be tempted to fight by any means. Whereupon Böemund being necessitated for lack of Provisions was resolv'd to fight 'em though the place was much to his disadvantage. So he or∣der'd that Lance wherewith Longinus pierced Christ's side (which they found in St. Andrew's Church at Antioch) to be carry'd before 'em as the best Ensign they could have; and marching up to 'em he defeated them with the slaughter of an hundred thousand, though at first they made a brisk resistance. Besides that, they say there were fifteen thou∣sand Camels taken in their Camp; and so much plunder carry'd off, that from the greatest extremity of want they were advanced to the greatest abundance of all things necessary. The Governour of the Castle when he knew of it, surrender'd the Castle to Böemund and embraced the Christian Faith: and all that were in the Garrison, if they would do the like, were permitted to march off with Bag and Baggage whither they pleased. After that there arose a great debate betwixt Böemund and Raymund, when Böemund demanded Antioch, and Raymund said, it belong'd to the Emperour of Constantinople, by the contract they had before freely made. But the Priests, to whom it was referr'd, gave it to Böemund without any more ado. In the mean time Hugo Magnus (who was gone to Constantinople to compose things) died, and then the other Officers (all but Raymund, who besieged Caesarea in Cappadocia) re∣solv'd to go to Jerusalem with their Army, and rendezvouz'd in Lycia. But by the way they attempted to take Tortosa, and after they had spent three months in vain, they raised the Siege, and march'd to Tripoli, the petit King of which place furnish'd 'em liberally with Mony, Provisions and Arms, and thereby obtain'd a Peace upon Condition, that he, if Jerusalem were taken, should embrace the Christian Religion. Hence they removed, and passing by Coesarea in Palestine, came at five encamp∣ings to Jerusalem; which stands upon an high Hill, and is divided also
by several Dales, so that it cannot be besieged but by a very great Army. Beside, there wants Fountains and River-waters, which are necessary for an Army. For there is no other rivolet but Siloe, and that very little in the Summer time (and sometimes nothing at all) which runs down Mount Sion into the Valley of . Yet there are a great many Cisterns in the City and the Countrey, to furnish the Citizens with Wa∣ter, but cannot supply great Armies and Beasts of carriage. Notwith∣standing the Christians got what Provisions they could and attaqued the City in four places very fiercely, (whilest the Jerusalemites defended it as stoutly) and upon the 13th of July they took it by storm, the thir∣ty ninth day after they began to besiege it, in the year 1499. four hun∣dred and ninety years after the Saracens took it under the Reign of He∣raclius. Godfrey was most to be commended in that action; for that he first master'd that part of the Wall which was allotted for him and his Brother to storm; and help'd Balion down into the City to open the Gates for the Christians: at whose entrance there was such a slaughter both in the City, and especially in the Temple, that Men were above the ancles in bloud. And the same day they had taken the Temple too, if Night had not come upon 'em. However the next day the At∣taque was nenew'd, and quarter given to all that desired and would lay down their Arms. But the Christians, after such a Victory, when they had rested eight days from the toil of War, and had visited the holy places of the City and our Lord's Sepulchre, took Godfrey upon their shoul∣ders, and carry'd him into the Palace, where by universal consent they chose him King. And he, though he did not refuse the Title of King, yet he would not have a golden Crown; because he thought it unseemly for any one to wear a golden Diadem, where Christ, the King of Kings wore one of Thorns when he redeemed mankind. Then also was Ar∣nulphus the Priest made Patriarch and consecrated by the Bishops that were there present. The Citizens of Neapolis in Assyria were so fright∣ed at this Victory, that they sent Ambassadours to Godfrey to surrender themselves and all they had. Soon after news came that a mighty Army of Soliman King of Babylon was come to Ascalon (a City twenty miles from Jerusalem, was always in  with the People of it,) Godfrey resolv'd to meet 'em: and therefore left Peter the Hermit to guard the City, and recall'd Eustace, and Tancred, whom he had sent to Neapoli, with two Legions. As he march'd against the Enemy, he was inform'd by the Prisoners he took, that Clement was Soliman's General, and had fifty thousand Men under him and a Navy laden with Provision and Ar∣tillery; but notwithstanding was resolv'd to fight him; which he did, and Godfrey, who had the day, kill'd thirty thousand of his Men, as the story goes: But Clement, who led the Enemy, escaped away. The A∣scalonites having received such a blow, deliver'd up their City streight to Godfrey: in which he found as much Gold and Silver, as ever was seen together before. Jerusalem being thus retaken, many of the Princes who had perform'd their Vow and had their desire, began to take their journeys home into Europe; among the rest the Earls of S. Giles and Troyes. But Godfrey and his Brothers, who had great success, took Joppa a Sea∣port Town, and Rama, which hinder'd the Christians passage from Asca∣lon to Jerusalem. He also besieged Cassa, otherwise called Porfiria, at tho foot of Mount Carmel, four miles from Acon. But whilest the Siege last∣ed,
Tiberias, a Town of Galilee surrender'd of their own accord, and Caffa was not long after yielded upon terms. But nothing, that Men call Happiness, is very lasting. For a year after the taking of Jerusalem, which cost so much labour and pains, Godfrey died of a Fever: and the Christians to prevent any damage that might happen by an Interregnum,  Brother Baldwin in his room, A. D. 1101. But to return to Pa∣schal, whom Gregory the Seventh made Cardinal Priest of S. Clements, for his Learning and Vertue. He was chosen Pope by the Clergy after Urban's death: though he could have been well satisfied with a private life: for he was formerly a Monk, and made Pope against his will; de∣nying himself to be capable of so great a Charge; but yet at the desire of the People, because the Clergy chose him unanimously, and the Col∣lege of Cardinals approved of it, he did take upon him the Pontificate: but not till they had thrice repeated these words with acclamations [St. Peter has chosen Rainerius, a very good Man, Pope,] and the Secreta∣ries and Clerks after that gave him the Title of Paschal. Then he put on his Scarlet Cloak or Robe, with a Mitre on his Head, and was at∣tended to the Lateran by the Clergy and People, upon a white Horse, until he came to the South Portico that leads to St. Saviours, Where when he had sate some time in a Seat made on purpose, as the custom is, he went up into the Court of the Lateran, and put on a Girdle upon which hung seven Keyes and seven Seals; to let him know, that accord∣ing to the seven fold grace of the Holy Ghost, he had Power to govern the Church under God, and to bind, loose, open or shut. Then with a Papal Scepter in his hand he visited those places which are to be enter'd onely to : and the day following he received his Consecration at St. Peter's, where Oddo, Bishop of Ostia, Maurice, of Porto, Gualter, of Alba, Bono, of Lavico, Milo, of Palestrina, and Offo, of Nepeso, anoint∣ed him with Chrism: at which Ceremony the Bishop of Ostia had the chief Place, which continues so till this day. After his Unction he re∣turn'd into the City, and took his Crown according to the Custom. That this would so happen, Albert Bishop of Alatri had formerly fore∣told. For being ask'd by a Friend of his, who he thought would suc∣ceed Urban, God, said he, will choose Rainerius for his faith and con∣stancy. Nay, they say that the same Albert foretold also the exact time that he should live in his Pontificate. But Paschal who consulted the good of the Church, then like to be ruin'd by seditious Men, sent out his Forces against Gibert the Anti-Pope, the Ring leader of all the mischief: And to render himself sufficient for so great a War, he borrowed seve∣ral Troops of Roger Earl of Sicily and a thousand ounces of Gold. Gi∣bert, that Villain, lived then at Abba de Marsi: and when he under∣stood that the Enemy was coming, he durst not trust to his own strength, which he had procured of Richard Count of Capua, but left Alba and went with all speed into the Mountains near Aquila, where not long af∣ter he died suddenly and paid for all his iniquities. But notwithstand∣standing his being taken off, the Church of God did not rest altogether from troubles. For Richard, who, we told you, supply'd him with Men and Mony, put up in his room one Albert a Citizen of Aversa, between  and Capua: who was compelled immediately by the well-affect∣ed Party to quit the place, and go into banishment. But the People of Cava near Palestrina, following the Example of Richard's solly and ar∣rogance,
made one Frederick, Pope. But they also repented of what they had done, and one hundred and five days after turn'd him out of his Pontificate, compelled him to take upon him the habit of an Anchorite, and lead a private life. Besides these there was a Third also, one Maginulphus a Roman, who was so bold as to usurp the Title of Pope at Ravenna. But the Romans banish'd him, and those of Ravenna, when he had no Friend left, expelled him their City. The Roman Church being thus settled, Paschal, who was a Man of great Wit and Courage, diverted his Mind from Religion to Arms, and by the help of Roger, retook Castellana and Benevento from the Enemies. But in the mean time Peter Columna, a Roman Citizen, by the advice of Richard Count of Capua (whose main design was to divide the Pope's Army) seiz'd upon Cava a Town in the Pope's Dominions. Thereupon the Pope marched against him, and not only retook Cava, but also took from him Zangarola and Columna, two Castles of his paternal Inheri∣tance; from whence the Family of the Columneses took their Title. There was another Family at Rome (called the Corsi) very powerful and so true to Gregory VII. that their Houses which were under the Capitol were burnt by Henry down to the ground; yet afterward Stephen, the chief of that Family, chang'd sides, and in Paschal's absence surpriz'd St. Paul's Church, and the Castle hard by: from whence he continually teazed the City of Rome with inroads very strangely. For this reason the Pope omitted all forein Affairs, and return'd with all speed to the City, from whence he drove Stephen; who went safely off, disguised in a Monks Habit and so deceived those that came to take him. At that time many Authors say, there appeared a great many Prodigies; as, that the  gain'd in some places full twenty paces into the Land more than ordinary: and on the other side, in some places, retired from the shore an hundred. And the like I saw at Pozzuoli the last year by some old weather beaten Marble Pillars, that were wasted to three Cubits; though the Inhabitants told me that three years before they were wash'd by the Sea. They tell you likewise that a Comet appeared of a vast bigness, that was seen at Sun-setting. Paschal however was not disturb'd at any of these things, because he knew 'em to be natural: But when he heard the Bishop of Florence should say, that Antichrist was born, he went immediately thither, and calling a Council, who discussed the matter very nicely, he perceived the Bishop was onely ambitious of being the Author of some great matter, and therefore when he had chid him he sent him away, and went himself into Lombardy, where he called an Assembly at Guardastallo of many Princes and Bishops, and held a long debate about Homages, Fees, and the Oaths of Bishops that had been or should be administred to Laymen. And hearing of the scandalous lives of the French Priests, he went into France, and at Troyes he called a Synod, in which having taken order for the more decent adorning of Churches, and partly expelled, partly chastised their Incumbents, he returned in haste into Italy, because he heard all things were there in an uproar. For Stephen Corsus had taken Montalto, and Pontechio from that part of Toscany which now they call St. Peter's Patrimony, and had fortified them with Castles, from whence he pillaged the whole Country with frequent inroads; but the Pope fell upon him, and beat him out of one of his Castles; though he could not storm the other by reason of its situation, and the Winter season which was at hand. Going therefore
into Puglia to compose the differences of those parts, he committed the care of the Church to the Bishop of Lavico; to Peter the Son of Leo, and to Leo the Son of Fregepan, the City and all its concerns, and to Ptolemy Lord of Subiaco, the territories adjacent, leaving his Nephew Godfrey, General, to assist them in the defence of the Churches jurisdiction. But in the Pope's absence, Ptolemy the reputed Author of all that mischief threatned he should never return to the City any more, and all these re∣volted from the Church: to wit, Peter Columna, whom the Pope had taken into favour, the Abbat of Farfa, together with those of Anagni, Palestrina, Tivoli, Frascati, and Sabina. The same Ptolemy also raised an Army and besieged Alba in Campagna di Roma, which the Citizens very stoutly defended. But when the Pope and the Prince of Cajetta came up, together with Richard of Aquila, two excellent Commanders, they drove out these Usurpers that would have possessed themselves of the Church Revenues, and freeing Alba from the Siege, he also had the other revolting Towns surrender'd up to him, except that he was fain to storm Tivoli, which stood out very obstinately, and occasion'd much damage on both sides: though he took Montalto and turned out Stephen, and quieted the whole Patrimony in a short time. Assoon as he had made Peace here, he apply'd himself to the War in Asia, and to that end wrote Letters and sent Nuntios to all Christian Princes to exhort and animate 'em to it as much as possible; because he heard that  the death of Godfrey the Saracens brought great Armies to Jerusalem design∣ing to re-take it; as also that the Christians had received a great over∣throw, that the Earl of Burgundy was slain in the fight, that Boëmund was taken alive, and that Baldwin himself, Godfrey's Brother, then King, had made a narrow escape, so that the City was well-nigh taken. But the Barbarians, though they had gotten such a Victory yet they durst not attempt Jerusalem. For Tancred who had defended Antioch very valiantly, did also take Laodicea, which belong'd to the Emperour of Constantinople, by storm, because he heard that Alexius was pleased to hear that so many Christians were killed, and hinder'd our Men from pas∣sing out of Europe into Asia. Baldwin the King encouraged by the good fortune and resolution of Tancred, raised an Army as fast as he could, he resolv'd to march against , having sent to Genoua and Venice for Auxiliaries: from whence he had eighty Ships of War, besides many Galleys that were sent to the place: insomuch that the City was be∣sieged both by Land and Sea very closely, and in twenty days was taken; and the Saracens that came to defend it, utterly routed and defeated. Tancred shew'd great piety towards his Uncle Boëmund who had been kept in Prison by the Enemies for three years, and restored him to the Principality of Antioch, after he had redeemed him with a great Ransom of Silver and Gold. After that  committed the care of An∣tioch to Tancred, and went first into Italy and then into France, and married Constantine King Philip of France's Daughter: but hearing that Alexius Emperour of Constantinople infested the Seaport Towns near Antioch, he return'd into Italy, and getting a Navy  sailed into Dalmatia, where he besieged Durazzo, that he might divert Alexius from the War in Asia, as he soon did; and Alexius desiring a Peace, Boëmund granted it, upon condition, that he should put an end to the War against Antioch and let the French Soldiers pass through his Country into Asia
without any hindrance. Peace thus made, Boemund sail'd for Asia with the Navy which he had provided against Alexius, and did so recruit and chear the spirits of the Christians, that King Baldwin storm'd and took Baruti, a Maritime Town of Phaenicia, between Sidon and Biblos, whose Metropolis is Tyre, after he had besieged it two months, but not with∣out great loss of Men: so that he was very severe with 'em, and gave the City as a Colony to the Christians. At the same time was Sidon also taken. But amidst these successes of the Christians: Boemund, that fa∣mous Prince died (which caused an  sorrow) and left his little Son Boemund whom he had by his Wife Constantia, and who was to be his Successor in the Principality of Antioch, under Tancred's Tuition till he grew up. In the mean time Henry the Fourth, when his Father was dead (whom he had defeated at Liege in a pitch'd Battel) having com∣posed all things in Germany came into Italy, but tarry'd at Sutri, know∣ing he should scarce be welcom to Paschal; because he had demolish'd many Churches in the Wars, and given Bishopricks as he pleased to any body against Law and Reason. But when Ambassadours had been sent from one to the other, and the Emperour had sworn that he would come peaceably into the City, and force all the Bishops that were possest of Bishopricks either by bribery or violence, to quit their preferments immediately; it was agreed he should enter the City. Then Henry re∣moved from Sutri to Monte Guadio, or, as some will have it, to Monte Malo, (by others called Monte aureo) and pitch'd his Camp there: and from thence by consent of the People, and attended by all the Nobility, he march'd first into the Borgo di Santo Pietro, the Priests leading the way in their Vestments, and carrying the reliques of Saints along with 'em from St. Angelo; for he went that way into the Borgo di Santo Pietro as far as St. Peter's Church; and upon the steps that ascend to it he kiss'd the Pope's feet, who came so far with the Cardinals to meet him. And when he had quarter'd his Soldiers according to his mind, he went into the Church upon the Pope's right hand; where when he had said his Prayers at the Altar, he desired the Pope to confirm the Bishops that he had made, though he had sworn that he never would ask it; which Paschal denying, he gave the signal and in came his Sol∣diers, who presently took Paschal and all the Cardinals, and carry'd him and a great many of the Clergy, whom they had plunder'd before; into their Camp. The People of Rome were so incensed at this affront, that they rose in Arms and beat the Germans out of the Borgo and shut all the Gates. Thereupon the Emperour went to M. di Santo Silvestro and put the Pope and Cardinals in streight Prison, with Guards round about, lest they should escape: which done, he went back with the rest of his Men to attaque the City, and came as far as the River Aniene. From whence when he had first made himself Master of Ponte Mammolo (which takes its name from Mammea the Mother of Alexander the Emperour, who founded it) he burnt all the Villages round about, and made continual incursions upon the Romans. At which the Pope, who was concern'd for the calamity of the Citizens and wearied with their intrea∣ties, desired to be brought (as he was) to Ponte Salaro, where he sent for Notaries out of the City, to write down the Contract, and (though he was unwilling, yet) did confirm all the Bishops that Henry had cho∣sen. Things being thus composed and Prisoners on both sides dismissed
the Emperor was Crown'd by the Pope in S. Peters; but the City Gates were first shut, lest the People should break out; and the very Church had a Guard set upon it by Henry's Order. By this means he had what he wish'd for, and so return'd into Germany not long after. But the Pope, when Italy  little settled, exhorted the Pisans who were skilful Seamen, to leave the Baleares (two Islands called Majorca and Minorca, which they had in their possession for some time before) and sail against the Saracens, who infested our Seas and all the shores of Christendom. The Pisans were desirous of Honour and provided a great Navy, mann'd with most of their young Men, and went against the Enemy. But whilst they staid at Volterra for a Wind, the Luccheses in∣vaded their City, which had no body to defend it; and had taken it, had not the Florentines at the request of the Pisans beat back the Luccheses, and manfully maintained it. For which kindness the Pisans when they came back victorious over the Saracens, presented the Florentines with two Prophyry Pillars, still to be seen at the Gate of St. John Baptist's Chappel. In the mean time Paschal held a Council at the Lateran, and revok'd all that he had promised to Henry; because he was forc'd to do what he did, either out of fear of Henry or in pity to the Cardinals that were in bonds, or to the People of Rome, whom Henry harass'd after an hostile manner, to make a Peace upon any terms. He therefore thought it better to retract what he had done amiss (since he was compelled) than to let other Princes take that for a Precedent, and think that law∣ful for them to do, which Henry onely extorted from him against his will. At that time Maude the Countess died of age and left the Church of Rome, in her Will, all that tract of ground that lies betwixt the River Pissia, and Santo Quirico in Sienois, to Ceperano between the Apennine and the Sea; as also Ferrara, which is still tributary to the Church of Rome. There are some Authors (of which Vencentius is one of the best) who write that this Lady died at Florence in a great Fire (that burnt down most of the City, and destroyed two thousand Persons) and that her Body was carry'd thence afterward into , and buried in a Mo∣nastery of St. Benedict, twelve miles from Mantoa. My Opinion is, that she died at Mantua and was carry'd to St. Benedict's (which she built) by her own Order, and Anselm's care, who was a very holy Man and the cause of her building that stately Edifice. And I am sure Anselm himself who was Bishop of Lucca, was buried there too, but translated after∣ward to the Cathedral of Mantua, lest the neighbourhood should have stollen him out of his grave, because he was every day more and more famous for Miracles. The Lucceses say that they have Maud's body, which I cannot believe, because Guido Gonzaga, whilst he repaired the Monastery of St. Benedict found and removed the body (as he ought) to a better place: Some Authors also write that there was another An∣selm at the same time, a very learned Man, and of such esteem in Eng∣land, that he was in a short time from a Monk made an Abbat, and then Arch-bishop of Canterbury; the same Person who wrote several Books of Meditations; Why God should be made Man; of free Will; of Parables; of the Cross; and of St. John Baptist. These happy times produced Sigebert the Monk of Gemblours, a Man of excellent Learn∣ing; and Bernard of Castillon in , a Man of a noble Family: He, when he was twenty two years of age took upon him the habit
of a Monk (under Stephen the Abbat, who was the third after the Or∣der of Cistercians was erected) with thirty Fellows more, and was so much commended for his Learning and Piety, that in a short time he was made Abbat of Clarevalle, a Monastery built by one Robert a Noble∣man of great honour, and there he lived and govern'd with great repu∣tation for thirty six years. And when he (that is Bernard) died, he left, besides the same of his sanctity, a great many Monuments of his Wit in writing: especially his Commentaries upon the Canticles, and his considerations of divine Contemplation dedicated to Eugenius the Pope, from whence he might learn the duty of a Pope. He likewise wrote many Epistles; one above the rest to the Romans, in which he much blames 'em: as also an Apology, and some Sermons upon solemn occasions. But to return to Paschal, who decreed in a Council held at Guardastallo, that no Cities of Romagna, as Piacenza, Parma, Reggio, Modena, nor Bologna should be any longer subject to Ravenna which had been formerly the Metropolis and Mother-Church: because the Bi∣shops of Ravenna had often exalted their horns against the Roman Sea. But when the Pope came back to the City, the People desired him that he would make Peter's Son Governour of the City, upon the death of his Father who was so in his life time: which the Pope denying to do by reason of his nonage (for he was scarce ten years old) there was such a tumult of a sudden, that he was forced to leave the City, for fear of some great mischief; for there were many, that said it was not fit that such a Boy should be intrusted with such a weighty Employment. But that would not do; for when he was at Alba, and heard that Peter Leo (a great friend to the Church) was set upon in his own House by the ad∣verse Faction, he immediately sent Ptolomy from Ariccia with a good competent number of Men to assist him; who drove the Enemy over the Tiber, killing some and taking others whom he divided among the several Towns, to be kept. But there soon appeared great inconstancy in Ptolomy. For those whom he had taken but a little before, he set upon by surprise as they went through the Selva del Aglio by his Order to the several Towns, and took 'em again and carry'd 'em with him to Ariccia: among whom was also the dead Governour's Son. Nor was Ptolomy content to do so onely, but he possess'd himself of Sarmoneta Nymphaeo, Tiberia, and the Sea-coasts, In the mean time Henry came out of Germany into Italy with an Army which strook terrour into all that heard of it. But when he was come to Rome in the Pope's absence, (who at that time held a Council in Puglia) and thought himself de∣prived of his Imperial Dignity, together with the Power of bestowing Bishopricks, he was Crown'd a second time, before St. Gregory's body, by the Arch bishop of Braga, who was banish'd by his own Country, and so went home again. But Paschal when the Council was dismiss'd, came out of Puglia to Rome with an Army of Normans and retook many Towns from the Enemy, and at  gave willing Audience to the Ambassadours of Calo Johannes Emperour of Constantinople (who suc∣ceeded his Father Alexius) and bid 'em be sure to animate their Master against the Sarazens. Then the Abbat of Farfa and Ptolomy, whose ill actions were too great to be pardon'd, sculk'd about a good while, till at last Paschal, who was a very mild Man, took 'em into favour. When things were thus settled and a Church dedicated to Agapetus, built at
Palestrina, which he consecrated, he returned from thence in Pomp to Rome where he was met by the whole City: in which croud he fell sick, and per∣ceiving his approaching death, he received the Sacrament, exhorted the Clergy to Peace and Concord; and dy'd, after he had been Pope eighteen years, six months and seven days, upon the 14th. of January, and was honourably buried in the Lateran Church. He in his Pontificate, made fifty Priests, thirty Deacons, and an hundred Bishops. He also conse∣crated fifteen Churches at Rome; especially that of St. Adrian intrefori, which had been prophaned by some of the factions; and the Church of St. Mary in Monticello. In fine, he repaired and consecrated the Church of the Sancti quatuor Coronati which was defaced, when Robert Guiscard Prince of Salerno set that part of the City on fire, which goes from the Lateran to the Capi∣tol; as I have said in the life of Gregory the Seventh. GELASIUS II. GELASIUS the Second, before nam'd John, born at Gaeta, his Father's name was Crescentius of a noble Family, from his youth up well educated and learned, in Monte-Cas∣sino under the religious Abbat Odrisio he learn'd the funda∣mental Principles of the Christian Faith. For this Reason he was sent for to Rome by Urban II. who knew him to be trusty and virtuous and ever had a great esteem for him. But his fidelity was then most conspi∣cuous, when Pope Urban was besieged by the Germans and sectators of Gilbert the Anti-Pope in the Isle of S. Batholomew, between the two Bridges; for he only and that noble Person Peter Leone never abandon'd him. Urban therefore, when he was in his prosperity again, mindful of so great kindness and for his learning and fidelity made him his Se∣cretary, and because he had an elegant way of writing, he committed to him the charge of reforming the style of the Court of Rome which by the ignorance and negligence of former Ages, was very much corrupt∣ed. And afterwards observing the great worth of the Man, he resolv'd to make him a Cardinal, and proposed it often in the Consistory with the good liking of all. But Urban dying soon after, Pope Paschal taking notice of his great deserts, immediately made him Cardinal-Deacon; and upon the death of Pascbal, when the Consultation was held for the electing of a new Pope, all the Cardinals being to that purpose assem∣bled in the Monastery below the Palace of Leo and Cincio Frangipane, by an universal consent John of Gaeta was chosen Pope by the name of Ge∣lasius. This Election put Cincio Frangipane into so great a rage, because the College had rejected a Creature of his, whom he had proposed to them to be Pope, that accompanied with many armed Men he  into the Monastery, breaking down the doors, and beating down whom∣soever he met in his way, and taking the Pope himself by the Collar, he slung him upon the ground and kick'd him, and then made him a Prisoner. The Cardinals, who endeavour'd to make their escape, he threw  their Horses and Mules, not sparing any manner of contu∣mely,
that could be put upon so venerable an Assembly. But the People of Rome would not endure the assront, but gathered together in Arms before  House, and threatned death and ruin to himself and his Family  he did not immediately set  safe and sound at liberty. The Frangipani comply'd with all their demands, and Leo in the sight of all falling at the Pope's feet, kiss'd , and most humbly beg'd his Par∣don. The Pope then mounted his white Horse, and attended by the Clergy and People of Rome he rode to the Lateran, and was there Crown'd according to custom. At this time Baldwin (who had been exhorted by the Pope, both by Letters and Messengers, to withstand  the Barbarian Forces till some supplies could be sent into Asia to his assistance) took Sobal, a strong place in Syria, and fortified it, that it might be a receptacle for the Christians in their War against the Infi∣dels. Boemund also the younger dying, Tancred who was his Uncle and Guardian, was by all the Christians declar'd Prince of Antioch, which Principality having setled, he was sent for by Baldwin King of Jerusalem, to come with all his force to aid him against the Turks, Saracens and Arabs, who with a great Army had invaded his Kingdom. Tancred arriving there, and observing the small forces of the Christians, dissuaded Bald∣win from joyning Battel with the Enemy, by that means putting the whole affair of Christendom under a great hazard, but all in vain; for Baldwin giving them an opportunity of fighting was overcome with great slaughter, himself and a few Men retreating with great difficulty to Jerusalem, and Tancred by several by-ways escaping to Antioch. The Enemies puff'd up with this great Victory, seiz'd Mount Tabor and pul∣ling down the Monestery there, put all the Monks to the sword. Gela∣sius in the mean time could not be at rest from a forein Enemy; for the Emperor Henry had entred Italy with his Army, wasting all as he march'd, was just about to enter Rome in a hostile manner; to escape whom the Pope at first retir'd to the House of Volcamino a noble Citizen, but not deeming that altogether safe, he went with his Attendants aboard a couple of Gallies prepar'd for that purpose, and sail'd down the Tiber to Ostia, the German Soldiers pursuing him and shooting at him with Darts and Arrows. Coming to Ostia, he dared not venture any whither by Sea, it was so stormy, but he travell'd hy Land to Ardea, accompa∣nied still wherever he went by Hugh Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles, an illustrious Prelate; Soon after the Sea growing more calm, he re∣turn'd to , from whence he sail'd first to Terracina and then to Gaeta, where he was very kindly entertain'd by his Countrymen. Hither came to meet him William Duke of Puglia, Robert Prince of Capua and Richard of Aquila, who all promised him their utmost service, as became loyal Feudataries of the Church of God. Henry hearing these Princes were raising an Army against him, set up for an Anti pope Maurice Arch∣bishop of Braga, by the name of Gregory, to oppose Gelasius, and recom∣mended him to the Family of Frangipani; and not content to have act∣ed so pernicious a thing, he entred the Country of Anagni, and plunder'd and ruin'd all before him; he had just laid Siege to Turricolo a strong place, when on a sudden news was brought that Gelasius with the Princes of Puglia, approach'd with a great Army, whereupon he decamp'd and as he retreated out of Italy, he sill'd all places with slaughter and rapine. , upon his retreat, dismiss'd the  Princes, supposing now
that Henry was gone, all things would be in a peaceable condition at Rome hereafter; but he was very much deceiv'd in his opinion; for he was soon after inform'd that the Anti-pope upheld by the power of the Frangipani continued still at Rome, out of fear of which Family he staid privately a while in the House of a Friend; but afterward as he was say∣ing Mass in the Church of Praxede, his Enemies with their Party rush'd in, and he had much ado to escape out of their hands by flight, some of the Corsi and Normanni, two great Families, with his Nephew Cre∣scentius fighting briskly in his defence. The next day guarded by his Retinue and Friends in Arms, he return'd to the City from S. Paul's (whither he had fled) and consulting with his Cardinals, he resolv'd to leave the City, lest the Uproars every day encreasing some great mis∣chief might ensue. Having therefore left to Peter Bishop of Porto, the Vicegerency in Ecclesiastical affairs at Rome, and to Hugo Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles the care of Benevento, he sail'd first to Pisa, not conceiving the way by Land to be secure for himself and the Cardinals who accompanied him; where he in the audience of the whole City related the causes of his departure from Rome, and was received with great kindness by the Pisans; thence setting sail for France, he arrived at S. Giles's, and was there entertain'd by the Abbat of Clugni and his Monks with many others who came for that purpose, very magnifi∣cently and splendidly. Then he cross'd the middle of France with a ve∣nerable rather than sumptuous attendance, (which now adays is the fashion) by the way dedicating the Churches of S. Cecily in Stagello, S. Sylvester in Burgundy and S. Stephen in Tornay, and with Stones de∣termining the Bounds of each Church. Coming at last to the Monastery of Clugni, he was taken with a Plurisie, and died, having been Pope one year and five days. He was a most holy Man and very praise-worthy both for his life and doctrin; so that I cannot doubt, considering the integrity of his life, and his religious constancy amidst the many storms and troubles he underwent, but that he now enjoys Eternity among the blessed in Heaven. He was buried in the Porch of the said Monastery. Some write, that in his time the Order of Knights Templers first began, who living not far from the Holy Sepulcre, entertain'd Pilgrims and accompanied them in Arms in their journeys to and from the holy Places, which by their means might be visited with all safety. These Knights Cusentinus commends highly for their holy Christian Lives.
CALISTUS II. CALISTUS the Second, first named Guy, a Burgundian, Arch-bishop of Vienna, descended of the Blood Royal of France, was chosen Pope by those Cardinals who were at Clugni at the death of Gelasius, but he would not take up∣on him the , till he heard the Election was ap∣prov'd by those Cardinals also who were left at Rome and elsewhere in Italy; which being certified to him by Letters and Messengers, he went to Rome, and the Nobility and People meeting him congratulated his Promotion and their own good fortune, not doubting but he would be a restorer of peace and tranquillity to the City of Rome. Here he settled matters to his mind, and went to Benevento, where all the Princes thereabout were met to salute him (according to custom) of whom the principal were William Duke of Puglia, Jordan Count of , Arnul∣phus Count of Ariano, and Robert Count of Lauretello, all Men of great honour, and without doubt the most powerful Lords of that part of Italy, who took their Oath of fealty to the Pope. But Calistus having nothing more in his thoughts than the holy War, where it was much fear'd the Christian Cause would not be able to sustain it self against so many barbarous Nations, returning to Rome, dispatch'd away Lambert Bishop of Ostia, a Saxon, Cardinal of S. Stephen in monte Celio, and Gre∣gory Cardinal of S. Angelo, to the Emperour to treat of a Peace, which having procured without much difficulty, they hang'd up a Table of the Articles thereof in the Lateran Church, to the incredible joy of all People. But this lasted not long, for Roger Count of Sicily in the ab∣sence of Count William, had seiz'd upon Calabria and Puglia, the charge of both which Countries William (going to Constantinople to espouse the Daughter of Alexius the Emperour) had committed to the care of the Pope. Upon this therefore the Pope left Rome and went to Benevento, from whence he sent Cardinal Hugo to Roger as he was besieging the Rocca di Niceforo, to persuade him to lay down his Arms and quit the Siege, but he little regarded the Pope's Order, rather pursuing the War more vigorously, fearing lest if his Cosen William should arrive before he had possest himself of those two Countries, it might render his de∣sign unfeasible. The Pope then began to raise an Army, when on a sudden both himself and many of the Cardinals were taken ill of Fevers, which forc'd him to return to Rome without performing any thing; so that Roger not meeting any resistance easily made himself Master of Ca∣labria and Puglia. Thus was William  of his Country and of the Wife he expected, and being forc'd to betake himself to live in the Court of the Prince of Salerno, he died a little while after without Heirs; and Roger having lost so considerable an Enemy, arrogates to himself the Title of King of Italy. Calistus as soon as he recover'd his health, held a Council in the Lateran of nine hundred Fathers, where it was consulted, how with the first opportunity they might send Recruits to the Christian Army in Asia, then much weakned; the news whereof
gave such courage to Baldwin King of Jerusalem, that he set upon Gazis a King of the Turks that inhabited Asia minor, who was coming against him with a great Army, vanquish'd him and took him Prisoner; and with like success he encountred the King of Damascus who was marching against Jerusalem, whom he defeated having kill'd two thousand of the Enemy and taken a thousand. But Balahac King of the Persians coming on with numerous sorces, and Baldwin not staying till the Auxiliaries could arrive, he rashly adventur'd to fight him, and was totally routed, and him∣self and many of his Nobles made Captives. This made Pope Calistus hasten their assistance, lest the remainder of the Christians should be de∣stroy'd having no King: and by the mediation of Veramundus Patriarch of Jerusalem a learned and a good Mam, he animated the Venetians with hopes of glory and reward to man out a stout Fleet upon the service, in the year 1121. Dominico Michiele being Duke; which arriving at Joppa, then streightly besieged both by Sea and Land by the Saracens, they o∣vercame them with great slaughter and raised the Siege. Hence they went to Tyre, which after a long and bloody Siege they took, having first made it their bargain, that half Ascalon and Tyre should be theirs, if by their means they happened to be taken. But Emanuel Emperour of the Greeks, Successour to Calo-Joannes enving these great successes to the Latines or those of the Roman Communion, commanded the Venetians to recall their Admiral, which they did and he obey'd, but he was so in∣rag'd, that in his return he sack'd Rhodes, Chios (from whence he transla∣ted to Venice the body of S. Theodore the Martyr) Samos, Mitilene and Andros, Islands belonging to the Emperour. He took Modone and  it; and subjected the Island Trau (before in the hands of the Hun∣garians) to the Venetian Commonwealth. He brought also along with him to Venice the Stone upon which at Tyre Christ is said to have sate. In the mean time Baldwin, who we said was taken Prisoner, being ransom'd, return'd to Jerusalem, and for a while kept up the Christian Cause; so that Calistus having now a little leisure from forein troubles, creates twelve Cardinals, rebuilds several Churches that were ruin'd with age; repairs the City Walls, makes Conduits,  Castles belonging to the Church and distributes great Donaries of Silver and Gold to several Churches, purchases several pieces of ground to augment S. Peter's Revenue and within the Court builds the Church of S. Nicolas. But so great felicity cannot long be enjoy'd on Earth, without interruption, for Gregory the Anti-Pope, before nam'd Bordino, attempting to usurp the Papacy kept at Sutri, where with the assistance of some Roytelets thereabout he did great damage to the Romans by his incursions, and plunder'd all the Strangers he could meet with that travel'd to Rome either out of devotion or about business. Calistus therefore gets together an Army on a sudden, and sending before John de Crema Cardinal of S Chrysogon with the most ex∣pedite part of Soldiery, himself follows and defeating the Enemy takes Sutri, and sets Bordino upon a Camel, leading him so in triumph to Rome; and then forgave him his life, but thrust him into the Monastery of Cave. At last Calistus having deserv'd well both of God and Man died in the Lord; after he had been Pope five years ten months and six days. The Sea was then vacant eight days.
HONORIUS II. HONORIUS the Second, at first named Lambert, born in the Country of Imola, was made Pope about the time that Baldwin being ransom'd from his imprisonment added the Principality of Antioch to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, all the Heirs being dead, to whom of right it belong'd. But so great a Province not being to be govern'd without a Lieutenant, he made Raymund Son to William Duke of Austria their Governour, whose Wife was the Daughter of Boemund the elder; and having thus setled mat∣ters, he went against the King of Ascalon, who being assisted with forces from Aegypt infested the  of Jerusalem, and him he utterly routed in one Battel. Afterward Baldequan a petit King of Damascus attempt∣ing the same thing, but with greater forces, he overthrew him in three fierce Battels, his men in their flight being kill'd up and down like sheep. To return to Honorius; though his Parentage was mean, yet for his excellent Learning and conversation he was every way worthy of so high a Dignity; not but that the methods by which he obtain'd it were not altogether commendable, the Election having been procur'd rather by the ambition of some private Men than by unanimous con∣sent. For when upon the death of Calistus, the Consultation was held about chusing a new Pope, Leo Frangipane imposed upon the Conclave, that the Election should be deferred for three days, under pretence of more mature deliberation and a stricter search into the Ecclesiastical Canons; though neither of these were part of his design, but it was craftily and politickly done by him, to gain time in which Votes might be procur'd for the choice of Lambert. The People were extreamly de∣sirous to have had the Cardinal of S. Stephen, which Frangipane also pretended, that so he might by this trick draw over the People and the unwary Fathers; which some of the Cardinals observing, because they would not have a Pope according to his mind, they set aside the Cardinal of S. Stephen, and chose Theobald Cardinal of S. Anastasio, Pope, by the name of Coelestine. Leo now thought it no time to dally, but perceiving the People were displeased at that choice, declares Lambert aforesaid for Pope, with great acclamations of the Citizens, the Clergy also appro∣ving it; and that the People might not have time to change their minds, he immediately clothes him with the Pontifical Vestments in the Scinie, a place near S. Sylvester's Church. He, though it was not without slight that he got the Popedom, yet was afterward universally saluted and own'd as such. As soon as he was made Pope, he created several worthy Persons Cardinals, of whose assistance he constantly made use in all his difficult affairs; being very much delighted with the conversation of excellent Men, which was the reason that he detain'd at Rome with him Pontius Abbat of Clugni, a very diligent person; and shew'd great respect to the extraordinary parts of Hildebert Bishop of Mans, whom for the sake of his skill at Heroic or Elegiac Verse he promoted afterward to the Arch∣bishoprick of Tours. This age was rendred also more illustrious by Hu∣go de Sancto Victore, a famous Doctor of Paris, who then flourish'd, who
lest behind him several lasting Monuments of his admirable Learning: as his Book concerning the Sacraments, his Book of Sentences, another written by way of Dialogue, entitled Didascalus, another of care of the Soul, and a Book entitled, of Arts and Sciences. All these learned Men Pope Honorius lov'd to that degree, that he neglected no opportunity of preferring them. One foul deed yet was acted in his time much to be abhorred; for one Arnulphus an excellent Preacher of the Religion of Christ, was murdered at Rome by the procurement of the Priests, because he inveighed bitterly against their incontinence and sensuality, and reprov'd their pompous living and insatiable appetite after Wealth, proposing the Poverty and pure Integrity of our Saviour for their Imitation. This Man the Roman Nobility and Gentry look'd upon as a true Prophet and Disciple of Christ, and extoll'd him to the Skies; which begat  much envy and rage as cost the good Man his life. Whether this holy Man was a Priest, a Monk, or a Hermit, is not certain. Historians write that Ho∣norius was very much troubled at the fact, but could never find the Authors of it: He aster having reign'd well in S. Peter's Chair five years two months and a day, died to the general grief, and was buried with the greatest solemnity in the Lateran Church; and the Sea was thereupon vacant one day. His name is in an Inscription in Marble  the Church of Praxede, but I know not what it means. INNOCENT II. INNOCENT the Second, a Roman, born in Trastevere, being made Pope, raises an Army and marches against Roger, Son and heir of the former Roger Lord of Sicily, who en∣deavour'd to possess himsess of Puglia, upon the death of William the Duke thereof, in whom the whole Family of Robert Guiscard was extinct. In this expedition the Romans shew'd so much courage and fortitude, that at the first onset they overthrew the Enemy then encamp'd at S. Germans, and taking the Town, they follow'd Roger to  and there besieg'd him. But in the mean time  Duke of Calabria, his Son, with a good Army comes upon them and in one Battel defeats them, not only delivering his Father from the Siege, but taking the Pope Prisoner with all the Cardinals that then at∣tended him: all whom yet soon after Roger using wonderful modera∣tion, freely released. For which reason the Pope afterwards was easily persuaded to grant any thing he desired, except the Title of King, which he earnestly solicited with great expence and large Promises. During these actions one Peter Son of Peter Leone a potent Citizen of Rome, by some seditious Fellows was set up for an Anti-Pope by the name of Anacletus, who by spoiling several Churches in the City and rifling their Treasures (particularly breaking into S. Peter's Church, whence he took a Cross of Gold with its appendent Ornaments) had rak'd to∣gether so much wealth, that he was able with it to corrupt to his side any of the Citizens who were desirous of change. So that Innocent up∣on his return to the City finding all places full of uproars, and that
these must needs end in the slaughter of many men, he retir'd of his own accord, and first sailing to Pisa, from thence he went to Genoa and at last to France. Anacletus then being rid of so considerable an Adversary, endeavour'd as much as he could by liberal Pensions to bring over those who were for Innocent to his side, and that he might more firmly oblige Roger, (then inclining to his party) to his interest, he created him King of both Sicilies. Innocent in the mean while holds  Council at Clermont, in which the Anti-Pope and his followers were condemned; from whence he went to Orleans, and having visited King Philip, by whom he was kindly receiv'd, he pass'd into la Beausse, where at Chartres he discours'd with Henry King of England who came to meet him, whom he endea∣vour'd with many arguments to persuade to undertake an expedition against the Saracens. Hence he took a turn into Lorain, and finding Lotharius newly made King of the Germans, at Liege, who made him many large Promises of assistance towards his Restauration, he made him take an Oath, that he would make such sufficient preparations for the enterprise, as that he should return to Rome with security. After this having held another Council at Rhemes, and, upon his return into Italy, one other at Piacenza, he came to Pisa, where he composed the animo∣sities that had long been between the Pisans and Genoeses. He also raised the Bishoprick of Genoa, which before was in the Province of the Arch∣bishop of Milan, to an Arch-hishops Sea, to which he subjected three Bishops of Corsica and the Bishop of Bebio. The same he did by that of Pisa, making it an Arch-Bishoprick, with Jurisdiction over the other three Bishops of , and the Bishop of Populonia. Lotharius by this time was come into Italy with a great Army, which having by the Pope's advice divided with two distinct Bodies he march'd to the City; where making himself Master of Janicolo he entred that way, while Innocent with another party by another way crossing the River Anien over Ponte Mamolo gets into the Lateran, the Anti-Pope not appearing at all. So that Lo∣tharius with marvellously good fortune quash'd that Faction and as much as in him lay took care that Innocent should not thereafter be  by them. The Pope was so extreamly obliged by these great ser∣vices of Lotharius, that Henry being now dead, he created him Empe∣rour of the Romans and crown'd him with an Imperial Diadem. Which done, Lotharius return'd into Germany, to reduce the Leutici then in Re∣bellion; but while the Pope called a Council at Pisa, to consider of the State of Christendom and of the preservation of Religion; the Anti-Pope who was condemn'd in this Council also, with the assistance of Roger and some factious People, again bestirs himself against the Pope. Here∣upon the Emperour Lotharius having repress'd his own Rebels, once more advances towards Rome with his Army, and the Pisans on the Pope's behalf fit out a powerful Fleet; and with these Forces they not onely quell'd the Sedition at Rome, but attack'd Roger so stoutly both by Sea and Land, that they stripp'd him of all that he held in Italy, and drove him to his own Sicily in a short time. John Emperour of Con∣stantinople, who had no kindness for Roger, hearing of these great suc∣cesses, sent Ambassadours to congratulate Lotharius upon that occasion; one of which Embassie was a Sophister, who would undertake to prove that the Latin Church profess'd a great Error, in declaring contrary, as he said, to the opinion of the Nicene Council, which was that (the Holy
Ghost proceeded from the Father) that the said Holy Ghost did proceed from the Father and the Son. But among those who manag'd the Con∣troversie was one Peter a Deacon, a learned Man and a great Disputant, who replied thus: If the Latins (says he) are to be condemn'd be∣cause they add that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son also; why are not the Greeks much more to be condemn'd who say, the H.G. proceeds from the Father alone; whereas the Council said no more than that it proceeded from the Father? The bold man was so gra∣vel'd with this acute Answer, that he laid down the Controversie and disputed no more. The Emperour Lotharius being about to depart, and Innocent fearing that when he was gone Roger would attempt to regain what he had lost in Italy, he created Raino one of Lotharius's Comman∣ders, (left by him to secure the Country with some Troops) Duke of Puglia. The Anti-Pope soon after died and was buried privately by his Friends, and the Cardinals who had been his Sectators were recon∣cil'd to the Pope, so that the Church seem'd to be in a likelihood of en∣joying a little Tranquillity; when on a sudden some Citizens of Rome seeking to enlarge their Power by tumults, set up several Senators of their own to take into their hands the whole Government of the affairs and territories of the City. Whilst the Pope withstood these attempts, he holding a Council in the Lateran, wherein it was ordain'd that no Lay-man should lay violent hands on a Clergy-man, he died, having been Pope fourteen years, seven months and thirteen days, A.D. 1114. At which time were in great esteem, Gilbert an English Man, a Person of so great knowledg, that he was call'd, the universal Scholar, and Am∣bert Arch-bishop of Rhemes, not inferiour to his Master Gilbert for parts and learning. That piece of Mosaic work which is still to be seen in the Vault of S. Mary in Trastevere was done by this Pope. CELESTINE II. CELESTINE the Second, at first nam'd Guido, Cardinal Priest of S. Mark, a Tuscan, born at Citta di Castello, called by the Antients Tiphernum, was by universal consent cho∣sen Pope in the room of the deceased Innocent, at the time when Baldwin King of Jerusalem dying, Fulk Earl of Anjou, his Son-in-law succeeded him in that Kingdom, which with the help of his two va∣liant Sons, he defended stoutly for some time. For when the Turks who inhabited near the Persian Gulph, had made incursions into the territo∣ries of Antioch, he not onely defeated them, but slew three thousand of their number and took as many Prisoners. Which loss so enrag'd Alaph the Turk, that with some Babylonian Auxiliaries, he sate down before E∣dessa a City of Mesopotamia, called by Jews Arach, (which we told you Baldwin had beg'd of his Brother Godfrey) and took it, the Barba∣rians plundering and spoiling all without mercy, putting all those Chri∣stians to the sword who would not deny the Faith, and ravishing the principal Women, even upon S. John Baptist's Altar, because they knew it was had in high reverence by the Christians. But while an Army
was raising, King Fulk (I know not by what ill luck) fell from his Horse, as he was riding too rashly after a Hare, and died of his fall, to whom Baldwin the third of that name, succeeded in the Throne. And Cele∣stine, after he had sate five months, died, and was buried in the Lateran. He was happy in one thing, that he was not pestered with any Sedi∣tions in his Pontificate, which yet perhaps is to be attributed to the shortness of his time. LƲCIƲS II. LƲCIƲS the Second, a Bononian, his Father's name was Albert, came to the Popedom at that time when the news of the taking of Edessa was brought to Italy. This Edessa was the City to which Holy Scripture says, Tobias sent his Son, and which the Apostle Thaddaeus converted to the faith of Christ, being since honoured with the reliques of S. Thomas, and hence it was that Agbarus King of the place sent a Letter to our Saviour, to which he vouchsafed to write an Answer with his own hand. Upon the tidings of this great loss, Bernard Abbat of Clairvaux, a personage famous for Sanctity and Learning, as I have said before, took to heart the defence of Christianity, and by Letters and Messengers animated all Christian Princes to take upon them the Cross and Banner of Christ against the Saracens; and prevailed upon Conrade of Schwaben, who had succeeded Lotharius in the Empire, to engage in the Expedition. While provision was thus made for the defence of the Christian Religion, in France and Germany, Roger by the Pope's negligence returns into Italy and regains all that he had lost without meeting any resistance, which success gave him so much courage and strength, that passing with a Fleet into Africa, he so plagu'd the King of Tunis, that to buy his peace, he made him pro∣mise him a yearly tribute, which he paid for thirty years afterward. Conrade having in the mean while got together a great Army under the Cross, march'd to Constantinople, where Emanuel II. Emperour of the Greeks over-persuaded him to take his journey straight on to Iconium, without taking care of provision, assuring him that himself would sup∣ply the Army with whatsoever should be necessary. Whereupon that City, well fortified both by Art and Nature, was closely besieg'd a great while; but the wicked Emperour shew'd them a Greek Trick, and mix'd Lime with their Meal, with which the bread was made for the whole Army of the Christians, and this kill'd so many of the Soldiers, that they were forc'd to raise the Siege and return into France, without having done any thing. Some advantage yet this Expedition may be said to have given the Christians, because King Baldwin IV. of Jerusalem took such courage upon it as to besiege and take by storm the City of Asca∣lon, having also a little before rebuilt the antient City Gaza, (then almost deserted by the Enemy) giving it for a dwelling place to the Knights Templars. Beside the same Baldwin gave a bold repulse to some Turkish Chieftains who infested the Inhabitants of Jericho, of whom in one single Battel he is said to have kill'd five thousand. Moreover Noradine
Governour of Damascus invading the territories of Jerusalem was met withal by Baldwin, and totally routed, so that in the pursuit the Chri∣stians were with much ado kept off from entring the City of Damascus pel-mel with the Enemy. But to return to Pope Lucius; he omitted no care nor pains in promoting that so considerable and necessary Expedi∣tion; and I suppose, he was much the more concern'd in his mind for it, because before he was Pope, he was Cardinal Priest of S. Cross in Jerusalem, the Church whereof he almost wholly re-built. By his ap∣probation, a national Council was held in France of several Bishops and Abbats, against Peter Abelardus a Peripatetic Philosopher, and a very learned Man, who had maintain'd some heterodox Opinions; but was in the presence of King Lewis, so effectually convinc'd, that he not only chang'd his mind, but took upon him the life and order of a Monk, and afterward together with some of his Scholars led a most holy life seclu∣ded from the World in a desert place. Lucius, after he had been Pope eleven months and four days, died and was buried in the Lateran. EƲGENIƲS III. EƲGENIƲS the Third, a Pisan, Abbat of S. Anastasius ha∣ving been chosen a Monk by that holy Man Bernard, was crea∣ted Pope in the Church of S. Caesarius; for when the Cardinals could not well agree whom to chuse out of their own number, mov'd by an impulse from above, they pitch'd upon this most religious Man Eugenius. He finding the Romans would be urgent upon him with threats, to procure his confirmation of their Senators, he fled by night to Sabina, accompanied by the College of Cardinals, and was consecra∣ted in the Monastery of Farfara; and despising not onely the big words of the Romans, but defying the worst they could do, he drove those Senators to such a straight, that he forc'd them to resign their Offices. Hereupon he return'd to Rome, but perceiving the Citizens were recon∣cil'd to him only out of design and not heartily, and being afraid lest some trap should be laid for him, he escap'd to Tivoli, the Romans throwing at him Darts and other missile Weapons as he departed. After this he went to Pisa and from thence by Sea to France, where he persuaded King Lewis to engage in the holy War against the Turks and Saracens, who arriving at Constantinople, was no better used by the Emperour Emanuel than Conrade of Schwaben had been before him; for Lewis taking his advice to pass through the deserts of Syria at a very unseasonable time, was reduc'd to such extream necessity, that he was compell'd to march his Army (harrass'd with the bad way and want of all things) to An∣tioch, without entring upon any action. This falsity of Emanuel pro∣cur'd him the enmity of Roger King of Sicily, who mans out a Navy for Greece, and seizes from him the Island of Corfu, Corinth, Thebes and Euboea, and had gone up to Constantinople it self, if the Venetians had not equipp'd a Fleet of sixty Gallies to hinder his design. Roger there∣fore, as God would have it, turns to the coast of Asia, where the Saracens Fleet had block'd up Lewis King of France, (then intending to set sail
for Palestine from Porto di S. Simon,) and having got them at an advantage sets upon 'em and routs 'em, delivering by this means this Christian King and his Army from destruction. In the mean time the Venetian Fleet which was altogether on Emanuel's side, retakes all those places which Roger had possest himself of, but had been left by him unfortified and without Garisons; Roger then leaving King Lewis at Joppa, sets sail directly for Constantinople, where he burnt the Suburbs in the very sight of the Emperour, and carried his Victory so far, that for some time he besieged even his Palace, and with his own hand gather'd fruit out of his Garden. But having got his Fleet together in order to return into Sicily, he fell unawares upon the Venetian Navy which was ready pre∣par'd for a Battel, and was by them defeated with the loss of twenty of his Gallies, himself hardly escaping by flight. While these things were doing, Conrade, Lewis and Baldwin, with joint forces and courages at∣tack'd Damascus, which City was built by the Servants of Abraham, in a Champain Country and naturally subject to drought, but by Art ren∣dred fertile and plentiful; for the ground is watered by Channels and guts dug in the Earth and by that means made to abound with all things. There is but one small River in that Country, which running not far from the City Walls, makes a little tongue of Land in which their Camp was pitch'd, whereby they easily could hinder the Citizens from fetching Water; but a certain Assyrian, to whom in difficult matters Baldwin was wont to give great credit, over-persuaded him to remove his Camp to the other side of the Town, pretending that it might with more ease be there expugnable, because the Walls were not so strong; which was no sooner done, but those of Damascus possess'd themselves of the place where our Men had encamp'd, and having entrench'd them∣selves stop'd all the Water and Provisions that the Christians wanted: So that being press'd with hunger and thirst, they were forc'd disho∣nourably to raise the Siege, from which Baldwin went to Jerusalem, and Lewis and Conrade took their march to Europe, whither they re∣turn'd An. Dom. 1152. with their Armies, which by several accidents were very much shattered. Eugenius after having (as aforesaid) stir'd up the Christians to this Expedition, return'd to Rome, where he was pompously and heartily entertain'd by the Citizens; but having reco∣ver'd Terracina, Sezza, Norba and Rocca di Fumone, places which had been seiz'd from the Church by several Lords of the adjacent Country, he retir'd to Tivoli for his diversion, where soon after he died, having sate in the Papal Chair eight years four months and twenty days. His body was carry'd to Rome, and buried with great state (as reason good) in St. Peter's Church. By his Order and at his charge the Portico of S. Mary Maggiore was built or rather re-edified, as appears by the In∣scription.
ANASTASIƲS IV. ANASTASIƲS the Fourth, a Roman, Son of Benedict, was before Abbat of S. Ruffo in Velitro, and now of a Cardi∣nal was made Pope, at that time when Alphonso K. of Spain died in his return from the Holy War, to whom succeeded his Son Sanctius, who soon after being slain in the Christian quarrel in a Battel in Arabia, his Brother Ferdinand succeeded him in the Throne. Anastasius having obtain'd the Popedom, gave a Chalice of most excellent workmanship and vast price to the Lateran Church, and in a short time raised a noble structure near the Pantheon, now called S. Mar∣ca rotunda; and many other things he design'd for the honour of the Church and the Ornament of the City, if he had lived a little longer. Great expectations Men had entertain'd concerning him and hopes that his goodness together with the learning of Richard de S. Victore his Co∣temporary, would vindicate those times from obscurity and ignominy: for Richard was then a famous Doctor and wrote many things gravely and copiously, particularly a Book concerning the Trinity; beside that he was an eloquent as well as profound Preacher. At this time almost all Europe was afflicted with Famine, which put our Pope upon acts of Cha∣rity which he perform'd liberally both openly and in secret, but he died when he had been Pope one year four months and twenty four days, and was buried in the Lateran in a Tomb of Porphyry. HADRIAN IV. HADRIAN the Fourth, an English man [born near S. Al∣bans in Hertfordshire] having been sent into Norway to preach the Gospel, he converted that Nation to the Christian faith, and was therefore by Pope Eugenius made Bishop of Alba and Cardinal. Upon the death of Anastasius being elected Pope, he was ap∣plied to by the Romans both with Prayers and threats for an investiture of their Consuls in the absolute administration of the Government of the City, but he positively refused; and the Clergy of Rome desiring him to go to the Lateran to be consecrated, he also denied so to do, unless Ar∣nold of Brescia who had been condemn'd for a Heretick by Eugenius, were first expell'd the City. This so enrag'd the People, that they set up∣on the Cardinal of S. Pudentiana in the Via Sacra as he was going to the Pope, and gave him a wound or two. This the Pope took so ill, that he set them under Excommunication, till at last they chang'd their minds, and both banish'd Arnold and forc'd their Consuls to lay down their Of∣fices, leaving to the Pope the absolute Power of governing the City. Mean time William King of Sicily, who succeeded Roger, takes the Sub∣burbs of Benevent, and both Ceperano and Bauco from the Church, which so enrag'd the Pope, that he Anathematiz'd him, and absolv'd all his Sub∣jects
of their Allegiance, that so they might be at liberty to rebel. But at this time the Emperour Frederick I. of Schwaben was entred into Lom∣bardy with an Army and besieging Tortona, which had revolted from the Empire, he took it by force, and thence with great speed he continued his march towards Rome. The Pope was then at Viterbo, from whence he went to visit Orvieto and Civita Castellana, places belonging to the Church, to confirm them in their Allegiance; but finding himself unable to cope with the Imperial Army, by his Nuntio's he struck up a Peace, and met the Emperor near Sutri, who alighting from his Horse, address'd to him with all that Ceremony which was due to the true Vicar of Christ. From hence they went to Rome, where Frederick was to be Crown'd by the Pope in S. Peter's Church, but the Gates being shut lest any tumult should happen between the Citizens and the Soldiers, the Romans yet broke forth by Ponte S. Angelo and set upon the Germans (whom they look'd upon as of the Pope's side) and kill'd many. This unsuf∣ferable riot angred the Emperour so, that having brought his Army, which was encamp'd in the prati di Nerone, into the City, he drove the Romans from the Vatican, and slew and took Prisoners multitudes of them, till being appeased by the intercession of the Pope, he let those he had taken go free. But when afterward according to custom, the Pope and Emperour were to go together to the Lateran and found it would be unsafe because of the seditious humour of the Citizens, they went first to Magliana, and there crossing the River they pass'd by the way of Sabina and Ponte Lucano to the Lateran, and perform'd the Coronation with the usual Solemnity. While matters went thus at Rome those of Tivoli surrendred themselves to Frederick, professing a perfect submission; but when he understood that it was a part of S. Peter's Patrimony he restor'd it to Hadrian, and without any long stay return'd into Germany. The Pope also at the request of the great men of Puglia remov'd to Be∣nevent, where by his presence alone he regain'd from William to the Church a great part of his Kingdom. In the mean time Paloeologus an illustrious personage came Ambassadour from Emanuel II. Emperour of Constantinople, first by Sea to Ancona, and then by Land to Benevent, with an offer to the Pope of fifty thousand pounds in Gold, and a Pro∣mise to chase William out of Sicily, if upon the good success of the Expe∣dition, three maritime Cities of Puglia might be put into his possession; which no sooner came to William's Ear but he sued for the Pope's mercy, promising not onely to restore what he had taken from the Church, but to add somewhat more, and that he would employ his Force to con∣strain the rebellious Romans to their duty, if he might be honour'd with the Title of King of both Sicilies. The Pope could not grant this, be∣cause several Cardinals opposed it. Wherefore William getting a good Army together enters Puglia after an hostile manner, destroying all with fire and sword, and setting upon the Greeks and Apulians who were en∣camp'd near Brundusium, he easily overcame them, upon which those of Otranto and Puglia immediately made their submissions to him. The Pope then was very angry with those Cardinals who had opposed the Peace before, and took William into favour and gave him the Title of both Kingdoms, he having first taken an Oath, thereafter not to attempt to do any thing which might be a detriment to the Church of Rome. Matters being thus composed to his mind, the Pope taking his journey
through the Countries of Cassino, Marsi, Reati, Narin and Todi, came at last to Orvieto, which place he was the first Pope that made his habita∣tion and beautified. He was afterward by the earnest intreaties of the Romans persuaded to go to Rome, but being here teiz'd by the Consuls who would be setting up for liberty, he went to Arignano, where not long after he died, having been Pope four years and ten months, leaving the Estates of the Church in a very good condition; for he had built se∣veral Castles on the lake of S, Christina, and so fortified Radifano with a Wall and Citadel, that it was almost inexpugnable. The History of these times was written in an elegant style by Richard a Monk of Glugni, much quoted by other Writers. The body of Pope Hadrian being brought to Rome was buried in S. Peter's Church near the Sepulcre of Pope Eu∣genius. ALEXANDER III. ALEXANDER the Third, born at Siena, his Father's name Ranuccio, upon the death of Hadrian, was by the suf∣frages of twenty two Cardinals chosen Pope, though other three Cardinals set up Octavian, a Roman, Cardinal of S. Cle∣ment, by the name of Victor, which gave beginning to a Schism. But A∣lexander, lest the Church of Rome should suffer by the continuance there∣of, dispatch'd Legats to Frederick the Emperour then laying Siege to Cremona, to desire him to interpose his Imperial Authority in extinguish∣ing the Sedition. He return'd for Answer, that both Popes should be∣take themselves to Pavia whither he would come and hear their Case de∣bated. Upon the receit of this Answer Alexander went to Anagnia, and Octavian to Segna. This the Emperour took so heinously, that he sent two Bishops to Alexander, to cite him before a Council, by the name of Cardinal and not of Pope. Alexander stood upon his right and rejected them, whereupon they went to Octavian, and brought him to Pavia, with intent to set him up against Alexander, which they did; for holding a Council, Frederick confirms him in the Papacy, leads him sitting upon a white Horse through the streets of Pavia, and performs the usual adoration to him. Alexander was much mov'd at this, and having first admonish'd them to no purpose, he sets them both under an Anathema, and writes Letters to all the Princes and Nations of Christendom in justi∣fication of himself for so doing: Then returning to Rome in the second year of his Pontificate, he finds he had many Adversaries there, who took the boldness to oppose him, because Frederick's Army had now pos∣sess'd themselves of all St. Peter's Patrimony but Orvieto and Anagnia. Wherefore Alexander by the persuasion of King Philip of France, went to Terracina, and there embark'd in a Ship provided for him by Order of William King of Sicily, and arriv'd in France, where in a Council holden at Clermont he pronounc'd the Anathema before laid upon the Emperour and Octavian. While these things were doing in Europe, Baldwin III. died at Jerusalem, and his Brother Almeric step'd into the Throne, lest if an Interregnum should have been among so barbarous and treacherous
a People, it might have given occasion to some mischievous revolution; and having settled his affairs for the time, he led his Army against the Egyptians, and defeated their General Drogon with a great slaughter, he laid Siege to Alexandria, of which Tiracino Lieutenant to the Soldan of the Saracens, had traiterously made himself Lord; which Siege he urg'd on with so great diligence that the Alexandrians could hold out no longer and yet were not willing to be made subject to the Christians, but of∣fer'd to yield upon condition they might be freed of this new Lord, and be restor'd to the Dominion of the Soldan; Almeric was content, and receiving a vast sum of Money redeliver'd the City to the Soldan, who ungratefully put off the performance of the full bargain, which caused Almeric to march against him and to lay Siege to Cairo. Mean time in Europe Frederick acts very tyrannically, for he sack'd Tortono and laid Milan even with the ground (from whence he translated the bodies of the Magi to Cologn, of which, I think, Rodolphus was then Arch Bi∣shop) and did great mischief to the Cremoneses. Upon this those of Ve∣rona, Vicenza, Padoua, and Venice resolv'd unanimously to stop all man∣ner of assistance that Frederick should stand in need of, while he thus harass'd Lombardy. This angred Frederick so that he was about to in∣vest Verona with his Army, but hearing that the other Cities had sent thither their Auxiliary Troops, he retreated to Pavia; from whence by Letters and Ambassadours he exhorted the King of France, that to put an end to the Schism, he would bring Alexander before a general Council, where also he would appear with Victor. The City of Dyon, situate where the River Savo divides France from Germany was the place ap∣pointed for the Council, whither Frederick (having composed his Af∣fairs in Italy for a time) arriv'd, together with Octavian and the Kings of Scotland and Bohemia, and attended by great numbers of armed Men. But when Alexander refused to go to that Council which himself did not call, but had begun another at Tours, Frederick full of rage and threats returns into Germany, having sent Octavian into Italy, intending speedily to follow him; but he dying at Luca, Guy of Crema was set up for Anti-Pope in his stead. The Romans had now chosen Consuls who were Friends to Alexander, they immediatey recall him out of France, and he taking Ship arrives first in Sicily, and thence comes to Rome, where he was very kindly receiv'd with universal acclamations; and the People of Lombardy were by the arrival of Alexander put in hopes of retrieving their liberty, so that they took up Arms against Frederic who had used them so tyrannically, and drove several of his Garrisons out of their Towns, An. Dom. 1165. Frederic hereupon marches with a numerous Army into Italy, and without doing damage to any one, contrary to all expectation , enters the Territory of Bononia, where he divides his Army, and sends some Battalions to Luca, to be a Guard to the Anti-Pope who then resided there, whilst he invests Ancona with his Army, and after a Siege of some time takes it. In the mean time the associated Cities of Lombardy re-edifie Milan and fortifie it, and receive those of Lodi, who had been Enemies to the Milaneses, into their Confederacy, the more to enable them to resist Frederick, if he should invade them: But Frederick had somewhat of greater moment to think of; for upon the death of William the Norman King of Sicily, Emanuel Emperour of Greece had sent Ambassadours to the Pope to offer him a great Army to
be employ'd against Frederick and to promise a perfect agreement of all the Grecians with the Church of Rome, that so the Eastern and Western Churches might be all one, if he would suffer the Roman Empire then di∣vided, to be again reduc'd into one body. What Answer these Ambas∣sadours receiv'd is not certain, for by reason of a War then begun be∣tween the Romans and those of Tusculum and Alba, the Pope could not give them a positive resolution. The cause of this was that the Romans being too rigorous in the exaction of their Gabels, the Tusculans and Al∣bans denied to pay them, which enraged the People of Rome so, that they march'd out contrary to the Pope's will, against them tumultuously; but at that time Raino, (who had been sttip'd of the Dukedom of Puglia by Roger) bore the chief sway among the Tusculans, a Man well skill'd in the Arts of War, who sending for the German Soldiers from Nepi and Su∣tri, made so great a slaughter among the Romans, that they afterwards had much ado to defend their Walls, much less could they meet an Ene∣my in the Field. Frederick took this occasion to avenge the wrongs (as he call'd 'em) which Alexander had done him, and leaving Ancona leads his Army to Rome, and encamps in the Prati di Nerone, from whence he made an Attack upon the Vatican Suburb, but was stoutly repell'd by the Friends of Alexander. The next day he attempted to set fire to S. Peter's Church, and had effected it, if those who had the care of it would have suffered it, and the Pope not thinking himself safe in the Lateran, into which he saw the Germans would soon enter, remov'd to the House of the Frangipani near the Palladio. William King of Si∣cily, Son of the Great William, hearing of the Pope's danger, sent him a good sum of Money and two Gallies well man'd; which came in good time, for Frederick having promised Peace to the Romans, was very ur∣gent with them, of the two Popes to chuse the more worthy, and to de∣pose and reject the other, which when Alexander knew must be done as the Emperour should please, he embark'd in the Gallies and escap'd first to Gaieta, and from thence to Benevent. Frederick afterward was driven from the City by a Plague of which both Citizens and Soldiers died like Sheep, and as he march'd back through Lombardy, the Army of the Confederate Cities met him, and urg'd him to a Battel, which he care∣fully declin'd and arriv'd in Germany. When he was departed, the As∣sociates built a City at their common charge near Roueretto upon the River Taro, which from the name of the Pope they call'd Alexandria, to inhabit which from all the Cities they sent fifteen thousand Men, divi∣ding the ground equally among 'em, and setting out the dimensions of their Streets and Houses. The Romans yet regretted the slaughter made among 'em by the Tusculans and their Friends, and therefore upon the de∣parture of Frederick they took Alba and demolish'd it, and had done the like by Tusculum, if the Pope had not terrified them with Threats and Anathema's from doing so great a mischief. At this time Emanuel Em∣perour of Constantinople sent other Ambassadours with greater Promises than before, if the Pope could be brought to comply with his desire; to whom Alexander gave this Answer, that he was not willing to unite what his Predecessors had thought good industriously to disjoin. In the mean time Guy the Anti-Pope died in S. Peter's Church, which was still strongly garrison'd by Frederick, in whose room the seditious substituted John a Hungarian, Abbat of Sirmio, who had before the re∣pute
of a Thief; to him Raino, (who was afraid of the Romans upon ac∣count of the mischief he had formerly done them) deliver'd up Tuscu∣lum, upon condition that he should have Monte-fiascone in lieu of it; but when Raino went to take possession of it, the Inhabitants would not re∣ceive him, neither would the Tusculans submit to the Anti-Pope, upon which he return'd to Tusculum, but was forbidden entrance. From thence therefore he went to Alexius who was then at Veruli, and surren∣dred to him all his Title to the place, which when the Tusculans heard up∣on mature deliberation by a publick Decree they acknowledg'd their sub∣jection to the Pope, and receiv'd him. Here it was that the Ambassa∣dours of Henry King of England were heard, when they came to clear their King of the false Accusation of having conspir'd the death of S. Tho∣mas Arch-bishop of Canterbury. But the Pope not easily giving credit to the King's Ambassadours, sent two Cardinals into England with ple∣nary Power to examine the matter; to whom Henry paid so great re∣spect, that though he was engag'd in a War with Ireland, yet he came as far as Normandy to meet 'em. Upon debating the case, it came to this end, that Henry should by an Oath, (because the matter of fact was not clear) purge himself, and promise to do Penance for the murther of that holy Man; of which though he were not guilty nor conscious, yet it seem'd that the great spite and grudg he bore him in his life-time, had given some occasion to the assassination; and moreover, that he should raise and maintain two hundred Soldiers for a year to assist the Christians in the Holy Land; that he should within three years himself, with what force he could raise, undertake an Expedition to the same pur∣pose: that he should conserve the Ecclesiastical immunities in his Realm, and not oppose any Appeals that might be made by his Subjects to the Court of Rome. All these Conditions he having sworn to per∣form, he had (and, he deserv'd it) the right and Title to the Crown of England confer'd upon him and his Heirs, with the Pope's consent. Hence it may be observ'd, that all the English Kings acknowledg them∣selves to have receiv'd the Title to their Realms of the Pope of Rome. But Alexander having long strugled with the Romans, offered them, if they would admit him into the City, to leave the whole Civil Govern∣ment to their own managery, and to intermeddle onely in religious matters; but this would not be granted by them, so he retir'd to Segna, and there being inform'd by the English Ambassadours of the Miracles wrought by S. Thomas [Becket] he canoniz'd him. Frederick now returning into Italy by Moncenisi, took Seculia by treachery and de∣molish'd it; he took also Asti which surrendered for fear, and laid close Siege four months to Alexandria, but receiv'd so much loss from the Sallies of the besieged, that he grew weary of it and on Easter day rose up from before it and went to Pavia; where a Treaty for the peace of Italy was carried on, by the mediation of the Pope, which the Vene∣tians were willing to embrace; who though they had been favourers of Emanuel before, yet had receiv'd from him a horrid affront contrary to the Law of Nations; for he had with red hot plates of Brass blinded their Ambassadour Henry Dandalo by holding them before his Eyes. Mean time Almeric King of Jerusalem raised his Siege from before Cairo, though he was not without hopes of carrying the place, but was bought off with a great sum of Money, and afterward march'd against Ascalon;
but was forc'd to quit that Expedition, being in great want of provisions, and finding his Soldiers to be very much tired and broken with the great and tedious toils of War they had undergone. He did not long outlive his return, but died and left his Kingdom to his Son Baldwin, who though he labour'd with a dangerous Leprosie, yet he manag'd his Government with great constancy and Wisdom. Alexander thinking now to enjoy a perfect Peace, made the new City of Alexandria a Bi∣shops Sea, An. Dom. 1177. but soon after Frederick re-enters Italy with great Forces and put all into confusion, till the Milaneses with the joint forces of the Confederates so broke his Troops with frequent Onsets that in one of them Frederick's Horse was kill'd under him and he nar∣rowly scap'd with life himself; many of those of Pavia and Como being on his side were lost. The Bishop of Pavia also because he took the Emperour's part, was by the Pope deprived of his Pall and the honour of bearing the Cross. Frederic's great Men thought these mischiefs happen'd to 'em, because they persecuted the Church of God, and open∣ly threatned to return into their own Country and leave that wicked Warfare, except he would be reconcil'd to the Pope speedily. A Treaty then was begun for the Peace of Italy; when Saladine a Person of great courage succeeded Noradine then deceased, in the Empire of the Sara∣cens, who having taken and slain the King of Egypt, added that Country and Syria to his Dominion; not that his success was alike when he fought with the Christians, being defeated by Baldwin in two Battels, one at Ascalon and another at Tiberias; but soon after gathering his forces together, he march'd into Cilicia, to meet with Emanuel, whose Army by a feigned flight he drew into narrow and difficult ways, where he set upon 'em and vanquish'd 'em, taking the Emperour Prisoner, whom he set at large again, upon condition that he should quit what∣soever he had taken in Asia. At this time Alexander was met at Venice by Frederic, there to treat of a Peace, where in S. Mark's Porch the Emperour kiss'd the Pope's feet; and from thence they went together to the high Altar, and having perform'd the mutual Ceremonies of Civi∣lity, they discours'd a great while upon the Articles of the Peace, which the next day was concluded. Hence the Emperour with the good leave of the Pope, departed first to Ravenna, and then to Bertinoro, which Town he design'd to keep in his hands, because of the commodiousness of its situation, but the Pope at last persuaded him to restore it to the Church. Alexander also left Venice, (having first made several Presents and conferr'd many honours upon that State for the services they had done him) and with thirteen Gallies of William King of Sicily and four of the Venetians, he sail'd first to Siponto and from thence to Troia, and Benevent, and then passing S. Germano he went to Anagni; where he staid not long but came to Tusculum, to treat with the Romans about deposing the Consuls they had set up before a Peace should be concluded; but be∣cause the Consuls had been so chosen for fifty years, it was found to be a difficult thing to alter the custom; wherefore they agreed that thereafter no one that was chosen Consul should enter upon his Office, till he had taken an Oath to be dictated by the Pope, that he would be true to the Church of Rome and never attempt any thing that should be a violation of the Pontifical Dignity. Thus all matters being settled, the Pope went the third time to Rome, all the great Men of the City coming forth to at∣tend
and congratulate him; soon after he held a Council in the Lateran, partly to find a way to reform the great licentiousness of that Court, but chiefly that it might be decreed, that no Man under pain of an A∣nathema should furnish the Infidels with Iron, Wood or any sort of Arms. At this time died Emanuel Emperour of Constantinople, leaving his Son Alexius heir of his Empire, under the Guardianship of Andronicus, one of the blood Royal, who for some years shew'd great prudence and fide∣lity in his publick Administrations; and by his consent the young Em∣perour was married to Agnes Daughter to Philip King of France. Bald∣win IV. also King of Jerusalem, to strengthen himself by the Alliance, married his Sister Sibyl to William surnam'd Long-sword, Marquess of Montferrat, an excellent Soldier, not doubting but that upon occasion William and other Princes of Christendom would come to his assistance if his affairs were in any danger. Mean time Alexander after having undergone so many and continual labours, when now he seem'd to be at rest from all his troubles, died at Rome when he had been Pope twenty one years nineteen days, having yet liv'd to see four Anti-Popes go be∣fore him, who with their factions had almost destroy'd the Church of Rome. LƲCIƲS III. LƲCIƲS the Third, a Tuscan, of a noble Family of the City of Lucca, was made Pope by general consent, at the time when Andronicus (who we told you was Guardian to Alexius, having driven out the Latins who favour'd the young Empe∣rour and drown'd him in the Sea, where he was wont for his recreation carelesly sometimes to venture in a little Bark) usurp'd the Empire of Con∣stantinople; and to secure his Empire thus unjustly gotten, he added a∣nother great wickedness, for in a short time he cut off all the Nobility whose Virtue rendred them suspected to him. Now also William surna∣med Long-sword dying at Jerusalem, King Baldwin taking care of his Ne∣phew, married his Sister Sibyl again to Guy of Lusignan, a Picard, upon condition, that after his own decease Guy should enjoy the Kingdom du∣ring the nonage of his Nephew Baldwin, after which he should resign it to him. All which was confirm'd by the Pope's Authority, who thought it very necessary for the Christian Cause, that the Princes of Asia should be knit together with the strictest bonds of Amity and Friendship, to e∣nable them the better to resist the insults of the Turks and Saracens: but he was quickly after expell'd the City of Rome, while by the favour of some Citizens he attempted to abolish the Office of the Consuls, and his Friends in that affair being taken had their Eyes put out. Upon this horrid affront the Pope betook himself to Verona and call'd a Council, where the exorbitant pride and licentiousness of the Romans was con∣demned, and all Christian Princes were exhorted to afford assistance to the holy War; especially because Saladine had entred and wasted the Territories of Jerusalem, encouraged by the dissension among the Chri∣stian Commanders; who had turn'd out Guy of Lusignan for his Arro∣gance,
from the Government, and had substituted Bertrand Count of Tri∣poli, Protector in his room, so that all things seem'd to threaten a Civil War. But the Pope incessantly persuaded them by Letters and Am∣bassadours to lay by their Animosities, and with one heart and the same mind to oppose the common Enemy, at least so long as till fresh Auxiliary forces could be sent to 'em. For by the instance of Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, who came for that purpose first to Verona, and thence went to Philip King of France upon the same Errand, a good number of Sol∣diers under the Cross were listed and sent away: But William King of Sicily in an ill time, designing to revenge the wrongs offered to the La∣tins by Andronicus Emperour of Constantinople, passing into Greece with his Army, confounded all things; for he took Thessalonica the chief City of Macedonia, by storm, and harassing many other of his Territories he took and plundered several Cities, Adronicus not appearing against him, being hated of God and Man, for the many murthers and banishments he had been the Author of. The Constantinopolitans were hereby re∣duc'd to necessity and forc'd to fetch from Pelopennesus, and to set up for Emperour one Isaac who was of the blood Royal; and he overthrew Andronicus in Battel, took him, and with various Tortures put him to death. Upon which it became easie for Pope Lucius to persuade King William to make Peace with Isaac and with Promises and Rewards to prevail with him to turn his Arms against the Asians; but while this matter was transacting by Internuntio's this excellent Pope died in the fourth year second month and eighteenth day of his Papacy, at Verona and was buried with great Pomp before the Altar of the Cathedral Church. This Pope had a great regard for his own Country and conser'd upon it many advantages both Civil and Spiritual before he died; particularly he obtain'd of Frederick the Emperour with whom he all his time kept a peaceable correspondence, that the Mony of Lucca onely should be current in Tuscany, as that of Pavia with the Imperial stamp went onely among the Lombards, which People by the means of this Pope were re∣concil'd to the Emperour. Ptolomy of Lucca writes that there flourish'd at this time, Peter Comestor, who wrote the History of both Testaments, and Joachim an Abbat of a Monastery which himself built at Calabria, famous for his Learning and for his skill in Divination, which he used to practise in doubtful and enigmatical terms. ƲRBAN III. URBAN the Third, a Milanese, his Father's name was John, of the Family of Crivellis was made Pope, applied himself to compose the differences between the Christian Princes, lest they should be destroy'd by the Infidels who would make use of that opportunity. For Baldwin IV. dying of a Leprosie, the Count of Tripoli who was made Guardian to Baldwin V. could not enter upon his charge, because Sibyl the Child's Mother and Guy of Lusignan her second Husband, opposed him. The Child how∣ever did not long outlive his Uncle, but died within eight months af∣ter
him, whose death his Mother kept secret so long as till what with gifts and what with good words she had brought over the Patriarch and the chief Men to her side, to make Guy their King. This Raimund Count of Tripoli highly resented, and that he might the more easily work his revenge, he made a Truce with Saladine; by which means the Provinces of Tripoli, Tiberias and Galilee were torn from the Christians; for they were then subject to Raimund in right of his Wife whom he had newly married; and lest a pretence for making War (which Saladine earnestly sought) should be wanting to him, the Prince of Monreal, a Christian, in whose Dominion was a great part of the Country beyond Jordan, and who was wont to supply in great abundance Jerusalem with Corn, inconsiderately broke the Truce with him. Saladine looking upon the time to be come at last which he had so long desired, raised a great Army of Horse and Foot, and stoutly assaulted Ptolemais then garison'd by the Templers. In this Action the Templers got the better, but with the loss of their choicest Men; for their grand Master and many other of their most skilful and couragious Soldiers were slain. Saladine hereup∣on reinforces his Army, and taking courage from their distress, presses more hardly upon them. Raymund observing this and not thinking good to give too much credit to Saladine, leaves his Wife at Tiberias and re∣turning to Tripoli renews his friendship with King Guy, slighting his Treaty before had with the Barbarians: so that Saladine having a fair occasion to make War upon him, draws off from Ptolemais and marches towards Tiberias. All the Christians then, but especially the Templers, urging that their Army might march against Saladine, King Guy accor∣dingly sets upon him in his Camp, which was pitch'd in a pleasant place and well-watered, but was repulsed, after which he encamping in an incommodious and extream dry ground where the Christians suffer∣ed much by thirst, himself was forc'd to fight and was defeated with great slaughter. In this unfortunate Battel most of the Christian Com∣manders were taken Prisoners, as was also King Guy and the Master of the Templers; many of whom were afterwards beheaded. Saladine ha∣ving gain'd this Victory, marches to Acon, which was immediately sur∣rendred by the Christians, who were permitted to depart onely with their Clothes, and thence following his good fortune, he takes Berylus, Byblos and all the Towns upon the Sea-coast; those of Ascalon onely trusting to the strength of their fortifications, told him they would not yield to him except he were first possess'd of Jerusalem. But the excellent temper and faithfulness of Saladine did the Christians much harm; for he was so affable to every one, that Subjection to him was a desireable condition. He, notwithstanding the big words of the Ascalonites, in∣vests the place and after a Siege of ten days had it deliver'd up to him, upon condition that he would set at liberty King Guy and the Master of the Templers who were then his Prisoners. That which made Saladine thus hasten the Surrender of this place, was, he heard that Conrade Mar∣quess of Montferrat was arriv'd at Tyre with the Fleet of Isaac Emperor of Constantinople, (whose Sister he had lately married) under his Com∣mand; and that William King of Sicily was expected in a short time with forty Gallies. The tidings of these glorious successes of Saladine against the Christians coming to the Turks in the lesser Asia, so fill'd 'em with emulation, that they march'd against Laodicea and took it, and
from thence they invaded the Territories of Antioch; but they were there vanquish'd by the Christians with as great loss on their side as the Christians suffered from Saladine. At this time Saladine had in∣vested Jerusalem and carried on the Siege with so great diligence, that those who were in Garison being out of hopes of succour, (after the taking of it by the Christians under Godfrey eighty eight years) deli∣ver'd it up, on condition that whosoever should be minded to leave the City should go freely, with so much and no more than they could car∣ry on their shoulders. The Christians who came forth of it went some to Tyre, some to Antioch, and some to Alexandria; from whence many sail'd with the Sicilian Fleet into Italy. Saladine having entred Jerusa∣lem, first threw down the Bells out of the Steeples, and then profan'd all the Churches, but Solomon's Temple, which 'tis said, he caused to be washt with Rose-Water before he would enter it. The Asiatic, Sy∣rian, Armenian, Jacobite, Georgian and Greek Christians staid in Jerusa∣lem by the permission of Saladine, who leaving there a strong Garison, took his way with great speed towards Tyre, the defence whereof by common consent and with the joint Forces was entrusted with William, who with the help of the Sicilian Fleet gave Saladine a repulse; but when the news came that that valiant Prince was going to lay Siege to Antioch, the Pope (who had labour'd with his utmost might to hinder the loss of Jerusalem) going to Venice to take care to get a Fleet toge∣ther for the relief of it, died in his Journey at Ferrara of grief for the calamity of the Christians, having sate in S. Peter's Chair one year ten months and twenty five days. GREGORY VIII. GREGORY the Eight, a Beneventan, was created Pope by universal consent, and immediately dispatch'd away Nuntio's and sent Letters to all Christian Princes, exhorting them to join with him with their utmost Power to raise forces both by Sea and Land, to attempt the recovery of Jerusalem out of the hands of the Enemy; which great end the better to carry on, he went to Pisa, there to compose some differences between the Pisans and Genoeses, with design to excite them (both being powerful by Sea) to that holy Expedition. But whilst this good Man perplex'd himself with over∣much care in this matter, he died at Pisa, the fifty seventh day of his Pontificate.
CLEMENT III. CLEMENT the Third, a Roman, Son of John, surnam'd the Scholar, as soon as he was made Pope, sent forth a Bull to encourage Men to go to the Holy War; for Saladine follow∣ing the course of his Victories had taken twenty five Towns in the Principality of Antioch, and at last had by bribing the Patriarch rendred himself Master of Antioch it self. This gave the alarm to the Christian Princes, so that now complying with the Pope's exhortations they raised Men; the chief of those who engaged in the Expedition were the Emperour Frederic, Philip King of France, Richard King of England, and Otho Duke of Burgundy, beside many Arch-bishops and Bishops who accompanied them. The Venetians and Pisans set forth their several Fleets well equip'd; that of Venice was under the command of the Arch-bishop of Ravenna, and that of Pisa under their own Arch-bishop: And William King of Sicily, having clear'd the Sea of Pirates, took care to supply them by the way out of Puglia and Sicily with all sorts of Pro∣visions. Beside these, the Friselanders, Danes and Flemings with a Fleet of fifty Gallies landing on the African shore, did the Saracens much mis∣chief, taking and plundering Siluma one of their Cities. Bela also King of Poland out of good will to the Christian Cause, made Peace with the Hungarians, that so the passage through that Country might be more easie and safe for those who were to take their way through it to this great Expedition. At last they all arriv'd at Tyre, and from thence they march'd unanimously to Ptolemais and besieg'd it; where Saladine with a great Army came and beat up their quarters, so that having the Enemy before them and behind, they were forc'd to fight. The Battel was long and bloody, and the Victory inclin'd to the Christians side, when the mis∣chance of a Horse slipping out of the hand of a common Soldier, gave them an occasion of flight, our Men thinking that the Saracens had got the better: but Geoffrey of Lusignan who was left to guard the Camp, in the nick of time giving a brisk Onset shock'd their pursuit and gave the Christians an opportunity to rally. However 'tis certain the Chri∣stians lost two thousand men that day; beside that the Master of the Templers and Andrew Earl of Bremen died afterward of their wounds. In the mean time the Siege lasting long the Christians were reduc'd to so great a want of all things, that they were forc'd to procure Victuals of the Enemy: which Saladine having notice of, laid hold on the opportu∣nity, and deserted his Camp which he left without any Guard, but fur∣nish'd with all manner of necessaries; which when the Christians alto∣gether in disorder enter'd and fell to plundering, Saladine return'd and kill'd many of them ere they were aware or prepared to receive him. Yet did not the Christians quit this tedious and toilsom Siege; though to their other distresses this was added, that a Dysentery rag'd in their Camp, of which Disease Sibyl the Wife of Guy with four Sons which she had by him, all died. While matters went thus in Asia, William King of Sicily died at Palermo, not leaving behind him any lawful Heir, so
that that Kingdom fell to the Church; but the Noblemen of the Island set up Tancred in his room, natural Son of Roger the Norman by a Concu∣bine, a Man of so great cowardize and sloth, that William would not be∣lieve him to be Roger's Bastard. Pope Clement not willing to lose his right, sends away an Army thither with all speed, between whom and Tancred who opposed them, the Country was fill'd with slaughters and outrages. Frederic the Emperour was now by the way of Hungary and Thrace, march'd with his Army as far as Constantinople, in order to advance against the Enemies of Christ, where Isaac the Emperour of the Greeks fearing his Power, persuaded him to cross the Bosporus, which he did; and Clement still hastening him on by Letters and Nuntio's, he sate down before Philomena a City of the Turks and took it; then he wasted the Country about Iconium, and possess'd himself of all Armenia minor; but going one time into a rapid stream to wash himself without regarding the depth, he was drown'd; and his Soldiers retreating towards Antioch either were lost or died, so that his Army came to nothing. The two Kings, Philip and Richard having pass'd the Gallic and Tyrrhene Seas ar∣riv'd together at Messina, after which they met with different fortune: for Philip had a good Voyage and coming safe to Ptolemais, brought great strength and courage to the Christian forces; but Richard being born by contrary Winds to the coast of Cyprus, and being by the Greeks denied the liberty of landing, he entred the Island by force, and conquering it, he plac'd therein Garisons of his own, and then went to Ptolemais. That City was then stoutly attack'd, but Saladine had put in it so strong a Garison, that with their frequent Sallies they did the Christians much damage. Pope Clement now thought good to defer his Controversie with Tancred, till the Christians should have more success against the Saracens, and betook himself to regulate some Ecclesiastical Affairs, and with great severity animadverted upon the scandalous lives of Clergy∣men. Moreover, he built the Monastery of S. Laurence without the Walls, and with great expence repair'd the Lateran Palace and adorn'd the Church there with excellent Mosaic work: not long after dying, when he had been Pope three years and five months, and was buried in the Lateran Church, with great Funeral Pomp. CELESTINE III. CELESTINE the Third, a Roman, Son of Peter, sur∣nam'd Bubo, succeeded to the Chair, who grudging that Tancred should enjoy the Kingdom of Sicily, secretly gets away Constantia, (Daughter to the late King Roger) out of a Nunnery at Palermo, and though she was under the Vow of Chastity, yet granting her the Apostostical Dispensation, gives her to Wife to Henry VI. Son of Frederic Barbarossa, upon these terms: that he should be empowered to attempt the recovery of both the Sici∣lies, which he should enjoy in the name of a Dowry with his said Wife, paying a yearly tribute to the Pope, as Feudatary of the Church. Henry was so sensible of this extraordinary kindness of the Pope, that he re∣stor'd
to him Tusculum, which he had before strengthen'd with a good Garison, which Celestine immediately bestowing upon the Romans, they so spoil'd and ruin'd it, that the very stones of the demolish'd City were brought to Rome, and many of them were for a long time to be seen in the Campidoglio, as Monuments of this great devastation. Henry and his Wife Constantia laying Siege to Naples, were forc'd to raise it by rea∣son of a Plague which rag'd in their Army; but the Christians who had now for two years besieg'd Ptolemais, had it surrendred to them upon con∣dition, that they (restoring that piece of our Lord's Cross, which we before told you was lost) should march out freely, every Man with his own Clothes; but when they could not make good the agreement, be∣cause the piece of the Cross was not to be found, Richard put many of the Barbarians to death. Saladine was so dismay'd at these losses, that despairing of being able to defend them all, he dismantled several Cities in that Region and was upon the point of delivering up Jerusalem itself, if it had not been for a difference which arose between Philip and Ri∣chard concerning Precedency; upon which Philip pretending himself sick, departed home from Asia. Richard then apply'd himself more vi∣gorously to the War, though at this time Conrade of Montferrat was as∣sassinated in the Market-place of Tyre, by two Saracen Ruffians, who had bound themselves under an Oath and Vow to destroy all the Ene∣mies of their Religion after the same manner; but as they ran away they were caught and put to death with the most exquisite Torments; and Henry Earl of Champagne taking Queen Isabel to Wife, entred upon the Dominion of Tyre. Richard giving some fair words to Guy of Lusig∣nan, persuaded him to pass over to him his Kingdom of Jerusalem, (which the Kings of England still put among their Titles,) and herewith taking courage, he march'd his Army to beleaguer the City of Jerusa∣lem; but Saladine in his Journey falling in with his Rear, forc'd him to a Battel in a very disadvantageous place, in which though he at last came off Conqueror, yet it was with great loss of men. Saladine after this encamp'd not far from Bethlehem, in a commodious place to inter∣cept any manner of Provisions that might be sent from Egypt to the Christian Army as they should lie before Jerusalem; wherefore and be∣cause the Winter was coming on, Richard puts off his designs for this so necessary Siege, (the Pope yet urging him and continually supplying him with Money) and retreats to Ascalon, which as well as Gaza he for∣tifies again; they having before been slighted by Saladine. In the mean time the Sea-forces by degrees leave him, and the Pisans sailing into the Adriatic, seiz'd Pola, with intent to Winter there; but the Venetians re∣inforcing their own Fleet, set upon 'em, took the Place and sack'd it, and drove out the Pisans, and had pursued them to extremity, if Celestine out of care for the good of Christendom, had not mediated between them. Spring now came on and Richard was preparing for the Siege of Jerusalem, when on a sudden news was brought him, that King Philip had invaded Normandy, and intended to pass into England, to procure that Kingdom for his Brother John. Richard then laid by those thoughts and strook up a Peace with Saladine upon these Articles; That Saladine should enjoy all but Tyre and Ptolemais; to which with their Territo∣ries remaining in the hands of the Christians he should give no mole∣station. Richard having thus settled Affairs there, returning into Europe,
was taken by his Enemies, from whom he was ransom'd with a vast sum of Money, and at last arriving in England, he had many a Battel with the King of France, much against the Pope's mind, who was griev'd that so fierce a War should be raised among Christians at so unseasonable a time, when Saladine being now dead, it was thought to have been a very fit time to have recovered Jerusalem. It is reported of that illu∣strious Prince, that one Ceremony at his Funeral was this: His Shirt was hung upon the end of a Pike and carried before the Corps, and one with a loud Voice cryed; Behold, Saladine the mighty Lord of Asia, of all his Realms and of all his Wealth, takes no more than this along with him. A spectacle well befitting so great a Man, to whom no∣thing was wanting, but the Character of a Christian, to have rendred him a most consummate Prince. Upon the death of Saladine, as was said before, Celestine had fresh hopes, that Jerusalem might be regain'd, and so urg'd the Emperour Henry, who (Tancred being dead) suc∣ceeded to the Kingdom of Sicily, to undertake the Enterprize, that though he could not go in person, yet he sent thither with great speed a good Army under the Arch-bishop of Mentz and the Duke of Saxony. The King of France would have gone too, but that the Saracens who inhabited Mauritania [now the Moors] had cross'd the Streights and having taken the King of Castile Prisoner, had pos∣sess'd themselves of that part of Spain now call'd Granado; where the French fear'd they would hardly continue long quiet but go near to infest the neighbouring Nations, and therefore would not draw their forces out of Europe. The Germans however arriving in Asia, fortified Berylus, which had been deserted by the Saracens, and rais'd their Siege from before Joppa, from whence when they were about to go to Jerusa∣lem, Celestine this most holy Pope, who never let slip any opportunity for the recovery of the Holy Land, died, upon which they desisted. Notwithstanding all these troubles and these great charges of War, our Pope built two Palaces, one near S. Peter's, the other near S. John in the Lateran, fit for the reception of Popes. The brasen Gates yet re∣maining in the Lateran over against the Sancta Sanctorum, which were made by his Order and at his charge. Moreover, he made Viterbo a City, raising the Church there to a Bishops Sea, to which Diocese he added Toscanella and Centum-cellae. Celestine died when he had been Pope six years seven months and eleven days, to the great grief of all good Men, and was buried in St. Peter's Church. INNOCENT III. INNOCENT the Third, born in Anagni, Son of Trasi∣mund of the Family of the Conti, was for his great Learn∣ing and many Virtues made a Cardinal by Celestine, and upon his death was by general consent chosen Pope. Which he had no sooner arriv'd to, but he applied his thoughts to the Holy War, and by Letters, Messengers, large Promises and Largesses endeavour'd to contain the Germans within the bounds of their duty,
who after the decease of their Emperour Henry were all in a mutiny: but 'twas to no purpose, for they disdaining any Commander, left Asia and to the extream damage of the Christian Cause, return'd to Europe; whereby those of Joppa especially suffered most, for being destitute of help, the Turks and Saracens came upon 'em, and while they were about to yield, they took the City by force and cut them all off, rasing it to the ground. In Germany also all things seem'd to threaten confusion, some of the Electors stickling hard for Otho Duke of Saxony, others standing resolutely for Philip a German, Duke of Tuscany, who was left, by Henry upon his death bed, Guardian to his young Son: And to im∣prove this mischief to the height, the King of France took part with Philip and the King of England was for Otho. Innocent then to obviate the impending miseries that must follow upon such a state of Affairs, confirms Otho in the Empire, as duly elected by those who had just suf∣frage. Philip notwithstanding would not lay down his pretensions, but strengthen'd himself with good Garisons both in Tuscany in Italy, and Schwaben in Germany. The like with a more than Womanly fortitude also did Constantia, the relict of Henry, in Sicily, on the behalf of her Son Frederic II. yet a Child, rendring the Frontier-places defensible against any Enemy. Though these Animosities every day grew higher, yet In∣nocent still thought of renewing the War in the Holy Land, and to that Expedition he stir'd up Boniface Marquess of Montferrat, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Henry Count S. Paul and Lewis of Savoy; who all arriving at Venice, could not persuade that State to rig out their Fleet for the Ser∣vice, till they had all promised to recover Zara for them, which again was revolted to the Hungarians; the Fleet then being fitted out, they first routed those of Trieste who piratically infested the Sea, and then after a long Siege re-took Zara. While these things were acted in the Adriatic, Alexius dethrones his Brother Isaac Emperor of Constantinople, (who had been a good Friend to the Latins) and putting out his Eyes throws him in Prison. But his young Son Alexius escap'd by flight to the Christian Camp, and begs the assistance of those Commanders for his Father against the Usurper, which they consented to give him, on condi∣tion, that his end being atchiev'd, the Greek Church should be subjected to the Latin, and that thirty thousand Marks of Gold should be paid for the damage which Emanuel the late Emperour had done to the French and Venetians; and thus when they had agreed, they set sail from Zara and passing by Candy, that Island submitted itself, which young Alexius bestow'd upon his Kinsman Boniface of Montferrat. Hence they pro∣ceeded to Constantinople, which while they besieged by Sea and Land, Theodore Lascari Son-in-law to Alexius endeavouring to sally forth, was driven back, and the City after two days close Siege was taken by storm, Alexius got away in the night, leaving behind him a great quantity of Gold in the custody of Irene, a Nun. Isaac the Father with his Son A∣lexius then entred the City, but liv'd not long after; the Father dying of sickness and the Son being poison'd. Upon this Boniface of Montferrat gets the Kingdom of Thessaly, but wanting Money he was persuaded by Baldwin to sell Candy to the Venetians, which he did, and having receiv'd a vast sum for it, he beleaguer'd Adrianople then opprest by the Usurper; but this gave so much distast to the Walachians who live on the further side of the Danube and to the Bulgarians, that fearing the number of
his Enemies, he took his way to Constantinople, intending to go meet the Turkish Sultan of Iconium, who having taken the City Satellia from the Greeks; did much and continually incommode the Christians. Innocent encompass'd thus with Enemies raised what Forces soever he could to re∣inforce from time to time our Armies: but when he heard that Hilmino∣line a Saracen, with a great Fleet had cross'd the Streights into Spain and had sate down with his Army before Toledo, he publish'd a Bull inciting all those that could bear Arms to oppose this torrent; whereupon num∣bers of French men got together in order to assist the Spaniards. but per∣ceiving they were not welcome to them, they return'd home; so that Hilminoline in a short time over-run all Spain after a hostile manner, and came as far as Arles and Avignon, filling all places where he came with spoil and slaughter. This Calamity roused the four Kings of Spain, that is, of Castile, Aragon, Portugal and Navarre, so that, joyning their forces together, they set upon the Saracens and gave them a total rout, leaving nothing to 'em of what they had but onely Granado. At this time sprung up a Heresie at Tholouse, which by Innocent's means, the blessed Dominic, (who was afterwards made a Saint) repress'd, with the aid of Simon Montfort; for it had gone so far, that he had need of the help of the Arm of Flesh as well as of Arguments and spiritual Weapons. Mean time Otho Emperour of the Romans was every where worsted by Philip, and at last besieg'd by him in the City of Cologn, where he making in Person a successless Sally, the Citizens shut him out and surrendred to Philip, who yet did not long out-live the Action, being soon after trea∣cherously made away by the Count Palatine. Upon his death, the E∣lectors chose the Duke of Saxony Emperour, nam'd Otho V. who the next year was crown'd by Innocent at Rome. The Venetians now being very powerful at Sea, and the State having greater matters in hand, private Men had leave to make themselves Masters of what Islands they pleased, provided they continued their Allegiance to the Government, upon which many Citizens entred upon several Isles in the Ionian and Aegaean Seas, and at the publick charge were seiz'd Corfu, Modone and Corone. Otho having, as is aforesaid, receiv'd the Imperial Crown of the Pope, against all justice and right, possesses himself of Montefiascone, Ra∣dicofano, and several other Towns belonging to the Church, and then marches into the Kingdom of Naples, designing to take that Kingdom from Frederic II. who was young and as yet under Guardians; which so angred the Pope, that having first admonish'd him without any effect he excommunicated him at last and depriv'd him of his Imperial Title; and the King of Bohemia with the Arch bishops of Mentz and Triers, by the persuasion of the Duke of Austria and Landgrave of Turingia, chuse Frederick King of Sicily, then in the twentieth year of his age, Emperour in his stead. Otho hereupon returns into Germany, to take care of his Pa∣ternal Estate, by which means Innocent had an opportunity to his mind to recover whatsoever he had taken from the Church. Those of Candy now rebelling against the Venetians, they were by force of Arms reduc'd An. Dom. 1214. and brought into the constitution of a Colony, many Citizens being sent to live among 'em and to observe 'em. At this time Frederic II. came to Rome to receive the Imperial Diadem, but could not prevail with him to bestow it upon him, so he return'd into Germany and there was by the Arch-bishop of Mentz Crown'd King of Germany, and
then made an Alliance and League with the King of France; which ad∣ded so much to the strength of that King, that he invaded the Realm of John King of England, with such success, that John was fain to make use of Divine aids as well as humane force, to resist him, by making his Kingdoms of England and Ireland tributary to the Church of Rome, in the payment of one hundred Marks yearly, which for some years after was perform'd. Frederic now in pursuit of Otho, who had been totally defeated by the King of France, takes in Aquisgrane, and there by Autho∣rity receiv'd from Pope Innocent he sets up the Standard of the Holy Cross, promising speedily to march to the assistance of the Christians against the Saracens in Asia: beside that he might shew with what a grate∣ful mind he had receiv'd so many benefits of the Holy Sea, he gave the Country of Fondi to the Church of Rome, and what had before been given and afterward usurp'd from it, he restor'd. But the Pope taking notice of the increase of the Saracens Power in Asia, call'd a full Council in the Lateran, where were present the Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Con∣stantinople, seventy Arch-bishops, four hundred Bishops, twelve Abbats, eight hundred Priors of Convents, and the Ambassadors of the Greek and Roman Emperours, with those of the Kings of Jerusalem, France, Spain, England and Cyprus. Many things here came under debate, but nothing could be determin'd, because the Pisans and Genoeses were then at War by Sea, as those of Lombardy were among themselves at Land. The Pope therefore took a journey thitherward to compose their diffe∣rences, but died in the way at Perugia, when he had been Pope eighteen years seven months and sixteen days. He was a Man most exact in his life, a proof of which is, that none of his Acts which approv'd or dis∣anull'd any thing, were by any of his Successors revers'd. He decreed many things for the reformation of manners both in Clergy and Laity; and wrote Books concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Sacra∣ment of Baptism, and the unhappiness of Mans condition, beside that he was wont to make Sermons upon remarkable occasions and solemn days. He disallow'd a Book written by Abbat Joachim, which con∣tain'd some Heterodox Opinions; and condemn'd the Errors of Alme∣ricus a Heretic, that with some of his followers was burnt at Paris, who among other false Notions maintain'd, that those Idea's which are in the divine Mind were created and did create others, whereas according to S. Augustin, there is nothing in the Mind of God but what is Eternal and unchangeable; beside he said, that to one who was in a state of Grace no Sin is charged. Great satisfaction this Pope took in observing the Virtue and Learning of S. Dominic, who was Founder of the Order of Preaching Friers, and of S. Francis of Assisi, who was Author of the Order of Friers Minors. 'Tis said, that in his time liv'd Gratian who compil'd the Decrees, and Papias the Lombard, who collected a Latin Alphabetical Dictionary; and indeed of Papias we have no reason to doubt, but for Gratian, some Authors place him in the times of Pope Alexander III. Now lest you should think that Innocent in so long a Popedom neglect∣ed works of Piety, I must tell you that at his charge the Hospital of the Holy Ghost was built and endow'd with so fair an Income as it is, for the relief of Pilgrims and sick People, and for the Education of Father∣less Children and Foundlings. He adorn'd S. Peter's Altar with Mo∣saic Work, as the representation of him and his Cipher in the Arch do
testifie. Moreover, he gave to each Church in Rome a Pound weight in Silver to make Chalices for Divine Service, and he repair'd the Church of S. Sixtus then almost falling with age. The Enemies of his good Name indeed say that he did this, only for fear Men should say that he laid out all his Mony in building of the Torre de Conti, which he erected for the honour of his Family. However that be, 'tis certain he shew'd him∣self in all the parts of his life an excellent Man and one worthy to be reckon'd among the best Popes. HONORIƲS III. HONORIƲS the Third, a Roman, Son of one Almeric, was by a general suffrage chosen Pope; to whom Peter Em∣perour of Constantinople coming with his Wife Jole, he was Crown'd in the Church of S. Laurence without the Walls, and immediately John Colonna a Cardinal, was pitch'd upon to go into Asia with those forces which Pope Innocent in his life-time had got to∣gether for that end. The Christian Princes by the persuasion of Hono∣rius now went to Acon, particularly Andrew King of Hungary, who to that purpose borrow'd the Venetian Shipping and by way of requital passed over to 'em the right to all that part of Dalmatia, which had been in the possession of the Duke of Austria. With Andrew went Hen∣ry Count of Nevers and Walter Chamberlain to the King of France. All these holding a Council of War together with John King of Jerusalem, they resolv'd to lay Siege to Damiata in Egypt, and thither they went, in the month of May 1218. This City was once call'd Aeliopolis from Aelius Pertinax, who environ'd it with a trebble Wall, and deriving a little stream of the Nile about it made it stand in an Island. The Sub∣urbs hereof were large and full of Merchandize, which the Christian Soldiers plunder'd; but soon after upon a West-wind the Nile rose so high, that their Provisions were spoil'd, and they began to be in great want of necessaries; especially because the Soldan who was encamp'd not far off, had beset all the passages to hinder any supplies coming to 'em. The Christians under this difficulty march their Army against the Soldan, who in great fear streight leaves his Camp stor'd with plenty of all things and retreats, leaving them free to besiege the Town which he at first came to relieve. Cordirius also Son to the great Soldan, despair∣ing of being able to defend Jerusalem, if the Christians took Damiata, broke down the Walls of the City and left nothing standing but the Tower of David and the Temple of God; only he did not violate the Holy Sepulcre, mov'd (as we may suppose) by the intreaties of the Christians that inhabited those places. While our men attack'd Da∣miata, the Soldan returns with a much greater Army and pitches his Camp between Cairo and Damiata; from which he could not be provok'd to Battel by either the challenges or reproaches of our Men; which so en∣rag'd the French, that without any Order they set upon him and receiv'd great loss. Notwithstanding all this, the Siege was still push'd on, till after fifteen months lying before it it was taken by the Christians and
sack'd: so that the Soldiery was wonderfully enrich'd with the spoil. In the mean time Honorius had at Rome confirm'd the Order of S. Dominic upon his request, and had Anathematiz'd Frederic II. because (after his Mo∣ther Constantia was dead, who was wont to restrain him within his duty) he came to Rome, and without right or reason laid wast the Pope's Ter∣ritories. These differences between the Pope and the Emperour being discover'd to the Soldan, mov'd him to take the opportunity, and ac∣cordingly he raises a greater Army than ever he had before, thinking the Christians would not now shew their heads; but Cardinal John Colonna roused them with his persuasions, so that they took up Arms and went to meet the Enemy at the Nile: where when they were come, the Soldan feign'd himself afraid to cope with 'em, putting it off till the time of the Increase of Nile, which follow'd a little while after; and the Cataracts of that River opened and so overflow'd the whole Country, that it was in no place less than a Cubit in depth. This so terrified the Christians, that they were glad to accept of Peace upon condition, that Damiata should be re deliver'd to the Egyptians, the Prisoners on both sides be discharg'd, and the piece of the Holy Cross then in the hands of those Barbarians should be restor'd to the Christians, and they suffer'd to re∣tire quietly to Acon and Tyre. Thus was Damiata which was begun to be inhabited by the Christians upon the Feast of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, deliver'd up according to the Articles, on the Birth-day of the same, An. Dom. 1221. In which year the Tartars a Nation of Scythia (or as others will have it, of the mountainous parts of India) leaving their own Country, ravag'd through Parthia, Media, Persia, As∣syria, and came as far as Sarmatia; where not far from Palus Meotis dri∣ving out the old Inhabitants they seated themselves. The Christian Commanders finding at this time that nothing was to be attempted in Asia, the Enemy being too powerful, they together with John Colonna re∣turn'd into Italy, and were soon follow'd by John King of Jerusalem, who came to Rome and was by the Pope kindly entertain'd and had large Pre∣sents made to him. Afterward he gave his Daughter which he had by his Wife Jole in marriage to the Emperor Frederic, though he was under the Pope's Anathema, and pass'd over all the Title he had by hereditary right to the Kingdom of Jerusalem to him by way of Dowry. Hence it is, that all the succeeding Kings of Sicily and Naples, use the Title of that Kingdom also, though they make their claim to it with words only, and not with Arms. John then took a Journey into France, where he had better luck than he was wont to have, for Philip King of France be∣queath'd in his last Will forty thousand pounds in Silver to him, and as much to the grand Master of the Templers; and with the help of this Money he went into Spain to perform a Vow he had made to S. James of Compostella, where he took to Wife Berengaria Sister to the King of Spain. This year died S. Dominic, that holy Man, at Bononia; and Frederic de∣clar'd his Son Henry, a Boy but of ten years old, King of Germany. Our Honorius being a little quiet from forein troubles repair'd the Church of S. Laurence without the Walls, that is call'd Sancta Sanctorum and the Church of S. Vivian; beside he built a Palace at Casa Marii, and adorn'd the Cibory [Altar-Canopy or Covering] of S. Peter with excellent workmanship. He also compil'd the Decretal Epistles, and confirm'd the Order of S. Francis, who within two years after was canoniz'd by
Pope Gregory. After this blessed manner did Honorius lead his life, and as became a careful and a good Shepherd, and dying when he had been Pope ten years seven months and thirteen days, he was buried in the Church of S. Mary Maggiore. After his death there happened so great Earthquakes that in the Monti Salvii five thousand persons were slain by the falls of Houses and by the Stones that were thrown into the Vales from the tops of the Mountains. GREGORY IX. GREGORY the Ninth, born at Anagni, a City of Cam∣pania, of the Family of the Conti, and Nephew to Inno∣cent III. was created Pope at the Settizonio [a place in Rome so call'd from seven rows of Pillars there plac'd by the Emperour Severus.] Which was no sooner done, but he dispatch'd away monitory Letters to require Frederic the Emperour un∣der pain of an Anathema, that he should with the first opportunity march with his Army into Asia, there to endeavour the recovery of the holy City. Frederic receiv'd the Admonition and indeed promised so to do; accordingly giving out Orders that all who had entred themselves of the Crusado should by a day appointed repair to Brundusium, with their Arms. Great numbers met there from all Countries, particularly from Germany came the Lantgrave of Hesse, who (waiting there for the arrival of Frederic out of Sicily, where he staid and prolong'd the time feigning himself sick) died himself and a great number of his Soldiers; and as soon as the news of his death was brought to Frederic, he then imme∣diately set sail for Brundusium and seiz'd into his hands whatsoever the Lantgrave had left of value, which act plainly detected the fraudulence of his pretence. However he continued to make the World believe that he was really intent upon the holy Expedition, and after the rapacious action aforesaid upon the goods of the Lantgrave, he hoisted Sail and commanded the rest that were there to follow him; but in a little while after return'd to Brundusium, forc'd (as he pretended) by the tempe∣stuous weather. 1. The noise of this Expedition mov'd John King of Je∣rusalem and Berengaria his Wife (knowing well that they did what would be very acceptable to the Pope) to take a journey to Bononia, meaning to make use of some Shipping of the Venetians to carry him to Asia; but the Pope understood well enough the tricks of Ferdinand and what little credit was to be given him, and lest John should quite lose his labour and come for nothing, he confer'd upon him the Government of the Exarchate of Ravenna, and ratified the Sentence of Excommuni∣cation which was pronounc'd by his Predecessor Honorius III. against the Emperour Frederic, and had done worse things against him, if himself had not been under some fearful apprehensions of an Invasion from the Moors, who were then out at Sea with a powerful Fleet, but were after∣wards vanquish'd by Ferdinand of Aragon with so great loss on their side, that in a short time he possess'd himself of Majorca one of the Islands call'd the Baleares, and took the City Valentia, driving out the Saracens
and compelling the Inhabitants to receive the Christian Religion. At last yet Frederic was, what by the intreaties of his Friends and the threats of the Pope, wrought upon to begin his Voyage, sailing first to Cyprus, which afforded some hopes to the Christian Soldiers that were in Asia, whom he had so often deceiv'd. But while he staid there sending out Spies to bring him an account of the strength of the Soldan's Forces, his General Rainaldo, whom he had left in Sicily invades the Pope's Territories and takes several Towns in the Marca di Ancona. The Pope was then at Perugia, designing to go to Assisi, there in person to examine the truth of those reports which had been of Miracles wrought by that holy Man, S. Francis; and when he found what he had heard concerning him to be really true, he canoniz'd him with great solemnity, in the presence of great numbers of Christian People who came together for that end. While these things were acting by the Pope, another Commander of the Emperours by siding with a Faction seizes Fuligno, but was quickly ex∣pell'd by the Power of some good Men who stood up for the holy Church. By this time Frederic was got to Acon, and from thence solicited the Pope earnestly by Letters and Messengers, to be absolv'd by him, and promised if he could obtain his request, to be ever after his most humble Servant: but the Pope being well aware of the crafty temper of the Man, not onely warns the Christian Soldiers to have a care of him as of one that was always plotting mischief; but having rais'd an Army he sends it under John King of Jerusalem against Rainaldo, who then was harassing the Marca di Ancona and fill'd all places with rapine and deva∣station; and with other Forces under Cardinal Colonna he drove the Em∣perours Lieutenant, with his mercenary Saracens, out of S. Germans, and had all the places from thence to Capua deliver'd to him by surren∣der in a short time. These successes of the Pope so affrighted those of Ʋmbria and Marca di Ancona who had serv'd under Frederic, that they deserted whatsoever they held and retreated into Naples. In the mean time Frederic was return'd from Asia to Brundusium, and being now very desirous of Peace, offer'd his requests to the Pope, that he would please to take him into favour, to acknowledg him Emperour, and a true Feu∣datary of the Church for the Kingdom of Sicily. Which he at last ob∣tain'd, but not till he had paid down one hundred and twenty thousand ounces of Gold for the use of the Church of Rome, to make good the damages he had done it; and these Conditions he was forc'd to come to Anagni and there to implore of his Holiness. While Gregory (as became a faithful Shepherd) was thus careful on all hands and was gone to Pe∣rugia, to settle matters in that City then much disordered by some banish'd persons who were newly return'd, there arose a greater Sedi∣tion and Heresie at Rome than had been known before: for Hannibal of the Family of the Hannibali joyning with some Priests, was made use of to head the People of Rome in a Conspiracy they carried on against the Church of God; but the divine Vengeance speedily put a stop to their wicked designs; for the River Tiber rising over his Banks, did them much mischief, and this was accompanied with so devouring a Plague, that hardly one man in ten was left alive. The Pope coming to Rome, behav'd himself with wonderful Clemency, and forgave the People of Rome their fault, onely putting Hannibal out of the Senate and convict∣ing the Priests of their Heresie, he brought them to recant their Error
and to profess as true Christians ought to do: then turning his thoughts to adorning the City, he caused the old Common-shores to be cleansed and repair'd, and new ones to be made, at the same time yet consulting not onely the Ornament but the healthiness of the place. Then leaving Rome, for his healths sake, at Riete (as some will have it) he canoniz'd S. Dominic who founded the Order of Friers Predicants, and at Spoleto, he did the same by S. Antony, who was born at Lisbon, but died at Padua, and was the second after S. Francis, head of the Order of Minors; hence he return'd to Anagni, and fortified the circumjacent Town, not a little apprehending the factious humour of the Romans, whose chief Senator, after the antient manner, had proposed a Law to be made and the People had pass'd it, that should oblige all the Towns lying about Rome to pay a certain Tax to themselves; the Pope hereupon fearlesly takes his journey to Rome (though the Cardinals dissuaded him) mean∣ing to endeavour by admonition or correction to bring the Romans off from these insolences: but when he found it signified nothing what he did, he departed to Riete, whither also came the Emperour Frederic; and they having discourse about the present state of Affairs, they both came to this resolution, that they would join their forces together and unani∣mously march against the Romans. But at this time (as he had always used to do) Frederic put a trick upon the Pope; for returning himself into Germany, he left Order with his Men, that they should in all jun∣ctures act as the Romans would have 'em. The Pope was much mov'd at this treachery of his, and proposed a good Reward to any German Soldiers who would leave their Leaders and serve under him, whereupon so great multitudes came over to his side, that the Romans dar'd not any where shew themselves in open field against the Army of the Church. Gregory having by this means recover'd the Patrimony of St. Peter and the Contrada de' Sabini, he slighted the Ambassadours of the Soldan, who came humbly to sue for Peace, and sent Friers of the Orders of S. Francis and S. Dominic throughout Europe, by their preach∣ing to stir up the Christians to the War against the Saracens, by whose means greater numbers were got together, than ever were before; and in the mean time that it was under debate who should command this great Army, the Pope canoniz'd Elizabeth Daughter to the King of Hungary, a most holy Woman and famous for the Miracles wrought by her. At length Theobald King of Navarre, Almeric Montfort, Henry Count of Bari and Campania with the Christian forces passing through Germany and Hungary, arriv'd first at Constantinople, where crossing the Bosporus, they came at last to Ptolemais, laying the Country waste far and near. But they were not long after set upon by a vast Army of the Enemy, and compell'd to retreat defending themselves from their pursuers for two days, and there lost all their best Men. Thus in a short time came this Expedition to nothing, which had cost so much industry to be brought about, merely through the unskilfulness of the Commanders. The Pope was extremely troubled at this Calamity, and resolv'd to return to Rome (at the earnest instance of the Citizens) there to put up Prayers and supplications to appease the Divine Wrath, which the sins of Mankind had provok'd; but his intention was fru∣strated by Peter Frangipani, who being of the Imperial Faction, oppo∣sed him; so he left Perugia and went to Viterbo, to meet the Emperour
with an Army, who (as intelligence was brought him) had already en∣tred Lombardy, and without any just cause wasted the Territories of the Confederate Cities, and was about to lay Siege to some of 'em whose Forces were almost broken already, having receiv'd one mischief upon the neck of another from Ezelino who then Lorded it over Padua. This Ezelino surnam'd the Roman, was Grand-son to a German Commander (who under Otho III. led an Army of his Countrymen into Italy,) and now having a body of Men which he receiv'd of Frederic, under his com∣mand, procur'd to himself a great Dominion in the Country of Lom∣bardy, bringing under his jurisdiction Treviso, Padoua, Vincenza, Verona and Brescia; and Frederic not shewing any regard to the stipulations and agreements which had theretofore been ratified between his Ance∣stors and them, makes War upon the Milaneses and the associated Cities, and in a great Battel fought between 'em at a place call'd Nova Corte he overcame 'em with great loss on their side; which put the Pope so much out of hopes of success, that upon hearing this ill news of the misfortune of his Friends and Allies, he began to think of retiring to Rome, though his coming thither was opposed by one John Cincio, a potent Citizen and Sena∣tor, whose intolerable arrogance yet was so curb'd by James Capocio ano∣ther Roman Citizen, that the Pope was received into Rome with great splen∣dor & magnificence. This was that James, whose name is yet to be seen and read in the little Chappel of Mosaic Work which was built at his charge in the Church of S. Mary Maggiore, in which also was buried Peter Ca∣pocio who was a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, and while he liv'd a bitter Enemy of this Schismatical Emperour Frederic: at whose expence the Hospital of S. Anthony not far from the aforesaid Church and the College for Scholars at Perugia (now call'd la Sapientia) was also erect∣ed. Gregory having quieted the minds of Men in the City, again pro∣nounces an Anathema against Frederic and declares him to have forfeit∣ed his right to the Empire and deprives him of it; then he sends for the Ambassadours of the States of Venice and Genoa, (between whom there was so great a quarrel as it was fear'd a War would ensue) to mediate their differences, which he did so effectually as that he procur'd an Agree∣ment between 'em to a Peace, upon condition, that without mutual consent neither of the two States should make Peace with the Emperor of Constan∣tinople; that they should be Enemies to the Enemies of each other and join their Forces upon every occasion for the common defence; and this Treaty to be in force and complied withal for nine years by them both, under pain of Excommunication to be denounc'd by the Pope upon the Infractor. About this time died Baldwin who upon the Death of John had succeeded to the Empire of Greece, and made shift to hold it for two years; but with so great difficulty by reason of his poor Treasury, that he could hardly defend himself from his Enemies, being forc'd to deliver his Son for a Pledg to the Venetian Merchants for Money that he had borrow'd of 'em, and to make Money of the Lead that belong'd to the Churches; beside he sold to the Venetians, who were wealthy and able to purchase 'em, the Spear with which our Saviour Christ's Body was pierc'd and the Sponge which was reach'd to him to drink out of Frederic had a great spight at these Venetians, because they were on the Pope's side, and drove them into their Marishes (where their City stands) for security and did them great damage; but in the mean while happened a general revolt of the Cities of Lombardy, by the Procure∣ment
and instigation of Gregory Monte-longo, who was Legat at Bononia, and Ferrara, which had revolted before from the Pope to the Emperour was retaken by them, though Salinguerra a valiant Commander was in it and made a brave defence. As soon as it was taken, it was put into the hands of Azo of the House of Este, who was a considerable Person in this Enterprize, to be govern'd by him in the name of the Church, An. Dom. 1240. This so alarm'd the Emperour who was then at Pisa, that being under great uncertainty whom to look upon as Friends to himself or Wellwishers to the Pope, he divided first the Cities of Italy into two Factions, giving the name of Guelphs to those who were for the Pope's Interest, and that of Gibellines to them that were for the Imperial. These most pernicious names of distinction, invented surely for the mischief of mankind, were first made use of at Pistoia, where when the Magistrates expell'd the Panzatichi, who were Gibellines, out of the City, there chanc'd to be two Brothers Germans, the one of which whose name was Guelph, was for the Pope; the other for the Emperour and his name was Gibel; from which these two Parties were discriminated by those different appellations. On the other side those of Arezzo and Sienna drive out the Guelphs, whose example being follow'd by many other Cities of Italy, gave occasion and rise to a worse than Civil War. Seve∣ral Cities after this revolted from the Pope as well in Ʋmbria as in Tus∣cany, and particularly the Citizens of Viterbo threw off their obedience. The Romans also would fain have been doing the same thing, but that the Pope carrying the heads of the Apostles SS. Peter and Paul, through the City in Procession, moved the People to commiserate the State of the Church, and then making a most excellent Oration in S. Peters Church, he had the power and good fortune by it to persuade even the Seditious (who were ready to mutiny) to take his part and to list themselves un∣der the holy Cross for the defence of the Church of God. These, when some time after Frederic came in hostile manner before the Walls of Rome, gave him a repulse, which so enrag'd him that whatsoever Priso∣ners he had taken he put to death with divers tortures, and retir'd to∣wards Beneventum, which City he took by force, sack'd, and dismantled it. Then returning by the Via Latina with his heart full of fury to∣ward the City, by the way he plunder'd the Monastery of Monte-Cas∣sino and turn'd out the Monks; he destroy'd also with fire and sword the City of Sora, formerly belonging to the Samnites, situate at the head of the River Garigliano, and pillag'd any thing that belong'd to the Tem∣plers wherever he could meet with it. He was so great a Lover of the Saracens, that he made use of them rather than any other People in his Wars, made Magistrates of them, and gave them a City for themselves, which is call'd to this day Nocera di Pagani. He threaten'd the Brother of the King of Tunis, because he was come as far as Palermo to receive the Sacrament of Baptism. By a sudden Onset he also made himself Master of Ravenna, which appertain'd to the Church. All which Gre∣gory well considering, he appointed a Council to be holden in the La∣teran, there to find out means to depose Frederic; but the Emperour had so beset all the ways, that, with the help of the Pisans, he took se∣veral Cardinals and Prelates as they were travelling both by Sea and Land and cast them into Prison. Which so griev'd the good Pope, that he liv'd not long after, dying when he had been Pope fourteen
years and three months. There happen'd an Eclipse of the Sun a little before his death greater than ever was seen. Raymund of Barcelona flou∣rish'd in his time and assisted him in compiling his Book of Decretals, whom many Authors so commend that nothing can be added to his Praise. CELESTINE IV. CELESTINE the Fourth, a Milanese, of the Family of the Castiglioni, Bishop of Sabina, famous in his time for his ex∣emplary life and great Learning, being very old and sickly, was yet chosen Pope in the room of Gregory; but died on the eighteenth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, to the great disappointment of all Men, who hoped to see much better times under his Government. After his decease the Sea was vacant twenty one months; for those who were then in the highest Authority in the Church of God did not think good to elect any Man to the Popedom, so long as the Cardinals which were taken by Fre∣deric, were detain'd in Prison. During this vacancy of the Holy Sea, Frederic over-ran the Marca di Ancona and Romagna, as far as Faenza and Bologna, which after some resistance he took by force, and transferred the University which was at Bologna, to Padoua: and beside gave many troubles and did great mischiefs to all those that were look'd upon as Favourers of the Churches Cause. Then Baldwin Emperour of Constan∣tinople, despairing of managing the Asian Affairs to any purpose, toge∣ther with Raymund Earl of Tholouse, came into Italy, and what with his intreaties and by reason of the respect which Frederic (who was then at Parma) had for him, he procur'd that the Cardinals and other Eccle∣siastical persons who were kept under custody by him, should be set free; who in a little time after had a meeting at Anagni to consider of the Choice of a new Pope. INNOCENT IV. INNOCENT the Fourth, before call'd Sinibaldo, of the Family of the Fieschi, Counts of Lavagna, was created Pope at Anagni; at the news of which Frederic was not very well pleased; for he knew him to be a Man of resolu∣tion and of a great Spirit, they having lived together fami∣liarly for some time before, and he was very much afraid he would call him to account for his past actions: So that when some of his Friends were complementing him upon this occasion, he is said to have told 'em, that Cardinal Sinibaldo was indeed his special Friend, but now being made Pope, he was his bitter Enemy. Innocent having put on the Pon∣tifical Robes, comes to Rome, where by the way he is met by all the No∣bility
and Men of note and receiv'd with universal Acclamations, and ha∣ving perform'd all the Ceremonies of the Consecration and Coronation which are usual in such cases, he begins to discourse of making Peace with Frederic, Baldwin also interposing his Authority to bring it about: But the business met with many delays, till after four months had been spent in negotiating, the result was this, that the Pope should remove to the City of Castellana, and tarry there a while till the Emperor came thither also, personally to treat about the Peace. But Innocent receiving certain information, that Frederic had laid snares and Ambushes for him both at Rome and in his way to that place, he made use of some shipping of the Genoeses, which then lay in the Port of Civita-vecchia, and with a prosperous gale arriv'd in France, where at Lions he was receiv'd very generously by all People and with great kindness, and at that City he appoints a Council to be holden, An. Dom. 1246. to which he cites the Emperour by Nuntios and Letters first, and at last by an Officer for the purpose, setting him under a penalty if he were disobedient. In answer to this the Emperour onely sends thither a Civilian of Sinuessa, to desire of the Pope some longer time, promising shortly to begin his Jour∣ney thitherward; and so much time as was fit was allow'd him. But his craft appearing and that he onely sought an occasion to scandalize and ruine the Pope, by universal consent he was declar'd to be depriv'd of his Title to the Empire and his other Dominions. This Frederic took with so great indignation, that he commanded the Houses and Palaces of some of Pope Innocent's kinsfolks (who by his advice were remov'd from Parma, where their Estates lay, to Piacenza) to be pull'd down, and then making a League with the Duke of Burgundy, he resolv'd to go to Lions, and for that purpose he prepar'd a vast Retinue; with which he came as far as Turin, where news was brought him, that those persons who had been banish'd from Parma, were return'd and having defeated their fellow-Citizens near the River Taro, had entred the City by force and made great slaughter of the contrary party. This caused Frederic to break off his intended Journey and to return into Italy, where ga∣thering into one Army all his Forces which had been dispersed through the whole Country, he made up a body of sixty thousand Men, and with these he marches to invest the City of Parma, which the associated Cities being solicitous to defend, they put into it very great reliefs under the command of the Pope's Legat; who having with great obstinacy sustain'd the Siege for two years, at last making a bold sally, when Frederic ex∣pected no such thing, he utterly routed and destroy'd his Army and made himself master of his Camp, which was plentifully stor'd with all man∣ner of necessaries, because Frederic had fortified it after the manner of a City with Out-works, designing when he should have plunder'd and rased the City of Parma; against which he had conceiv'd the utmost hatred, to build a City in the place where his Camp stood, (and where he had already coin'd pieces of Money call'd Victorines) and to name it, the City Victoria. According to some Authors, himself had much ado to escape to Cremona from this great defeat, in which he lost a Crown of inestimable value and several Vessels of Gold of huge weight; but he durst not enter the Walls of Cremona, for fear of the Cremoneses, many of whose fellow-Citizens had lost their lives in that Engagement. Innocent being advertised of this great blow given to the fortune of Fre∣deric,
and that his heart was so broken with it, that he let himself loose to all manner of voluptuousness, and made himself Gardens of Pleasure, where he kept a number of beautiful Women and Eunuchs, he took pity upon the Man, and dismissing the Councils without farther prose∣cution of him, he dispatch'd Nuncios through France and other Countries to persuade the people to engage in the Holy War and to follow Lewis King of France who was preparing for an Expedition into Asia, which he had promised and vow'd to perform when he lay under a great fit of sickness. But the Tartarians put a stop for a while to this Journey, who with two numerous Bodies of men had entred Europe and Asia; where those who invaded the latter, having pass'd through the Countries of Georgia and Armenia, pierc'd as far as Iconium, then the Royal Seat of the Turkish Princes: the other party which entred Europe, under the con∣duct of one Batto, ravag'd all through Poland and Hungary, and then turning toward the Euxine Sea, they depopulated the vast Realms of Russia and Gazaria. At the same time the Grossoni, a people of Arabia, by the instigation of the Soldan of Babylon, set upon the Templars and put 'em to flight, and without any trouble took Jerusalem, which was before stripp'd of its Walls, putting the Christians that were in it to the Sword and dishonouring our Saviour's Sepulchre with all manner of fil∣thiness. The tidings of which mov'd Innocent to urge King Lewis to ha∣sten his march towards Asia, with those Forces he had already got toge∣ther for that intent. He complied, and arriv'd at Cyprus, but it was at so unseasonable a time of the year, that he was forc'd to take up his Winter quarters there; but as soon as Spring came on, he sail'd to Da∣miata, where he got the better of the Soldan's Navy, and defeated his Land-forces who would have hindred his coming on Shore, where he pitch'd his Camp for so long as till the rest of his Troops could arrive from Italy. But these were very much retarded by the fury of Frederic, who weaning himself after a while from the pleasures in which he had been immers'd, takes up his Arms again and fills the whole Country with confusion, and compells several Cities in which were many factious Per∣sons, to throw off their subjection to the Pope; the chief of which were the Inhabitants of Forli, Arimino, Ʋrbin, and all the Marca di Ancona: In Ʋmbria none stood to their Allegiance but those of Todi, Perugia and Assisi: and in Tuscany onely the Florentines were on the Pope's side; who therefore were so harass'd by the Army of Frederic, that they were forc'd at last to banish so many of their fellow-Citizens as were of the Guelphs Faction; The Bologneses had better luck, for giving Battel to Henry one of Frederic's Generals, they overthrew him and cut him to pieces. Some write that 'twas at this time that Frederic passing into Sicily, died at Pa∣lermo; while others affirm that he was taken desperately sick in Puglia, and when he began to recover, he was smother'd to death with a Pillow by one Manfred, who was his natural Son, begotten upon a Noble-Wo∣man his Concubine. Howsoever this was, 'tis certain that some time be∣fore his death he had made Manfred Prince of Tarento, and had bestow'd upon him, beside that Principality, many other Towns and Territories. He left Conrade (whom he had by his Wife Jole Daughter to John King of Jerusalem) Heir of all his Estates, but he was afterwards taken off by Poison, as was manifest, by the means of Manfred; having before seiz'd upon Naples and Aquino, and sack'd them, much against the mind
of the Pope, who vigorously opposed these proceedings, though in vain, in order to procure the peace of Italy, that he might have liberty to tran∣sport the Italian Soldiers to recruit the Army of King Lewis then lying before Damiata. But Damiata was now taken, and Robert Earl of Poi∣tiers coming with fresh supplies from France, he marches from thence with his Army towards the City of Pharamia, whither the Soldan, apprehend∣ing his design, was already come with great Forces. There happen'd to be a River betwixt the two Armies, by reason whereof they could not join Battel, but they had frequent light Skirmishes, (both Generals keep∣ing themselves within their Camps) in one of which Robert rashly ven∣turing too far, was taken Prisoner by the Enemy. By this time Innocent had almost extinguish'd those flames of War with which Italy had so long been consum'd, and intended to have return'd to Rome, having first ca∣noniz'd Edmund Arch-bishop of Canterbury; but when he came to Peru∣gia, he thought good to decline his journey to Rome, understanding the Senate there arrogated to themselves more Power than stood with the dignity of the Pope and Court of Rome; and there he canoniz'd and en∣roll'd among the holy Martyrs Peter of Verona a preaching Frier, who had been murthered by some Hereticks between Milan and Como; and the same honour he gave to S. Stanislaus Bishop of Cracow, who in his life-time was very famous for working Miracles. Hence he was invited by the Noblemen of the Kingdom of Sicily, and immediately departed for Naples, then newly repair'd, where he died and was buried in S. Lau∣rence's Church, when he had been Pope fourteen years six months twelve days, just in the nick of time when he had hopes to have brought into his possession all that Kingdom. It was by the Decree of this excellent Pope Innocent, that the Octave of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin was commanded to be observ'd yearly in the Church of God as a Festival. He with good advice, fill'd up the places in the College of Cardinals, which had long been vacant, with very worthy personages, and ordain'd that when they rode abroad they should always wear a red Hat, for an honourable distinction of the degree they held. Moreover this learned Pope, though raised to the highest dignity in the Church, compil'd and publish'd several things; for he composed the Apparatus [or Glosses] to the Decretals, which are of great use to the Canonists, because they con∣tain many nice disquisitions, which render the Text wonderfully plain: and he put forth another upon the Councils, which Hostiensis in his Summa calls the Authenticks. He wrote also a Book concerning the Ju∣risdiction of the Emperour and the Authority of the Pope, in answer to one Peter surnam'd Vinea, who asserted, that the Empire and every per∣son and thing thereunto belonging were absolutely subject to the Empe∣rour; to which Book Innocent afterwards gave the Title of his Apologe∣tick. He was extremely delighted with the conversation of learned Men, whom also he remembred to prefer to dignities in the Church; particu∣larly one Hugo, who wrote Comments and Concordances upon the holy Bible, a Person famous for his learning and good life, he advanc'd to be Cardinal of S. Sabina, which great promotion yet did not make him leave his former course of life, being a Frier of the Order of S. Dominic. In this Pope's Reign and by his Order, Alexander of the Order of Friers Minors, who was well in years when he took upon him a religious Ha∣bit, wrote a very copious sum of Theology: by the procurement also of
this Pope and enabled by his bounty Bernardus Parmensis and Compo∣stellanus two very learned Men, at this time made publick their Works upon the Decretals, which they call'd Apparatus. Innocent had not long been dead, when he was follow'd by his Nephew William, whose Tomb is yet to be seen in the Church of S. Laurence without the Walls. ALEXANDER IV. ALEXANDER the Fourth, a Campanian, born at Anag∣ni, was chosen Pope in the room of Innocent, and streight sends monitory Letters to Manfred, that he should not at his peril attempt any thing that might be a diminution of the honour of holy Church; for he calling to his aid the Saracens from No∣cera, had surprised the Church-Forces utterly unprepared, that were in Foggia, and either put 'em to the Sword or took 'em Prisoners; and pre∣tending that Conradine was dead and that himself was his rightful Heir, he had taken upon him to rule as King. In the mean while the Chri∣stians, who we told you had encamp'd near the City of Pharamia, were very much visited with sickness, and press'd with want of Provisions, that part of Nile being prepossess'd by the Enemy, by which they were wont to be supplied with necessaries; beside that the Patriarch of Jerusa∣lem coming that way with some number of Ships, was made a Prisoner; so that Lewis being afraid his Army should be lost by famine, resolv'd to return to Damiata, and in his way fell into a great Ambuscade of the E∣nemy, by whom he was routed, and himself with Alphonsus Earl of Poi∣tiers and Charles Earl of Anjou, his Brothers-German, was taken Prisoner; but the Soldan not long after this great Victory was slain by his own Men, and he that succeeded in his stead having Damiata surrendred to him and a good sum of Money, discharg'd all the Christians and sent them under safe conduct to Ptolemais; where Lewis sent away his two Brothers into his own Country and by the persuasion of Pope Alexander staid in Asia, till Cesarea, Joppa and Sidon, (Cities the Christians had newly gain'd from the Saracens) were well garison'd with Men; which done, after having been six years on this Expedition, he return'd home. While this was doing, Pope Alexander having excommunicated Manfred, went to Anagni, and dispatch'd away Octavian, a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, of the Family of the Ʋbaldini, to confirm the Neapolitans in their resolutions against Manfred, assuring him that he would in a short time come in person with good succours to the aid of them and those of Cam∣pania; but Manfred not contenting himself to teize the Neapolitans, raised up also several Factions in Tuscany, especially at Florence, which City upon the death of Frederic had asserted its Liberty, where matters were car∣ried so high, that they were fain by a publick Edict to call home those persons who in the days of Frederic had been banish'd for being Guelphs, that they might be rendred able to withstand the contrivances of the Gibellines; by which means the Guelphish Faction got so great strength in Tuscany, that they harass'd and did much mischief by their Troops to those of Pistoia, Arezzo, Pisa and Siena, who had expell'd their fel∣low-Citizens
for being Guelphs, the Luccheses more than any helping them against the Pisans, who had been certainly ruin'd by the Florentines, after they had been overcome by 'em at the River Ansari, but that they were afraid of those of Boggibonzi. This Town stood in the Valley of Hel∣sa, about twelve miles from Siena, very strong by its natural situation and by artificial strengths, of which the Gibellines made use against the Guelphs, as a Garison; but it was at length taken and rased; and then the Florentines being Enemies to Manfred, made offer to the Pope of their assistance against him; which so mov'd Manfred, that having been first declar'd King at Palermo, and with the help of some Saracen Auxi∣liaries having in divers conflicts broken the Forces of the Pope under the command of the Legat, he sent his Lieutenant-General Jordan with one thousand five hundred Horse to the aid of the Sieneses against the Florentines, who not long after were met by the Sieneses near the River Arbia and receiv'd so great an overthrow, that they were forc'd to leave their City to the will of the Enemy. The Pope yet ceased not to persecute the tyrannical Lords, wheresoever they were, for when Ecelino, as was said, had seiz'd into his hands almost all the Venetian Territories and had laid Siege to Mantua, he immediately sent away Philip Fontanese, Arch-bishop of Ravenna to Venice, where having pub∣lish'd the Crusado, he got together a good Army, and with it drove Anselm, Ecelino's Nephew, out of Padua; upon news whereof Ecelino raises his Siege from before Mantua and marches in great haste to Verona, but un∣derstanding he could have no hopes of recovering Padua, he put to death with divers torments, all the Paduans he had in his Camp, to the number of twelve thousand. At this time the Friers Minors who were sent to Brescia, had by their preaching persuaded those Citizens to recal the banish'd Guelphs and to declare for the Church; and the same success they had had at Piacenza and Cremona, but that Obert Pallavicino, with the help of the Gibellines, had taken the Goverment into his sole Power. Against him then and Ecelino, his Confederate, the Pope's Legat assisted by the Guelphs, marches with his Army, but near Gambara he is defeated with great loss, and himself with the Bishop of Brescia and the chief of the Guelphish Faction, taken Prisoner, all whom upon the surrender of Bre∣scia, Ecelino let go free, An. Dom. 1249. This success of Ecelino, made the Legat Apostolick very fearful of the increase of his Power, and put him upon the design of bringing off Obert Pallavicino from his side; which he effected by the means of Boso Donario, a noble Citizen of Cremo∣na, who laying before him the barbarous and detestable cruelty of Ecelino, wrought upon him to throw off his Alliance with him, and to enter in∣to the League with the Milaneses and Mantuans, and those of the other confederate Cities. This much enrag'd Ecelino, seeing so many Enemies conspiring against him, so that rendezvousing his Army at Cassano, he from thence ravag'd all the Country about Milan, provoking the Asso∣ciated Cities to give him Battel; which they did, and not only vanquish'd him, but took him Prisoner, and he died soon after at Soncino of a wound he had receiv'd. Upon his death all the Cities of Lombardy recover'd their liberty, and became obedient Sons of the Church; and the Pope's Legat who had procur'd to the Paduans their freedom (as aforesaid) to make an end of all the reliques of the War, drives out of Treviso, and puts to death Alberic Brother to Ecelino, with his Wife and Children. Pope
Alexander having taken off these tyrannizing Lords and put an end to so many great confusions, set his mind upon renewing the War in Asia; but by reason of a quarrel which happen'd between the Genoeses and Vene∣tians, this pious and necessary Expedition was laid aside. The Chri∣stians then inhabited Ptolemais and Tyre, two opulent and wealthy Cities; which were especially peopled with Genoese, Pisan and Venetian Mer∣chants, who now for sixty four years had engross'd almost all the Trade both from East and West. These Merchants had their several Ex∣changes, their several Streets and Landing-places, and nothing was com∣mon to both the Venetians and Genoeses, but the Churches; when a contention arose between 'em about the Monastery of S. Saba, which each City claim'd to itself alone. The Pope would fain have composed the difference, and sent his Letters to both, willing that the Monastery should be equal free to both Nations; but the Genoeses having notice a∣forehand how the Pope intended to determine in the Case, by the fa∣vour of Philip Montfort, Prefect of the City, they excluded the Vene∣tians, possess'd themselves of the Monastery and fortified it. The Vene∣tians hereupon unanimously leave the City, and making League with Manfred King of Sicily, raise Forces against the Genoeses, and setting upon their Fleet, consisting of two Gallies and twenty three great Ships then in the Port of Ptolemais, they burn 'em and following their blow at the same time make themselves Masters of the Monastery of S. Saba, which they demolish'd. The Genoeses, rather enrag'd than terrified at this disaster, fit out another Fleet, to encounter the Venetians at Tyre, but they industriously avoiding a Battel, sail towards the Euxine, and take Selymbria from the Saracens and plunder it; after which both Nations recruiting their Forces, they steer for Tyre, the common Seat of War. The Pope fearful of the fatal consequences of this Contention, sends for the Ambassadours of both Countries, and makes himself a Media∣tor of Peace; which was welnigh agreed to, when news comes that the Venetians with their Allies, the Pisans, had between Tyre and Ptolemais routed the Genoeses, taking and sinking twenty five of their Ships; that thereupon the Victors were retreated to Ptolemais, and the vanquish'd were sled to Tyre; that all the Edifices of the Genoeses at Ptolemais were pull'd down, all their Merchandizes seiz'd as spoil, and the Ci∣tizens of that Nation expell'd the place. This havock made by the Venetians so highly displeased the Pope, that he would not admit their Ambassadour to Audience till they had set free all the Genoese Prisoners they had taken. Neither did this Calamity come alone to be the sub∣ject of the Pope's care, for Baldwin Emperour of Constantinople, (during whose prosperity, there seem'd yet to be some hopes left of recovering the holy Land) was about to quit that City: for Michael Palaeologus, who by the last Will of Theodore Lascari, was left Guardian to his two Sons did the Latins all the mischief that lay in his power, driving out of Achaia William a Frenchman, and teizing Baldwin with Seditions at home and open War abroad; who afterward going toward the Euxine Shore, in order to secure it from the Enemy, the Citizens of Constan∣tinople in the mean time at midnight let Michael Palaeologus into the City; upon news whereof Baldwin and the Patriarch Pantaleo retire from Pontus into Europe and lay by all thoughts of War. Palaeologus having thus rid himself of his Competitor and Enemy, murders his
two Pupils, and assumes the Empire, which after having been possess'd by the Latins forty eight years now was transferred to the Greeks. In the mean time Octavian Cardinal Ʋbaldino return'd to the Pope, with∣out having had any great luck in his negotiation at Naples, and the Pope having first at Anagni canoniz'd S. Clara a Franciscan Nun, went to Viterbo, to endeavour a Peace between the Venetians and Genoeses; in which Affair he met so much trouble and so many delays, that he died for grief in the seventh year of his Pontificate, and was honourably interred in St. Laurence's Church. The Sea was then vacant three months and four days. The life of this Pope is certainly much com∣mended by all Writers, he being said to have been bountiful and kind to all, but especially to the poor Religious; to whom the great love he bore caus'd him to comdemn by a perpetual Edict some Books writ∣ten by William de sancto Amore, against that sort of Poverty, wherein the wicked Fellow asserted that those who took upon them religious Habits to live by the Alms of other Men were not capable of Salva∣tion. He also publickly burnt another abominable Book, in which the Author affirm'd that a State of Grace was not to be obtain'd by the Law of the Gospel, but by the Law of the Spirit; which Opinion, he said, was taken out of the Writings of Abbat Joachim. This Book was call'd by those of that Sect, the Eternal Gospel. It was Alexander's custom, when he got leisure from publick Affairs to busie himself about somewhat that savour'd of Learning, for he compil'd Decretal Epistles, and gave such countenance to learned Men, that he promoted several of them to Cardinalates, particularly, Henry Cardinal of Ostia, a good Divine and an excellent Lawyer. He was also very liberal and muni∣ficent to Bartholomew, a Canonist of Brescia, who wrote much upon the Decretals; by which and by his extraordinary abilities and sancti∣ty he got great renown. By this means moreover the vaulted Church near that of S. Agnes, which had in old time been dedicated to Bac∣chus, was made capable of Divine Worship; and the Inscription in the Porch of the Church of S. Constance shews that the Altar there was consecrated by him.
ƲRBAN IV. URBAN the fourth, born at Troyes in France, Patriarch of Jerusalem, was made Pope, and immediately listed French Soldiers to assist him against Manfredus who infested the Patrimony of S. Peter; for fear of whom Jordanes Ge∣neral of Manfredus his forces in Tuscany against the Guelphs was re∣call'd to Naples, which gave some breathing time to the Guelphs, espe∣cially those of Florence and Lucca, who had been by the Gibellines mark'd out for destruction. Lombardy was also plagu'd with the like Seditions, Hubert Pallavicino carrying on now the Interests of the Gi∣belline faction and persecuting the adverse party; though before by his Policy and moderate behaviour to both sides he had got the Com∣mand of Brescia by an universal consent. But the Citizens of Modena and Reggio, instigated by those of Ferrara and Bononia, fearing lest Pal∣lavicino should over-pour them all at last, revolted to the Popes side, and turn'd the Gibellines out of their Cities, giving their goods and effects to the Florentines who had been banish'd for Guelphism, by this means adding great strength to their faction. And thus went matters in Lom∣bardy, the Pope still earnestly endeavouring a Peace. At Constantinople the Venetians attempted to dethrone Palaeologus and had done it, but for his Friends and Associates the Genoese; this gave him the greater Power so that having taken Malvasia, he easily made resistance against the Venetians and William Prince of Achaia. The Pope was now in∣tent upon sending a Legate to procure a Peace betwixt the Venetians and Genoese, when Manfredus with a new body of Saracens seizes la Marca, the Inhabitants being before inclin'd to a Rebellion. The Pope therefore sends the same Legate to France, with order to make use of all manner of Promises and Intreaties to persuade those French who had taken upon them the Croisado, (who had been inform'd of the thing before-hand) to hasten their march thither; they presently under the conduct of Guy Bishop of Auxerre descend into Italy, and vanquishing Pallavicino at Brescia, without meeting any resistance, they come to Viterbo: from whence a little while after, having first receiv'd the Popes blessing, continuing their march through Ʋmbria and the Coun∣trey of Tagliacozzo, they beat the Saracens who had fled thither and pursu'd them as far as the Garigliano. At the same time the Romans, though they medled not with the Patrimony of the Church, yet they threw off obedience to the Pope, making what Magistrates they pleas∣ed; particularly, contrary to custom, by which they were to chuse for Senator a Roman onely, they elected one Brancaleon of Bononia, a man of a great spirit and very politick, to this high dignity and promised him great advantages; but this humour held not long, for they soon altered their minds and clap'd him in Prison. This affront gave great offence to the Bononians, who seizing several Romans, protested they would never release them, but upon the delivery of their Brancaleon; which so wrought upon the cautious Romans, that they not onely releas∣ed
him, but restor'd him to his former dignity; setting up also ano∣ther Court of men chosen out of every Ward in the City (whom they called Banderese) to whom they committed the Power of life and death. The Pope plainly found the reason of this insolence of the Romans to be that they observ'd how Manfredus had plagu'd him and that he was not able to help himself. That he might therefore at last free the Church from the tyranny of these men, he sent Legates to Lewis King of France, to exhort him, that he would assoon as possible send his Cousin and Son-in-law Charles Earl of Provence and Anjou with an Army into Italy; he intending upon the expulsion of Manfredus, to create him King of both Sicilies. And this no doubt he had done (so high were his resentments of the Ingratitude of Manfredus) if sickness had not taken him off from business. Which yet was brought to pass, as is supposed, by the following Pope. To the times of this Pope is ascribed Albertus a High German, of the Order of Friers Predicant, who for the vastness of his learning got the Surname of Magnus. He Commented upon all the Works of Aristotle and explain'd the Christian Religion with great acuteness; beside he wrought very accurately concerning the secrets of Nature; He also put forth a Book de Coaequaevis, where∣in he endeavours to shew the little difference that is between Theo∣logy and Natural Philosophy. He expounded a great part of the Holy Bible, and illustrated the Gospels and S. Paul's Epistles with excellent Notes. He began also a Body of Divinity, but liv'd not to perfect it. He was a man so modest and so much given to Study, that he refused the Bishoprick of Ratisbon, because it could not be manag'd with∣out trouble and force of Arms sometimes, as the Bishops of Germany are wont to do. He liv'd therefore in private at Cologn reading onely some publick Lectures. At length he died there in the eightieth year of his age, leaving behind him many Scholars for the good of Poste∣rity, especially Thomas Aquinas, who leaving his Countrey and his noble kinred (for he deriv'd his pedigree from the Counts of Apulia) and going to Cologn, he made such progress in learning, that after a few years he was made Professor at Paris; where he published four Books upon the Sentences, and wrote a Book against William de St. Amour a pernicious Fellow; Beside he put forth two Books, one de qualitate & essentiis, the other de principiis naturae. At last he was sent for to Rome by Ʋrban, but refusing those promotions that were offered him, he gave himself wholly to Reading and Writing. He set up a School at Rome, and at the desire of Ʋrban he wrote several Pieces, and ran through almost all Natural and Moral Philosophy with Commentaries, and set forth a Book contra Gentiles. He expounded the Book of Job, and compiled the Catena aurea. He composed also an Office for the Sacrament, in which most of the Types of the old Testament are ex∣plained. But to return to Ʋrban, he died at Perugia in the third year, first month and fourth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in the Ca∣thedral Church. The Sea then was vacant five months.
CLEMENT IV. CLEMENT the fourth, formerly called Guidodi Fulcodio, a Narbonnese of S. Giles's deserv'd to be made Pope upon the account of his Holiness and Learning. For he being with∣out question the best Lawyer in France, and pleading with great integrity in the Kings Court, was created (after the death of his Wife by whom he had several Children) first of all Bishop of Pois, and then of Harbonne, and last of all a Cardinal by universal consent, and afterward was chosen out as the onely Person whose sincerity, and Au∣thority had qualified him, to compose the Differences between Henry King of England, and Simon Earl of Montford. As soon as he was cho∣sen Pope, some say he put on the Habit of a Religious Mendicant, and went incognito to Perugia. Thither immediately went the Cardinals, who having chosen him Pope though in his absence, attended upon him pompously to Viterbo. In the mean time Charles, whom, we said, Pope Ʋrban sent for, to bestow a Kingdom upon him, set out from Mar∣seilles with thirty Ships, and coming up the Tiber arriv'd at Rome: Where he lived as a Senator so long by the Popes order, till certain Cardinals, sent from his Holiness, came and declared him King of Je∣rusalem and Sicily in the Palace of St. Giovanni Laterano: upon this condition, that Charles should take an Oath to pay the Sea of Rome a yearly acknowledgment of forty thousand Crowns: and should not ac∣cept of the Roman Empire though it were freely offer'd to him. For there was at that time a great contest for the Empire between Alphon∣sus King of Castile (who sought to procure it by Power and bribery too) and the Earl of Corwall the King of Englands Brother, whom the Electors had no great thoughts of. Therefore lest Manfred should hope to make use of any quarrels between Alphonsus and Charles (to whom many people said the Empire was justly due, though he could not challenge it) the Pope animated Charles against Manfred as one that stood in Contempt of the Roman Church. For Charles's Army was already gotten over the Alpes into Italy, and marching through Romagnia, had brought all the Soldiers of the Guelphs Party as far as Rome. From whence Charles removed, and took not onely Ceperane, having beaten out Manfred's men, but posted himself in a Forest near Cassino, which Manfred himself had undertaken to defend: although his mind was soon alter'd, and he resolv'd to march for Benevento, to expect the Enemy in plain and spacious places, because his forces consisted most of Cavalry. Thither also did Charles move; and assoon as he had an opportunity to fight, did not decline it, though his Sol∣diers were very weary with travelling. Each of them encouraged their men to engage: But Charles coming to relieve a Troop of his Soldiers, that were like to be worsted, more eagerly than usually (as in such cases Military Men will do) he was knock'd down from his Horse, at which the Enemy was so transported, that Manfred fought carelesly out of rank and file▪ and was kill'd; which, when Charles appeared again
straight turn'd the fortune of the Day. For many of his men that ran away were kill'd, and a great many others taken Prisoners. Charles ha∣ving obtain'd so great a Victory removes to Benevento and marches in∣to it upon a voluntary surrender of the Citizens. From thence he went to storm Nocera de Pagani, where both the modern and the ancient Saracens lived, but sent his Mareschal into Tuscany with five hundred Horse, to restore the Guelphs that had been banished, into their own Cities. He was no sooner come thither but the Gibbelins departed on their own accord, and he without any disturbance appointed a certain number of Officers at Florence, which the neighbouring Natives call the Heads of the Guelphian Faction. Thence he moved against the Sienneses, and made all the Gibellins of Tuscany, but especially those of Pisa his Ene∣mies, because he besieged Poggibonci, which the Gibellines stoutly de∣fended. Now when Charles had reduced both Kingdoms, all but No∣cera de Pagani, he at last grants the Saracens a Peace, and let 'em live in Italy upon their own terms, as they thought good. But he himself with his Army upon the Popes invitation, went to Viterbo, where Henry, banish'd by his Brother, the King of Castile, was not long before arrived. Of whom when the Pope had heard Charles's good Character, he was so pleased with it, that he presented him with great things and made him a Senator of the City. After that Charles marched into Tuscany, to suppress the Gibellins, who desired Corradin a young Man, Nephew to Conrad of Schwaben, to come into Italy and assist them against the Guelphs. And seeing that he could not take Poggi∣bonci by storm, because it was so well fortified both by Art and Na∣ture, he resolved to starve it into a Surrender. And by that means after a long Siege he took it; and then going against them of Pisa, he took a Town of theirs, called Mutrone, and gave it to the State of Luc∣ca. Charles at that time was very likely to have done greater things, but that his friends called him hastily home to his Kingdom by reason of some factious People that favour'd Corradin's Party, but most of all upon account of the Saracens, whom he presently shut up in the strong Castles of Nocera de Pagani, that he might go the safer against Corradin, whom the men of Pisa endeavour'd to make their King, after they had not only laid waste all the Countrey of Lucca, but conquer'd and kill'd Charles's Mareschal at Arezzo, by the assistance, chiefly, of Guido of Montferrat, and all the Gibellin faction on that side the Alpes. They say, that as the Youth passed through the Countrey near Viterbo toward the Kingdom, the Pope, who pitied his condition, said in a Prophetick manner, that Cor∣radin himself was led as a Sacrifice to the slaughter. So then he went toward Rome, and was met at Ponte Molle by Henry the Senator together with all the people of Rome, who saluted him with loud acclamations by the name of Emperor; but whether out of fear or love, is not well known. At Rome he dismissed Guido of Montferrat, and went himself in all haste with his Army toward the Kingdom; where when he un∣derstood how Charles had taken possession of Compagna di Roma, and the great Road that goes through it, he turn'd away to the Moun∣tains called Tagliacocii, toward Marsi. And there he encamp'd first of all near the Lake, being fortified with an old Conduit, and ruinated Houses. Charles mov'd that way too, and pitch'd his Tents within ten furlongs of him at the entrance of an hollow Vale; where by ad∣vice
of Alardus a Neapolitane, who had been an old Soldier in Germany, he immediately sent away part of his Army under the command of his Marshal who was disguis'd like a King, with a design to provoke the Enemy. But he himself staid the mean while on the other side the Hill with his best Soldiers in Ambuscade to wait for a good occasion of doing his business effectually. They fought full three whole hours without being able to say who should have the better of it, till the Marshal who behav'd himself very bravely, fell. At whose death the French began to give back, but the Germans were more brisk than ever, and pursu'd them to all places without any manner of Order. By this means Charles came upon 'em in a Confusion, routed 'em and made 'em run for't, but kill'd a great many of 'em as they fled. Henry the Se∣nator was taken Prisoner at Rieti whilst he endeavour'd to escape; and Corradin being discover'd at the same time with the Duke of Austria, as he attempted to pass the Tiber and go by Boat into Tuscany, was brought to Charles and put to death: as the Pope, we told you, had prophesied it would shortly happen. Charles therefore in the year 1268, after so great a Victory, and having made himself absolute in the Kingdom, went to Rome, where for some time he acted as a Senator by the Popes per∣mission, and sent his Marshal into Tuscany: by whose pains and care a Peace was made between the Sieneses and the Florentines. But when Clement was dead, in the third year of his Popedom, and twenty first day, and buried at Viterbo, there was such a Difference presently not onely between the People of Italy, whom the godly Pope whilst alive had by his Authority, and awe upon them, kept within some kind of measures, but also between the Cardinals about the choice of a new Pope, that the Sea was void two years. At that time Charles, who took a great care, that the Church should not suffer any damage, went with part of his Army into Tuscany, where he took Poggibonci (the place from whence all the Troubles sprang) and sold it to the Floren∣tines. Which when they had demolish'd, they built a new Town, not far from thence upon a plain ground, which they call Poggibonci, where∣as the old one was called antiently Bonitium. After that Charles made Peace with those of Pisa, whose Ships he design'd to make use of to carry him over into Africk, and then intended to return to his King∣dom, leaving Ruffus Earl of Anguillara, with part of his Army in Tus∣cany, to keep the Tuscans in Order. In the mean time King Lewis set sail from Marseilles, and was follow'd by three of his Sons, Theo∣bald King of Navarre, and the Earl of Champaigne, together with an Apostolical Legate. All these arrived at Tunis the very same time, and besieging the City they destroyed all that ever came to their hands. But a Plague happening in the Camp, which for a good while had in∣fected none but inconsiderable Persons, at last took off Lewis with his youngest Son and the Legate. To him succeeded Philip his Son, who began now to think of going homeward. But Charles King of Sicily coming up to him, a Peace was concluded upon this Condition, that the Captives on both sides should be dismissed, and the King of the Countrey should pay Charles a certain Tribute, besides that he should suffer the Gospel to be freely preach'd in his Dominions. Then they brought back their forces into Sicily, where the King of Navarre, and the Earl of Campaigne died at Trapani; which made Philip and Charles,
partly for Devotion, and partly to avoid the Contagion, sail to Civita∣veccha, with an intent to go from thence by Land to Viterbo, where the Cardinals were still contending about the choice of a Pope. For they imagin'd, that the presence of two such great Kings would cer∣tainly move them (as it did) to make Theobald of Piacenza, Arch-dea∣con of Liege, Pope, though he were absent. But to return to Clement: Whose life is to be commended in every part of it for his Learning, Pie∣ty, Religion, Humanity, Charity to his Neighbours, and to all poor Christians. As for the goods or the Church, he distributed them at such a rate, and with such discretion, that he in all probability gave more to God, than to his own Relations. He had two Daughters by his Wife who died before his Popedom: to one of which, that liv'd in a Nun∣nery, he gave thirty pounds of small Deniers Tournois, and to the other, who was married to a man of an equal fortune, he ordered a portion of three hundred pounds Tournois, upon condition she should never ask for one penny more. He had besides a Nephew that was a Clergy-man, whom when he found to have three Prebends (for so they call Canon∣ries) he forced him to take his choice, which of 'em he would keep and leave the other two. But when his friends were urgent with him not onely to let his Nephew enjoy what he already had, but give him more, and greater preferments, the Holy Man made answer, (I would the Popes in our time would follow his Example) that he would obey God, and not flesh and bloud: That it was Gods pleasure, what be∣long'd to the Church should be bestow'd to charitable uses, nor was he worthy to be S. Peter's Successor, who would give more to his Kind∣red than to Religion and to Christ. But whilst he was at Viterbo, and news was daily brought to him that Ednigeth, a Dutchess of Po∣land, who had been long dead was in very great esteem for her Mi∣racles, he canoniz'd her. He was also wonderfully satisfied with the Doctrine of Bonaventure, General of the Order of Friers Minors, who at that time wrote gravely, and copiously upon the first, second, third, and fourth Books of the Sentences. Now the Holy Man dying with such a Character was much lamented and miss'd by all men. And hence arose the Controversie among the Cardinals, to find out a fit Per∣son to succeed Clement. GREGORY X. GREGORY the tenth, formerly called Theoald, an Italian, born at Piacnza, and Arch deacon of Liege, was created Pope by the Colledg of Cardinals at Viterbo, whilst he was in Asia. For at that time, when Lewis went into Africa, Edward, Son to the King of England, sailed from England into Asia with a great Navy, in order to regain the holy Land. But staying so long at Ptolemais, till Lewis, King of France came out of Africa with Victory, according to his promise, he was stab'd in three places by one Arsaci∣da, a Companion of his, as he was alone in his Bed chamber, and by the assistance of another friend of his, very hardly escaped his Death.
For that other person held the Russians hand so long, till the People of the House came in, who tare treacherous Arsacida to pieces, and dragg'd him out of the Room. But Edward, when he was cured of his Wounds, had a great esteem for his friend Theobald, because he conti∣nually animated all Christian Kings and Princes against the Saracens; and when he went to Rome in order to receive the Popedom, being sent for by the Cardinals, who had elected him, he assisted him extra∣ordinarily with a Ship, with Money, and a splendid equipage, espe∣cially at that time, when Henry a Youth, and Son of Richard Earl of Cornwall, who was lately dead, came to Viterbo to see Clement. After whose death, staying there for some time, he was unluckily kill'd. For Guido Monford, who went to the Cathedral Church along with Phi∣lip the French King, to hear Divine Service, stabbed him before the Al∣tar; because his Father Simon had been basely murther'd in England by Richard. He having reveng'd his Fathers death in this manner, he escaped with safety to Ruffus, Governour of Tuscany. Not long after Philip and Charles, vexed at such an Indignity went from Viterbo, the former into France, the latter into Puglia. For having made a Peace with the Saracens, Charles went along with Theobald (who was arri∣ved at Siponto, now call'd Manfredonia) as far as Ceperano. From thence his Holiness travell'd through Marsi, and Sabini to Viterbo: where he was receiv'd by the Cardinals with all Respect and Honour imaginable, and being crown'd with the Pontifical Diadem, he was in∣vested with all the Power that Christ left Peter. When that was done, and that he had setled the Popedom for a time, he was desirous to make Peace between the Genoeses and the Venetians. For these two States had been engaged one with another in great and bloudy Conflicts for a long time. Upon this account Philip King of France, who tarried at Cremona, was prevail'd upon by the Pope to send for the Genoese, and Venetian Embassadors, and made a Peace between 'em for five years, that they might all go in one body against the Saracens. Italy was now quiet, when the beginning of an universal disorder rose from the Venetians now Exactions. For they made a Law, that no one should sail in the Adriatick, especially from Pola to Venice, unless they paid a Gabel according to the value of their goods. But the Bologneses could not endure this, as being at that time masters of a great part of Romagna, and therefore for three years together they fought the Venetians with great variety of Fortune. At last being tired out they accepted of a Peace upon this Condition, that they should demolish a Castle, which they had built upon the ve∣ry mouth of Po, that they should have free leave to carry out some goods that were there, and then the Venetians should have the sole custody of the Mouth of the River Po. They also of Ancona were of∣fended, that the Venetians challenged the absolute dominion of the A∣driatick Sea, and exacted Custom from those that sailed there. And hereof they complain'd to the Pope, whose Duty it is to see, that no new Taxes be imposed. He therefore immediately commanded the Venetians, to take off that Imposition, who answered him in these very words. That the Pope did not perfectly understand the mat∣ter, and that when he did, he would be able to judg better of it. Gregory could not make an end of this matter to his mind: because
he was forced to go to the Council, which he had called at Lyons. Thither also went Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople with a great Retinue; and made the Greeks comply and subscribe to the Opinion of the Church of Rome now the thirteenth time, they having so often revolted. Nay farther, some Noblemen of Tartary were induced by his Authority to receive Baptism. Mean time, the Western Empire being vacant, Rodolphus, Earl of Assia is made Emperor by the Electors, upon condition that he would go to Rome the next year, to receive the Crown there. But the Florentines who were Guelphs immediately turned out their Countrymen the Gibellins, though they had been restored to their Countrey by Gregory, as he went into France. At which the Pope was so angry, that he interdicted them from all bene∣fit of the Law, and was very near doing the same thing by the Bolog∣neses, who had ejected the Lambertescii and the Asinelli, Gibellins of noble Families: but they suffer'd for it not long after. For when they went to fight against the Forleses, that had kindly entertain'd some persons whom they had banish'd; 'tis said, eight thousand of the Bologneses were slain at one Sally from the Town. Upon which mis∣fortune some Cities of Romagna grew confident, and immediately re∣volted from the Bologneses themselves. Especially Cervia, from whence they received a great Revenue out of Salt. But Gregory when he had dismissed the Council at Lyons, in which many Decrees were made, re∣lating to the choice of Popes, the expedition against the Saracens, the union of the Greek and Latin Churches, and the peace of Christendom, as he was going into Italy, he met Alphonso King of Castile at Bellocado∣ro, complaining grievously that he had given the Empire to Rodul∣phus. But when the Pope had satisfied him, he resign'd all his right to Rodulphus. The Pope was very kindly receiv'd by all the Italians as he travell'd through Tuscany, but shunn'd the Florentines on purpose, and went to Arezzo, lest they should have prevailed with him to take off his Interdiction, At Arezzo he died in the fourth year, second month, and tenth day of his Pontificate and there he was buried. He was a Man of an extraordinary Reputation through his whole Life, for Prudence in the conduct of his Affairs, for Courage, and greatness of Mind, that made him contemn Money and all mean things: for hu∣manity, clemency, bounty to poor Christians, and those especially that fled for refuge into the bosom of the Apostolick Sea. INNOCENT V. INNOCENT the fifth, formerly called Peter of Tarantaise, a Burgundian, a Dominican, a man very learned in holy Writ was created Pope at Arezzo in the year of our Lord 1275. From thence not long after he went to Rome, where he was crown'd in S. Peter's Church, and from that time immediately apply'd himself to compose the Affairs of Italy. To this end he sent Legats (men of great Authority) to command not onely the people of Tuscany (who con∣spir'd the ruin of those of Pisa) but also the Genoeses and Venetians
(who were mortal Enemies) to quit their Arms. Assistant to them were the Embassadors of Charles, the King, by whose Awe over them he hoped to have his business done more to his mind. The People of Tuscany did as he commanded them, but especially the Floren∣tines, whom the Pope absolv'd from Gregory's Interdiction upon that very score: But the Genoeses and Venetians, whose hatred was more inveterate, were still in Arms, perpetually butchering each other: and yet Innocent, if he had lived a little longer, had brought them over to his Opinion; so zealous he was in that matter. But he died in the sixth month and second day of his Pontificate, and was buried in the Lateran Church. Now the secular Priests had no great reason to la∣ment his death by reason of a Sentence which he gave just before he dy'd. For when there arose a Dispute between the Priests of the Ca∣thedral Church, and the Friers Preachers concerning the body of Cle∣ment the fourth (for each Order desired to have the disposing of it) he gave judgment that it ought to be committed to the Friers; for he said his Holiness had order'd it so whilst he was alive. Upon this account Innocent was a little maligned: but was otherwise a very good Man, and such a Person from whom those of his time might have expected all the good imaginable. ADRIAN V. ADRIAN the fifth, a Genoese, of the Family of the Flisci, before called Othobon, was made Pope at Rome in the Court of the Lateran. He was Innocent the fourth's Nephew; by whom he was created Cardinal Deacon of S. Adrian, and sent Legat into England with plenary Power to compose the differences between that King and his Barons. Assoon as he was made Pope he presently went to Viterbo, and invites Rodulphus the Emperor into Italy, to lessen the Power of Charles, who at that time did what he pleas'd at Rome. But Rodulphus being ingaged in the Bohemian War, could not com∣ply with Adrian. In the mean time Charles was very cautious, to avoid the envy of the World, and turn'd all the stress of the War upon Achaia, so to make his way toward the Empire of Constantinople. But Adrian dying in the fortieth day of his Pontificate, he came back into Italy. This Pope died at Viterbo before his consecration, and was buried in a Convent of Freres Minors. He had an intention not onely more and more to secure the Churches Patrimony from Tyrants, but also to re∣duce Gregory's Decree for the Choice of a Pope into a better method, not totally to abolish it. But Death obstructed his endeavours, and withstood the greatness of his Mind. The Sea at that time was vacant twenty eight days.
JOHN XXII. JOHN the Twenty-Second, a Spaniard, born at Lisbon, and formerly call'd Peter, was made Pope, being then Bishop of Frascati. Who, though he were reckon'd a very learned man, yet by his ignorance in business, and the unevenness of his Conversation he did the Popedom more injury than Honour or kindness. For he did many things that argued him to be guilty of Folly and Levity: and does not deserve commendations unless it be for one thing; and that was; that he assisted young Scholars especially the poorer sort with money and preferments. At that time the Venetians infested those of Ancona for Merchandizing in Dalmatia without pay∣ing any custom to the Venetians: and yet the Pope himself to whom they were tributary, did not protect them as he should have done; but onely seemed ready with his Tongue to say what he was too much a Coward ever to do. Nevertheless, the Anconeses, though the Pope would not aid them, took courage and made a Sally so briskly, that they rais'd the Siege, and drave the Venetians from the Town a good way, not with∣out considerable damage to them. By the advice of John Cajetan (who govern'd all things at that time, for that he was made Pope by his as∣sistance and the Votes he procured) he sent Legats to Paleologus, and all the Western Kings, to exhort 'em in his name, that they would make Peace with one another, and bend their Forces against the Sara∣cens and other Enemies of Christianity. The Man was a Fool to pro∣mise himself a long Life, and to tell every body he should live a great while: because every body knew his life and Conversation; he was so immodest, and so sottish. But behold, as he was betraying his Folly to all that were about him, a certain new Apartment that he had built in the Palace at Viterbo fell down all of the sudden, and he was found among the Wood and the stones seven days after the fall of it: but he receiv'd the Sacraments of the Church and then died in the eighth month of his Pontificate, and was buried at Viterbo. He was a Man (as I said before) of great Learning but little Prudence. For he wrote many Tracts in his life, especially certain Rules relating to Phy∣sick: for he was counted a very good Physician. He wrote also ano∣ther Book and called it Thesaurus Pauperum, or the Poors Treasure, and set out Problems in imitation of Aristotle. But 'tis certain, however it comes to be so, that many very learned Men are not at all fit for bu∣siness. Yet I need not doubt how it comes to pass, but take it rather for a greater Wonder, if he that takes pleasure in Contemplation, should apply his mind to Wordly Affairs too.
NICOLAS III. NICOLAS the Third, a Roman, of the Family of the Ʋrsini, formerly called John Cajetan, was made Pope at last, after the Election had been six months in suspence, by reason of a great Contest that was among the Cardinals. Now the King of Sicily as Senator, had the guard of the Conclave at that time, and was very urgent with 'em, to chuse a French-man. But Nicolas, assoon as he began his Reign, in the year 1278, resolv'd to restrain Charles's Power, and took from him the Lieutenancy of Tuscany; because, he said, that Rodulphus took it ill, and would not perform his promise of going upon the Expedition into the holy Land upon any other terms, since Tuscany was reckon'd to belong to the jurisdiction of the Empire. Though the Pope gain'd this point, yet he reduced Romagna and Bologna it self together with the Exarchate of Ravenna, which at that time were un∣der the Emperor, and made 'em subject to himself. And thither he sent Bertholdus his Nephew, who was declared Earl of Romagna. He sent also another Nephew of his that was a Cardinal, called Latinus, Legat into Tuscany; who restored the Gibellins in all places, and impo∣sed what Officers he pleased upon the Citizens at Florence and in other parts of Tuscany. But the Office of Senator, which used to be granted, or committed to Kings and Princes, he discharg'd himself alone. He would not see the Embassadors from the Venetians (who at that time harass'd the Anconeses with War) and so they departed. But he called 'em back, and chid 'em severely; nay he threaten'd to ruin their City, if they did not desist from besieging, or storming Ancona. At length when both parties had suffer'd great inconveniencies, they made a Peace upon equal terms. But this Pope had a mind to create two Kings, both of the Ʋrsini; one of Tuscany, and the other of Lombardy; to keep those Germans on the one side (that inhabit part of the Alps) and the French on the other side, that lived in Sicily and Naples, with∣in their bounds. And to bring it about, he persuaded Peter King of Aragon, to endeavour the recovery of the Kingdom of Sicily upon the title of his Wife Constantia who was heir to it: And he took the Honour of Senator from Charles and conferr'd it upon himself; and made an everlasting Edict, that no King or Prince should dare to sue for, or bear that Office. This Nicolas (as Authors say) was a man of great courage and conduct, and so perfect in his life and conversation, that in Italian he was commonly called il Composto or Composto. He was a lover and admirer of learned men, especially of those who had Learn∣ing mingled with prudence and Religion. But he was reckon'd impar∣tial to all in the distribution of honours and dignities. For at his first Ordination, he chose a Bishop for Alba out of the Order of Minors, for Ostia and Porto out of the Preachers. The Bishops of Palestrina and Trescat, were Seculars. He created besides these, two Cardinal-Priests, that is to say, Gerard, with the Title of the Twelve Apostles, and Je∣rome of the Order of Minors, with the Title of S. Pudentiana. To
them he added two Deacons, that is to say, Jordan his Brother, Cardi∣nal of S. Eustachius, a man of much Learning and innocence; and James Colonna of S. Maries in Via lata, a person of great Religion and gra∣vity. He adorn'd, and enlarged the Papal Palace with other Buildings which he added. For he built a convenient house nigh S, Peters (part of which is yet to be seen) which Nicolas the fifth afterward repair'd to his great cost and charge. He also walled S. Peter's Garden, which now they call Belvedere. Then he repair'd S. Peter's Church when it was ready to fall with age, and adorn'd it with the Pictures of the Popes. The same he did in S. Pauls. More than all this, he advan∣ced divine Worship most wonderfully, by encreasing the number of Canons, and the provision that had been made for those who serv'd in Churches. Again, he divided the Ecclesiastick Orders and appointed to each their Offices. He likewise assigned every one his Lodging, that even Strangers might know where every Officer, especially the chief Officer was to be found. He finish'd the Lateran Palace which was begun be∣fore by Adrian the fifth. He built the Sancta Sanctorum from the ground, after the first Chappel was ruin'd with age: and beautified the Church it self with Mosaic work (as it is now to be seen) and with plaister of Marble. And thither he removed the Apostles heads, till he had reqair'd St. John's Church at his own Charge. But when it was finish'd, he presently brought 'em back again, in Silver Cases made by his Order, and, attended by all the People, he laid 'em up in the Chap∣pel which was built for the purpose. The same day he consecrated the Church, that is, upon the eighth of July. Some Historians say, that no one ever said Mass with more Devotion than he; for during the performance of that Divine Office, he constantly wept. He was very godly, and such a Lover of the Friers Minors for that they contemn'd the World, that he has explain'd many doubts relating to that Order in a decretal Epistle. When Churches were void, there never was a Pope, that took care sooner or more deliberately; giving them to the best and the fittest Men he could find. For he first look'd into a mans life and his Learning, and then gave immediately the vacant Seas to those that he thought wor∣thy. For he used to say Delays were dangerous; because there were such men in the World, as would commit Sacriledg with all their hearts. He could not endure Proctors, and Attornies, because they liv'd upon the bloud of the Poor; and those that went to Law, but hated them as a Plague: in which he imitated Gregory X. and John XXI. But because there were great corruptions among Magistrates in all places; he or∣dain'd, that all Offices should be annual only; and if any one durst to hold 'em longer, he was liable to an Anathema, from which he could not be ab∣solv'd but by the Pope himself. Besides these things he did a great many more for the good of the Clergy and all Christian People, as it appears in his Titles. And yet he had his faults too, amidst all these commenda∣tions. For he is said to have lov'd his Relations to such a degree, as that he would rob others to give to them. For he took Castles from some Noble Romans, and gave 'em to his own kindred, particularly that at Soriano; Where, though he was a most temperate man, yet he died suddenly in the third year, eighth month, and fifteenth day of his Ponti∣ficate. Whose death they say some body foretold by a presage drawn from the swelling of the River Tiber. For it rose so high, that it was
four feet and more above the Altar in round S. Maries. But his body was carried to Rome and buried in the Chappel of S. Nicolas which he built in S. Peter's, in a Marble Tomb beautified with Fret-work, still to be seen, An. Dom. 1280. eight days after the Assumption. This year Charles the King, adorn'd, and honour'd the Body of S. Magdalen, which S. Maximin had buried in a Town of his own name, with a more mag∣nificent Tomb and a bigger Chappel: and laid her head up in a Silver Case separate from her body. Now they say, that upon the death of Nicolas, the Sea was vacant five months. For whilst the Cardinals were about electing a new Pope at Viterbo, and one Richard, of the Family of the Hannibals (which is the best in all Rome) was Keeper of the Conclave, two Cardinals of the Ʋrsini did what they could to hinder the Election, unless Richard, who was a bitter Enemy to the Ʋrsini, would restore Ʋrsus, Nephew to Nicolas lately deceased, to his Govern∣ment of Viterbo, from which he had not long before deposed him. For this reason the people of Viterbo sided with Richard, went into the Con∣clave, took the Cardinals and imprison'd them. Which when it was known at Rome, the same faction of the Hannibals drove the Ʋrsini out of the City: who seeing they were forced to depart, went all to∣gether, and retir'd as far as Proeneste. So that the French Cardinals (when the Ʋrsini were gone) out-voted the Italians, and chose a French Pope about the end of the fifth month. MARTIN IV. MARTIN the fourth, formerly called Simon, a Cardinal Priest of S. Caecilie, and a French man of Tours, being chosen Pope, would not be crown'd at Viterbo, because he thought that City ought not to be made use of in such a solemn occasion, where the Cardinals had been so assaulted. And therefore he went to Orvieto, an ancient City, and there performed all the Ceremonies upon the 23d day of March. And upon Easter day he created six Cardi∣nals; of which the Earl of Millain had the Title of S. Marcellin and Peter; and Benedict Cajetanus had that of S. Nicolas in the Prison. As for Charles, the King, he not onely receiv'd him kindly when he came to him, but he gave him his former Senatorian Dignity, whereof Ni∣colas had deprived him. But this was not so very well approv'd on by all, because it was like to cause great Tumults in the City, the Ʋrsini being now restored and the Hannibali banish'd. For Charles was a mighty Enemy to the Ʋrsini, for Nicolas's sake, whom he hated. For this reason John, to revenge the injuries done to his Brother Latinus, and in defence of the Dignity conferr'd upon himself by the Romans, got a good Army together, and marching toward Viterbo, spoiled all their Countrey far and near. But Martin, who was then in Mon∣tefiascone, being concern'd at the misery of the Viterbeses, sent Mat∣thew, a Cardinal of the Ʋrsine Family to Rome in all haste to compose the business; who took John, the Captain of the Roman People, whom he met upon the Road, along with him. Thither came all the Heads
of the Factions by command from the Legat, especially Richard Hanni∣bal, to be absolved by the Legat from that Interdiction, that he in∣curr'd at Viterbo, for breaking into the Conclave, and imprisoning the Cardinals Ʋrsini. He therefore laid himself at the Cardinals feet, with a Rope about his neck, (as the greatest sign of penitence) and after he had beg'd pardon was absolv'd. Peace being thus made between both the factions, and the Roman Army called back from plundering the Viter∣boses, the Pope immediately grants the Romans a Power to choose two Senators out of themselves, that should govern the City. Accordingly two were chosen, Hannibal, Son of Peter Hannibali, and Pandulphus Sa∣velli, who ruled the City very well all the time they were in Office: Especially at that time when Pope Martin, at the request of Charles King of Sicily, excommunicated Palaeologus for not keeping the Ar∣ticles of Alliance made between them. But then Palaeologus fearing Charles's Power, made a private League with Peter King of Aragon, who laid claim to the Kingdom of Sicily in right of his Wife Constantia, Manfred's Daughter and Corradin's Niece. Hereupon they prepared a great Navy at the common charge of 'em both: which made the Pope send to Peter, to know of him, what he meant by all those pre∣parations. Peter told him, that if he thought his Shirt could know what his intentions were, he would tear it from his Body. So the Legat went away without any satisfaction: And Peter when he had gotten his Navy ready sails into Africa, where he pillaged the Coast at Tunis extreamly, and then returning into Sardinia expected to hear of some new commotions in Sicily by the contrivance of John Prochita, according to an agreement they had made. In the mean time new broils arose in Lombardy. For the Viconti a noble Family there, under the command of Luchino, drave the Turriani another potent Family out of Millain. Which Luchino was afterwards sent as Lieutenant to the Em∣peror into Tuscany, where he resided at St. Miniato, and plagued the Flrentines and Luccases with grievous incursions, not regarding the Popes interdictions, with which he thought to have affrighted him from troubling these his Friends and Allies. Those also of Perugia were now in Arms, and did so press the Fuligneses, that they took their City, and demolish'd part of the Walls. Thereupon the Pope excom∣municated 'em; but paying a good sum of money to him for penance they soon obtained his pardon. In the mean time the Sicilians, whose motions Peter attended in Sardinia, could no longer endure the pride and licentiousness of the French, and therefore were persuaded by John Prochita to enter into a Conspiracy against Charls, that upon such a day in the Evening when they should hear such a Bell ring, they should fall on and kill the French without respect to Sex or Age. In which action 'tis said, they were so true to their barbarous Promise, that even those Sicilian Women were killed who were with Child by French men; Hence comes it that the Sicilian Vespers is grown a By-word for any great Massacre. At this time Guido Appius met with ill fortune, when he was sent in the Popes name with eight hundred French Horse to re∣cover Roagna. For as they sate before Forli, and the Citizens would fain have slied out, one Guido Bonatus an excellent Astrologer▪ exhor∣ed his fellow Citizens to wait till such time as the Stars should promise good luck, and make their Sally when he gave 'em the Signal. They
did as he would have them, and breaking forth in the very nick of time they kill'd Guido and almost all his French men. Thus was that City freed from a great Siege. But Charles when he heard how the Sici∣lians had revolted, and of their cruelty too, went over into Sicily with a very considerable Army. And first he besieged Messina, which he had certainly taken by Surrender, but that the French, desirous of Re∣venge had threaten'd to raze the City. Besides Peter of Aragon, who expected (as I told you) such commotions, no sooner heard of it, but he comes over with all speed from Sardinia into Sicily, and arriving at Palermo, he was very kindly received by the Citizens and all the other Sicilians, who also saluted him by the name of King, whilst all the Rabble flock'd about him. Charles was frighted at this, and therefore leaving Messina he went immediately into Calabria, to stay for his Son the Prince of Salerno, who, he knew would come very shortly out of the Province of Narbonne with some Recruits. Charles expostulated with Peter of Aragon, that he who was his Relation, nay of the same bloud too should dare to invade his Kingdom. To which he reply'd, that he was so compassionate, as that he could not deny his assistance to a miserable people that were so hardly used: though he said too, that the Kingdom belong'd to him by right of inheritance, as he was Husband to Constantia, Monford's Daughter, and Corradins Niece. At last when words grew high on both sides, it came to a Duel; upon this condition though, that each King should have an hundred men a∣long with him, as being to engage in such a weighty Combat, and the place where they were to fight was to be Bourdeaux. For both these Kings were akin to the King of England, who with the assistance of Pope Martin at length made up the difference. But when Peter, for all that, made War upon Charles, Martin sent Gerard, Cardinal of Par∣ma, his Legat to Naples, not onely to keep the People in Allegiance to him, but to assist him who was but a youth with good counsel and the awe of his presence. But when Peter had sent Rogeris Lorias, his Ad∣miral to Naples, Charles moved toward the Enemy and not far from Naples was conquer'd with the loss of a great many men: nor onely so, but he was taken, and carry'd first into Sicily and then into Aragon. But this, without question, had never happen'd if he would but have hearken'd to the Legat, (as he should have done) who was of a con∣trary opinion; who dissuaded him and told him that such a mighty Kingdom as that was, ought not to be hazarded at that rate. For not long after his Father Charles came with a great Navy, which would have made him able to have coped with the Enemy before he was a Con∣queror. But Martin being concern'd very much for Charles's misfor∣tune, excommunicates Peter of Aragon, and gives his Kingdom for a prey to any one that can or will take possession of it; absolving his Sub∣jects from their Oath of Allegiance to him, and exciting all Christians against him, as an Usurper of the Churches Patrimony, according to his opinion. Nay, he would have sent the Church-Militia to help Charles, but that he was fain to wage War in Romagna himself against the Forleses, who by the aid of Guido Earl of Monford, were so bold as to revolt from the Church, and attaque some Forts thereabouts. But when Guido himself repented of what he had done, and had made Peace with the Pope, he not onely demolish'd the Walls of Forli in revenge
to Guido Appius, but he recover'd a great part of Romagna in a short time. He had also taken Ʋrbino as sure as he attempted it, but that Rubeus Anguillarius, Earl of Tuscany died in the action. There were at that time two Generals that commanded the Camp: one of which was sent into Tuscany to defend that part of the Countrey that lies toward the Soane, and the other (whom they call Earl of Giovenazzo) continu'd the Siege by the Popes Order, whilst Guido Montefeltranus supplied the very Townsmen with necessaries under-hand. But in the mean time when Martin was at a loss from which of the two States, Pisa or Genoa, he should desire Auxiliaries against Peter of Aragon, there arose im∣mediately such a quarrel between them about the possession of Corsica, that they themselves were fain to beg assistance one against another. Then the Pope sent word to the Apostolical Legat, that he should keep the people in order, till Charles came with a supply. After which Charles went into Naples, and having setled the peoples minds sailed in∣to Africa where he died of a Fever: upon which occasion all the weight of the Government devolv'd upon the Legat. At that time there was a rumour, and almost a currant Report, that Philip Son of the French King, and Earl of Artois was coming to receive that Kingdom. But that did not frighten Peter from spoiling the Country, because he was sure he came with a small number: For his Father Philip was going into Aragon with a great Army, to take possession of Peter's Kingdom, which Martin the Pope, by heavy Censures first laid upon him, had exposed as a booty to any one that could get it. But the Pope being surrounded with so many cares, and those increased too by new tumults at Orvieto (for the Gibellins had banish'd the Guelphs) he went to Perugia: where not long after he died of an hectick Fever in the fourth year, and first month of his Pontificate, and was buried in the Cathedral. At whose Tomb many sick, blind, deaf, and lame people that are brought thi∣ther, recover from God their former health by the merits of this most holy Pope. HONORIƲS IV. HONORIƲS the fourth, a Roman, of the Race of the Sa∣bini (a very noble Family) formerly called James, a Cardi∣nal Deacon, was made Pope at Perugia, and came to Rome in the year 1285. when his Brother Pandulphus was Senator. For Pandulphus was esteemed a Person of so much severity, and Justice, that whenever the Citizens of Rome had a mind to purge the City of Robbers, Ruffians, Thieves and Parricides (of which at that time there were great numbers in Rome, among the Seditious) they desired no other Senator than Pandulphus. And he, though mightily tormented with the Gout both in his feet and his hands; yet in courage and constancy of mind he was inferiour to none of those that had their health. Hono∣rius also was sometimes troubled with the same Distemper, insomuch that he was forced to make use of certain Instruments made for the purpose to support him, when he performed the Priestly Office. But
he was a Man of that Conduct and Prudence, that he did not seem much deficient in corporal strength: for he himself could discern ra∣ther more of the Affairs of the City, than those that were in it besides, put 'em all together. He lived in the Mount di S. Sabina, and built him a curious Palace there (whose ruins are yet to be seen) which drew many of the Romans to live by him; so that the Mount began from his time to be very full of Inhabitants. He was resolved to injure no Man whilst he was Pope, but on the contrary to do what good he could to all; and therefore being provoked by the indignities which Peter King of Aragon offer'd to him, by endeavouring to get the King∣dom of Sicily, he confirmed Martin's Interdictions against Peter. But Rodulphus the Emperor, having a great mind to raise money, sent his Chancellour (one of the Family of the Flisci) into Tuscany; to make all the Country free, especially those who would buy their Liberty. Those of Lucca paid upon that account 12000l. The Florentines six thousand: and as soon as they were made perfectly free, they crea∣ted a certain kind of Officers (which they call Arts-masters) with a Sword-Bearer. This Sale did not displease Honorius, though it look'd too mean for such a great Prince; because by that means the Patrimo∣ny of the Church would be more secure, he thought, when the Em∣peror had no more power to oppress those free Cities. But whilst the King of France besieged Girona, and Peter of Aragon was sollicitous, how to hinder the carriage of Provisions from Narbonne into the Ene∣mies Camp, he was engaged in a sharp Conflict, where he received a deadly Wound, of which not long after he dy'd for want of looking to. So that Girona was surrender'd upon Terms, and submitted to the King of France; though he did not long survive the Conquest. For he died of a Fever which he caught in the Camp, as he was besieging Per∣pignano. His Navy too, not long after that, was taken and burnt in the Port of Narbonne by Roger Loria. Peter of Aragon had two Sons, Ferdinand and James; whereof he left Ferdinand, his eldest Son, King of Aragon by his Will, and James, King of Sicily. But when the old Kings were dead, in that manner, as I have told you, the Wars de∣volved upon the young ones; who attempted on both sides to make those of Pisa, and the Genoeses, who were excellent Seamen, of their Party. But these two States heing incens'd and arm'd against each o∣ther, engaged so furiously at Malora, an Island near the Port of Pisa, that those of Pisa lost forty Ships, or Gallies, and twelve thousand men; which were partly slain, and partly taken. Honorius took this misfortune of theirs so much to heart, that he had like to have inter∣dicted the Genoeses, who pursu'd the men of Pisa with too much ani∣mosity. And that unhappy day gave such a shock to those of Pisa, that they never retrieved themselves since. But Edward King of En∣gland went at that time into Gascoigne, to make peace between Charles, a Youth, Son to the King of France (who I told you was taken in War) and Ferdinand, King of Aragon. The business went as he would have it, and they treated about Charles's freedom, when at the same time the Apostolical Legate, and the Earl of Arras, with the assistance of the Earl of Avellino, possess themselves of the City Catina, and send over thither an Army raised out of Tuscany. For this reason Edward return'd home without success. But Roger Loria advanced King Ferdi∣nand's
fortune by taking the French Fleet as it came back out of Sicily. Honorius could not engage in this War, because he was invaded in Ro∣magna by Guido Feltrini. But at length, when he had conquer'd Guido he recover'd all Romagna in a short time: and not long after dy'd, two years and a day after he was made Pope. His body was carried in great State from S. Sabina to S. Peter's, and buried in a Marble Tomb, which is yet extant among those that Pope Pius collected, as the Arms of his Family and the Inscription declare; And indeed he deserv'd all the honour paid to his dead Corps; because he was a very upright Man, and a great lover of Christian Piety. For he confirm'd not onely the Order of the Carmelites, which was not very well approved of in some Councils, and chang'd their black Cloaks for white ones; but he did the same also by the order of Eremites, which was disapproved on at Paris. But the onely Cardinal, he made, during his Pontificate, was John Boccamatius, Bishop of Frascati: for he would say, that none but good and learned men ought to be taken into so great a Society; not those that were illiterate, and ignorant in the manage of humane Affairs. He loved Courtiers so, as that he would go every year, especially in the Summer, to Tivoli, on purpose to avoid the Heat of the Town, which causes many Diseases. When Honorius was dead, the Sea was vacant ten months. For the Conclave being summon'd to meet at St. Sabina, a great many of the Cardinals were taken sick of a sudden. Out of whom there died Jordan Ʋrsin, Earl of Millain, Hugh an English man, Gervase of Anjou, Dean of Paris, and Antherius, an excellent Person. For this reason they dismiss'd the Conclave, and deferr'd the matter till a more seasonable time; especially because of the Earthquakes, which were then so great, that they thought Heaven it self would be angry with 'em, if they did it at that time. NICOLAS IV. NICOLAS the fourth, of Principato-citra, an Ascolese, for∣merly called Jerome, a Brother, and General of the Order of Friers Minors, and after that a Cardinal Priest, was made Pope at St. Sabina, the tenth month after Honorius's death, and placed not onely in Peter's Sea, but in the Saint's own Chair. Af∣ter that he went to Rieti to avoid some Tumults at Rome; and there he created Cardinals of almost all Religions. For he loved all men alike, nor did he think that he ow'd more to his Relations, than to any good man. The difference between Virtue and Vice caused him to incline more to one man than another. Some of those that he made Cardinals were called Neapolio, Petrus Columna, Hugo Colionius, a famous Doctor of the Order of Preachers, Matthaeus Aquasparta, General of the Mi∣nors, and Bishop of Porto. About a year after he came back to Rome, when City broils were somewhat appeased, and lived at S. Maries the Great, which Church he and James Columna repaired, as appears upon the great Portico, where the Image of our Saviour, the Pope, and James the Cardinal are yet to be seen. The same Pope repaired the front,
and the back-part of the Lateran, and adorn'd it with Fret-work, as the Inscription tells us. In the mean time the Kings of Aragon and Sicily con∣clude a Peace upon these terms; That King Charles should be set at Li∣berty, and settle James of Aragon in the Kingdom of Sicily at his own charge. And if he did not do so in three years time, he promised to return to Prison; giving his two Sons for Hostages; one of which was named Charles (who was afterward created King of Hungary and called Marcellus) and the other Lewis, who, when he had lived a good life in the Order of S. Francis, was canoniz'd for a Saint. Whilst these things were transacted in Europe, the Great Turk made use of that occasion, and whilst the Christians quarrell'd among themselves thought himself secure. Wherefore he goes with fire and sword, and razes Tripoli a fa∣mous City in Asia, killing all the Christians that were there in Garison. Said, and Barui suffer'd the like Calamity, having no body to assist 'em. Aca, of old called Ptolemas, stood, because they made a truce with the Sultan for two years. And to defend it for time to come, Nicolas the Pope did all he could to get Soldiers under Christ's Banner, and paid them with his own money. They were about one thousand five hun∣dred: but there were a great many more that follow'd 'em, without being inrolled, without Colours, or any body to conduct 'em. Who when they were come to Aca, they did the Christians as much hurt as they did the Saracens, But the Sultan demanded what was his due, as he pretended, which when the Christians refused to restore, he threa∣ten'd utter ruin to 'em all. Then there arose a great question among the Christians, who should have possession of Aca; for the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, the Templars of Germany, the King of Cyprus, and Charles King of Sicily did all lay claim to it. Those also of Pisa had a mind to demand Aca and lawfully (as they said themselves) but that a War which brake out in Tuscany diverted them from such an ill design. For they starv'd Earl Ʋgulinus in Prison, where they kept him, his two Sons and two Nieces; and after that, did so far animate the Gibellins against the Guelphs, that they threaten'd equal destruction to 'em all. They fell first upon those of Arezzo, because the banish'd Gibellins desir'd it; when William Petramala was Bishop of that place, who was aided by Earl Feltri the Florentine. But the Florentines did not think them∣selves strong enough, and therefore they sent Charles the Second also thither with some forces, as he was going through their Country to wait upon the Pope. Their Camps were pitched near one another in the Country of Tipherno, by which name they now call the City, having al∣ter'd the name of the Castle. Immediately as the Battel was just begun there were a great many Florentines kill'd; but not long after the case was alter'd, and, though William the Bishop, and Earl Feltri were slain, yet there fell of the Gibellini three thousand, and two thousand were ta∣ken. The Neighbours call the place where they fought, Campaldino. Charles having obtain'd so great a Victory goes straight to Nicolas, and gets the favour to hold of him in Fee the Crown of both the Sicilies. Which when James of Aragon understood, he presently goes and attaques Cajetta. But lest any thing should be wanting that might disturb the quiet of Christendom, a fatal War broke out between Philip of France and Edward King of England, which did not onely trouble the Christi∣ans in Asia very much, but also gave our Enemies great confidence and
hopes that they should totally obliterate the Christian Name throughout all Asia. For the Sultan, who at that time was sick, had sent an hun∣dred and fifty thousand men to Acra under the Command of his Son. But the Siege continuing for two months, the Father died in that time, and the Son succeeded him; who attaqued the Town with much greater re∣solution. For he filled the Trenches, and promised all the plunder to the Soldiers. But when he had fought his way to the very Walls, he was beaten back by the Christians, (who made a Sally upon him) even to his Camp, and had a great many of his men hurt in the Action. Whilst they were thus employ'd in Asia, Nicolas, the Pope, sends two Legats à Latere (as they call'em) i. e. Benedictus Cajetanus, and Gerard of Parma with all speed into France, to make a Peace between the two Kings and animate 'em against the Saracens who then besieged Acra. For he had made a Peace between James of Aragon, and Charles who was a Captive, upon those Conditions, that I told you before, that they might all be the more free to go against the common Enemy. Nay he had begun to provide a Navy, as thinking himself almost sure of a Peace; but to no purpose. For the Kings did not obey him, when he gave 'em good advice, nor did they that were in Garison at Ptolemais agree so well among themselves, as to keep out the Enemy according to their power. For having daily lost a great many of their men, there were at that time but twelve thousand left; who afterward made their escape in a Corsaire (or a swift sailing Frigot kept for that purpose) along with the Patriarch of Jerusalem. And though at first they had good ship∣ping, yet at last they were Shipwreck'd near Cyprus. But the Sultan enter'd the City when the Inhabitants had left it, and destroy'd it im∣mediately with fire and sword in the 196th year after Godfry had taken it. But amidst so many Calamities, the Island of Cyprus, and Armenia the less, formerly called Cilicia, continued Christian. At that time Ni∣colas was very urgent with Rodulphus the Emperor to send his Army into Asia, for fear the Enemy should get the remaining part of it. But Rodulphus soon after died, and Adolphus Hasso was chosen to be his Suc∣cessor; who, demanding the Rights of the Empire, was kill'd in a fight at Spire by Albertus Son to Rodulphus. He was indeed a brave Man, but had neither men nor money enough: and that was the reason that they said, he was rather overpower'd by multitude, than fairly Con∣quer'd. But Nicolas, the Pope, through discontent (as some suppose) to see all things go cross to his expectation, and being conscious that he had favour'd Parties more than became a Pope, died at Rome in the fourth year, first month, and eighth day of his Pontificate near S. Ma∣ries the Great; and is there buried, at the upper end of the Church, by Cardinal Columna, as you may see upon the Pavement, where his Pi∣cture is in Porphyry. But after his death the Cardinals went to Pe∣rugia, that they might choose a Pope with greater freedom, but pro∣tracted the business by quarrels among themselves two years and three months. In the mean while Michael Palaeologus, Emperor of Constan∣tinople dies: but the Priests and the Monks would not suffer his body to be buried in an holy place, because he joyned with the Western Church in the Council of Lions. And indeed Andronicus, Michael's Son, would have declared himself of the same opinion as the Latins, if he had been assisted by our Party. But when the Sea was vacant, An∣dronicus
was destitute of Friends, and so at last apostarized from the faith. But Charles the Second, King of Naples, seeing what would come of it, made a journey from Narbonne to Perugia, and exhorted the Cardinals several times to agree, and perfect their Election. And would have con∣tinu'd his importunity, had he not been severely rebuked by Benedict Cajetan, of Anagni; who told him that he was too urgent, and there∣by seemed to lay a kind of restraint upon the Cardinals, whose Votes ought to be free▪ CAELESTIN V. CAELESTIN the fifth, formerly called Petrus Moroneus, by profession an Anchorite, of Sergna, who dwelt in an Abby two miles from Sulmona, was made Pope at the re∣quest of King Charles, and Cardinal Latinus. A thing, which all people wondred at so much the more, because his holy retirement had voluntarily removed him out of the prospect of any such Grandeur. After his Creation he went to Aquila, and thither he summon'd all the Cardinals to him from Perugia. But they were very importunate with him both by Letters and Messengers, that he would come to Perugia, which was a City more agreeable to the Dignity of a Pope. Notwith∣standing Caelestin's Will was at last obey'd, who would needs have it so, because he understood that King Charles was of the same mind. Thereupon they went all thither, and paid such homage to Caelestin as became a Pope. Now Ptolomy says, there were two hundred thou∣sand men at his Coronation; and that he himself was there too. I suppose the people were taken with the newness of the thing, and the holiness of the Person: that a man, that was an Eremite should come to such Honour (as if he had been preferr'd by Heaven it self) after so long a Contest between the Electors. As soon as he enter'd upon the Popedom, he made twelve Cardinals; men of the greatest integrity, of whom two were Eremites. But because he did not alter his former way of living and take upon him the Grandeur of a Pope, he was so kind, and accessible to all that made suit to him, as that he granted the same things to several persons; which brought not onely a Contempt upon his Dignity, but was a lessening to the Majesty of a Pope: For indeed he was unfit for publick business by reason of the obscure life, which he had led in the Wilderness. Hereupon they talk'd of deposing him; especially after the death of Latinus the Cardinal, a good man, by whose assistance Caelestin had hitherto made shift to support himself under so vast a burthen. But some of the Cardinals being very instant, especially Benedict Cajetan (a cunning man, and well skill'd in the Civil and Canon Law) who was a great favourite of the Popes, that he would remove himself from the Pontificate, lest the Church of God should be endanger'd by the unskil∣fulness of its Governour, he began to think of laying down his Papal Office. But King Charles was so much concern'd at his levity and su∣perstition, that he takes the good man to Naples, and endeavours to convert him from such base thoughts; whilst the people cry'd out in all
places, that they would have no other Pope, but Caelestin, and heartily beseech'd his Holiness that so it might be. To whom the Pope made answer, That he would do nothing but what God would have him do, and what he thought might be for the good of Christendom. At that the Cardinals that desired he would leave the Papacy were very urgent with him to do it as soon as he could; telling him the danger all Chri∣stendom was in by his ignorance, and that all the mischiefs that then befell the Church would be put to his Account at Dooms-day. The holy, simple Man was moved with what they said, and told 'em he would do as they'd have him, if it might lawfully be done. Where∣upon there was an Order made by unanimous consent, that the Pope should have liberty to depose himself. Which Constitution Boniface the eighth his Successor afterward confirm'd, as appears in the sixth Book of the Decretals. Then Caelestin return'd to his private life again, and gave the Cardinals power to put another Pope in his place, in the sixth month of his Pontificate. And Benedict Cajetan by that means, having most Votes, was chosen Pope; who seised upon Caelestin by the way as he was going into his Hermitage, committing him to the custody of the Governor of a certain Castle, called Fumo, in Campagna di Roma. For which he said his reason was, lest the Authors of Sedition should one time or other bring some calamity upon the Church of God under his conduct; although he really admired the Sanctity of the Man. How∣ever, this is certain that Boniface was very ungrateful, as well as subtil, first, to chouse a good man out of his Dignity, to satisfie his own am∣bition, and then to take him (when he would have retired again to his solitude) and keep him in Prison, till he dy'd for very grief, before his time, in seventeen months after he first came to the Pontificate. There are some that say, this Caelestin was so famous for Miracles after his death, that there were frequent Discourses in Councils about his Ca∣nonization; and that many people worship'd him as a Saint, and put him in the Catalogue of Confessors. His Anniversary is kept every year on the 17th of July (which was the Day of his death) by an Or∣der of Clement the fifth made at Avignon. BONIFACE VIII. BONIFACE the eighth, born at Anagni in Campagna di Roma, formerly called Benedict Cajetan, was made Pope at Naples, upon Christmas Eve in the year 1294. He was a man of great Learning and Experience: as having lived long in Publick, and risen to the Popedom by all the degrees of Honour, though not without some imputation of Pride and Ambition. For whilst he was Cardinal-Priest of S. Martins in the Mount, he was so de∣sirous of the Papal Dignity, that he omitted no fraudulent or other in∣direct means, that might in his opinion conduce to his obtaining of it. Besides, he was a man of that arrogance that he contemn'd every body, and recalled some Indulgences granted by Nicolas the fourth and Caele∣stin the fifth. He also persecuted the Gibellines extreamly: from whence arose that quarrel between the Pope and the Gibellines of Columna, who
also maintained their party against the Pope at Anagni. Thereupon he began to calumniate, and traduce them in general; but especially two Cardinals, Peter and James, two famous Men of the same Family; that upon the death of several Popes, they had wasted the Churches Treasure, and spread abroad scandalous Pamphlets against his own Person. For after he had done 'em Injury, they did indeed write to several Kings, Princes and States concerning Boniface's Arrogance and Ambition: how he had possessed himself of the Papal Sea against all right and reason, after he cheated Caelestin out of it, and then put him in Prison. For there are some that write, how Boniface sent some cunning Rogues pri∣vately in the Night-time, to speak in a strange Tone through Caelestins Chamber-Wall, and tell the poor, simple man (as it were by a Voice from Heaven) that he must lay down the Popedom if he would be sa∣ved. The Cardinals were cited but did not appear, because they fear'd Boniface's severity and resolution. Wherefore they retired to Nepi, with all the Family of the Columneses; and being declared Schismaticks by a publick Decree, they had their Benefices, Dignities, Estates, Castles, and Towns taken from them. Which Deprivation Boniface afterward reduced into the form of a Decree, as appears in the Book called Sex∣tus. After that Boniface raised a great many Men and Arms, to quell them, and besieged Palestrina, where they were ingarison'd with one Sarra a famous Man, who was their Uncle. And when they got away from thence, after he took and plunder'd the Town, he pursu'd 'em to Zagalora, and Columna: from whence also they were forced to fly not long after by reason of the multitude of their Enemies, by whom these Castles likewise were destroy'd, but especially that of Columna, which was their native Country. But the Cardinals got away from thence too, and went to Rieti; though Sarra staid a long time in the Woods at Antium, for fear of Boniface's cruelty. But falling into the hands of certain Pirates, he was put to the Oar, and by that means suffer'd a great deal of misery: though he was more willing to endure banish∣ment and hardship in that manner, than to feel Boniface's Tyranny, who hated the whole Race of the Gibellines. 'Tis well known what he said to Prochetus, Arch-bishop of Genoa, when he came and laid himself at his feet upon an Ash-Wednesday; For whereas the Priest uses to say, Remember, man, that thou art Ashes and into Ashes shalt thou return; he alter'd some of the words and said, Remember, man, that thou art a Gibellin, and with the rest of the Gibellines into Ashes shalt thou re∣turn: and, with that, he threw some Ashes into his Eyes, not upon his head, as the custom is. Nay, he deprived him of his Arch-Bishoprick, for the very name of the Gibellines; though he restored him afterward, when he understood that the Cardinals of Columna, did not go to Genoa, as he supposed they had done. The Columneses being banish'd in this sort, Boniface appointed a double Anniversary, one in honour of the Apostles and Evangelists, and another in honour of those four Do∣ctors of the Church, Gregory, Austin, Jerome, and Ambrose. He like∣wise canonized Lewis (one of the King of France's Family, Son to Charles the Second, who, some say, was profess'd of the Order of S. Francis,) whilst he was at Civita Vecchia. After that he turn'd out the Secular Canons from the Cathedral of Alby, and put Regulars in their room, at the request of Bernard Castanetus, Bishop of the Place. He also put
forth a sixth Volume, or Code of the Pontificial or Canon Law, which was compiled by three very learned Men (according to his Order) with the addition of some new Decrees of his own. The City of Gubio, which by the instigation of the Gibellines had revolted from the Church, he in a short time recover'd. He denied Albertus Duke of Austria to confirm him in the Empire, though he petitioned for it several times. But when James of Aragon was dead, and Robert, Son of Charles, and Duke of Calabria or Terra d' Otranto was gone over into Sicily, and had taken Catina, there brake out such a War of a sudden, that almost all Italy was in an Uproar. For the Sicilians who favour'd the Arago∣neses, got a Navy together, and not onely conquer'd Philip, Robert's Brother, but took him and put him in Prison. Whereupon Robert left Catina, and return'd into Italy without accomplishing his Designs. But Frederick of Aragon coming out of Spain with an Army into Sicily, did not onely recover all Sicily, but Terra d' Otranto too. In Tuscany, those of Genoa did burn with so much hatred against the Inhabitants of Pisa, that they not only took Leghorn and burnt it, but they sunk Merchants Ships in the mouth of the River, to hinder the men of Pisa from sailing out. These things were carry'd on in Italy, to the no small detriment of the Country; whilst the Pope sate still, nor would interpose his Au∣thority to make Peace in any place. And lest you should think Heaven was at peace with Mankind, there was of a sudden such an Earthquake, as never was known before, which lasted at several places a great many Days, and threw down many Houses. The Pope was then, with all the whole Court, at Rieti: and fearing lest he should be knock'd on the head with the fall of Houses, he caused a little Hutt to be built of small planks, in a wide Field which was in the Cloyster of the Friers Preach∣ers; and there he kept for some time, though it were bitter cold Wea∣ther. For this Commotion began upon St. Andrews day. There ap∣peared also at that time a Comet, which was a sign of some great Cala∣mity to come. But Boniface after so many and such continu'd Earth∣quakes came to himself, and made several Cardinals, of which number were the Arch-bishop of Toledo, Richard of Siena▪ Nicolas of Treviso, Master of the Order of Preachers, John Murro, General of the Minors, and one Peter, a Spaniard. He also kept a Jubilee in the year 1300. and gave a full pardon of all their sins to those that had visited the Apostles Tombs, after the manner that is prescribed in the Old Testa∣ment; though the Jews at first had quite another sentiment of this Af∣fair. For they kept a Jubilee every fiftieth Year, wherein Debtors were released from their Creditors, as Josephus says, and Servants, or Slaves challenged their freedom. From whence the Jubilee imports li∣berty both in mind and body. For they are truly said to be free, whose sins are forgiven. He commanded it to be kept every hundredth year. For this reason, that year, there came such a multitude of people to Rome from all parts, that you could hardly stir in the streets, though they are very large and spatious, it was so throng'd. There came to Rome at that time Charles Earl of Valois, Brother to Philip of France, who married the Daughter of Balwin late Emperor of Constantinople, and got leave of Boniface, that his Father-in-law might endeavour to recover the Empire, of which by force he had been deprived. Boniface was wil∣ling to gratifie him, because he intended to make use of their assistance
toward sending an Army into Asia, to recover Jerusalem. But whilst things were coming to a settlement, he made Charles sole Governour of Peter's Patrimony, and sent a Legat into Tuscany, to appease the new broils there. For instead of Gibellins and Guelphs they were called Whites, and Blacks. But the Legat could do no good though he threa∣ten'd to interdict them; nor could Charles of Valois who came thither by the Pope's Order, restrain the Florentines so much, but that they did drive the Albi, or Whites, out of their City and kill a great many of 'em besides. For, at that time, the Gibellines were called, the Whites. But the Pope having long premeditated of his Expedition to Jerusalem, he sends the Bishop of Apamea to Philip King of France, to exhort him into the same Design. He went; but when he came thither and could do no good by fair words, he was fain to make use of Menaces. At which Philip was very angry and threw him into Prison. Which when the Pope understood, he sent the Arch-Deacon of Narbonne, an excellent person, thither immediately, to command Philip in his name, to set the Bishop of Apamea at Liberty. If he would not do it, he bid him declare publickly, that the Kingdom of France was fallen to the Church by Philips contumacy, and forasmuch as he had broken the Law of Na∣tions: and order'd him farther, to lay a Curse upon him, and absolve all the French from their Allegiance. The Arch-Deacon did all this very chearfully, and compelled the King to dismiss the Bishop. But the King, having a mind to take some part of a Revenge for the injuries offer'd to him by the Pope, set forth an Edict, that no man should go out of his Kingdom to Rome, or send money thither. The second year after the Jubilee Charles of Valois went to Charles the Second his Cousin. At whose coming Frederick of Aragon was concern'd, and desired a Peace, which he obtained upon condition, that he, restoring what he had taken in Italy, should keep Sicily as long as he lived. But when Charles of Valois went out of Tuscany, the Whites, who were driven out of Florence went in great numbers to Forli: among whom there was one Dantes Aldegerius, a very learned Man, and an excellent Poet in his Mother-Tongue: this Person endeavoured to return into his own Country several times, but in vain; although he were assisted by the Bolognians, and Canegrandis Governour of Verona, with whom he lived afterward for some time in all the freedom of conversation. There are some Authors that tell us, how Boniface about this time caused the body of one Hermanius, that had been worship'd in Ferrara as a Saint for twenty years, to be taken out of the ground, and burnt, because he had made a strict inquiry into his Heretical Opinions. I suppose he was one of the Fratricelli, or Holy-Brotherhood, whose Sect at that time was very numerous. In the mean time Philip King of France, ta∣king Boniface's Arrogance very ill, called an Assembly at Paris of the Clergy and Nobility: and recounting the injuries that Boniface had done to him, his Ambition, and Cheats which he had used to get the Pope∣dom, which he was unjustly possessed of, he appealed to the Sea Apo∣stolick, which, he said, was then vacant, and to the next Council. At which Boniface, being startled, called a General Council, wherein he de∣clared Philip and his Kingdom subject to Albert the Emperor, whom in the beginning of his Pontificate he had repulsed. Then Philip, thinking to tame his pride, sent Sarra of Columna (who was known and redeemed
from the Pirates, at Marseilles) with Nogaretius a French Cavalier, and a trusty Soul, to Rome, for no other end (as he declared himself) but to publish his Appeal. But he had a quite different Design. For Sarra, putting on the disguise of a Slave, went into Campagna di Roma; where gathering to him as many friends as he could, he sent Nogaretius with two hundred French Horse, which he had listed out of Charles of Va∣lois's Army, before to Ferentino; to assist him, if need were. But him∣self went into Anagni privately, in the Night, and by the assistance of the Gibellines, whom Boniface had teazed extreamly for a long time, he broke the Door open, and took the Pope by surprise in the House where he was born, and so brought him to Rome, where thirty five days after he died for grief, in the eighth year, ninth month and seventeenth day of his Pontificate. He was buried in S. Peter's, in a Tomb that he built himself before he died; which is yet to be seen in a Chappel which he made of Fret-work. He likewise built the Pulpit and the Portico in the Lateran, where Curses are pronounced upon the Sacrament; and where he laid that Curse upon Philip King of France, and the Columne∣ses. Thus died Boniface, who made it his business rather to infuse ter∣rour than Religion into Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations, and States; and would pretend to give and take away Kingdoms, to banish and to recall men, as he thought fitting, to satisfie his pride and covetousness, which was unspeakable. Therefore let other Princes as well Religious, as Secular, learn by his Example to govern the Clergy and the Laity, not proudly and disdainfully, as this party of whom we speak, but holyly and modestly, as Christ our King, and his Disciples, and true Followers. And let 'em desire rather to be beloved than feared; which is usually the just bane of Tyrants. Some say he cherish'd the Feuds among the Italians, especially between the Genoeses and the Venetians, who were two States, very powerful at Sea. BENEDICT XI. BENEDICT the eleventh, an Italian, of Treviso, former∣ly call'd Nicolas, Cardinal of Ostia, was made Pope the first of November at Rome. For he enter'd himself into the Order of Preachers, when he was but young; and so far prevailed upon the Fraternity both by his Virtue and Learning, that they preferr'd him gradually through all Offices till he was made General. From which Station he was chosen Pope, and in that place also gave great de∣monstration of his Virtue. For he lived after such a manner, that he may well be reckon'd among the number of those that are in Bliss. But as soon as he got into the Apostolical Chair, he cites Nogaretius, and Sarra and all those of Anagni that conspired to take Boniface, to come before him; but they not appearing, he laid an heavy Curse up∣on them. He likewise heard King Philip's cause, and absolv'd him from Boniface's Censures. And after that, he receiv'd John and James, the two Cardinals of Columna, into favour; whom Boniface persecuted, for being of the Guelphian Faction, more than became a Pope to do. Nay he gave
'em their goods again, onely he enjoyn'd 'em to let the Red Hat, that Boniface had taken from 'em, lie by for some short time. Having setled the Affairs of the City in this manner, and made some Cardinals (of whom Nicolas a Pratese of the Order of Preachers was one) he immediately applies himself to procure a general Peace in Italy. And because there were greater tumults in Tuscany than any where else, he sent Nicolas Bi∣shop of Ostia thither with full Commission; who made new Officers in Florence, and put 'em into the House, which they had built for the re∣ception of Magistrates, now called the Palais of their Lords. But at that time Nicolas thought he might do more than so, and therefore spoke about recalling the persons that were banish'd: Which Proposal not taking effect as he would have had it, he declared a Curse upon them, and went to Prato. But not long after, Benedict dying, Tuscany was again in an uproar, for the banish'd of all places met near Bologna, resolving immediately to enter Florence, and thereupon in the Night getting over the Walls which were not then finish'd, near the Gate, that leads to Bologna, they advanced as far as the Church of S. Sepa∣rata, that was begun to be built a little before. But whilst they look'd too eagerly after the plunder, and consulted their friends what they had best to do, they gave their Enemies time to take courage, and raise Arms; insomuch that they quickly drave 'em out, and killed a great many of their men. Then they got Robert Duke of Calabria to be their General, and were grown confident they had strength enough not onely to defend their own but to attaque their Neighbours too. Hereupon they besiege Pistoia, which those within it did so bravely defend, that with one Sally they beat Robert and all his Army back to Prato. Be∣nedict, who was a very good and holy Man, resolv'd, when he had quieted Italy, to assist against the Tartars, who were fallen into Syria and Palestine, having been sollicited to it by frequent Messages. But dying at Perugia (where he and all the Court were) in the eighth month and seventeenth day of his Pontificate, he missed his Design. He was buried with due pomp, in the Church of the Freres Preachers the fifth of June in the year 1303. Now the Miracles which he did after his death shew him to have been an excellent, holy Man; for he cured the sick, and cast out Devils. The Sea was then vacant from the fifth of June to the seventh of July, in the year ensuing; although the Car∣dinals that were kept in the Conclave for that purpose, were impor∣tun'd and sometimes threaten'd to make choice of a Pope. CLEMENT V. CLEMENT the fifth, a Gascon, Bishop of Bourdeaux, for∣merly called Bertrandus Gottho, was made Pope in his ab∣sence at Perugia, though the College of Cardinals had a long debate about the Election. But he approving of their choice, went from Bourdeaux to Lyons, and called all the Cardinals thither to him: who obey'd him without any scruple; so that the Court of Rome was translated into France in the year 1305. And there it remained
for seventy four years to the great damage of all Christendom, but e∣specially of Rome; where the Churches, great part of 'em, fell to ruin for want of use; whilst they were absent, that ought to have taken care to repair 'em. There were present at the Coronation of this Pope, Phi∣lip King of France, and his Brother Charles lately return'd from Italy, John Duke of Britaigne, who, together with some others, was kill'd by a Wall, that fell upon him, whilst the Coronation pomp was going, as is usual, through the City. Philip also was a little hurt by the same acci∣dent. But the Pope though he was in such a consternation that he fell from his Horse, yet he lost nothing but one Carbuncle out of his Crown, that some say was valued at 6000l. When the Solemnity was over, and all things in order, Clement made a great many French Cardi∣nals, but none out of Italy, though indeed he did restore John and James of Columna to their entire Dignity of Cardinalate, which they formerly enjoy'd. Besides that he sent three Cardinals to Rome, with the chara∣cter of Senators; to govern not onely the City, but all Italy by their Conduct. But when he saw the Genoeses and those of Pisa involv'd in a bloody War one against the other, and that Sardinia in the mean time was taken by the Saracens, he gave that Island to Frederick King of Si∣cily upon condition that he should beat out the Enemy and recover it as soon as possible: the Venetians making a League with Charles the Se∣cond against the Emperor of Constantinople, induced King Rassianus, to come and desire of the Pope to be instructed in the Orthodox Faith, in the year 1307. But the Venetians and Charles falling out again, they alter'd Rassianus's mind by their ill example. In the mean time a new Heresie was broached at Novara by Dulcinus and Margaret, which al∣lowed Men and Women who lived together, freely to exercise all acts of uncleanness: and the professors of it were called, the Brotherhood. Clement endeavour'd to suppress them, and immediately sent thither a party of Soldiers, with a Legat Apostolical; who partly with cold and hunger, partly with force of Arms routed 'em from the Alps, where they harbour'd. But Dulcinus and Margaret were taken alive, torn in pieces, and their bones burnt and scattered into the Air. About that time Intelligence was brought, that the Templers, who were formerly Christ's Soldiers, had revolted to the Saracens. For this reason all of 'em that could be apprehended were kill'd, and their goods given part∣ly to the Rhodian Knights who had possess'd themselves of that Island a little before, and partly to Religious uses. Philip also, King of France turn'd all the Jews out of his Territories, confiscating their goods for their Rogueries and their covetousness. Not long after, Albert the Empe∣ror being kill'd by his Nephew John, almost all the Cities of Lombardy, chose their Captains or Governors to be their Sovereign Lords; as at Ve∣rona, the Scaligeri, at Mantua, the Bonacossi, at Padua, the Carraresi. The House of Este had been Masters of Ferrara a long time before, but now they reduced Modena also. Nor did Charles the Second King of Naples, think it below him to marry his Daughter Beatrice to Azo, Marquis d' Este. But Friscus his Son, seeing he had gotten a Step-mother, put his Father in Prison and there murther'd him: and then possessed himself of Ferrara, by the assistance of the Venetians who lent him aid to storm a Castle, called Thedaldo. Then the Cardinal Pelagura was sent to Bo∣logna from Clement, to forbid the Venetians from medling with Ferrara
under the pain of a Curse; those of Ferrara desiring to be under the Church. Wherefore the Venetians, thinking it their best way to make haste, attaqued the Castle Night and Day till at last they took it. Which when they had done, Friscus himself, greedy of Revenge, set fire on half Ferrara, especially their Houses, who seemed to desire a Change. The Citizens now not able to endure so great an injury any longer, taking up Arms, turn'd Friscus out of his usurp'd Sovereignty and surrender'd themselves to the Venetians, who in all probability might be able to defend them. At which Pelagura was very much in∣censed, and muster'd up all the Church forces immediately against the Venetians and those of Ferrara. But Clement, understanding how obsti∣nate, and how desirous of Dominion the Venetians were, laid a Curse upon them with an Interdiction: commanding all persons, wherever, to look upon them as no better than Slaves, and to take away whatever they had from them, by which that trading Nation, suffer'd great damage both in England and France. After this the Pope sent other Cardinals into Tuscany, which was all one Scene of War, to command Robert Duke of Calabria, the Florentines, and the other people of that Province, to break up their Siege of Pistoia. They all obey'd him, save onely the Flo∣rentines and those of Lucca; so that he interdicted those two States. But Robert went away for Avignion to complement the Pope, and then the Pistoieses, tired out by this long Siege; at length concluded upon a Surrender. The Florentines and those of Lucca pulled down the Walls of the City as soon as they had taken it, and filling up the Trenches, di∣vided the Country among them, leaving to the Citizens their lives onely, the City it self remaining equally subject to both. But it was not long before the Florentines made themselves sole Masters of it, by Wal∣ling it round within the Trenches, contrary to the Articles agreed up∣on by them and those of Lucca. And that they might make all things the more secure, they bought Aciano a Castle belonging to the Ʋbaldi∣ni, which they pulled down: and in the Plain not far distant, they built Scarparia, as some few years before they had done Castel-Franco and S. Johns in the Valley of Arno. Cardinal Ʋrsin was now sent into Tuscany, to compose the differences; whom the Florentines and those of Lucca contemned, and thereby put him into such a passion, that he pub∣lickly reiterated his Curses and his Interdiction. For that reason the Florentines revenged themselves upon the Clergy by exactions very long and very much. Nay farther, they used such severity upon this occasion, that they put Cursio Donato (an eminent Citizen and one that had deserved well of the Publick) to death, for marrying Ʋgutio Fa∣giolanis Daughter; such Enemies they were to all Nobility. But af∣terward they were receiv'd into the Popes favour for assisting Pelagura, the Legat, in the recovery of Ferrara, and the Castle of Thedaldo which was in possession of the Venetians, in the year 1309. Charles the Se∣cond of Naples dying the same year, his Son Robert was sent by the Pope to be his Successor; but he went to Bologna to Pelagura, who pre∣sently in the name of the Church made him Governour of Ferrara while it was yet in Arms. But he was to go on toward Naples, and so left Dego Catelano, an eminent Person, with a Troop of Horse in the Garison. This Dego seeing he could not contein the People of Ferrara within their Duty by fair or foul words, sent his Horse down upon
them from the Castle, and kill'd a great many of them, hanging up eight and twenty of the House of Este, who aspir'd to the Dominion. At that time Henry of Lucenburgh was chosen Emperor by the Germans, and confirm'd by the Pope upon condition, that he should come into Italy within two years and receive his Crown at Rome. This the Pope did to the end that the commotions in Italy would be suppress'd by the arrival of the Emperor. Who promised to perform what the Pope had injoyn'd him, and immediately sent Agents into Italy to all the States and Princes there; but chiefly to the Florentines, who at that time harass'd them of Arezzo. The Florentines made answer, That so great a Prince as he was did not do prudently, in endeavouring to bring Foreiners into Italy, which was a Country that, as Emperor, he ought to defend from such with his utmost power. And that he did not do well to protect them of Arezzo, who, he knew had banish'd the Guelphs, their fellow Citizens: whereas it was the Emperors prerogative alone to banish or to recall from Exile. They say that Dantes then told the Flo∣rentines, They were blind, for making such a foolish answer to the Em∣peror, than which nothing could be more to the disadvantage of their State, especially when so great and Warlike a Prince with so great an Army approached them. But indeed they were encouraged by the pro∣mises of King Robert, who as he went into his Kingdom, gave them as∣surance that he would always be a Patron to the Guelphin Faction. The Emperor was now advanc'd as far as Piedmont, where in the Plains all the Princes, or Governors of Cities came to meet him. There were at that time two principal Factions in Millain, the Turriani, and the Vi∣conti. Guido Turriano was Head of the Guelphs, as being Captain of the people (to use their own word) and Maffeo Viconti of the Gibellins. And Guido fearing lest the Viconti should get into Henry's favour before him upon the account of their Faction, he raised an Army and encamp∣ed in the Country of Millain, to see, as he himself said, who durst come into that City without his leave. When at the same time Maffeo sent Agents to the Emperor to invite him to Millain, which was a City, he told him, that was the very Mansion-house of the Roman Empire. There∣upon Henry drew his Forces near to the City, and made a great bustle, though Guido was got in before him. But he allay'd all Tumults by a composition which he made upon these Terms; That Guido should have Marcelli, and Maffeo be Captain General of his Horse. And thus the Emperor having gotten possession of Millain, almost all the adja∣cent Cities surrendred presently, except Alessandria. Then he received the Iron Crown at Millain, according to custom, but put the Citizens to so much expence, that the Commonalty finding themselves rather op∣pressed than vested with the Liberty they expected, betook themselves to their Arms: The Germans seeing their men kill'd by both Factions, went out of the Suburbs into the City, and called the Heads of the Parties to 'em. But Galeatius, Son to Maffeo Viconti, left his Father at home and went with a considerable number of Suppliants to wait upon the Emperor and told him, That the Turriani, affecting Sovereignty, had made that uproar in the City. Whereupon the Germans joyning the Gibellin Faction, drave the Turriani, (after some small resistance at S. Martes New-street) out of the City: from whence they fled in great numbers to Vercelli by the persuasion of Guido. Thirty of this Faction
being kill'd, of which four were Turriano's. After this Henry moved toward Cremona and Crema, and called the Guelphs before him there, who had turn'd out the Gibellins, but he dealt mildly with the Cremo∣neses, because they rendered themselves so freely, though he was a little severer upon the Cremeses, and demolish'd their Walls. Which strook such terror into those of Parma (who by the persuasion of one Gil∣bert Correggio had received the Rossi into their Town) that immediately they drove out the Guelphs and took in the Emperors Lieutenant. Those of Brescia defended themselves for some time: but being smartly at∣taqued by Henry, they fled in the Night to the Mountains, and left the City quite empty. The Germans enter'd it presently, and pulled down the Walls. At which Calamities of their Neighbours, the people of Mantua, Verona, Vicenza, Padua, Treviso, and Venice were so affright∣ed, that they immediately submitted to the Emperors Orders. Those also of Piacenza turn'd out Albertus Scotus, Captain of the Guelphs, and took in the Emperors Governour. Having setled Affairs after this manner in Lombardy, the Emperor went through Piacenza to Genoa, a∣long with Amadeus of Savoy, attended by the Agents from Pisa and Genoa. Thither came Embassadors from Robert of Naples and Fre∣derick King of Sicily, not long after; the former to make a shew of friendship, and the latter to assure him of the real love which they had for him. For Robert had sent his Mareschal into Tuscany with two thou∣sand Horse, to assist the Floretines and those of Lucca, if need were, a∣gainst the Emperor. But Henry went by Sea to Pisa, and having sent his Land-forces before him, did the men of Lucca a great deal of damage. Hitherto I thought fit to relate all the inconveniences which were brought upon the Italians, which some impute wholly to Clement, who solicited Henry to come with an Army into Italy: Whilst others tell us, that Clement did it for the advantage of the Country, because of the civil Discords among 'em, which were the cause of much blood-shed in every City, nay in every little Castle. The Citizens were slain, old men murther'd, young Children dash'd against the ground, with a boundless cruelty. Whereupon Clement used that saying of Homer, Let there be but one chief Lord, one Judg of all matters. Henry went on toward Rome, and sent Lewis of Savoy, Son to Amadeus, with five hundred Horse before, who taking up his quarters at one Stephen Columna's House, near the Lateran, put the Ʋrsin Faction in a terrible fear. But Henry came first to Viterbo and thence to Rome, where he was very kindly recei∣ved not onely by all the Nobility, but by the Citizens in general. Af∣ter that being Crown'd by three Cardinals, he made the Romans swear Allegiance to him, as the custom is, and made a great Feast, to which he invited all the Noblemen of the City, except the Ʋrsins. But lest in such a concourse of people, there should arise any tumult through the animosities of some men, he planted his Soldiers in the Theatres, Baths and other fortified places; in the strength of which Guards he was so confident, that he had the courage to demand of the people a Tribute which they never used to pay. Hereupon all the Citizens of both Fa∣ctions fled to the Ʋrsins, who had set good Guards about their House, which stood near the Tiber and hard by Hadrians Bridg. At that the Emperor was so enraged, that he summoned the Sea-Archers, whom the men of Pisa had sent him, to march into the City against the Romans;
but they were surprised and soon routed by John, the Brother of King Robert, who had placed his Sea-forces under the Mount di S. Sabina. He also let in the Horse who quarter'd not far off, and by the aid of the Roman people forced the Emperour himself to retreat as far as Tivoli. After him John, Robert's Brother went away by Command from the Cardinals, and left the City quiet. But Henry going from Perugia ar∣rived at Arezzo, where he accused Robert the King of Treason; and be∣cause he did not appear upon Summons, deprived him of his Kingdom, against the mind of Clement, who thought he had done a thing of such consequence in a very improper place, besides that it was none of his Prerogative. For he said, It was Popes peculiar Province to di∣spose of the Kingdom of Sicily on both sides the Pharo. The Emperor marching from Arezzo led his Army toward Florence and Lucca, who were Allies to Robert. But seeing he was not able to storm a Town, he possess'd himself of Poggibonci; which when he had fortified, he de∣clared War against the Seneses, because they were so niggardly, and spa∣ring in supplying him with Provisions. But falling sick he went to the Bath at Macerata, from whence he came back to Bonconvento much weaker than he was before. There, after some days, he died; but it was suspected, he was poison'd by a Monk at Florence, who was in∣duced by large Rewards and Promises to give him the Eucharist dipped in Poison. The State of Pisa (now that the Emperor was dead) fear∣ed the power of the Florentines, and therefore chose Ʋgutio Fagiolano their Captain and sole Governor; who not long after reduced those of Lucca, and took away their Lands from 'em, by the assistance of the Cavalry, that had served under Henry. In the mean time Clement was very much troubled not onely at all the other evils that Italy under∣went, but that S. Constantines Church should be burnt down. Where∣fore he sent Money to the Clergy and people of Rome toward the repair of that Church, though there was such scarcity and Dearth in his Coun∣try at that time, that he could hardly buy himself Victuals and Drink. Which miseries were foretold by frequent Eclipses of the Sun, several Comets, and the Plague which was almost Epidemical. But Clement apply'd himself to settle the State of the Church, and therefore he ex∣ercised his Episcopal Function three times, not onely in making several Cardinals, who were excellent Men, but in three Councils which he cal∣led in several places and at several times he did many things with pru∣dence and deliberation. For he suppress'd Dulcinus's Sect (as I told you) that opposed the Churchmen, and took off the Templers, who were fallen into very great Errors (as, denying Christ, &c.) and gave their goods to the Knights of Jerusalem. He likewise withstood the King of France at Poictou when he made unreasonable and unhandsom Demands; for the King would have had Boniface censur'd and Nogare∣tius and Sarra absolv'd. The first request he never obtein'd, but the second he at last had granted to him, upon Nogaretius's Promise, that he would go against the Saracens for Penance. Which expedition Cle∣ment himself had a great mind to, as appears by his Councils. After∣wards he canonized Caelestin the fifth by the name of Peter the Confes∣sor, because approved by Miracles; and set forth the Clementines, which he composed during the Council at Vienna. But in succeeding time he was afflicted with divers Diseases: for he was troubled sometimes with
a Dysentery, sometimes with a pain in his Stomach, or his Sides, of which he dy'd in the eighth year, tenth month, and fifteenth day of his Pontificate. The Sea was then vacant two years, three months, and seventeen days, whilst the Cardinals were at a stand, whom they should choose. Nor was there less Discord among the Electors of the Empire, upon the Death of Henry, some proposing Lewis of Bavaria, others Frederick, Duke of Austria. And these two engaging in War one against the other, Frederick was Conquer'd: at which Lewis grew so proud, that he not onely called himself Emperor, without Authority from Rome; but favour'd the Viconti in Lombardy, so far, that they got into Millain. And this he did to make his own passage more easie toward Rome, where he was to receive a golden Crown according to the usual Custom. Then began the people of Tuscany, and all the Guelphs to tremble, when they saw Lewis Emperor, and that he was likely to recover all the rights of the Empire in a short time, by the help of the Viconti and Ʋgutio Fa∣giolani who was sole Governour of Pisa and Lucca. Wherefore they endeavour'd to bring over to their Party by Promises and Presents, Pe∣tramala, Bishop and Lord of Arezzo, and Philip of Tarento, a Prince and Brother to King Robert. For Philip at that time was very strong in Ca∣valry, and a very good Soldier. JOHN XXIII. JOHN the twenty third, formerly called James of Caturco, Bishop of Porto, after a long debate between twenty three Cardinals, was chosen Pope at Lyons, and the fifth of Septem∣ber received the Pontifical Crown in the Cathedral Church there. From thence he removed with the whole Court to Avignion, where he made eight Cardinals in the Ember-week before Advent: some of which were James of Caturco, his Sisters Son, and John Cajetan, Car∣dinal Deacon of S. Theodores, of the Family of the Ʋrsins. Besides that, he canoniz'd, for a Confessor, Lewis Bishop of Tholouse, Son to Charles late King of Sicily, though there are some that ascribe this Act to Bo∣niface, as I told you before. He forced Hugo Bishop of Caturco, to re∣linquish his Bishoprick and Priesthood, and stripp'd him of all his Pon∣tifical Ornaments, as, the Ring, the Mitre, the Coife, the Cap, and the Rocket. And after he had deprived, degraded, and (to use their own phrase) deliver'd him over to the secular jurisdiction, he was tortur'd to Death for conspiring against the Pope. The Church of Tholouse, which he loved entirely, he made an Arch-bishoprick; and improved six Castles that belong'd to it into so many Cities, that the Arch-bishop might have something under him which was honourable, and worth his governing. He also joyn'd Limosa, i. e. Wiselburg, and the Abby of S. Pontius to the Arch-bishoprick of Narbonne; nay so much addicted was he to Novelties, that he divided some single Bishopricks into two, and uni∣ted others that were distinct; turning Abbaties into Bishopricks and Bisho∣pricks into Abbaties. He likewise created new Dignities and new Societies in the Church; and alter'd those, which had been formerly constituted.
Yet he was so grateful, that he confirmed the Design of setting forth that Book called Clementinae, or Rules of Clement; and commanded all Doctors in publick Schools, to read it for Lectures. He reduced the Order of Gramont, which had been corrupted by some factious fellows, into a better form, by taking away such things as might be inconvenient, and adding other things that might keep up the Grandeur of Religion. He loved the Church of Saragoza so well that he made the City a Metro∣polis, and assigned it the Covernment of five Cathedrals out of eleven, which were under the Arch-bishop of Tarragona. He also created a new Order of Knights, to fight under Christ's Banner in Portugal, and oppose the Saracens in Granada and Africa. Boetica was the old name for Granada, which lies to the Mediteranean, and is so called, I sup∣pose, from the abundance it yields of a sort of Grain that Dyers use. Now the Head-quarters of this Order, which the Pope constituted, was in a Seaport Town in the Diocese of Sylva; and the Knights had all the Templers goods by consent of the King of Portugal, that they might be more at leisure to fight for Christ. Their Censor and Moderator is the Abbot of a Monastery of Cistercians at Alcoasia in the Diocese of Lis∣bon, who has the Power to list and disband a Knight as he pleases, Af∣terward he made two S. Thomases; that is to say Thomas Bishop of He∣reford, a man of a great Family, a good Life, extraordinary Learning, and famous for his Miracles; and Thomas Aquinas, a celebrated Doctor of the Order of S. Dominick, of whose Life and Writings I have former∣ly made several Remarks. Not long after, he created seven Cardinals at a second Ordination, in the year 1322: and presently thereupon he set forth an Edict, to declare all those for obstinate Hereticks, who af∣firm'd that Christ and his Disciples had nothing which they could call their own. Which certainly does not much agree with the Scripture, that tells us in many places, how Christ, his Disciples and true follow∣ers had a real propriety in nothing: as in that passage of the Gospel, where it says; He that does not sell all that he has and give to the Poor, cannot be my Disciple. Nay more than that, He accounted e∣very one an Heretick, that said the Disciples as such had not Power to sell, to give, to bequeath, and to get, because when they enter'd into Religion, they were to be under the Will of another. Which is the rea∣son that Slaves do not gain any thing for themselves but their Master, or give the Poor what they formerly got, if he command them. And of these Positions he sent Apostolical Transcripts to all publick Schools, that the Scholars might not dare to Dispute of that matter any more. Moreover he condemned the Opinion of one Frier Peter of the Order of Minors, who had animated a whole Convent of the third Order to imi∣tate Christs poverty: of which number many were condemned and burnt. After that he made ten Cardinals more; among whom he con∣sider'd John Columna and his Brother Matthew, who were of the Ʋrsin Family, and of the Order of Preachers. Whilst the Pope was imploy'd in these Affairs, the Florentine Army was overcome in a bloody fight by Ʋgutio Fagiolani, not far from the Mount Catino. But those of Lucca, not able to endure the Tyranny of Ʋgutio any longer, took an occasion and turn'd Nerius his Son out of the City, whilst he was going to pu∣nish Castruccio, a person of a Noble Family, and good courage; whom he had put in Prison, that he might get the spoils which Castruccio had taken
from the Enemies. Nerius being banish'd out of Lucca incensed his Fa∣ther against that State, upon whom those of Pisa shut their Gates, as he was going out of the City to meet the Enemy. Upon that he and his Son escaped to Malaspina, after he had often attempted, and been as often frustrated in the recovery of his Sovereignty; but by Command from the Pope he came back at last into Romagna which was his native Countrey. By this means Castruccio was promoted from extream mi∣sery to the greatest happiness: for he was taken out of Prison and made sole Governour of Lucca. But the Pope hearing that the Esteses had routed the Church Forces out of Ferrara, and gotten it totally into their own hands; and that the Viscounts, by assistance of Lewis of Bavaria, had made themselves Masters of Millain, he said, he would let the Este∣ses alone for a while; but interdicted the Viscounts, though he was not so angry with them as with Lewis, who usurped the Title of Emperor. At the same time the Gibellins of Genoa were banish'd by their Fellow-Citizens the Guelphs assisted by King Robert, to whom they had com∣mitted the Government of their City, and fled in great numbers to Sa∣vona. But there too some time after, Robert persecuted 'em every one in their Exile, and reduced the Savoneses, as he went into France. The Pope understanding that the Guelphs were generally oppress'd af∣ter Robert's departure, sent Charles, Earl of Valois, the Son of Philip King of France into Italy, to protect the Guelphs, and those especially that were at Vercelli with the Turrianoes, who were Lords of that City. But Viscount Galeatius, by command from Lewis the Emperor, prevented Charles, and expelled the Turrianoes out of Vercelli before he came; up∣on which that City became subject to the Viscounts. Not long after Castruccio gets into Pistoia, as Guido Petramala a little before had into Ti∣pherno, though the Florentines withstood him. But Castruccio relying up∣on the aid of Viscount Galeatius (for he had sent his Son Accio with one thousand five hundred Soldiers to assist him) pursu'd and beat the Flo∣rentines back to the very Walls, killing a great many men. The Pope seeing the Bavarian resolv'd to embroil all things interdicted him with the usual Ceremonies; and degraded Guido Petramala from the Priest∣hood, after he had got possession of Tipherno. He also separated Corto∣na from the Bishoprick of Arezzo and made it a City of it self, making John of Viterbo Bishop of it. In the mean time Nicolas d' Este, Lord of Ferrara, storm'd and took Argenta, a Town belonging to the Church of Ravenna, by the assistance of Passerino Bonacossio Lord of Mantua, who a little before had married Nicolas's Sister. These two also joyn'd their Forces and attempted Bologna, but went off with great loss, being de∣feated by Beltrando who commanded the Church-forces, and not long after cursed by the Pope. Ferraria too was interdicted, till they resto∣red Argenta—. But Castruccio at that time did torment the Floren∣tines after he had taken Segna, from whence he made frequent Sallies upon them, insomuch that, despairing of their Affairs, they called in Charles, the Son of Robert to be their Covernour. At that time Pope John sent John Ʋrsin into Italy with all speed, to animate the Florentines and the Guelphs against the Bavarian, who was then coming over the Alps with a mighty Army. But he, in his way to Rome, went first to Millain, at the earnest request of the Gibellins. Where having received his Iron Crown, he wanted Money, and was forced to raise some upon
the people; which Galeatius their Governour making some scruple of, he put all the Viconti in Prison, and chose four and twenty Citizens to manage the publick Affairs, with a chief Officer of his own Family. Afterward the Bavarian, at the request of Castruccio, set all the Viconti at liberty, whilst they were at Lucca, where the Emperor was enter∣tain'd with great respect and kindness. And when he went from thence, he was attended to Rome by Castruccio with one thousand five hundred Horse: where in the Palace of S. Giovanni Laterano he was Crown'd by Stephano Columna at the command of the Clergy and People. At that time there were two chief Officers in the City, chosen out of the Nobi∣lity, which they called the Emperors Lieutenants: and one of 'em, cal∣led Nicolas di Conti being then absent, it fell to Stephano's lot to do that Office. Being Crown'd Emperor, he presently made Peter of Corbiere, of the Order of Minors, born near Rieti, Pope (to Rival John the twen∣ty third) who was a man of mean Birth, but a learned Man and very fit for business. This Person had a Wife formerly, against whose de∣sire, and inclination he enter'd into the Order of S. Francis. So being made a mock-Pope and called by the name of Nicolas the fifth, he was saluted by the Emperor and all that were there along with him, as the true Vicar of Christ; who likewise made Cardinals and Bishops of men like himself—. In the mean time the French Horse that were left in Ga∣rison at Florence, having surprised Pistoia in the Night, they forc'd Ca∣struccio to depart immediately from Rome. Who having first joyned the Viconti's forces, came to Lucca and Pisa, and thence moving toward Pi∣stoia he besieged it a long time, and at last compelled it to surrender for want of Provisions. But the Bavarian followed Castruccio with an Army, and left the Anti-Pope at Viterbo, having a Design to storm Flo∣rence. And perhaps he had taken it, if Castruccio had not happen'd to die of a Disease which he contracted by the excessive pains that he took. Yet the Bavarian forgot his great kindness to him, and banish'd his Sons from Pisa and Lucca, as they were disposing of Soldiers to guard the several Cities; and took possession of the Towns. At the same time Galeatius also dying, his Sons sled to the Bavarian, desiring him, that he would restore 'em to their Countrey for such a sum as they promised him. He thereupon, being very greedy of Money, sent Accio home, but kept his Brother, Marco for an hostage till the whole Money was paid. And then, leaving the Anti-Pope at Pisa, with Viscount Marco, he went to Millain, in order to go for Germany, but could not be recei∣ved into the City by Accio, who too well remember'd the injuries done to his Father. But the German Soldiers who kept Marco in Tuscany for an Hostage, when they knew his good temper, swore Allegiance to him, and made him of their Prisoner, their Captain, so that he was straight∣way Master of Lucca, by the surrender of Castruccio's Soldiers, who gave up the Castle into his hands. And yet not long after the Germans, in Marco's absence, changed their mind and sold the City of Lucca to a certain Genoese of the Family of Spinola, a great Seaman. So that after all, the Bavarian return'd to Germany, without having perform'd any thing to the advantage of the Empire; and Boniface Earl of Pisa, to gratifie Pope John, brought the Anti-Pope to Avignion, where he died in Prison. And now the Pope being freed of his two greatest cares; to wit, the Anti-Pope being dead, and the Bavarian gone out of Italy in∣to
to Germany, he declared an Expedition against the Saracens, and imposed new Tenths, to be paid to Philip upon the account of that Voyage. The Florentines were then in Lucca, but were driven out immediately by the Bohemians, whom the people of Brescia had invited into Italy against the Bergameses; and by whose assistance also the Popes Legat had taken Parma Rheggio, and Modena. But he, making an Alliance with John King of Bohemia, quickly changed all the Measures of the Italian Fa∣ctions. For whosoever the Pope and King of Bohemia were Confede∣rates with, Robert and the Florentines were certainly against, without any distinction of Guelphs or Gibellins. For Mastino Scala Lord of Vero∣na, Philippino Gonzaga of Mantua, the Carrarieses, Lords of Padua, the Esteses of Ferrara enter'd into Alliance and League with Robert, by whom the Florentines also were assisted, and took Pistoia, by surrender from some of the Citizens without opposition. In the mean while the Mar∣quesses of Este were not absolv'd from the Ecclesiastical Interdiction, be∣fore they were tired by the Petitions of those of Ferrara, and restored Argenta, which they were possessed of, to the Church of Ravenna. Yet still, relying upon the assistance of the Scaligeri, they attaqu'd the Castle of S. Felix in Modena; till Charles, the King of Bohemia's Son, came upon them, with Manfred, surnamed Pius, who was Lord of Carpo, and by these two Confederates, they were routed and beaten out of the Field. 'Tis certain that eight hundred of their Soldiers fell in that Bat∣tel, and many of their Nobles were taken, and among others of the great∣est note, one Nicolas d' Este, Brother to Rainaldo the Marquess. The Legat of Bologna took this occasion, and getting a considerable Army together, commanded by Galeot Malatesta of Rimini, Francisco Ordela∣po of Forli, Richard Manfred of Faenza and Hostasio Polentano of Ra∣venna (at that time Lords of their respective Cities,) he besieged Fer∣rara; which was then sharply attaqued, and the Suburbs of S. Antony taken, when Auxiliary Forces sent by Philippino Gonzaga, Mastino Scala, and Ʋbertino of Carrara encouraged the Ferrarians to sally forth; which they did with such success, that they routed the Enemy, and took most of their Captains. But the Earl of Romagna, who was taken, was chang'd for Nicolas d' Este: and the rest were sent safe home, upon condition, that they should take up Arms no more against the House of Este. Rai∣naldo d' Este proud of such a Victory, march'd into Bologna, where he spoiled all the Country round about, and had very near taken the Town. They of Bologna well hoped that the King of Bohemia would have assist∣ed the Legat: and it was reported that he was on his way thither, when on the sudden news was brought to him that Mastino Scala, had taken Brescia, and Bergamo by surrender: and that Accio Viconti was got into Pavia and storming the Castle. For this reason he desisted from any farther attempts, and leaving his Son at Parma, went himself with some Troops to Pavia: where seeing he could not take in the Forts that the Viconti had raised, he only plunder'd the Country about Millain, and went back again to Parma without effecting his Design. There he un∣derstood that Americk Son to Castruccio had gotten Lucca by means of some friends within: but that the Castle held out still, though the King, for a sum of Money surrendred that too, because he was to go shortly into Germany, being weary of the Italian Factions. For the Vi∣conti, having taken the Castle of Pavia, made excursions far and near.
Wherefore placing a German Garison in Modena, and Rheggio, and com∣mitted the care of Parma to Marsilio and Piedro Rubeo, he went into Germany, but promised to come suddenly back again with a greater Army. When the King was gone, the Bologneses, with the aid of the Florentines and the Marquess d' Este, beat out the Legat, and recover'd their Liber∣ty, killing all the Ecclesiastical forces both within and without the City. So that the Legat growing helpless, writ to Avignion in the year 1334. just when John the Pope died in the ninetieth year of his Age, and in the nineteenth year and the fourth month of his Pontificate, and left be∣hind him in the Treasury such a mass of Gold, as never any Pope did before him. He was buried in the Cathedral, in great State. Some say that Petro Mutroneo, once Pope, was canonized by John; and that Gentilis of Fuligno, and Dyno of Florence, two famous Physicians were at the same time rewarded by him with money and honour: for he was reckon'd a great Lover of learned Men. BENEDICT XII. BENEDICT the Twelfth, of Tholouse, a Cistercian, for∣merly call'd James, Cardinal Priest of S. Prisca, was made Pope at Avignion the sixteenth day after John's death, and presently confirm'd the Censures which John had laid upon the Bavarian, as one that usurped the Empire. By this means the Em∣pire was vacant, and every thing tended toward a War, when every one, though never such a petit Lord, endeavour'd to encroach upon his Neigh∣bour. For the Scaligeri were not content to be sole Governours of Ve∣rona, Brescia, and Bergamo, but strove to get Parma too from the Rubei. Gonzaga had a mind to get Rheggio, d' Este Modena, and the Florentines Lucca. But the Scaligeri, seeing they could not take Parma, because the Soldiers within, especially the Germans, who hated the Scaligeri, de∣fended it so briskly, they march'd toward Vincenza. But they could do no good upon it; and therefore hearing that the Germans were gone from Parma, they return'd thither and straight took it by surrender of the very Rubeans themselves. Nicolas d' Este also took Modena by the assi∣stance of his Father-in-law, one Guido Gonziaco, whose Daughter he had married. And Philippino Gonzaza had Rheggio voluntarily yielded to him by the Citizens. But at the same time the growing Power of Ma∣stino Scala, who had gotten into Parma, Lucca and Padua by surrender from Ʋbertino Carrara, made all the Princes and States almost in Italy conspire to ruin his Grandeur; but the most zealous of 'em were the Venetians; Gonzaga, and d' Este besieged Verona, whilst Lucino with ano∣ther Army took Brescia and Bergamo. But the Venetians fearing, lest by their endeavours to lessen the power of one, they might augment that of another, they make a Peace with Mastino Scaliger upon Condition, that if he would let the Carrareses have Padua, and the Viscount Bre∣scia and Bergamo, as he formerly had, he should keep Verona, Vincenza, Parma and Lucca. This Peace was very offensive to the Florentines, who were their friends and Allies, and had a great mind to have Lucca: yet
they deferr'd their complaint till another time and at that present held their Tongues. But the Pope sent a Legat into Italy, who persuaded the Senate and People of Rome, that they would exercise the Senatorian Office in the name of him and the Church, though they had done it for a long time in the name of the King. For this reason Stephano Colum∣na was continu'd Senator for five years, and Collegues or Partners in the Office were assigned him annually. But when the Pope had sent for Stephano to Avignion, Ʋrsus Earl of Anguillaria, who was Stephano's Collegue, made Francis Petrarcha, a man very eloquent, especially in his Mother-tongue, and famous for the Poems he had publish'd, Poet Laureat, in the Capitol, before all the Nobility and people of Rome, in the year 1338. But the Pope fearing lest when the Empire was vacant, Italy might be invaded by any forein Enemy, he made Viscount Luchino and John his Brother, Arch▪bishop of Millain, Lieutenants of Millain and other Cities that were in their possession. The same Power he de∣legated to Mastino Scala over Verona, and Vincenza; to Philippino Gon∣zaga, in Mantua and Reggio: to Albertino in Carrara and Padua: and to Obicio d' Este in Ferrara, Modena and Argentae, and that very just∣ly, as he pretended; for the Empire being vacant, all the Power belonging to it devolves upon the Pope, who is the sole Vicar of Jesus Christ upon the Earth. But he set a Tribute upon Obicio d' Este, that he should pay ten thousand pounds every year to the Church of Rome. This Pope in all his Reign made but six Cardinal-Presbyters, and that at one time; who were excellent Persons, not of his own kindred, as 'tis usual now a days, but men called forth to receive such a Dignity, out of several Nations. Yet I do not disapprove of them, that are preferr'd to honour, because they are related to the person who confers it, if they are deser∣ving. Besides, he was a Man of such constancy, that he could not be induced to do an injury either by force, by importunity, or promises of gain. For he loved good Men, and on the contrary was an open Enemy to all evil, and lagitious persons. He likewise often attempted by his Legats to make Peace between Philip of France and Edward of England, but to no purpose, since they were such foes, as to have fought many bloody Battels one with another. For Edwards Navy engaged with the French above Selusas near Flanders so fiercely, that he overcame them, and kill'd (they say) full thirty three thousand French in that one fight. But the Pope, having tried to effect that business so often, at last de∣sisted, and betook himself to building a Palace for succeeding Popes with several Towers, and making of Orchards, which he finished. He also re∣paired the Roof of S. Peter's Church at his own charge, as the Inscrip∣tion under his Statute there shews. He died in the seventh year, third month, and seventeenth day of his Pontificate, and left a great quantity of Gold behind him, not to his Relations, but to the Church. He had a Design to have Zoto a famous Painter of that Age, to draw the Histo∣ries of the Martyrs in the House that he built, but was prevented by Death. At which every body was grieved, he was so good and so learn∣ed a Man; and shewed their sorrow by their Tears and Sighs, whilst they attended at his Funeral.
CLEMENT VI. CLEMENT the sixth, a Limousin, formerly called Peter, at first a Monk, and then Arch-Bishop of Rouen, was at last made Pope at Avignion. He was a Man of great Learning, and exact Eloquence, liberal to all men, affable and very hu∣mane; elected Pope the seventh of May, and Crowned the sixteenth of June, in the year 1342. In the first year of his Pontificate, and the Ember-week after his Coronation he created eight Cardinal-Priests, and two Deacons, that is to say, his Brother who was a Monk of Tulle, and William his Sisters Son. Of those Priests also which he made one was his Relation by Marriage; and the following year he made two more, of which one was his Nephew by another Sister. This Pope when the Romans petition'd and told him, that whereas Boniface the eighth had formerly granted a full Remission of sins to all that visited the Shrines of the Apostles Peter and Paul every hundredth year (which space of time the Romans anciently called Saeculum, an Age, and thence their Games once in an hundred years, Ludi Saeculares.) they thought it more convenient the time should be contracted because men seldom lived so long, he freely consented that the Jubilee should be kept every fiftieth year. But when he sound that all Italy was in an uproar, he confirm∣ed onely Luchinus and John two Viscounts, his Lieutenants in the Dutchy of Millain, without mentioning the other Princes of Italy. For he thought that they alone were able to resist the Bavarian, who (as he gave out himself) was coming down into Italy, and, to requite the Pope, confirm'd many Lieutenants in the Towns and places belonging to the Church by his Imperial Authority. For he continued John of Vicourles, at Viterbo; Galeot Malatesia, and his Brethren, at Rimini, Pesaro, and Fano; Antonio Feletrario, at Ʋrbino; Nlphus and Gallasius, two Bro∣thers, at Callio; Allegretus Clavellus, at Farriano; Bulgarutius at Ma∣telca; Ismedutius at Sancto Severino; Gentilis Varraneus, at Camerino; Michael, at Mount Milon; Pongonius, at Cingoli; Nicolas Boscaretus, at Esio; Guido Polentensis, at Ravenna; Francis and Synebald, at Forli, and Caesena; John Manfred, at Faenza; though before some of these men had gotten the same places under them partly by force and partly by the good will of the Inhabitants, as I said in the life of Benedict. But in the mean time the Frescobaldi, who were eminent Citizens of Florence, were banish'd by their fellow-Citizens, and would have instigated the Pisanes to War, but it was at an ill time. For the Florentines at that time were just upon buying Parma of the Scaligeri, and to that end had sent some of their Sons to Ferrara as Hostages, promising to give 'em for it 500000l. For there were two Arbitrators, one chosen by each party out of Ferrara. But the Florentines having engaged in several bloody fights one upon the neck of another, were extreamly weaken'd both by the Pisanes and their Allies, and at last even forced to slip the opportunity of such a bargain. Yet they did not neglect to send aids to the people of Lucca when they were besieged by the Pisanes; besides
that their Allies helped 'em too, under the conduct of Malatesta of Ri∣mini, surnamed Ʋngarus, who forced the Pisanes from Lucca. At that time Robert, who was an Ally of the Florentines, being moved with the calamities of his Confederates, sent one Gualter a French man, that they called Governor of Athens with a small party of Horse into Tus∣cany, who having by mere stratagem defeated Malatesta, who was but an unskilful Captain, he gain'd so cunningly upon the favour of the Flo∣rentines, that in a short time he was both General of their Forces and Governour of their City; and turn'd out all the other Officers in it. Those of Arezzo also, if Pisoia, and Volaterra promoted his success, by surrendering themselves immediately to him. But when Accio Corri∣gienses had deliver'd up Parma, which he could not keep, to Obicio d' Este, Philippino Gonzaga, provoked to War by Obicio, got an Army to∣gether, and near to Reggio engaged with him so furiously, that he routed and pursu'd him as far as Ferrara▪ Then Obicio finding his condition desperate, put Parma which he could not defend, under the protection of Luchino in the year 1366. But when the Florentines could no longer endure the Tyranny of Gualter, and many were put to death every day for conspiring against him how to get their Liberty, Angelo Acciaiolo, Bishop of the City, sends away for the Citizens ready armed into his Bishoprick, with a resolution to recover the liberty of his Country. At which the Tyrant seeing himself too weak for the Citizens, made the Bishop himself Umpire concerning the Terms of Peace, and so march'd off in safety with what he had in the tenth month of his Reign. But the Rabble of the City shewed themselves ungrateful (as indeed they always do) and banish'd the Nobility, by whose conduct and courage they had gain'd their Liberty, spoiling their Goods and demolishing their Houses. And lest any thing should be lacking that might disturb all Italy, there were great animosities arisen in the Kingdom of Naples. For King Robert, dying without Issue male, bequeathed Johanna Daughter of Andrew, his Nephew, for a Wife to King Charles of Hungary's Son, who came at that time a Youth to Naples. But Johanna hating him, for a dull fellow, kill'd him by surprise in the City, which was generally a∣gainst the Match; and was married to his Cousin German, one Lewis, Son to a former Prince of Tarento, who was known to be Robert's Bro∣ther. But Lewis King of Hungary and Brother of her first Husband, resolving to revenge so great a piece of Villany, came into Italy with a very well order'd Army, and first attaqued the Sulmoneses, who had the boldness to oppose him. But in the mean while the manner of choosing Senators at Rome was alter'd by Apostolical Authority, and Nicolas de Renty, Citizen of Rome and publick Notary, a man very earnest and high for Liberty, when he had taken the Capitol, gain'd so much good will and Authority among all the people, that he could incline them to what he pleased. And that he might work upon them the more effe∣ctually, he used this Motto; Nicolas, the severe and merciful Patron of Liberty, Peace and Justice, and the illustrious Redeemer of the Sacred State of Rome. With these great Words he created such an admiration of himself, that all the people of Italy desired by their Embassadors to en∣ter into League and friendship with him: Beside that some forein Nations look'd upon the glory of the Roman Empire to be now reviving. But his vain Boasting continu'd not long; for whilst he was kind to some Citizens,
and an Enemy to others, he all on the sudden was accounted, instead of a Patron a Tyrant. So that in the seventh month of his Govern∣ment, of his own accord, without any bodies knowledg, on a dark Night he went disguised from Rome into Bohemia to Charles, the Son of John; whom Clement a little before had made the Electors put in nomina∣tion for Emperor, because he was so fine a Scholar; besides, that he had a mind to affront the Bavarian by setting up a Competitor. So the Tribune, i.e. Nicolas, was taken by Charles and carry'd to Avignion for a Present to the Pope. But Lewis having gotten into Sulmona after a long Siege, makes himself easily master of the whole Kingdom, since Johanna and the Adulterer Lewis were fled for fear into Narbonne, and had left onely the Duke of Durazzo Nephew to King Robert, to protect the Kingdom; who was conquer'd and taken by Charles, and put to Death. But the Plague being very hot all over Italy, Charles left suf∣ficient Garisons there, and return'd into Hungary, in the third month after his arrival; which was just about the time, when John the Arch-Bishop, a man of great courage and conduct received from the Pope the Lieutenancy of Millain, upon the death of his Brother Luchino. But Clement kept Nicolas in Prison, and sent some Cardinals to Rome, to settle the State of the City: to whom Francis Petrarcha wrote, per∣suading them to chuse Senators impartially out of the Commonalty, if they would appease the Tumults; since it did not sufficiently appear in Rome who were of the Senatorian and who of the Plebeian rank, be∣cause they were almost all Foreigners and born of strange Parents. Up∣on this Petro Sarra of Columna, and John Ʋrsini were declared Senators: At this time the Plague raged so all over Italy for three years, that there was scarce one man in ten that escaped. Nor is that any won∣der; for there was such a concourse of men from all places to Rome at the Jubilee, which was then celebrated, that they not onely brought the Contagion along with 'em, but by the throng and bustle and sweating that was among 'em, infected all places and persons. At that time the Town of Colle and Geminiano were made subject to the Florentines, and Bologna to the Arch-Bishop of Millain, by the voluntary surrender of the Citizens. At which the Pope, being disturb'd, sent a Legate into Italy to instigate the Florentines and Mastino Scala against the Viconti. But when Mastino was dead, the Arch-Bishop endeavour'd to draw Canegrande Son to Mastino, and all the Gibellins in Romagna and Tuscany, to make an Alliance with him, and sent his Nephew Bernabos to Bolog∣na, to keep the Citizens in Obedience. In the mean time the Floren∣tines, without any resistance, set upon the Pistoians and the Prateses, and at length reduced 'em by main force. But after that, being harrass'd by the Arch-Bishop's force under the command of John Aulegius, they could hardly defend themselves within their Walls. At that time Anguillara and Borgo di Sancto Sepolchro, belonging to the Church, re∣volted to the Viscounts: and then also we read, that the Genoeses and Venetians fought a Sea-Battel, in which the Genoeses at first were con∣quer'd; but afterward they were more victorious under the Com∣mand of Admiral Philip Auria, and not onely took the Island Scio from the Venetians, but kill'd a great many men in Ʋbaea (now called Ne∣croponte.) But Clement resolving at last to consult the quiet of Italy, De∣creed that Lewis, Prince of Taranto, should be King of Naples; renew'd
the Peace with the Hungarian; bought the City of Avignion of Queen Joan, whose Inheritance it was, and paid for it by remitting of a cer∣tain Fee, that amounted to rather more than the price of it, and was due from her to the Church of Rome upon the account of the Kingdom of Naples. But whilst Olegio Viconti besieged Scarperia in Muciallia, those of Siena, Arezzo and Perugia being affrighted, enter'd into a new Confederacy with the Florentines against the Viconti. The Pisans could not shew their friendship to the Viconti for the Gambacorti, a Noble Fa∣mily, that were Allies of Florence; who being now unable to withstand the Viconti alone call'd Charles the Emperor into Italy. At this the Pope was concern'd, and fearing Italy might be destroy'd with fire and sword (as the Emperor threaten'd) he deliver'd Bologni ro the Viconti upon Condition, that they should pay the Church twelve thousand pound a year, and made Peace between the Viconti and the Floren∣tines upon these terms; That neither of 'em should molest those of Pisa, Lucca, Siena, or Perugia; and that Borgo di Sancto Sepolchro should be subject to the Church, and the Viconti should preserve the Liberty of the Cortoneses. He also endeavour'd to compose the dif∣ferences between Philip of France and Edward of England, but in vain; for they were so incens'd to fight, that in one Battel Edward kill'd twenty thousand French, and after eleventh months Siege victoriously took Calais by storm. The same success he had against the Scots. But the Pope having done the Duty of a good Shepherd, seeing he could not advantage Christendom, abroad, he consulted how to do the Church some good at home. For he chose excellent Persons for Cardinals; e∣specially, Giles a Spaniard, who was Arch-Bishop of Toledo, Nicolas Cap∣pocius a Roman Citizen, Rainaldo Ʋrsina Protonotary of the Church of Rome, and his own Nephew, who after got the Papacy, and was cal∣led Gregory the Eleventh. Some say this Pope canonized Ivo a Bri∣tain, Priest and Confessor. He died in the enth year, sixth month and twenty eight day of his Pontificate in the year 1352. and was de∣cently buried at Avignion by the Cardinals that were then upon the place. INNOCENT VI. INNOCENT the sixth, a Limousin, formerly called Ste∣phen, a man very well skill'd in the Canon and Civil Law, first Procurator, then Bishop of Cleremont, and afterward Car∣dinal, was at first made Pope in the year 1352. upon the fifteenth of December. He was a Man of an exact Life, of great con∣stancy and severity; and bestowed Ecclesiastical preferments upon none but men of good lives and Learning. Immediately after his Corona∣tion he suspended many Indulgences which Clement had granted; com∣manding all Prelates, and others that had Ecclesiastical Benefices to re∣pair to their Churches under the pain of Anathema; saying, Flocks ought to be kept by their own Shepherds, and not by Hirelings. He also retrench'd his Houshold expences, and reduced his Family to a con∣venient number, and would have none but honest men about him. He
strictly commanded the Cardinals to do so too; for he would often tell 'em, that both his own life and that of all Church-Men ought to be an Example to the Laity; in imitation of our Saviour whose whole life was a pattern to all mankind. He likewise appointed certain Salaries for the Autors of the Holy Palais, lest through want they should be tempted to give judgment for bribery. For he would say, that those who are ready to starve can hardly keep their hands from other peoples meat, if they have any opportunity to get it. He was sparing in his Det, but in his Warlike preparations very expensive, whilst he endea∣vour'd to recover that by Arms, which formerly Usurpers had taken away from the Church. For he sent Giles Carillo, a Spaniard, Cardinal of S. Sabina, an excellent Person, his Legate à latere into Italy, to make War upon the Usurpers, and secure the Church Patrimony. At this time, the Emperor of Constantinople, the King of Aragon, and the Venetians en∣ter'd into a League against the Genoeses; and having gotten a great Navy together, superiour to the Genoeses both in the number of Ships, and Men; set upon them between Constantinople and Chalcedon in a place very disadvantageous for the Genoeses, and when the Wind was against 'em. They fought from Morning till Night, till at length the Grecians ran away, but the Venetians and Catalonians were most of 'em slain, together with their Admiral; under the command of Pagano Auria. But the Venetians were so enrag'd at this Defeat and disgrace, that they and the Catalonians recruited their Navy, and under the conduct of Ni∣colas a Pisan, routed the Genoeses the year following not far from the Island of Corsica, and sunk forty of their Galleys with their Men. The Genoeses terrified at this overthrow, deliver'd up their City and all they had to the Arch-Bishop of Millain: who, by attaquing the Vene∣tians, alarm'd the Lords of Padua, Verona, Ferrara, Mantua, and the Florentines too to oppose him; they fearing lest, when he had conquer'd the Venetians, he would set upon them also. The War was carried on by Land and Sea; but the Genoeses, Pagano Auria being their Admiral, had wonderful fortune at Sea, and, at Sapientia, a Promontory of Morea, defeated the Venetians; taking their Admiral Nicolas the Pisane, with five thousand men, whom they brought to Genoa in the year 1354. But the following year the Arch-Bishop of Millain died, which freed the Venetians and their Allies from a great deal of care. Bernabos and Ga∣leatius, his Brother Luchinus's Sons were his Heirs. No place but Genoa relinquish'd them, these two making a peace with the Venetians: which had been first proposed by Bernabos and Galeatius, at the instance of the Pope and Giles, his Legate. In the mean while Calo-Johannes Empe∣ror of Constantinople was restor'd, having vanquish'd Cahtacusenus who had usurped the Empire against all right and reason. But that action was perform'd by means of Francis Catalusius, a Genoese, a great Seaman, on whom he bestow'd Mitylen and all Lesbos for a Reward, which the Turk afterwards took from the Gatalusii when he had gotten Constan∣tinople and all Thrace in his power. Nor was there less uproar at Rome, than was then at Constantinople. For Francisco Baroncello, a Roman Ci∣tizen, and a great man, having degraded John Ʋrsin and Peter of Colum∣na from the dignity of Senators, usurp'd to himself the dignity of a Tri∣bune, with these Titles; that is to say, Francisco Baroncello, Secretary to the Senate, by the grace of God second Tribune of our Mother this City,
and Consul of Rome. When the Pope heard of it, he had a mind to re∣bate the audacious spirit of the Man, and sent Nicolas de Gencio, a per∣son full as ambitious, as he, out of the Goal at Avignion, to Rome, to re∣cover the Tribuneship. He, when he came into the City, being assist∣ed by the Nobility and great part of the Commons, threw Boroncello out of the Capitol and kill'd him; so that he enjoy'd the Tribuneship a∣lone. But not long after forgetting his former condition he persecuted the Nobility, and especially the Columneses, who were going out at the Ex∣quiline Gate into Campagna di Roma with a Petition, but was repelled so much to his disadvantage, that he betook himself into the Capitol; and from thence endeavour'd to escape; but the Enemy follow'd him at the heels, and though he were disguised, yet the Citizens of Rome dis∣cover'd him and cut off his Head. Then was Guido Jordan made sole Senator for a year by Apostolical Authority. About that time the Em∣peror who was Son to the King of Bohemia was very kindly entertain'd by the Carrariens, the Gonziacks, and Viconti, and receiv'd his Iron Crown, as the custom is, at Millain. And going from thence to Pisa, was met by Embassadors from the Sieneses, from those of Volaterra, and almost all Tuscany, who told him they were ready to obey his Commands. The Florentines would have done the same, but that they had first bought themselves out of his Dominion, with a great sum of money. After that he went to Rome, and was crowned by two Cardinals, who were sent on purpose, upon condition, that he should not stay any longer either at Rome or in Italy. This made him depart the sooner, and when he was gone, Giles, the Legate, quickly recover'd almost all the Towns, which the Usurpers had gotten by the instigation of the Bavarian, either in Romagna, Marca d' Ancona, or S. Peter's Patrimony. But he confirm'd all those Lieutenans of Towns, whom he saw obedient to the Church of Rome; as Galiot, Malatesta, and Guido Poletanus in Romagna, and the Va∣traneses in the Dutchy of Millain. But the Odelaphi who were disobe∣dient to the Church, he persecuted with two years Wars, and at length quite routed them out of Forli, For impopili and Cesena. These indeed might have retein'd some part of their Dominion by the assistance of James the Cardinal of Columna, a man who was a great friend to their Family, but they chose rather to lose the whole like men, than save any part of it sneakingly. But Giles, having quieted Romagna, was so pleas∣ed at Forli that he laid up not onely the Treasure of the Church, but also all the money which was sent from Avignion into Italy to build Castles in that Town, and made some Ordinances which the Province uses to this Day. But when Giles had setled Italy, and built a great many very necessary Forts in the Church Dominions, and reduced all the Italian Princes and States to Obedience, he had a Successor in the fifth year of his Embassy, called Arduinus a Burgundian, Abbot of Ci∣steaux, a man not at all fit for business. Wherefore when Giles was gone, all the Princes and States of Italy took up Arms. For the Pisans did so molest the Florentines, that, seeing no body durst oppose 'em, they plunder'd all the Country of Florence, and took Figino a Castle lying up the River Arno, burning all the Villages which were built thereabout. At that time Pandulphus Malatesta was Captain General of the Floren∣tine Army, whom the people forced to relinquish his civil Government, because he had never shewn that he had courage enough to engage
with an Enemy. But the Pisans were then much higher than before; not so much out of any hope they had of taking the City, as that they should bring a scandal upon it, and therefore after some light Skirmishes before the Gates, they return'd home with great spoils, about the be∣ginning of Autumn. And Bernabos also demolished many Castles in Bo∣logna (which was now harass'd with War) though the Abbot of Clugny defended it stoutly. Bologna, as I told you before, was subject to the Viconti; but Aulegianus betray'd it to the Abbot of Clugny, and was to have Fermo as the reward of his Treachery. But whilst that Berna∣bos made War upon Bologna and Reggio, the Apostolical Legate makes an Alliance with Philippino Gonzaga, Canes of Verona, and Nicolas d' Este to go against the Brescians. Then Bernabos, being concern'd for the danger which those of Brescia were in, left Bologna and Reggio, and march'd toward the Enemy, but was so defeated at Montclere, that af∣terwards he could hardly defend the very Walls of the City. About the same time the Florentines overcame the Pisans, under the command of Galeot Malatesta, by corrupting their Soldiers to come over to their Party. For this reason the Pisans laid all the fault upon the Cambacur∣ti, who were eminent Citizens there, because they paid the Soldiers covetously and stingily; and therefore recall'd John Agnellus who was banish'd, as being a friend to Bernabos, and against the Cambacurti: and he in a little time reduced the City, and made it acknowledg him for their Governour, having removed all the friends of the adverse fa∣ction. But when the Pope had made a Peace between the Pisans and the Florentines, one John Haucut who had been used to fight under the Pisans, got together all the Soldiers in Italy, and gave all people oc∣casion to fear; especially since Rome was in such an uproar at the choosing of Senators. But Innocent easily appeased their Discords by sending a forein Senator to 'em, called Raimund Ptolomy, a Citizen of Siena, who bore that Office a whole year, and that was in the year 1359. But though things were setled in this manner, yet the Romans could not be quiet. For they turn'd out their Senator, and created se∣ven Citizens with Sovereign Power whom they called the Reformers of the whole Republick. Upon this account Innocent made Hugo Lusig∣naneus, King of Cyprus (who was going then to War against the Turks) Senator, and commanded totally to abolish that Society of Reformers. But he, at that time, was very intent upon making an end of the War betwixt England and France, that all might go against the Turk. But when the English had overcome the French in Poictou, and had taken their King with Philip his Son, they were thought to have done a great exploit: yet at the same time Edward, out of his Princely generosity, gives all the Captives their Liberty, upon condition, that they would never fight against him more. But they soon after broke those terms of Peace, and forced Edward to resume his Arms and besiege Paris. Innocent design'd also to prepare a Navy against the Infidels, when at the same time the Pisans, who were excellent Seamen, and the Venetiano that had a great Navy, were at War, the former with the Florentines, and the latter with Lewis King of Hungary. For that King did then be∣siege Treviso with a great Army; besides that the Venetians were at va∣riance among themselves. For Marino their General being accused, as if he aspired to Sovereignty, was beheaded. Innocent being thus discom∣posed
in his mind, he died in the ninth year, eighth month, and sixth day of his Pontificate, just about the same time with Bartholus Saxofer∣ratus, the wisest man in all that Age. But before the Popes death there was such an Eclipse of the Sun, as never was before: wherefore all people thought that such a great Man could not die, but even the Planets would give some presages of his departure. ƲRBAN V. URBAN the fifth, of Lymosin, formery called Will. Grisant, Abbot of S. Victor at Marseilles, was made Pope in his ab∣sence by universal consent. For at that time he was gone in∣to Italy as Legate to the Viconti; but being called to Avig∣nion he enter'd upon the Popedom. And no sooner was he got into the Chair, but, being a person of singular Virtue, great Courage, and very innocent in his Conversation, he immediately apply'd himself to vin∣dicate the Churches Liberty, and made use of such Instruments, as were zealous for the business. For he sent Giles a Spaniard (of whom we said something before) into Italy with full Power and Authority; who so far animated and engaged Lewis Gonzaga, Nicolas d' Este, and Francisco Carrario, against Bernabos, that he was overcome by them, and lost his Son in the Battel, and being wounded hardly escaped with his life. Nor was that all, but the Enemy took Andrew Pepulo a Bolog∣nian Banditto, Synebald Ordelaphus, Paulus Mirandula, Guido Foliano, A∣zo of Corrigia, William Cavalcabos, the most Signal Commanders of the Army. But the Kings of England, France, and Cyprus were concern'd at the misfortune of the Viconti and sent Embassadours to Giles, to de∣sire him, that he would make Peace with them. Which Embassadours were not sent in vain; for a Peace was concluded, though it were of no long continuance. For John Hawkwood, on the behalf of the Viconti, having engaged the Florentines, routed their Army at S. Miniato, which caused Giles, the Legate, to send Thomas Obicio an excellent Comman∣der, with three thousand Horse, and a competent number of Foot to help the Florentines. They fought betwixt Arezzo and Cortona four hours together stoutly: but at length Thomas, chiefly with the assist∣ance of his Infantry, gave the Enemy such a blow, that of six thousand Horse, which fought under Hawkwood, few escaped, and the Captain himself yielded. Those that had revolted from the Church when they heard of this great Victory, immediately surrender'd. Ʋrban then came into Italy, in the fourth year of his Pontificate to settle things, and Giles the Legate met him at Corneto; and rendring an account of what he had done was discharg'd from his Legateship; and the Pope going on his way from Corneto to Rome, he retired quietly in his old Age at Viterbo, where he died in three months after. He was a Man of singu∣lar Virtue and Courage, and preserv'd the Honour of the Church, whilst he lived, most wonderfully. His Body was carried to Assisi, and buried in the Church of S. Francis, in a Tomb that he built himself, whilst he was living. When Charles the Emperor understood that Ʋrban was gone
to Rome, he went thither too as fast as he could with his Wife and Chil∣dren; but, by the way, took Lucca from the Pisanes, and Sancto Miniato from the Florentines. Whether he went to Rome or no is not certain; because 'tis said, he received his Imperial Crown from Pope Innocent the Sixth, who sent the Cardinal of Ostia to Rome for that purpose. But having received a great sum of mony of the Florentines, to buy their own peace, he march'd out of Italy the third month after he came thither, in the year 1368. Ʋrban had sought a long time for the Heads of SS. Peter and Paul (which through the ignorance of the times had long been neglected) and having light upon them at Sancta Sanctorum he put 'em up in Silver Cases next the great Altar of the Lateran, where they were highly honourd by a great concourse of all the Clergy and People of Rome. The same Pope built one Palace in the old City, and another in Montefiascone, that he and other Popes might retire thither to avoid the Heat and bustle of the Town. But resolving to go back short∣ly into France, he made John Hawkwood an excellent Commander whom he released out of Prison, General of all those Forces that had serv'd under Giles, to guard the Church Patrimony till he return'd again. For he design'd to return for Italy. But going into France, he died at Marseilies in the eighth year, and the fourth month of his Pontificate: or (as others will have it) he dy'd at Avignion just about the time, when Briget a devout Woman, who was a Princess of Switzerland, came to Rome upon a Vow she had made. There were at the same time some Commotions in Puglia after the death of Nicolas Acciolo, who was Go∣vernour of that Province, and a Stout, Wise Man. GREGORY XI. GREGORY the Eleventh, of Lymosin, formerly call'd Peter Belford, and Cardinal-Deacon of New S. Maries, was made Pope at Avignion by a general consent. Clement VI. his Uncle, made him Cardinal when he was scarce seventeen years of age. But that he might not seem to consult the good of his Kindred more than that of the Church, he sent him to the best Masters he could find for breeding, and especially to Baldus, who at that time was a Professor at Perugia. Under whom he made such progress in all sorts of Learning that Baldus often used his Authority to clear a Doubt. And then he was a Man of such innocence, good nature, affability and piety, that he was generally beloved. At his entrance upon the Pon∣tificate this was the state of things in Italy; at Rome the Courts of Ju∣stice were held by Senators whom the Pope appointed for every six months, but the Guard of the City and all the management of publick Affairs were in the hands of the Banderesii, so named from their Banners (a Teutonic word) which they used in War, by which every Decuria (now called Capo di Regione or Head of a Ward) was distinguish'd. In Lombardy, those Nobles who (as I said before) conspired against the Viconti, surprised the City of Reggio by treachery which was before in their possession, but the Castle holding out, Bernabos entring the City
that way at the first Onset overthrew the Enemy and driving away Lu∣cius the German Commander, repossess'd himself of the place. Thus went matters in Italy, when Perinus King of Cyprus, who succeeded his Father Peter, was the cause of great animosities between the Genoeses and the Venetians. For when he was Crown'd at Famagosta, and two Bailiffs (as the Merchants call their Residents) one from Genoa, and the other from Venice were there attending; they strove who should walk on the right hand the King, which raised such a Tumult that the Genoeses were beaten and wounded basely, the King favouring the Venetians. The Genoe∣ses hereupon got a Navy of 40 Ships together, under the command of Pe∣ter Fregoso, Brother to Dominick Fregoso, and invaded Cyprus; and landed fourteen thousand men, to destroy all the Island with fire and sword for violating the Law of Nations. The King being deserted on all sides submitted to their mercy, and surrendering Famagosta, promised the Ge∣noeses to give them 40000. per annum to purchase his Peace. The Popes Legate was now come into Italy and had setled the state of the Church, he made a Peace with the Viconti, when a new Tumult arose at Prato, which was the original of great confusion. For the Inhabitants of Prato endeavouring to vindicate themselves from the Dominion of the Flo∣rentines, called the Church Forces into Tuscany by permission from the Legate. But the Florentines so far corrupted them with money, that they enter'd Prato by their assistance, put the Conspirators to death, and sent a great many Banners, with Liberty written upon them, by se∣veral Troops, to several Towns; exhorting the People, as their Lords, that they would remember the Liberty of the Church, and cast off the yoke of Servitude. The first that revolted from the Church were the Castellani, then the Perugians, those of Todi, Spoleto, Gubio, Viterbo, Forli, and Ascoli follow'd their Example. At that time too Astorgius Manfred, under the Bavarian, having tasted the sweetness of absolute Dominion, had possess'd himself of Granariolo a Castle near Faenza: against whom the Legate sent John Hawkwood with some Troops out of Bologna. The Florentines and those of Bologna defended Astorgius, and keeping out Hawkwood with all his men, asserted their Liberty. But Hawkwood seeing the Faenzeses ready to rebel, he not onely plunder'd the City severely, and kill'd all that his Soldiers met, but he sold the very ground on which it stood to Nicolas and Albert d' Este, two Bro∣thers, for 20000 l. reserving onely Bagnacavallo to himself, where the Carriages of his Army lay. The Pope hearing of such great Revolu∣tions sent Cardinal Cevennes as his Legate with six thousand British Horse ito Italy; who coming down through Piedmont, march'd as far as the very Gates of Bologna without doing any hurt designing to be∣siege the City. But when the Legate heard the Florentines were come to the assistance of the Bolognians under the conduct of Rodolphus Var∣raneo, he went with his Army, to Winter in Cesena. In which City there was such an upooar by reason of the pride of the French, that six hundred Britains were slain, and the rest turn'd out of Town. But they got in again afterward by way of the Tower, and being increased in their number they fill'd all places with bloud and rapine, not sparing even those, whose very age made their excuse: onely young Women and Maids were kept alive to be abused. But those of Forli, fearing lest for want of advice, and one to Govern them they might be op∣press'd
by the Legate, they took Synebald, Pyne, John, and Theobald, Or∣delaphi as their Lords into the City, and were bravely defended by them from the fury of the Britains. But Pope Gregory conceiving that all the mischiefs of Italy proceeded from his being absent, and that the long shipwrack of Affairs there happen'd because the Pilot was out of the way, the good Man was very intent a good while upon a Journey in∣to Italy. But he was mightily concerned at a certain Bishops words, who being asked by the Pope (as they were walking together) why he did not return to his Church, which he ought not to have left so long without a Pastor? He reply'd, Why do not you that are the greatest Bishop, give a good Example and go to your own Bishoprick at Rome? The Pope was disturb'd at these words, and therefore he got ready one and twenty Ships in the Rhoan, under pretence of going elsewhere, that he might not be stop'd by the French, as he would have been, if they had understood he had been going to Rome: because it was their Interest to keep the Court in France. Thereupon he went first to Genoa, and then to Corneto; from whence he went by Land (for he was weary of sailing, in the Winter especially) to Rome, and arrived there in the year 1376. about the 11. of January in the seventh year of his Pontificate, and the 70th year after the Court went out of Rome into France. But what preparations the people of Rome made, and with what incredible joy they received him 'tis needless to relate; for all the Nobility went to meet him, with their countenances, gestures and ac∣clamations expressing all kind of pleasure, as Children do that see their dear Father return'd from a strange Country. And indeed all things lacked his presence there. For both the Walls, the Churches and all buildings in general, publick or private, threatened nothing but ruin, till he repaired most part of them, as the Tower, which he built at S. Maries the Great does testifie. The morality also of the City was so decay'd, that they seemed to have nothing about 'em which look'd like a Citizen; but appeared as if they ought to go and learn manners, who formerly had reduced the whole to urbanity and good behaviour. So then the Pope, having seated himself in Rome (as a good Pastor should do) began to look about him, and think of a cure for the Wounds of Italy. And whilst he was a ruminating of it, he consider'd that nothing but a Peace could do the feat. Thereupon he sent his Legate first to the Florentines, who inclin'd to War, and persuades 'em not to slight or re∣fuse any fair Conditions of Peace. They suspecting the Popes power, and fearing lest they should be compell'd to make a Peace, enter into Alliance and Confederacy with Bernabos their old Enemy. After that they corrupted Haucut with money and fair promises to come over from the Church to their Party: at which they were so triumphant, and so proud, that they omitted no sort of injury or Affront, that they could do the Pope. For which they were anathematized, and yet were so insolent, that they forced their Priests, notwithstanding the Interdi∣ction, to perform the Divine Offices against Law and Reason. The Pope therefore weary at last of intreating took up Arms, and having recon∣ciled Bologna, which was to be govern'd in his Name, he, like the Flo∣rentines before made Varraneo his stipendiary, and gave him the com∣mand of the Church Army, to go against Florence. But a quarrel arose between the Genoeses and the Venetians which put a stop to his Designs,
he fearing, lest any forein force should invade Italy, if he ingaged with the Florentines himself. For whilst Andronicus, by the Genoeses assistance, to whom he had given Tenedo, as the reward of the Exploit, had de∣throned Charles's Father, who was John, Emperor of Constantinople, the Venetians restored him again to his Country, and had the Island Tene∣do given to them by him. At which the Genoeses were angry though they deferr'd their revenge till another occasion, for fear of the Pope's Curse, who threaten'd it to both parties, if they did not quit their Arms, not holding it fit for either of them to meddle in that War. But whilst this holy Man did all things with that diligence that became a Pope, he dy'd of that intolerable pain, the stone in the Bladder, in the se∣venth year, and fifth month of his Pontificate, the sixteenth of April, in the year 1378. and was buried in S. Maries in the New Street, in a Marble Tomb, which is yet to be seen; and so much lamented as ne∣ver man was before him. For all people thought themselves deprived of a Father, in him; and did bewail not onely the present but their future Calamity, into which they were faln by the loss of so good a Pope, and the Discords that arose among the chief Citizens. ƲRBAN VI. GREGORY being dead, and the making a new Pope being under debate, the Clergy and People of Rome address'd themselves to the Cardinals, and desired 'em, that they would choose some worthy Person, an Italian, to govern the Church and State of Rome with integrity and piety: for that, unless an extra∣ordinary Pastor were then elected, Christianity, as it stood at that time, must needs fall to decay. And they desired an Italian Pope, lest, if he were a French man, the Court of Rome must remove again beyond the Mountains, to the great disadvantage, and damage of the City of Rome, and all Italy besides. Alledging, that when the Pope was ab∣sent, all the Country and City were continually embroil'd with Usur∣pations, and Seditions; and that the Churches in Rome were so neglect∣ed, and thereby grown so much out of order, that they were most of 'em ready to fall. And that, upon this account, the people who came con∣tinually to Rome were not so zealous as they used to be, when they saw the Papal Sea, the Cardinals Churches, and Monasteries, nay the holy places where the Martyrs lie, without a Roof, and the Walls fal∣ling down, to let in sheep and other Cattel. That it was fit the Pope should live where Peter had placed the Pontifical Chair by the Will of God, out of his own Country and Nation, and advanced the honour of it by the ashes and the blood of Martyrs, Confessors, and holy Popes. Hence might the Pastors of the Church, if they were circumspect and mind∣ful of Christs Command, or incited by Example of those whose Martyr∣doms and Actions they had before their Eyes, consult the Salvation of Mankind; and at the same time recover S. Peter's Patrimony, which had been seised by several Usurpers in Tuscany, Sabina, Campagna di Ro∣ma, Ombria, Millain, and Romagna, whilst the Popes were absent. That
they would not say for the present, how the piety of people was dimi∣nish'd, and that their Pilgrimages to Rome, or to see the Bodies or Reliques of the Saints were much rarer than formerly, by reason of the Popes absence; but that all these things might still be restored, if an Italian were chosen Pope. The Cardinals made Answer, that they would take care to choose an excellent Man, to govern the Church of God, with∣out any respect to Persons or Nations, in imitation of our Saviour, who chose Apostles out of all Nations. That they might go and be satis∣fied that they would do nothing but what should promote the glory of God, the good of the Church and of all Christendom. So they ap∣pointed a Conclave at S. Peter's, and order'd a certain number of Guards to be in the Vatican, lest any Tumult might hinder so important an Election; But when they came to Vote, there was a great debate all of a sudden. For there were thirteen French Cardinals, who would have had a Pope chosen out of them; and four Italians, among whom one, that was of the Ʋrsin Family, did most aspire to the Popedom. The French seem'd to have the better of it because they had the Majority: but there hapning a quarrel betwixt those of Limosin and the other French Men, each side contending for the choice of a Pope out of their party, they chose Bartholomew Arch-Bishop of Bari, a Neapolitan, or, as others say, a Pisan, not of the Colledg of Cardinals, and in his absence, by the name of Ʋrban the Sixth. But before they appear'd abroad, or that it was known, that Ʋrban was made Pope; the French scandalized the Election, as extorted by fraud and fear, whilst the Romans urged them with force and Arms to chuse an Italian. So that the Cardinals when they came out of the Conclave, fled partly into Castel S. Angelo, and partly into other secure places, to avoid the fury of the enraged people. Cardinal Ʋrsin also went to Vicovaro, having great hopes of getting the Pontificate in a time of such Discord. But not long after the Cardinals repented, and came to the City, where they confirm'd Ʋrban, whom they had formerly chosen, saluting him, according to the dignity of a true Pope. Three months after the French Party pretend∣ed the City was too hot for 'em, and desired of the Pope, that he would give 'em leave to go to Anagni, for change of Air, which in the City was pestilent, especially in the Summer, and to French Constitutions; though they indeed were affraid of his severity, and so were desirous to get out of the way. For he had often called 'em to him and admonished them, to keep their hands clean, and receive no bribes nor rewards for pleading in behalf of others, or doing any man a kindness that should ask it: And told 'em, that he would punish them severely that he found guilty of Simony, or promoting unjust Suits. Besides he told 'em that he should be pleased, and was very desirous, that they would omit some of their State, and such a train of Servants and Horses, for what they spent in such vanity was really due to the Poor, or ought to have been employ'd toward the repairs of tottering Churches. He told 'em, that he would chuse good men to be about his own person, and that he would make the wicked suffer for their offences, unless they mended their manners. And because he heard that the French Cardinals did talk once, as if the Court of Rome would go back into their Countrey, he told 'em publickly that he would stay at Rome, and would not hearken to any one that should persuade him to remove from it, because, as he
said, the foundation of the universal Church, and of Christian Faith, was laid at Rome, and all the superstructure raised in the same place. The French Cardinals were moved with these Reasons, and especially those, who had robbed the Church Treasury upon the Death of several Popes, and done what they pleased; they fled first to Anagni, next to Fondi, where they inveigh'd against Ʋrban as a false Pope, and said he was made by force, and received his Crown by force, because that Ele∣ction and Coronation was not in a place at all safe, where peoples Wills and Votes might be free, but that on the contrary, they were forced to chuse an Italian rather than a French man. For these Reasons, the Sea (as they said) being vacant, they (who were eight in all) by the permission and favour of Queen Joan, chose Cardinal Cevennes, who had been Legate in Italy; and called him Clement the Seventh. Hence arose a great and a long quarrel in the Church of God, which they call a Schism; when part of the Christian Princes favour'd Ʋrban, and part favour'd Cevennes. Nor were these seditious Cardinals content with that, but sent the Britains, who had plunder'd and taken many Castles, Vil∣lages and Forts, against the Pope and people of Rome, who meeting the Enemy at Ponte Salaro in a confused manner were conquer'd and kill'd. But after that they fought another Battel at Sancto Marino with such cou∣rage and intention that they beat the Britains and kill'd so many of 'em, that there was hardly a Messenger left to carry the news. Those that were in the Castles defended themselves for some time, but espe∣cially the Governour of the Castle of Surio, who after many years sur∣render'd it to Pope Martin. In the mean time the Genoeses begin to shew the malice which they had conceiv'd in their hearts against the Venetians, and took Lewis King of Hungary into their Alliance, with Francis of Carrara, Lord of Padua, the Duke of Austria, and the Patriarch of Aquilegia. On the part of the Venetians were Perinus of Lusignan King of Cyprus, and so was Bernabos Viconti. In the first Engagement at Sea the Venetians had the better of it, upon the Coast of Antio, un∣der the Command of Victor a Pisan: of ten Genoese Ships five being lost. At that time also the Marchesi of Carreto, by the assistance of Ber∣nabos took Albenga, Noli, and Castel Franco from the Genoeses, but not long after they made a Peace with 'em and restored all. After this the Genoeses put Dominick Fregoso their Duke into Prison, with his Brother Peter, and made Nicolas Gualch their Governour by Land, and Lucian Auria their Admiral by Sea. But Bernabos, that had married his Daugh∣ter to the King of Cyprus, sent her very honourably into Cyprus to her Husband, with twelve Galleys, six Catalonian and six Venetian. Peri∣nus thus strengthened attaqued Famagosta both by Sea and Land; but in vain; for the Soldiers within defended it stoutly, and his Navy was batter'd, and disabled by bad Weather. In the mean while the Vene∣tians on the one side and the Genoeses on the other did not cease to mo∣lest both the Seas: For whilst Charles Zono, Admiral of the Venetian Fleet, infested the Genoeses in the Tyrrelene Sea, Lucian Auria over ran the Adriatique to the great damage of the Venetians, setting upon them from Zara (where his Ships lay at Anchor) the King of Hungary's Port. The Venetians were very much concern'd for the injury done to 'em, and seeing they could not draw Lucian to fight, they burnt two Towns of the Kings called Cataro, and Sibinico. In the mean time Galeatius Vicon∣ti
died, in the year 1379. and almost all the Dutchy of Millain seem∣ed to be for Bernabos: at which the Venetians were much pleased, but to no purpose; for first the half, and then the whole Country fell off to John Galeatius his Nephew. Lucian, Admiral of the Genoeses, mo∣ving toward Pola, conquer'd and took the Venetian Navy in the very Harbour: but, whilst he pursu'd the Enemy too rashly, he was run through with a Lance and died. Both the Navies, as well the Con∣queror, as the conquered, were brought into Zara, whither the Genoeses sent Peter Auria in the room of his deceased Brother, with nine Gal∣leys, and many other Vessels: who taking an account of his Brothers Victory, found two thousand Captives, beside the multitudes that were kill'd and drown'd. The Venetians were attaqued at Land too by Car∣rara and his Allies, whom I have mention'd, to whom the Venetians opposed Albrico Barbiano Earl of Cuni, an excellent Commander. But Peter Auria having gotten a Navy of sixty Galleys, and as many other Vessels, went to Venice, storm'd and burn'd Grado, Comachio, and Cahorle. From thence he went to Chioza, which though it were defended for some time by the Venetians, yet he took it at last, by assistance of Supplies, which he had from the Governour of Padua. 'Tis certain that full six thousand men were slain in that Siege, and nine hundred and fifty of the Venetians taken, and sent to Zara; they spared the Women, not violating their Chastity in all their fury and violence. The Venetians being quite disheartened at this Calamity, and despairing of any help by Sea or Land, set the Genoese Captives at liberty, and sent 'em to Chioza to their Admiral, to beg their pardon, and to make their submission to the Will of the Conqueror; But the Genoeses, proud of their Victory, as Conquerors use to be, refused to answer the Venetians, unless they would come and surrender themselves and all they had. Thereupon the Venetians betook themselves to the defence of their Country, and setting up Chains of Iron before the Ports mouth, and a Guard of three hundred Horse with as many Foot upon the Key; they sought out for some one person, whom they might make their General. And being in great doubt by reason of their Distractions whom to chuse, it was proposed by some body, that Victor of Pisa was the onely man fit∣ting to be in a place of that Trust, as well understanding the Power and Arts of the Genoeses. That Voice (whoever spoke) was heard with great reverence, as if it came from an Oracle: for immediately they ran all to the Prison, where he lay for his ill management at Pola, and taking him out made him their sole Commander. The Genoeses by that time were come very near, and having taken all the Castles thereabout, were just entering the City; but were easily repulsed after a long fight by John Barbadicus with certain small Ships well arm'd, the Genoese Galleys not being able to come on, in those narrow Seas. Besides, Barbadicus used this other Stratagem. There was at that time an Instrument, called Bombarda, i.e. a Gun, newly invented by a certain German, and called Bombarda from its thundering sound; and each of the Venetian Skiffs had two of those Guns or more, whereby the Genoeses who were ignorant and unskill'd in this new kind of fighting, were many of 'em destroy'd; each Gun often killing two or three men at one shot, because they were not able to avoid them so well on board as if they had been on shoar. Hereupon the Venetians bad Bernabos Viconti their friend
and Ally, to press upon the Genoeses so as to raise their Siege; they already wanting provisions. And indeed the Venetians must have pe∣rished, if (as Carrara advised, the Genoeses had taken care to hinder supplies from being imported into Venice. Bernabos, to give some satis∣faction to the Venetians, sent his Army against the Genoeses; who when they had plunder'd the Valley of Pulcephera and taken nineteen thou∣sand, they left the Genoeses (who fought against Bernabos not with Swords but with Gold,) and having loaded themselves with Spoil re∣turn'd into Millain. Astorgius of Faenza had not so good luck, when he was sent thither, by Bernabos, with the Horse. For coming toward the City he was routed by the people of Genoa who sallied out upon him, but escaped with much ado himself in the habit of a Country Fellow. But Calo John Emperor of Greece, being an Ally of the Venetians, be∣sieged Pera, a Place belonging to the Genoeses, over against Constantinople. For he saw the Genoeses were engaged in many and dangerous Wars. But Andronicus his Son, who was an equal Enemy to his Father and the Venetian both, with the assistance of the Turks and Bulgarians, defend∣ed it stoutly, and frighted his Father to that degree, that he soon after came over to the side of the Genoeses. In the mean time Ʋrban was not so intent upon making Peace between Christians (which he should have done) as he was desirous to revenge the injuries which he received from Queen Joan, and therefore incited Lewis, King of Hungary, to re∣venge his Brother Andrea's death and he would help him. He consent∣ed, and by instigating Charles his Son (who was then carrying on the War against the Venetians in Marca Trevisana) against Joan, he gave the Venetians some little respit, who before that were almost ruined. And it added somewhat to their Affairs that Charles Zenus a Venetian, an ex∣cellent Sea-man sunk two Ships of Burthen in the Port of Chioza, and reduced the Genoeses to that extremity, that they themselves (since all other Passes were stopp'd up, and they could not bring their Ships out) seemed rather to be besieged than to besiege, they were in such necessity of all provisions. But nothing did the Genoeses so much injury, as the death of Peter Auria who was kill'd by a shot from a Gun, as he was stoutly defending the Fortifications of Chioza. In whose place Matthew Ruffus was presently chosen, who, as he was coming to Chioza with new Galleys, took Thaddeus Justinianus at Manfredonia, with six Galleys la∣den with Provisions. Agapetus, Cardinal Columna, being concern'd for these misfortunes, exhorted the Genoeses and the Venetians to Peace very often, but all in vain: for they, who fought out of hatred, not for Do∣minion, would never hearken to the wholesom advice of those who gave 'em good Counsel. At length the Genoeses, when they saw themselves so begirt at Chioza, that they could not sally forth for the Venetian, nor get provisions from Matthew Ruffus, or the Lord of Padua, who had promised them shortly to supply them, they surrender'd the Town on the first of July 1380. At which time there were taken of the Ene∣my 4340. though more died in the Siege by Famine and the Sword. Yet the Genoeses, though they had receiv'd such a fatal blow, could not lie still, but with thirty eight Galleys compelled the Triesteses to re∣volt from the Venetians to the Patriarch of Aquilegia. They likewise took Justinople, but not the Castle. And when they had recruited their Navy they went for Venice again; but no body encountring them, they return'd
into Istria, took the City Pola and burn'd it: Many slaughters followed on both sides. But the Venetians were overcome in a Land fight by Carrara, whilst James Caballus an excellent Commander, defended Treviso stout∣ly, which was almost forc'd by Famine to a surrender. And now both sides being well tired with such a long and bloody War, the Duke of Sa∣voy, upon the 23d of September, 1381. makes Peace between them upon these terms; that the Venetians, every tenth year, should pay the King of Hungary seven thousand pounds, provided he kept all his part of Dalmatia free from Pirates, and suffer no Salt to be made in his Dominions there; and that the Patriarch of Aquilegia should have the same Power in Friuli as before the War. But the Venetians and the Genoeses were order'd, to send home each others Captives, without any mention of the Spoils which were taken on either side. The Padueses were commanded to draw off from the Siege of Treviso; and to demolish the Towers, and Forts which they had raised in Fens, and at the mouths of several Rivers; upon which account bounds were set out between the Venetians and those of Padua. In the mean while Charles whom we told you the Pope sent for out of Hungary to go against Joan, came into Italy with eight thou∣sand Horse, and first reduced Arezzo, which had been long embroiled by the seditions of the Guelphs and Gibellins. From thence moving to∣ward Florence, he was repell'd by John Hawkwood who at that time quarter'd at Sagia. But the Florentines fearing they should not be able to endure the shock of such a mighty King, they purchased a Peace of him at the rate of 40000 l. and discharged Hawkwood without his pay; who sold Bagnavallo to Nicolas and Albert d' Este, that they might the better keep Faenza in obedience, which notwithstanding they soon after lost by treachery, to Astorgius Manfredus. But Charles, after he had vi∣sited Ʋrban at Rome went into his Kingdom, and having conquer'd all Joans Forces, took Naples by surrender. The Queen was besieged in Castelnovo, when the Guelphs of Arezzo made a Tumult and forced James Caracciolo a Citizen of Naples who was sent thither by the King, to fly into the Castle. The Gibellins also fled thither too, whose good that just Man consulted as much as the Guelphs. For he desired to carry every thing alike with equity in all cases. Wherefore having sent for Albrick Barbianus from Todi upon the account of an injury which he reviv'd, he went into the City, and whilst he strove to reduce the Guelphs, he plunder'd the Gibellins also. And Ferraback another Gene∣ral who follow'd Albrick took all the remaining spoil that he could find in Arezzo. Whilst these things were transacted in Naples and Arezzo, a new cloud of War overcast Italy. For Lewis of Anjou, of the Blood Royal of France, enter'd Italy with thirty thousand Horse, and posted himself not far from Bologna, being set on by Clement the Anti-Pope not so much to free Queen Joan who was besieged, as by force to depose Ʋrban. For this reason Charles left Arezzo and sent for Albrick and Fer∣raback; to whom also the Frorentines sent John Hawkwood at the request of Ʋrban. Lewis going through Marci was come as far as the Forest of Cassino, expecting twelve thousand Horse, which were already come in∣to Italy under the command of Andegranius, and marching through Via∣cenza, Lucca, Florence, and Siena were arrived at Arezzo, where they were let in by the Guelphs, and sack'd the City, after Albrick had given 'em a fatal blow. The Gibellins defended the Castle, which was be∣sieged
forty days, and had been taken by the French, had not Lewis of Anjou died in the mean time. Then Andegranius, seeing how things went, by advice of the people of Arezzo, that were besieged in the Castle, sold the City to the Florentines; and so return'd into France. And the Anjouen Soldiers now destitute of their General, wandered home by two or three in a Company begging by the way. Ʋrban being now deli∣ver'd from the fear of the French, went to Naples, and as'd leave of the King, to make his Nephew Prince of Campania, which when he could not obtain, being of a clownish and uncivil temper, (which he would have had to be interpreted a blunt down-right honesty) he began to threa∣ten him, and provoked the King so far, that he set a Guard upon him for some days, and would not suffer him to walk the Streets. This af∣front he seemed to wink at for a time, and with the Kings good leave went to Nocera, to avoid (as he himself said) the heat of that City. Where when he had fortified the Town he made some new Cardinals, and imprison'd seven of the old ones, charging upon them a Conspiracy with the King and the Anti-Pope against him. Besides that He com∣manded a Process (to speak in their phrase) against the King, and sent him a Citation to appear: and had this answer from him, That he would come very shortly to Nocera, and acquit himself of all Crimes ob∣jected not with Words but with Weapons. And in order thereunto he came to Nocera with a competent Army, and besieged the Town. But Raymund Balcianus, of the Family of the Ʋrsins, and Son to the Earl of Nola (who was afterward Prince of Taranto) was concern'd at the indignity, with his own Forces, which he commanded under the King, he carried Ʋrban and the whole Court to the next Shore, and put 'em on board certain Genoese Galleys prepared for the purpose. By the way as the Pope sailed to Genoa, he took seven Cardinals at Nocera, of which he put five into Baggs and drowned them in the Sea. But upon the death of Lewis King of Hungary the Nobility of that Country sent presently for Charles: who going thither called a Convention of the Estates for the setling of Affairs, but whilst he was busie upon it, the Queen who ow'd him a grudg procur'd him to be murther'd, in the year 1385. This was just about the time, when John Galeatius put Viscount Ber∣nabos (his Uncle by the side of his Father Galeatius) into Prison at Monza, where he kept him as long as he liv'd, and enjoy'd his Estate. For formerly when they divided their Patrimony, Pavia, Vercelli, No∣vara, Tortona, Alessandria, and other places toward the Apennine Moun∣tains and the Alps, fell to Galeatius; and Piacenza, Cremona, Parma, Lau∣den, Brescia, and Pergamo, to Bernabos; Millain being common to both. Ʋrban had now pass'd a whole year at Genoa, when news was brought him that the Florentines incited the Cities belonging to the Church to assert their Liberty, as they had done formerly; upon which he went first to Lucca, and then to Siena and Perugia: And those Cities being confirm'd in their Allegiance by his coming, he went as far as Feren∣tino under pretence of seeing Naples; but his true Design was, to turn Ladislaus, a very Child, and John, both Sons to Charles, out of their paternal Inheritance. For many Noblemen, that favour'd Lewis of An∣jou, gave him hope of enjoying that Kingdom; but those of Gajetta were very faithful, and preserving the Children alive, saved the King∣dom too to their great Honour. The Pope therefore return'd to Rome
not being able to effect his Design, but was receiv'd into the City with great pomp; though not long after the Banderesii laid wait for him, which yet he escaped, and frustrated. He created in one day twenty nine Cardinals, of which three were Romans, the rest almost all Neapo∣litans. In the mean while Antonius Scala of Verona and Francis the el∣der, Lord of Padua, were engaged in a bloody War, in which John Ʋ∣baldin lead the Army of the Carrareses, and John Ordelafo that of the Scaligeri. But Galeatius Viconti, with the assistance of the Carrareses, conquer'd the Scaligeri, and took Verona and Vincenza. Nor was he so contented, but in a few months he besieged and took Padua, and im∣prison'd Francis Carrara at Monza; Francis his Son escaping by flight. The Florentines also willing now to encrease their Dominions, took Monte-Pulciano and Lusignano, two Towns in the Territories of Siena, by Stratagem rather than by strength; And afterward sent Charles, Son to Bernabos, and Antony Scala with five thousand Horse into the Country of Siena to forage. This mov'd Galeatius to such a degree, that he dispatch'd Embassadors to Florence to complain, that contrary to the League heretofore made between them, the Florentines had en∣tertain'd in pay his Enemies, Charles Viconti and Antony Scala; and that against all right and justice they had harass'd his Friends and Al∣lies, the Sienneses: In fine, his Embassadors were commanded, to de∣clare War against them, except they drew off their Forces from the Siennois, and disbanded those Officers. But lest Galeatius should have been as good as his word, Peter Gambacorta Lord of Pisa, a Friend both to him and to the Florentines, interposed, and undertook to make up the business. In the mean time Ʋrban dy'd at Rome in the eleventh year and eighth month of his unhappy Pontificate; and was buried in S. Pe∣ter's Church, where there was but little mourning for him, as being a rustical, and an inexorable Man. His Sepulchre or Tomb is yet to be seen with a very rude, and silly Inscription upon it. BONIFACE IX. BONIFACE the Ninth, a Neapolitan, formerly called Pe∣ter Tomacello, was made Pope at Rome by general consent of the Cardinals, in the year 1389. Who though he were not above thirty years old, when he enter'd upon the Pope∣dom, yet he lived so strictly at that florid Age, and in those wicked times, that no act of Lust, or inordinate pleasure could be charged up∣on him; for he seemed to have changed his Youth into Age. And then he was a Person of such courage and conduct, that he was the first who invested all the Power of Rome in the Pope alone, so that he crea∣ted Magistrates, as he pleased, and fortified the Castle of S. Angelo, which is situate near the Tiber as you go to the Vatican, and set guards upon all the Bridges cross the Tiber. Whilst this Boniface IX. was in the Chair, Galeatius made War upon the Florentines and Bolognians, by his Generals, John Ʋbaldin and Lantedescus Petramala, who in the Valley of Arno plunder'd and spoil'd all far and near. James Vermes
likewise enter'd the Territories of Bolognia upon his own account, and did the City great damage. The Florentines in the mean time, to pre∣vent with their utmost, these evils, sent Jown Hawkwood, Charles, Son to Bernabos, and Antony Scala with four thousand Horse, and two thou∣sand Foot, to aid the Bolognian▪ their friends and Allies: And sollici∣ted Stephen Duke of Bavaria (to whom Francis the younger was fled fot refuge) both by Letters and Messengers to come and assist 'em. Beside they hired James Earl of Armeniac for a great deal of Money, to come down into Italy against Viconti, and divert him from their borders, to defend his own. Francis the younger also, at their Intrea∣ty, disguising himself, and favoured by the Venetians, got into Padua, and took the City before any body was aware. The Duke of Bava∣ria follow'd him at the heels, and entering the Town, storm'd the Castle without any intermission. And the Veroneses, startled at this turn of Affairs, beat out the Guards of the Viconti, and invited An∣tony Scala to their side, who just about that time died in Tuscany, lea∣ving one onely Child, a little Boy. Which when they heard, they re∣pented of what they had done, and immediately sent for Ʋgulot Blan∣cardus, who was with Galeatius's Army in Cremona, having begg'd par∣don for their Crime, and paid some thousands of pounds to atone for their Error. Blaneard being let in, could not keep the Soldiers from sacking the wealthy City, but the Wife of Galeatius out of pity for the Noble Town after three days stay'd any further plundering. The Duke of Bavaria now complaining that the Subsidies promised him by the Florentines were not fairly paid him, raised the Siege of the Castle at Padua and went into Germany. Thereupon the Florentines, having procured passage for their Troops of Albert d' Este, who was fallen out with Galeatius a good while before, sent John Hawkwood to assist young Carrara; by whose Valour and skill the Castle of Padua was quickly brought to surrender. So that the Forces of Galeatius who were sent for their relief retired into the Country of Vicenza. By this time the Earl of Armagnac, a Pensioner of the Florentines, was arriv'd in Italy by the way of Turin, with twenty thousand Horse, and having taken Castellaccio by storm, he gave the plunder to his Soldiers. To oppose this Enemy Galeatius was necessitated to recall his men out of the Country of Vicenza: while the Milaneses who were posted in the Su∣burbs, of Alexandria were furiously set upon by those of Armagnac with∣out any order; but the Italians drew out the Battel so long, fighting for some time before the Gates, till their men (whom they had sent about, to fall upon their Enemy in the Reer) could have time to sur∣prise 'em. While the fight continued, they came about. So that the Enemy was attaqu'd in the Reer, Front and Flank, in such a dreadful manner (for the Towns-People also aided them) that they were almost all of 'em kill'd, before they were sensible what danger they were in. The Earl of Armagnac himself, General of this great Army, was taken, but died immediately of a wound that he receiv'd. Besides him there were taken Rainardus Lanfigliatius, and John Riccio, two Florentine Knights, who had guided the Earl into Italy. Galeatius grown confi∣dent by this Victory, sent part of his Foces against Hawkwood, who had pass'd the Rivers Adige, and Mencio, to join Armagnac; upon notice where∣of Hawkwood hasted toward Padua; but lost a great many men by the
way, who were drown'd in the Seluces that the Country people had made to hinder their retreat. But the Florentines being hard put to it by James Vermes, who was sent thither by Galeatius with twelve thousand Horse and four thousand Foot, called back Hawkwood, who overcame their Enemies by stratagem, whom he was not able to conquer in the open field. In the mean time a Peace was made at Genoa upon good conditions, between Galeatius and the Florentines by the mediation of Pope Boniface and Antony Adurno General of the Genoeses. But one flame was no sooner quench'd, but another broke out. For Francis di Vico Prefect of the City got Viterbo out of the Popes hands by trea∣chery; And Peter Gambacurta, Lord of Pisa, and his Sons, was kill'd by James his Secretary, and Counsellor, who strait usurp'd his Seigniory. At this time also upon the death of Albert d' Este, one Azzo of the same Family, who had been banish'd a long time, attempted to be restor'd to his Country by the Power of the Counts of Cunie. But the Guar∣dians of young Nicolas, Son of Albert, took up Arms, and driving Ac∣cius from Ferrara, promised the Towns of Lugo and Monselice to John Cunio, if he would kill Azzo. But he shewed 'em a trick for it, and only kill'd a man very like him; upon which the Towns being surren∣der'd to him, he produced the real Azzo. Alberic his Progenitor would never have done such an Act; to whom the Italians owe more than to all the Generals of his Age. For he first taught the Italians the Art of War (when they had been long unaccustomed to Arms) how to de∣fend themselves from domestick as well as forein Enemies. For before his time, if the Italians had any War either among themselves or against the Barbarians, they were forced to desire the aid of forein Soldiers. But he raised such a mighty Army in a short space under the Banner of St. George, that he drave the Britains (who had ruined our Country, and the Castles belonging to the Church) together with the Germans, English and all other Invaders, out of Italy. From him arose the Brac∣ceschi and Sforceschi, by whom Italy gain'd so much Glory, that other Nations either were content to be quiet for fear, or if they attempted to invade us, 'twas at the cost of their lives. In the mean time Cle∣ment VII. the Anti-Pope died, and in his place the Cardinals, who join'd in the present Schism, put up Peter Luna, then called Benedict XIII. at Avignion. At that time also Winceslaus, Son to Charles the Emperor, succeeded him; from whom John Galeatius Viconti received the Title of Duke of Milan by his Embassador Peter Philargi Arch-Bishop of Milan, who afterward got the Papacy, and was called Alexander the Fifth. But Galeatius when John Hawkwood was dead and buried at Florence, (whom the Florentines made use of as their chief Commander in their Wars) He resov'd to send Albrick with an Army into Tuscany, to keep the Florentines in awe, who then made War upon Appiax Lord of Pisa. There were in that Army Paul Ʋrsin, Ceculino, Brolia, Brandelino, Paul Sabello, Luke Canali, great Captains; who going with joint-forces and Counsels to besiege Florence, pitched their Camp near the Carthusian Monastery; from whence they continually infested the City of Florence and all the Country about it, with frequent inrodes, and filled all places with slaughter, rapine, and fire, Anno Dom. 1397. At which time Bo∣niface went to Perugia, to procure a reconciliation between the Nobility and Commonalty, there. But the Commonalty, even in the Popes pre∣sence,
took up Arms against their Promise, and kill'd eighty of the Nobles, and then made Biordo, and Nichilotto, who were admitted into the City as heads of their Faction, chief Lords of all. The Pope was angry at that, and went to Assisi, from whence he sent Agents to Galeatius, to desire him, that he cease to attempt Mantua, which he then besieged by Land and Water, having sent for Albrick Barbianus into that Coun∣try to assist in the War. But the Florentines and the Venetians being bound as Allies to aid Mantua, they sent a good Army under the con∣duct of Charles Malatesta, (Cousin to the Duke of Mantuan) who defeat∣ed Galeatius's forces at Governo. At that time the Florentines had a de∣sign to fall upon the Pisans, but the Earls of Puppio and Balono, and the Ʋbertine Rebels, who threaten'd destruction to the City of Florence, if they stirred a foot against the Pisans, diverted them from it. But not long after James Appian died, and his Son Gerard succeeded him, who when he could not keep Pisa in subjection, by reason of the Tumults which the Florentines raised in it, he sold the City to Galeatius Viconti, in the year 1399. keeping onely one Town for him and his, called Piumbino. At Perugia Biordus, being slain by the contrivance of Lantedescus, the Perugians endeavour'd to assert their Liberty: And when Ʋgolin Trinci of Fuligno, the Popes Vicar there, endeavour'd in his name to bring Perugia into the Churches Patrimony, the Citizens were angry, and surrender'd themselves to Galeatius; who two months after got posses∣sion also of Bologna and Lucca by a wile. Hence was the fear of the Florentines so encreased, that they gave out, that they and their Liberty were all lost, unless Galeatius were taken off. The Year of Jubilee ap∣proaching, the Pope was moved by Embassadors from Rome to leave Assisi and reside with them; which though he was very willing to do, yet he concealed his desire, and told 'em, he would not; because, he said, they denied to have Senators chosen out of forein Nobility according to the Custom and Orders of former Popes; and because they had chosen Con∣servators of the Chamber on their own head: Men not fit for the Em∣ployment, who gave too much Licence to the Banderesii. Then the Romans, to gratifie the Pope, remov'd the Banderesii, and admitted of Malatesta Son to Pandulphus, of Pesaro, a learned Man, as Senator, in the Popes Name, and furnish'd Boniface with Money to go to Rome. When he was come into the City, he fortified S. Angelo (as I told you) with Walls and Turrets, and made himself by degrees Master of the whole place. After that, in the year 1400. the Jubilee was kept, and a great multitude of People stock'd to Rome for Devotion, and then the Flo∣rentines, being willing to be rid of Galeatius, invited Robert Duke of Bavaria (whom the Electors of the Empire having deposed Wenceslaus, of Bohemia for his sloth, had chosen Emperor) to come into Italy upon condition, that he should not have the promised reward, till he was ad∣vanc'd as far as the Dutchy of Millain. But when he was come to Bre∣scia, near the Lago di Grada, and had receiv'd part of the Money, he engaged with Galeatius, and losing the day, fled to Trent. The Vene∣tians and Florentines promised him great things to keep him from going back into Germany, but all would not do. At that time Boniface, whe∣ther out of fear of the Power of the Viconti, or out of covetousness to enlarge the Churches Patrimony, was the first that imposed Annates, or yearly payments upon Ecclesiastical Benefices, upon this condition,
that whoever got a Benefice, should pay half an years Revenue into the Apostolical Treasury. Yet there are those who attribute this Inven∣tion to John XXII. Now all Countreys admitted of this usage, except the English, who granted it onely in case of Bishopricks, but not in other Benefices. Being thus strengthened with Money, and choosing Magistrates as he pleased, both in the City and all over the Church Dominions, the Pope restored Ladislaus a Youth, Son to Charles King of Naples into his Fathers Kingdom, which was usurp'd by such as sided at that time with Lewis of Anjou. And to do it the more easily and honourably he abolish'd that deprivation of Charles, which Ʋrban had promulged at Nocera, and sent Cardinal Florentino to Cajeta (which was the onely place, that had continu'd Loyal) to crown the Youth there where he had been so loyally preserv'd. Galeatius thus rid of the Emperor, sent his Army under the command of Albrick against John Bentivoglio, who had turn'd out the Garison, and made himself Master of Bologna. At this time Francis Gonzaga fought in Galeatius's Army (for they two were friends again) as also Pandulphus Malatesta, Charle's Brother, and Ottobon Rossi of Parma. The names of these Men terrified the Florentines so, that they sent Bernardo their General to assist the Bolognians their Allies; which so encourag'd the Bolognians, that they engaged the Enemy before their Walls; but had the worst, and lost all their Horse, as also Bernardo, who was kill'd in the fight. James Car∣rara was taken, but preserv'd at the request of Francis Gonzaga. Ben∣tivoglio fled with a small number into the City; which whilst he stout∣ly defended, he fell into an Ambuscade where he was kill'd, the Ene∣my not being able to take him alive; so that now Galeatius easily be∣came Master of Bologna, and struck great terrour into the Florentines, threatning suddenly to turn all the force of his Arms upon them: But not long after he died at Marignan of a Fever, Anno Dom. 1402. whose death, long wish'd for by the Florentines, freed them from many fears, and was presignified by a Comet which appear'd some time before. Up∣on this many Usurpers arose, either those who were chief in their Cities or who had command among the Soldiery, by corrupting the Garisons, seiz'd their several Towns; there being now no one Man of Authority and Power to correct their ambitions and excesses, infinite mischiefs hap∣ned. That fatal Sedition too of the Guelphs and Gibellins was renew'd, which ran through Italy two hundred years and above, and raised such civil Wars among the several Cities, that they fought till they had al∣most destroy'd each other. Ʋgolinus Cavalcabos, having vanquish'd the Gibellins, was Lord of Cremona: whilst Otho the third got Parma, ex∣pelling the Rossi. The Soardi seiz'd Bergamo, the Rusconii took Como, the Vignati possess'd themselves of Lodi, and Fazino Cane an excellent General made himself Master of Vercelli, Alessandria, and many other Towns thereabout. I omit others, who having been expell'd by Ga∣leatius, then were in some hopes of recovering their usurped Domini∣ons: especially William Scala, and Charles Viconti, Son to Bernabos, who sollicited all the Princes and People to revolt. Upon this account Pi∣ras Ordelaphus was banish'd his Country and got possession of Forli; and Albrick Earl of Cuni, would have reduced Faenza, then brought to extremity, if he had not been sent for in haste by Ladislaus, by the Popes advice, and made Great Constable of Naples. The Pope had sent his
Brother also thither with a competenr Army, to assist the King; but he being expelled by the Neapolitans moved toward Perugia, and soon made that City subject to the Pope. Baltesar Cassa also a Neapolitan Cardinal of S. Eustachius, compell'd the Bolognians to return to the Church-party, after he had besieged them for some time; in which expedition Bra∣chius Montonius led the Church-forces, as being a Person well skill'd in Military Affairs, and left for that reason in Romagna by Albrick. For he had fought under him from his youth, and been a Commander, as had Sfortia, who was born in Cotignola a Town of Romagna. By whose valour and prowess the Militia of Italy so improved, that whoever wanted a Commander, would make use of one of them. Hence those Military Factions so increased that all the troubles of Italy for sixty years might be imputed to one of them. For he, that was op∣press'd by the Brachians, immediately hired the Sfortians to revenge his quarrel. But Albrick (from whom as from the Trojan Horse so many Generals did come) made Naples yield to Ladislaus, after a long Siege. At which Victory all the Princes of the Kingdom and all the Cities surrender'd themselves to the King. But Ladislaus, over desirous of enlarging his Kingly power, before he had laid a good foundation in Naples, was sent for into Hungary, to accept of that Kingdom by he∣reditary right; and in order thereunto sent over his Forces. But whilst he was besieging Zara, his Friends sent him word, that the Neapolitans were like to revolt; wherefore having taken Zara, and sold it to the Venetians, he return'd to Naples; and calling back Albrick out of Ro∣magna, he deposed all the Nobles, and banish'd those that refused to obey him. But he was very severe upon the Family of Sanseverino, and put the chiefest of them to death. Boniface being troubled at such a tedious confusion of Affairs, at length died of a Pleurisie, in the fourteenth year and the ninth month of his Pontificate, Anno Dom. 1404. He was bu∣ried at S. Peters in a Marble Tomb, of Mosaic work, still to be seen with his Coat of Arms: which shews also that he built much in S. Angelo, the Capitol, and the Vatican. Nor had any thing been wanting to the glory of this Pope, if he had not been too partial to his Relations: Si∣mony being often committed, by reason that his Brethren and Friends, who came to Rome in great multitudes to get Money, ask'd for every thing that fell in his gift, without any reason. As for Indulgencies, and those plenary too, they were sold about at such a rate, that the Autho∣rity of the Keys and the Popes Bulls was brought into contempt. Bo∣niface indeed endeavour'd to amend these things, but was forced by the importunity of his Friends to let it alone. And for this reason I think it would go better with the Church of God, if Popes would not mind their kindred, or at least not too much, but consult the good and honour of the Papacy rather than promote the interest of flesh and blood. Especially at that time, when Tamberlain, who conquer'd the Turks, and led their Emperor in Chains along with him, was dead, and had left all the Armenians, Persians, Egyptians, and Assyrians with∣out Governors: so that the Christians might easily have recover'd Je∣rusalem and the Holy Sepulchre. But his care was plac'd nearer home, for he persecuted the Albi, [Bianchi or Whites] that would have introduced a new sort of Superstition under his Pontificate, of whom I heard my Father (who saw the Man) say, that there was a
certain Priest who came down from the Alps into Italy the year afore the Jubilee, with a great many after him: and being clothed in white Cloth, pretended so much modesty, that every body look'd upon him as a Saint. So that this Fellow coming into Italy drew a great number of Men and Women over to his Opinion in a short time. And these People at Night, lay, Men or Women, Pesants or Citizens, Servants or Freemen, promiscuously together cover'd with their white Robes, like so many Sheep. They feasted in the publick Streets, and strove who should bring the best provisions. The Priest himself carried a Cruci∣fix, which, he said wept for the sins of Mankind; and as often as it did so, the people set up a clamour and begg'd pardon of God. They sang the Lauds, or Praises of the Blessed Virgin, going along and standing still, in Hymns made for that purpose. But as he came from Piedmont and that way, into Romagna, Tuscany, and Millain, the Opi∣nion of his sanctity was advanced, whereby he brought over not only the rude and unlearn'd Commonalty, but even great Men and Bishops of several Cities. At Viterbo, being tired with travelling, he tarried with the multitude, and from thence, said, he would come to Rome, to visit the holy Places, and Bodies of the Saints. But Boniface fear∣ing him to be a Cheat, and thinking, as he said, that the superstitious Knave had a mind to get the Popedom by the assistance of that Gang about him, he sent Soldiers to meet him, and bring him to Rome. Which done, some write, that his knavery was detected by Fortune, and that he was deservedly burnt alive; but others say the Man was guiltless, and that it was onely a trick of the Pope to raise that re∣port of him, whereas he put him to death out of envy. Which is true, God knows: But this is certain, that after so great a conflux of people caused partly by this and partly by the Jubilee, a number of Men died of the Plague. But amidst all the evils wherewith Italy was afflicted, we received one Benefit. For Chrysoloras Byzantius brought the Greek Learning into our Country, which had been neglected in Italy for four hundred years. Hence came the Greek and Latin Schools, where Guarinus, Victorinus, Philielphus, Ambrose the Monk, Leonard and Charles of Arezzo, and many more were educated, by the emulation of who many Wits were excited to laudable Studies. INNOCENT VII. INNOCENT the Seventh, of Sulmona, before named Cosmo, Cardinal-Priest of Santa Croce, was made Pope at Rome, when all Italy was in an uproar. For John Galeati∣us being dead, and leaving two Sons but young, all Italy betook themselves to Arms. John Maria, the elder Son got the Dutchy of Millain; and Philip Maria, the younger, made himself Lord of Pa∣via with ease, as lawful Earl of it. The other Cities, to the number of twenty five revolted from the Viconti. Paul Guiniffius, a Citizen of Lucca, usurped the Dominion of his Country; Francis Carrara now that General was gone off, whose Arms he exceedingly fear'd) that
he might enlarge his Territories, sent Embassadours to Verona, Brescia, Bergamo, and Cremona, to sollicite the Guelphs to be on his side. But when he saw William Scala and Charles Viconti (who desired to govern their own Cities) could hinder his attempts, he promised William the Signiory of Verona, and that of Millain to Charles, of whom he bor∣rowed thirty thousand pounds. So he restored William to his Coun∣try; but he soon after was poison'd, and then Verona fell again to Fran∣cis. He would have serv'd Charles the same trick, when he was urgent with him, either to perform his promise or to pay the money he had lent him. He also advised Francis Gonzaga by Letter to come over to his side, and embrace his Alliance; and if he would not, that he would look upon him as an Enemy, and give him reason ere long to re∣pent of his obstinacy. And that, he said, was easie; because he ha∣ving gotten Verona, which border'd upon Mantoua, he should shortly compass Brescia too, and so teaze the Mantoueses as he pleased. Francis resolv'd to say nothing in answer to him, till he heard what the Vene∣tian Embassadors said, whom he understood to be upon the way com∣ing to him. For the Venetians suspecting the power of the Carraresi, took Vincenza into their protection by a free surrender of the Citizens, who fear'd Francis's strength; and would rather be under any Lord than one of Padua▪ for there was a mortal hatred between the Padu∣ans and those of Vincenza. So then, the Venetians admonish'd Francis Carrara, that he should not meddle with those of Vincenza who were their Tributaries: and that he would raise the Siege from Cologna, which they accounted within their Dominions; if not, that the Venetians would revenge their quarrels. Francis reply'd, that he admired at the impudence of the Venetians, who though they have no right or claim to any thing upon the Continent, yet would prescribe Laws to them who had just Titles. He therefore bad 'em go and confine themselves within their Bays, and Fens, and let them alone to govern the several Cities, who had derived a right to it from their Forefathers. This enraged the Venetians, who thereupon sent instructions to their Embas∣sadors, then upon the Road, to make a League with Francis Gonzaga; and choose him General of their Forces, with an honourable yearly sti∣pend. And Francis (when the League was made) thought it best to make haste, because he heard the Enemy had gotten Cologna, and rais∣ing a great Army, attaqued the Veroneses on that side, that lies toward Mantoua. The Venetians from Vincenza did the same. Which so terri∣fied the Veroneses, that having no hopes of help they surrender'd. For the Citizens hated Francis Carrara, for having poison'd William Scala, and imprison'd his Sons, after he had gotten Verona by a Wile. But as the Army enter'd the City, keeping their exact Order, for fear of some stratagem of the Enemy, James Carrara, who had commanded the Gari∣son, ran away with some few Soldiers to Hostia. But as he cross'd the Poe, he was taken Prisoner and sent to Venice. Now the Venetians ha∣ving fortified Verona as well as they could, march'd thence with all their Forces to Padua, which they besieged, though it were fenced with very high Walls, and a deep Ditch, and garison'd with stout Men: and after some months having block'd up the Avenues for provision, they had it yielded to them. Francis was fled into the Castle, with his Sons and Nephews: but the Venetians took that too not long after by
surrender of the Soldiers within, who were ready to starve. But Fran∣cis being taken and sent to Venice was put to death along with his Bro∣ther. And this was the end of him, who indulged his own lust of ru∣ling so much, that he contemn'd Peace, and would get all things by force of Arms. But this was not the end of our misfortunes. For, ei∣ther by the neglect of Popes (who used to procure Peace either by In∣terdictions, Menaces, or force) or rather by means of the Schism (un∣der which the Church of God did at that time labour) it was come to that pass, that every base Usurper, after the death of John Galeatius, would venture upon any mischievous Design. And though Innocent, whilst he was Cardinal, used to blame the negligence and timorousness of former Popes, saying, their sloth was the cause, that the Schism, which was the bane of the Church of Rome and of all Christendom, was not rooted out. Yet when himself had gotten the Popedom, he follow'd Ʋrbans and Bonifaces steps in several things, which he had carp'd at in them when he was a private person: and not onely did not what he had before commended, but took it very ill if any one mention'd it to him. Beside he was so furi∣ous in his Administration of the Government, that once, when the Romans desired to have their Liberty restored, and that the Capitol, Ponte Molle, and S. Angelo might be put into their hands, and also were urgent with him to extirpate the Schisms (which had been so destructive, and of such ill example) out of the Church, and that he would seek the Peace of Christendom (since the King of France promised to assist him in it, and Peter Luna the Anti-Pope was not against so good a work) the Pope e'en sent the Romans themselves to Lewis, his Nephew, who lay at the Hospital of the Holy Ghost in the Stone-Way, as to an Executioner. For eleven of these publick-spirited Citizens were presently put to death, and thrown out at the Windows; for that he said, was the onely way to remove Schism and Sedition. The People of Rome were so incens'd at this cruel usage, that they sent for Ladislaus King of Naples, and took up Arms to revenge themselves of Lewis. But the Pope, to avoid the fury of the People took Lewis along with him and ran away to Viterbo. Whereupon the People, seeing they could not satisfie their wrath upon the Author of the Villany, they turn'd their indignation upon the Cour∣tiers, and plunder'd them of all they had. Yet some, they say, were preserv'd in the Houses of several Roman Cardinals, who with much ado, did make a shift to protect those that fled to 'em, by the assistance of their Clients. Then the Romans having taken the Capitol, and Pon∣te Molle, they attempted S. Angelo; but in vain, though they were as∣sisted by John Columna Earl of Troja, Gentilis Monteranus, Earl of Car∣rara, great Commanders under King Ladislaus. But when Paul Ʋrsin came upon them by order of the Pope, with Mostarda and Cecchalino, they routed John Columna and Ladislaus's Men that were left, in a place called Neros Meads. This was a great damage to the Romans; for their Men and Cattel were driven away; and therefore when their anger was over, they became friends with the Pope, and desired him to return home to the City. For he was naturally courteous, and affable, learn∣ed in the civil and Canon Law, and well skill'd in the Art of Per∣swasion. When therefore things were thus composed, he came to Rome, and made more Cardinals, among which were Angelus Carrara, a Venetian, Cardinal of S. Mark, after called Gregory XII. Peter Philar∣di,
a Candiot, Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles, afterward Alexander and Otho Columna, Cardinal of S. George, after called Martin V. Thus ha∣ving setled the Popedom he created Lewis, his Nephew Marquis of Marca d' Ancona and Prince of Fermo: but he himself died a little after at Rome in the second year of his Pontificate; and was buried in S. Pe∣ters in a Chappel that was formerly dedicated to the Popes (which Nicolas V. afterward repair'd) and his Tomb bears this Inscription; Innocentio VII. Pontifici Maximo cum neglecti ejus Sepulchri memoria interi∣isset, Nicolas V. Pontifex Maximus restitui curavit. In the mean time the Italians wanted a true Pope and a good Emperor, and therefore every one did what they pleased. For Cabrinus Fundulus, of whom Charles Ca¦valcabos made great use both in War and Peace, being puffed up with hopes of being sole Governour (because all Magistrates and Lieutenants of Castles obey'd him as much as Charles) he murther'd Charles, with his Brethren and Kindred at Machasturma, ten miles from Cremona as he was coming back from Lodi. From thence he fled with a few Men to Cremona, before the thing was known in the City; and having gotten possession of the Fort and all the Gates, he went into the Market all in Arms, and whomsoever he saw that was likely to withstand his Designs, he banish'd or put to Death. But to make himself absolute he omitted no kind of cruelty. Nor could the great Men of Milan hinder this, being themselves embroil'd by the different Designs of Gu∣cegaldo Governour of Genoa, who attempted to bring Milan to subje∣ction to the French King, and of Facino Cane an excellent Commander, who strove to conserve it in the hands of the Heir John Maria Visconte. Now also Otho III. Lord of Parma was enticed upon pretence of treat∣ing with him, by Nicolas d' Este, to Rubera a Castle of his, where at the command of Nicolas he was kill'd by Sforza Cotignola: upon whose death, Nicolas immediately got Reggio and Parma by surrender of the Citizens, who hated the name of Otho. But Ladislaus, having been possess'd of Rome, as I said before, and Perugia being put into his hands, which had been brought low by the Forces of Braccio, he led his Army into Tuscany: which by the industry and conduct of Malatesta of Pe∣saro was so bravely defended, that Ladislaus was beaten thence and re∣treated into his own Kingdom, having received more damage than he had done his Enemies. But the Florentines being deliver'd from such an Enemy turn'd their Arms toward the Pisanes and after a long Siege took Pisa, under the conduct of Tartaglia and Sforza in the year 1406. GREGORY XII. THE Schism continuing still in the Church, to the decay of Christianity, one Pope being chosen at Rome, and another at Avignion, the Princes of France, to wit, the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, and Orleans (who at that time governed all France, during the Kings indisposition) took pity on the Church at last, and came to Avignion to Peter Luna, who was called Benedict XIII.
and desired him to commiserate the Church now falling to ruin, though it were to relinquish the Pontificate: he having promised so to do up∣on Oath in the Conclave, when he was made Pope. And they engaged the other Pope, that was then made at Rome after Innocents death, should do the same. For these Princes and those of Italy, who both were hearty Lovers of Christianity, had agreed, that those two which strove for the Pontificate, of whom one was of the French and the other of the Italian faction, should be put by, and some one afterward elected, that might be the common Father and Pope of all Nations. Bene∣dict reply'd, That he should grievously offend God, if he forsook the Church of God, whose Patron and publick Father he was made by universal consent of all good Men, and that he would not hold that Seat precariously to which he had been so fairly chosen. As to what they said concerning extirpating the Schism and treating of Unity, he profess'd, it pleased him very much, so it were debated in a free place, and that no man might lie under any force from either Party. Yet one thing he promised 'em, and confirmed it with an Oath, that if the Schism could not be composed by any other means, that then he would wholly lay down the Pontifical Dignity, if the other An∣ti-Pope would do so at the same time. Thereupon the Princes be∣gan to consult among themselves, how they should bring over Bene∣dict to their Opinion. But he fearing their Consults and conferences, furnish'd the Papal Palais with Arms and all necessary provisions; and there he stay'd and was besieged for some months, till at last he got Galleys ready for his escape, and sailed down the Rosne into Catalonia, where he was born. There are indeed, who write that the Princes of France did make that attempt upon Benedict by the perswasion of French Cardinals, who hated him, because he was not of their Nation. For when they could not agree concerning the choice of a French Pope after Clement's death, they elected him (after a long Debate) as a Person of great Virtue and Devotion; but he often admonishing them to live soberly and holily, and forbidding Simony upon severe penalties, they grew weary of his strictness, and notwithstanding his love to Christia∣nity, instigated the French Princes against him. Christianity was in all Countreys, but most of all in France, they met at S. Peters in the Va∣tican, where each of 'em took an Oath, and bound it with the greatest imprecations, that they would relinquish the Pontificate, whosoever of 'em happen'd to be elected to that great Dignity, upon condition that the Anti-Pope would do the same. They came to this resolution, to satisfie the French Nation, who having been so foolish to make an An∣ti-Pope, had brought in a custom, from which they could not recede without dishonour, unless the Italians did so too: and not onely so, but to comply with Benedict's judgment, who said the Church could never be healed but by that means onely: But if both were deposed, one true Pope might be elected by consent of all the Cardinals there, to whom all Kings and Princes should pay obedience. Upon this con∣dition Angelus Corarius a Venetian, Cardinal of S. Marks (who, as I told you, was called Gregory XII.) was chosen at Rome Novem. 2. 1406. and immediately in writing, by the hands of Notaries and before wit∣ness confirm'd what he had promised before his Pontificate, and set his hand to it. But when they came to discourse about a place, where
they might both meet without danger, and could not agree, they were esteemed by both Assemblies of Cardinals no better than Shufflers, and Promise-breakers. Nevertheless the Cardinals, some from Rome and some from Avignion, met at Pisa, and there with one accord they de∣prived Benedict and Gregory of their Pontifical Honour, and that by the consent of all Nations, except the hither part of Spain, the King of Scot∣land, and the Earl of Armagnac who favour'd Benedict. Then they proceeded to elect a new Pope, who might govern the Church of God without Sedition, and the result was, the creating of Gregory being ab∣sent, and this Election depending, Rome was all up in Arms. For La∣dislaus the King had taken Ostia, and put his Land and Sea-forces into it, and thereby so harass'd the Romans with inroads, that he forc'd them to sue for Peace, and to receive him honourably into the City as their Governour, where he changed their civil Officers, fortified according to his own mind their Gates and Walls. But Paul Ʋrsin, General of the Church-forces came upon him, they fought stoutly in the Septimiano near S. James's, and lost a great many Men on each side. For the King kept his Men on the farther side of Tiber, supposing that he should be the safer in that place, by reason of his Naval Forces whom he had brought from Ostia to Rome. But at last yielding to rather than flying from the Ʋrsin Faction, which increased every day, he went to Naples; his Par∣ty being very much weaken'd by a Victory obtain'd before he came thi∣ther over the Columneses, that fought under John Columna, Baptista Sabel∣lus, James Ʋrsin, and Nicolas Columna, who had taken S. Laurences Gate and got into the City. But when Paul Ʋrsin came up (as I told you) they were most of 'em taken and all vanquish'd. Two of them were put to death; one of which was Galeot a famous Norman Cavalier, and the other was called Richard Sanguineus, of a Noble and an ancient Fa∣mily. The rest were discharg'd upon condition, they would never fight for Ladislaus again. From these troubles at Rome there arose such a Dearth of all Provisions, that a Rubio of Wheat was sold for eighteen Florins, because the Cattel were all driven away, and the Husband∣men destroy'd, as is usual in the Wars. ALEXANDER V. ALEXANDER the Fifth of Candia, formerly called Peter, Frier of the Order of Minors, and Arch-Bishop of Millain; a Man famous for Holiness and Learning, was made Pope by consent of all the Cardinals that were at that time in the Pisan Assembly. So that Gregory fled as it were into Austria, and talk'd there of a General Council. But not thinking himself safe enough there, he went for Rimi∣ni and was splendidly receiv'd by Charles Malatesta: And Benedict ha∣ving a Council at Perpignan, fled to the Castle of Panischola, a very strong place, where he staid a good while for his better security. But though they were both deposed in the Council at Pisa, yet they created Car∣dinals like true Popes; especially Gregory; who whilst he tarried at Lucca made Gabriel Condelmero Cardinal by the consent of all the Cardi∣nals
that continu'd of his Party; which Gabriel was after elected Pope and called Eugenius IV. But I return to Alexander, who was an excel∣lent Man in the whole course of his life. He was of the Order of Mi∣nors from his youth, and took so much pains in his Studies at Paris both in Humanity and Divinity, that he soon became a publick Reader, and wrote very acutely and learnedly upon the Books of the Sentences. He was also reckon'd a great Orator and a great Preacher. And there∣fore he was sent for by John Galeatius, Duke of Millain, and made his chief Counsellor. After that, at Galeatius's request, he was made Bi∣shop of Vincenza, then translated to Novara, and last of all being made Arch-Bishop of Millain, he was created Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles by Innocent VII. From which step he rose to the Pontifical Dignity, and was deservedly stiled Alexander, because he might compare with any Prince for liberality and greatness of mind. For he was so munificent to the poor, and all that deserved his bounty, that in a short time he left himself nothing. That made him use to say in a joke, that he was a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope. For he was free from that desire of getting which increaseth usually with a Mans Estate and his Age. But it is a Vice, that cannot be found among good Men that contemn the World: who the older they grow the less Viaticum or pro∣vision, they know, they shall want for their Journey, and therefore they restrain their Desires, bridle their Covetousness, and extinquish all e∣vil lusts. Nay Alexander was a Person of that Courage as to depose that powerful King Ladislaus, (who in the absence of several Popes had for a long time much spoil'd and harass'd the Church Dominions and taken some Towns by force) at Pisa in the Council there, by approbation of all that were present; and declared his Kingdom to belong to Lewis Duke of Anjou. But when the Council of Pisa brake up, the Pope went to Bologna, of which Baldesar Cossa, Cardinal of S. Eustachius, was Governour. Him Alexander confirm'd in his Office, because by his in∣dustry and conduct the Council was held at Pisa; and because he was a Man fit to oppose Usurpers or such as encroached upon the Church Revenues. Yet there was more of rusticity, boldness, and worldliness in him, than his profession required. He led a military Life, and his manners were Soldier-like, and he took the liberty of doing many things not fit to be named. But when Alexander was very sick and knew his death was very near, he exhorted the Cardinals that visited him to Con∣cord and Peace, and to defend the Honour of the Church: And swore by that Death, he was just now about to undergo, and by the Conscience of his well-acted Life, that he did not think or believe that any thing was Decreed in the Pisan Council but with all justice and integrity, without any deceit, or fraud. This said, and the People weeping that stood by, he repeated that saying of our Saviour with much ado, My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you; and immediately dy'd, in the eighth month of his Pontificate; and was buried at Bologna in the Church of the Friers Minors: in which year there was a Famine and a Plague.
JOHN XXIV. JOHN the Twenty Fourth, a Noble Neapolitan, formerly called Cossa Baldesar, was chosen Pope at Bologna by general consent, though some say the Election was carried by force; because he was not only Legate of Bologna, but had Soldiers in the City and Country planted for the purpose, so that if he could not get it by fair means, he would by foul. However it was, it is most certain, that he was made Pope, and always aspired to that Dig∣nity. For when he was a Youth, and studied Civil Law at Bologna for some years, he took his Degree there (according to Custom) and then went to Rome. And being ask'd by some Friends whether he was going, he answer'd, To the Pontificate. When he came to Rome, he was entertain'd by Boniface IX. and made one of his Privy Chamber: Then he was made Cardinal of S. Eustachius's, and sent as Legate à La∣tere to Bologna, which he in a short space subjected to the Church; to∣gether with a great part of Romagna, beating aut some Usurpers and putting others to death. But after nine years, when he had enlarged the City of Bologna in a wonderful manner by a long Peace, and got∣ten a great deal of Money; Alexander died, and then he used Bribery, especially to the Cardinals, that Gregory had made, (who were yet poor) and so was made Pope. Thereupon he sent Agents to the Electors of the Empire, to desire of 'em, that they would choose Sigismund of Lu∣cenburg, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Emperor; as being a person very stout, and fit, as he said, for all brave Actions. For this was his way to get into Sigismunds's favour. And that succeeding according to his mind, he told 'em before-hand, that, whereas it had been order'd in an Assembly at Pisa, that a Council should be call'd at such a certain time, he would hold it at Rome, and no where else. And that all might have the freer access thither, he endeavour'd to settle Italy, especially that part near the Alps, in which the War did daily encrease by the in∣stigation of Fazinus Canis, who could not keep his mercenary Soldiers under his Command without employment. For he used to maintain them by rapine and plunder. At that juncture it happen'd, that the Pavians, whom Philip could not contain in awe by reason of his Mi∣nority, were grown factious, and took up Arms. Then the Gibellins, under the conduct of the Beccarian Family, brought Fazinus and his Army into the City, and were to have the Guelphs Estates for doing it. But Fazinus entering the Town with his Soldiers, spared neither one nor the other, but plunder'd both. And when the Gibellins complain'd, that their goods too were plunder'd against his Promise, he reply'd; The Gibellins, in their Persons, should be safe; but their Goods were Guelphs, which he would give as Spoil to the Soldiers, deriding the folly and covetousness of both Factions. When he went from thence, he left a good Garison both at the Gates and in the Fort, pretending to be Philips Protector till he grew of Age; and so went against Pandulphus Mala∣testa, where he teazed the Brescians and the Bergameses with frequent
inroads and ravagings; nor did he spare those of Cremona, at that time govern'd by Cabrinus Fundulus. During these transactions the King of Hungary who was going (as he pretended) to Rome freely to receive the Imperial Crown, sent twelve thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot against the Venetians, and seizing Friuli, he set upon Treviso. Against this great Army the Venetians sent Charles Malatesta to keep them off, not so much by fighting as by protracting of the time. The Venetians had like also to have lost Verona the same year by treachery of some of the Citizens, who had more mind to ▪try what they could get by violence, than to preserve their Liberty. But those that were guilty were punish'd. and there was an end of that. Fazinus Canis died the same year, after which several persons conspiring together kill'd John Maria Duke of Millain, and took Bernabos's Son and Nephews in∣to the City. Then Philip, by the persuasions of his Friends, married Beatrice, Fazinus's Widow, who was very Rich, and had Authority with the Soldiers that had fought under her Husband, Fazinus. By this means he had all the Cities, that paid homage to Fazinus, presently sur∣render'd to him, and drew Carmignola, and Siccus Montagnanus (who had seditiously divided the Legion between them after Fazinus's death) to come to fight under his Colours, by the perswasions of Beatrice. Which two Commanders Philip made use of afterward, and by their assistance drave Bernabos's Son, Astorgius, out of Millain, but kill'd him at the taking of Monza. Things went thus in Millain and thereabouts, when John Francis Gonzaga, Son to Francis that was deceased, went with a competent Army of Horse and Foot to guard Bologna, at the command of Pope John, under whose Banner he then fought. For Ma∣latesta of Rimini, stipendiary to King Ladislaus, laid close Siege to the City at that time. He therefore, by the aid of the Bolognians, fought several sharp Battels with the Enemies; in which he had the better and defended the City most gloriously. The Winter following Pope John was invaded by Ladislaus, which made him remove from Rome to Florence, and thence to Bologna. Nor did he stay there long, but he went to Mantoua, where he was splendidly entertain'd by John Francis Gonzaga, whom he took along with him, at his departure thence, to∣gether with great part of his Forces to Lodi, whither he knew the King of Hungary would come. For he trusted much to that Prince, whose faithfulness and integrity he had such experience of in the Bo∣lognian Wars, though he had been tempted by Malatesta with gifts and promises to revolt to the Kings party. But after when the Pope and the King did not think themselves sufficiently safe at Lauden, they sent John Francis to Mantoua (whether they said they'd go) with all speed, to prepare for their coming and for the reception of such a multi∣tude. He went and quickly made all things ready, and then returned to Cremona, where he heard the Pope and the King by that time were arrived. After that he conducted them to Mantoua, where all the people came thronging out to meet them, and they were much more kindly receiv'd than was expected. Now in these several meetings at Lodi, Cremona, and Mantoua, it was consider'd, how they should remove La∣dislaus out of Campagna di Roma, Ombria, and Tuscany; for he had ta∣ken Rome and many other Towns belonging to the Church. They saw that Italy could not be freed from the distractions of War by any other
means, and therefore they thought it convenient to advise concerning a supply to carry on the Affair not at Mantoua, but Bologna, when they were come thither. But they had greater concerns still upon them. For John being urged to call a Council by consent of all Nations, for the removal of the Schism, immediately sent two Cardinals into Germany, to advise with the Princes of France and Germany and choose a conve∣nient place for a Council to be held at. Upon enquiry, Constance, a City within the Province of Mentze, seemed to be most commodious for the purpose. Thereupon they all went thither by a certain Day, according to Order; so likewise did Pope John himself, though some ad∣vised him to the contrary, because they told him they fear'd, if he went thither as Pope, he would return thence as a private person: and so it fell out. For going thither with certain Men, that were excellent in all sorts of Learning, he puzled the Germans so long with tedious Dis∣putations, that they could not tell what to Decree. But Sigismund came up, who gave every body leave to say what they pleased, and then great and grievous Crimes were laid to the Popes charge: upon which he went privately in disguise from Constance to Scaphusa, for fear some dangerous Plot might be contrived against him. Scaphusa was a City belonging to the Duke of Austria, whither several Cardinals also, that he had created, betook themselves. But they being called again by Authority of the Council, John fled from Scaphusa to Friburgh, design∣ing to go, if possibly he could with safety, to the Duke of Burgundy. But by the care of the Council, John was taken, and imprison'd near Constance in the Isle of S. Mark in the fourth year of his Pontificate, and the tenth month. Then the Council began to enquire the rea∣son of his flight, and choose several persons of great gravity and Learn∣ing as Delegates, to examine and weigh the Objections made against John, and make an orderly report of it to the Council. There were a∣bove forty Articles proved against him: of which some contain'd faults, which he was so habituated to, that he could not avoid them, and therefore they were judged contrary to the Faith; and some of them were likely to bring a scandal upon Christianity in general, if they were not condemned in him. Wherefore since they all agreed in the same Opinion, John who was deservedly and justly deposed, approved of their Sentence though pronounced against him. And thereupon he was presenty sent to Lewis the Bavarian, who was Gregory the 12th's Friend, to be kept in custody, till further Order from the Council. Accord∣ingly he was block'd up in the Castle of Haldeberg which was a very well fortified place, for three years, without any Chamberlain, or Servant to attend him, that was an Italian. All his keepers were Germans, with whom he was fain to talk by Nods and Signs, because he neither under∣stood the Teutonick Language, nor they the Italian. They say John was deposed by those very Men, and them alone, that were formerly his Friends. For those that were of Gregory and Benedict's Party were not yet come to the Council. These Men therefore, that they might make their Deprivation of him just and perfect, with one accord pub∣lish'd a Synodical Decree, wherein they affirm'd, that a general Council lawfully called was the Supream Authority next to Christ. (Grant but this fundamental Point and the Pope himself is inferiour to a Council.) Whereupon Gregory was forced, by the persuasions of the Emperor Si∣gismund,
to send some Person to the Council (because he would not go himself) to approve of their proceedings in his Name. So he sent Charles Malatesta, an excellent Man, who seeing them all agree, to make Gregory also lay down all claim to the Papacy, he stood forth be∣fore 'em all, and sitting down in a Chair that was made as stately as if Gregory himself had been there, he read the Instrument of Renunciation over and presently deposed Gregory: for which free act of his he was made Legate of Millain by all the Council. But this Person not long after dy'd at Recanati of grief (as some say) for his so sudden Depri∣vation before the time appointed. For he was clearly for deferring the business as long as he could, as placing some hope in delay. But he died before Martin came to be Pope, and was buried in the Church of Recanati. Now though two Popes were removed, there remained a third who gave 'em more trouble than the other two, and that was Pe∣ter Luna, called Benedict XIII. as I told you before. But to force him to resign, Sigismund went personally with some Agents of the Council to the Kings of England and France, and perswaded them for the sake of Christianity so much endanger'd by the Schism, to assist him, now that the other two had laid down, in the removal of Benedict; who an∣swering him to his mind, he went straight to Ferdinand King of Aragon, whose Subjects generally stood for Benedict, who agreed among other Articles, either to persuade Benedict to resign, or to cause his People to withdraw their subjection to him, (as Gregory and John had done in the Council) and to submit to the Council; But Benedict kept in his strong Castle, and would not comply, persisting that he was Christ's true Vi∣car, and that the City of Constance, (where Pope John had been forc'd even by his own Friends to exauctorate himself) was not a place of Freedom requisite for a General Council. The Spanish Nobility seeing Benedicts obstinacy, followed the Order of the Council, and came over to the rest. Now things were carried in the Council by the Suffrages of five Nations, Italy, France, Germany, Spain and England. And what∣soever was Decreed by their Votes, was confirm'd, and publish'd by a Beadle, publick Notary before the Court, as a general Act. By this Authority Benedict, when the matter had been bandied for some time, was deprived of the Popedom, the Nations that were of his side, being either absent or rejected; especially the Scots, and the Earl of Armag∣nac. In the same Council the Heresie of John Wickliffe was condemn∣ed; and two of his followers, to wit, John Hus, and Jerome, his disciple, as heads of the Heresie, were burnt: because they affirm'd, among other Errors, That Ecclesiastical Men ought to be poor, for that all People were offended at their great wealth and Luxury. Matters being thus composed, and mention made concerning Reforming the Church, and manners of the Clergy, they thought that could not be done whilst the Sea was vacant. Then they Discours'd about electing a new Pope, that the Decrees of that Council might have the more Authority. And in order to it, they resolv'd to choose six good Men out of every Na∣tion, who together with the Cardinals, should go into the Conclave and choose a new Pope. Novemb. 8. 1417. they went into the Con∣clave, and by consent of 32 Cardinals, and all the several Nations (con∣trary to the expectation of all Men in the presence of many of the Schis∣maticks) Otho Columna, a Nobleman of Rome, and Cardinal Deacon of
S. George was made Pope upon S. Martins day, Novem. 11. when the Sea had been without a true Pope for four years. And this was done so much to the satisfaction of all Men, that the joy was inexpressible. The Empe∣ror was so mightily pleased at it, that he went into the Conclave and gave 'em thanks (without any respect to his own Dignity) for choosing so good a Man, and one so fit to support Christianity which was almost decay'd. And then falling down prostrate before the Pope, he kiss'd his feet with great Veneration; whilst the Pope on the contrary em∣braced him, and valued him as a Brother, and gave him thanks, that by his means and industry Peace was restored once more to the Church of God. But the reason why he would be called Pope Martin was, be∣cause the Election was upon S. Martins day. Whilst these things were transacted at Constance, Ladislaus dying as he was going against the Flo∣rentines, the cry at Rome was, To Arms, and for Liberty. Whereupon Peter Mattheucii was forced against his Will to assume the Government of the City, though afterward he relinquish'd the Office, when he un∣derstood that a Legate whom Pope John had design'd to send thither, would shortly come with a Senator of Bologna. As soon as they were come, they put Paul Palonius, and John Cincius, two seditious Citizens, to death. The year following Brachius Montonius came with an Army to Rome, and getting into the City, began to storm the Castle S. An∣gelo, which was defended by a strong Garison of Queen Joans; who succeeded her Brother Ladislaus in the Kingdom. But when Sfortia, the Queens General, came up, he not onely raised the Siege, but beat Brachius out of the City, the Romans siding with neither Party. John Columna was kill'd in that fight by a private Soldier, that formerly had fought under Paul Ʋrsin, whom Lewis Columna, in Brachius's Army, had formerly kill'd at Fuligno. Now the Soldier had a mind to kill Lewis, to revenge Pauls death, but John who was innocent died for it as he was going to save Lewis. Whilst Rome was in this tempestuous condi∣tion, rowing to and fro, it conceived at length some hope of quiet, upon Martin's being chosen. MARTIN V. MARTIN the Fifth, a Roman, formerly called Otho Colum∣na, was made Pope in the Council, by the general consent of all the Nations and Cardinals, at a time when he as well as the Church was in a declining condition. For he had been well educated by his Parents care from his Childhood, and when he grew up, he studied the Canon Law at Perugia, from whence he return'd to the City and for his integrity and learning was made Re∣ferendary by Pope Ʋrban VI. Which place he acquitted with so much humanity, justice, and mildness, that he was created Cardinal Deacon by Innocent VII. Nor did that make him forego his natural Disposi∣tion. For he was more courteous than before, and lent his assistance to all that wanted it, yet so, as not to meddle much in publick matters. So that when there were many Debates in the Council of Constance by
reason of the Factions, he took the middle way, and seemed to incline to neither Party, but always studied the general good: Being therefore beloved by the Emperor, the Cardinals, and indeed by all Men, he was chosen Pope, In which Office he was not idle, but active and careful, hearing, refuting, and approving; persuading, disuading, exhorting, or deterring those that came before him according to reason and the me∣rits of the Cause. For he was very accessible; and never denied a rea∣sonable request; besides that he was a Man of great prudence in De∣bates. For he would tell what ought to be done, as soon as a thing was proposed to him. He was short in his Speeches, and wary in his Actions, insomuch that people saw a thing effected before they could imagine he had thought of it. His Discourse was full of Sentences; nor did any word come from him so often, as [Justice:] frequently turning to his Attendants and Familiars, especially them that govern'd Cities and Provinces, and saying; Love Justice, ye that judg the Earth. Indeed the Church of God wanted such a Pope at that time, to sit at the Helm, and steer S. Peter's Boat (then batter'd with Waves of Schism and Sedition) into a safe Port. He therefore having obtained this great Dignity, and seeing the Hydras head which might grow out again and multiply, was still left; (that is, Benedict, formerly called Peter Luna, who kept with some few Cardinals and Prelates in a place that might be called the very Fort of Schism.) Whilst some People of Aragon were at a stand which way to incline, He, by approbation of the Council sent Alemannus Ademarius a very learned Man (whose Tomb is still to be seen in new S. Maries) a Florentine, and Cardinal of S. Eu∣sebius, as Legate à Latere into Aragon; to admonish Peter upon Eccle∣siastical Penalties and Censures to resign the Pontificate. Nay, even the Cardinals that were on Peter's side, when they heard this ultimate resolution of the Pope and Council, went to Peter and desired him, at last to remove all Schism out of the Church of God, with which Chri∣stendom had been for so many years afflicted; and told him, that John and Gregory had done the same, in order to save the Church from ruin. Peter gave 'em some slight answer, and told 'em he could not do it; but he would agree with Martin, if all were true which people said of his integrity and humanity: and bid 'em, let him alone to manage the business, and trouble themselves no more about it. But of the four Cardinals who went to him, two observing his obstinacy immediately revolted from him to Martin. And those two that continued on his side were presently counted Anti-Cardinals: one of which was a Car∣thusian, and the other called Julian Dobla. Upon this all Spain acknow∣ledged Martins Authority; and so did the Scots and those of Armagnac not long after. And so all Christendom, except one Peninsula, owned the Authority of Martin. This great Affair thus setled by the pains and industry of the Ecclesiastick and secular Princes, especially of Si∣gismund the Emperor, they began to talk of reforming the manners of both the Laiety and Clergy, which were debauched with too much Li∣cence. But because the Council of Constance had lasted already four years, to the great inconvenience of Prelates and their Churches, it was Martin's pleasure, and the Opinion of the Council, that weighty Affair should be deferred till some more seasonable opportunity, it being (he said) a work that would require much time and deliberation; because,
as Jerome says, every Country has its peculiar Manners, and Customs, which cannot be easily remov'd without great disturbance. Now be∣cause the Schism from a small beginning had lasted a long time to the great disadvantage of Christendom, upon notice that John XXIII. was esca∣ped out of custody, fearing lest he should call another Council, he publish'd a Decree concerning the calling of Councils, That from the end of the Council at Constance no other Council should be held within five years; and after that, within seven, and from thence it was drawn out to ten years, and was made a Law, That every ten years a General Council should be held in some convenient place, to treat of matters of Faith, and the common good of Christendom; In confirma∣tion whereof, by the approbation of the Council Martin publish'd his Bulls. But he abrogated all Decrees that were made during the Schism, before his Pontificate, except such as were made to promote faith or good manners. That all Men might know he intended to call a Coun∣cil, he publickly advised concerning a commodious place for it, and at last chose Pavia by general approbation, and gave out his Breves to this purpose: Martin, Bishop, and Servant of Gods Servants (for the fu∣ture remembrance of the thing) being desirous to have Obedience paid to the Decree of this General Council, upon a Debate had con∣cerning a Place where the next Council shall be holden, we do with the approbation and consent of the said Council and by the Authori∣ty of these presents appoint the City of Pavia for that purpose. And let no man contravene this our Decree, upon pein of the displeasure of God Almighty and of his Apostles SS. Peter and Paul. Given and enacted at Constance in the publick Council-House, April 18. in the first year of our Pontificate. And now he was willing the Council should be dissolv'd, wherefore calling a full Assembly, with the good liking of the Emperor and of all the rest, he commanded Ibaldo Cardi∣nal of S. Vitus to dismiss them, which he did by saying, Sirs, Depart in peace. Every one now having leave to be gone, the Pope was desired, on the one side, by the Emperor and the Germans, that he would tarry some time in their Country, and by the French Princes, on the other side, to go into France; but he told 'em he could not do it by any means, because he said, the Churches Patrimony was torn and spoiled by Usur∣pers in Italy whilst the Pope was absent; and that the City of Rome, which was the Metropolis of Christendom, was almost ruin'd for want of the presence of its Governour, so much it had suffer'd by Plague, Fa∣mine, Sword, Fire, and Sedition; beside that the Churches and Chap∣pels of the holy Martyrs, by the Pope's absence were either in ruins, or ready to fall, and therefore he must be gone thither. He desired 'em to take that kindly which reason and necessity forced him to, and that they would let him sit in Peter's Chair, since they had unanimously chosen him Pope. That the Church of Rome was the Mother and the Head of all other Churches, and therefore the Pope ought to reside there, lest the true Pilot should be displaced from the Stern, to the Stem, to the great hazard and detriment of both Passengers and Sailers, (i.e. all Christian Men.) So he went from Constance through Savoy into Italy, and arrived at Millain: where he was very kindly received by Duke Philip and all his People, who gave him all the respect imaginable. Phi∣lip was at that time in Arms, endeavouring to recover his paternal in∣heritance, which the Usurpers kept from him with great bravery and
courage; for having once tasted how pleasant it was to govern, they were not easily turn'd out of possession. However Carmignola Philip's chief Commander press'd Pandulphus Malatesta very hard, who having taken Pergamo, by bribing the Governour to betray the Castle, moved toward Brescia, and would have quickly strip'd him of all his Dominions, had he not been aided by the Venetians with great sums of Money and stout Cavalry; or had not Pope Martin persuaded Philip to make a Peace with Pandulphus: which was accordingly afterward composed and a∣greed upon at Mantoua, in the presence of Martin, and by the Umpirage of John Francisco, upon these terms; to wit, That Pandulphus paying a yearly Tribute should keep Brescia so long as he lived, but should not have Power to give it away by Will, because at his Death it naturally devolv'd upon Philip. But the next year Pandulphus broke his Peace, by endeavouring by Men and Money to keep Cabrinus Fundulus in the possession of Cremona. For Philip made War against him and endea∣voured to regain the City which was his paternal Inheritance, but had been so many years possess'd by that Usurper. Yet there was a report that Pandulphus had bought the City of Cabrinus, and promised to give him Riviera di Salo for it. But John Francisco strove all he could to keep him from this War, and sent Embassadors to tell him that he did contrary to all Law and Reason, in violating of Leagues, defending a Tyrant, and taking up Arms against him who gave him the Govern∣ment of Brescia. And that Martin's Authority ought not to be slight∣ed, to say nothing of his own, by whose Arbitrement the Peace was made. But if he slighted the Authority of Men, at least he should re∣verence that of God, whom they had invoked as a witness to the League, which he had broken. Soon after the Pope went away from Mantoua, in the fourth month after he came thither, and passing through Ferrara and Romagna he came to Florence, without calling at Bologna which he shun'd on purpose. For when they of Bologna heard that Baldesar Cos∣sa was forced to lay down the Pontificate, they expelled the Church-Officers and asserted their Liberty. At that time Carmignola press'd hard upon Pandulphus (by his breach of the Peace made justly obno∣xious to a War) and in a short space took a great part of the Country of Brescia, and pitch'd his Camp at Montclere, there to encounter Lewis Meliorat Nephew to Innocent VII. who was said to be coming with a great Body of Horse to help Pandulphus. For they two were kindred by Marriage, and Lewis did it in respect to his Relation. So they join∣ed Battel, wherein Lewis was basely routed; and not long after Carmig∣nola reduced Brescia and made it subject to Philip: who also within a little while was Master of Cremona, and put Cabrinus the Usurper to Death. Nicolas d' Este being mov'd at Philip's great success, went of his own accord, and did what he might have been forced to; that is, he went to Millain and restored Parma (which he possess'd himself of when Otho the Third died) to Philip, but kept Rheggio, at the request of Pope Martin, as a Fee. Thither also went John Francis Prince of Mantoua, to congratulate Philip's Successes. But when he saw Philip look gruffly upon him, and understood that he design'd to renew his Claim to all that he held of the Cremoneses and the Brescians, he went from Millain in haste, and enter'd into Alliance with the Florentines, and Venetians. For those two States were very timorous, and took pains to
draw over whom they could to their Party; because Philip, who loved Dominion, had broken the League with them, and not onely given Sar∣zana upon the River Magra, to Thomas Fregoso (whom he had expelled from his Principality lest he should join with the Bandittoes of Genoa against him) but also had incited the Bolognians, who were Allies of the Florentines▪ to revolt, and in order to it hired their Soldiers to fight under him; nay he had got possession of Forli under colour of the non-age of Theobald, or to gratifie the Prince of Ferrara, whereas there was a proviso in the League, that Philip should not meddle with Bologna and Romagna. They feared likewise, lest all would be carried by the power of the three mighty Princes, to wit, Philip, Pope Martin, and King Lewis, whom they knew to be Confederates. Whereas on the other side Philip laid all the fault upon the Venetians, because they had en∣deavour'd to keep Pandulphus in the Government of Brescia, and because the Florentines and Genoeses had assisted some of his Enemies with Money and Ammunition, and had bought Legorne, (which he had lately Conquer'd) of the Genoeses for an hundred thousand pounds. These seeds of Discord might seem enough to raise a War at that time, but nothing did more set on the Venetians, than the Autho∣rity of Carmignola, a person mightily famed for warlike Discipline, as any of that Age. This person could not endure (as he used to say himself) the insolence of Philip and therefore came over to the Veneti∣ans, and animating them to War promised to assist 'em with his utmost. Whereupon these two States, assisted by the Princes of Mantoua and Fer∣rara, and going Partners in the charge of the War, set out an Army of twelve thousand Horse and eight thousand Foot, over whom Carmig∣nola was General. And then setting upon Philip from every quarter at once, with Boats upon the River as well as Ships upon the Sea, they were invited into the Town by the Guelphs of Brescia, who were against Philip. And having seized some part of it, they reduced it all into their own power within seven months. Then Carmignola led them to take the Castles which belonged to Brescia, when Pope Martin, very much concerned for Philips misfortune, sent the Cardinal of S. Crosses to the Venetians, to mediate between them and Philip. But that did not succeed, because the Venetians and Florentines made unreasonable Demands, and so they began again mighty preparations for a War. They fought thrice in that year, first at Cotolengo, a Castle of Brescia; the se∣cond time at the upper part of Cremona (in which two places they parted pretty equal, and neither had the better on't) and the third time at Maclodio; where Philip was defeated, and Charles Malatesta the Ge∣neral taken. This was so great an overthrow, that if Carmignola would have kept the Soldiers that he took, and have pursu'd 'em whilst they were in such a consternation, it had been no great pains to have turn'd Philip out of his Principality. Charles (I told you) was taken in that Battel, but was sent away safe by the Prince of Mantoua, his Kinsman; But Carmignola employing the Army against the Towns belonging to the Brescians, which had continu'd in their Allegiance to Philip, he gave him time to breath upon it. For he not onely made Peace with Ama∣dens Duke of Savoy (who lay hard upon him) yielding him Vercelli; but he instigated the Emperor Sigismund and Branorus Scala against the Ve∣netians. But Pope Martin, seeing Philip in such dangerous Circumstan∣ces, sent the Cardinal of S. Crosses again to make peace between him
and the Venetians: who staying at Ferrara, till the several Embassadors of the Princes and Cities came with instructions, he made a Peace upon these Conditions, That the Venetians should keep Brescia and all the Towns belonging to the Brescians or Cremoneses, which they had taken; that Philip should surrender Bergamo and all that appertain'd to it to the Venetians; and that he should not molest their Allies, or those of the Florentines, or perswade any of 'em to revolt. Martin approved of this Peace, for fear Philip should be quite turn'd out of his Dutchy. For as he could not be his Friend (though he loved him well) upon the account of Religion: so neither could he then especially, because at that time the Church-Treasury had been exhausted for several years by the War against Brachius. For when he went to Florence, he found Brachius Montonius, an excellent Soldier, had so far got possession of Perugia, the Dutchy of Spoleto, and great part of the Churches Patri∣mony (by help of the Usurpers round about) that he could not get safe to Rome. But when Brachius upon Admonition would not com∣ply, the Pope used first of all spiritual Weapons, that is, Censures, a∣gainst him; and interdicted all his Adherents, nor were the Priests al∣lowed to do their Office in the usual places. At which misfortune of their Friend Brachius the Florentines were concern'd, and treated with Martin for Peace, upon Condition, that Brachius should throw himself at the Popes feet and ask pardon, which he did. And that he should restore some Towns to the Church, and fight under the Pope till he had reduced Bologna which was then in Rebellion, and made it subject to Martin. In which War Gabriel Condelmer, Cardinal-Priest of S. Clements, and Legate, was General; who by his industry and Brachius's Valour subdu'd Bologna in a short time, and made it tributary to the Church. Whilst these things were transacted in Bologna, the four Cardinals, for∣merly of Peter Luna's party, the Anti-Pope, came to Martin at Florence, where they were receiv'd most honourably by the whole Consistory, and retein'd their former Dignities. Three were Cardinal-Deacons, but the fourth, who was formerly a Canon Regular, was a Cardinal-Priest. Baldesar Cossa being still a Prisoner at Heidelberg in Germany under the Count Palatine, some Citizens of Florence (of which Cosmus was one) were urgent with Pope Martin, to set him at liberty: The Pope pro∣mised, he would: but whilst his Legate went thither to perform it, Bal∣desar, being impatient of staying any longer, gave the Count Palatine thirty thousand pounds to free him: And coming into Italy, he went di∣rectly toward Florence, but call'd upon Peter Rubeus a Baron of Parma, and an old Friend of his, where he understood that there was wait laid for him. Thereupon he fled by Night, along with the Legate whom he met by the way, to Thomas Fregosos, another old Friend of his, and gave people a suspition that the Schism would be renew'd. For he was a Man of great Courage, and very cunning, nor could he endure a pri∣vate life. Besides, there were not wanting such as would incite the bold Man to innovations, they were generally at that time so much af∣fected with Novelties. But God Almighty took pity on his Church and put Baldesar upon a resolution of going to Martin at Florence, without any Articles of Agreement, or any Caution, between them. When he came thither and had kiss'd the Popes foot (to the admiration of all that saw it) he saluted him in the presence and hearing of all the Com∣pany, by the name of Christ's true Vicar, and a true Pope canonical∣ly
elected. This was strange to all that saw it, and brought to pass, it should seem, rather by Gods providence than any humane skill: That a Man, covetous of Dominion, and in such an high Station before, should be so supple in a place where he might be free, because he was loved by all. But it made every body cry for joy, especially those Cardinals, that had acknowledged him as the true Pope. But Martin considering the vicissitude, or changeableness of humane Affairs, made him a Car∣dinal in few days, and then Bishop of Frascati; after which he shew'd him as much respect as any other Cardinal, both in publick and private. But Baldesar (some think) died of grief in a few months after, at Flo∣rence, (as being unable to endure a private life) and was buried most honourably in S. Johns Church, nor far from the Cathedral, at the great cost and charges of Cosmo di Medices, who grew so rich with Baldesars Mo∣ney, that he was look'd upon as the chief Man in Florence of a Citizen, nay perhaps the richest in Italy, or the World. Upon his Tomb were writ∣ten these words: BALDESARIS COSSAE, JOHANNIS XXIII. QƲONDAM PAPAE CORPƲS HOC TƲMƲLO CONDITƲM. Du∣ring these Actions at Florence, the Emperor of Constantinople's Agents came to the Pope, and promised that the Greeks would come over to the Latins in all points of Faith upon reasonable terms. The Pope re∣ceiv'd them very kindly and splendidly, and made Peter Fontesiccus (a Spaniard, Cardinal of S. Angelo, and a very learned Man) Legate à La∣tere, to go to Constantinople and settle matters there. But before he sent the good Man away, he dispatch'd Frier Anthony Massanus thither, (who was General of the Minors) to find how the Emperor and the Greeks were affected, and tell him what he might trust to. Now the Romans were ur∣gent to have him come to Rome, and therefore taking his leave very kind∣ly of the Florentines, he made their City a Metropolis. For though be∣fore, even from its foundation almost, it had only had the honour of a Bi∣shoprick, he made it an Arch-Bishoprick, and the Mother-Church to Vo∣laterra, Pistoia, and Fiesola. He also gave a bigger Altar to S. Mary the New, belonging to the Order of Preachers, where he lived all the while he was at Florence; that Convent being very commodious for his recepti∣on. At last, parting from Florence he came to Rome, where all the peo∣ple met him; and the Nobility look'd upon him as the good Genius, or Father of their Country.Sept. 21. 1421▪ And that day the Romans put in their Calendar as a lucky one. When he came he found the City of Rome so ruinated, that it look'd nothing like a City. You might have seen the Houses ready to totter, the Churches fallen down, the Streets empty, the City full of Dirt and Mire, and in exteam want of all sorts of provisions. What should I say more? There was neither the face of a City, nor any sign of civility there, the Citizens seeming rather Sojourners and Vagabonds. The good Pope was troubled to see it, and apply'd himself to adorning of the City, and reforming the Ci∣tizens manners, so that in a short time it looked much better than be∣fore. For this reason he was called by the People not onely the True Pope, but Father of his Country. But lest that publick joy should last too long without interruption, the year following in November, on St. Andrews Eve, the Tiber swell'd so high, that it came in at the Porta del popolo, over∣flow'd the whole City, (which lies upon a level) and filled the Church of S. Mary the round as far as the great Altar. Two days after it fell,
but took much Cattel along with it, and did great damage to the Citi∣zens; who sailed about the Streets, as upon the Tiber. Now King Lewis, Son to Lewis came to Rome, and obtain'd of Martin to be inve∣sted King of Naples, by general consent of the Cardinals. For he ha∣ving been invited thither and adopted by Queen Joan, Sister to Ladis∣laus, expected by this means to get the Kingdom without fighting, but was driven out of Naples by a contrary Faction and retired to Calabria. And now the time for the Council drawing near (according to the Decree at Constance) Martin was pleased, by consent of the Cardinals, to send some Bishops before to Pavia, to begin it: that seeming to be the most commodious place for it. Thither therefore he immediately sent Peter Donatus, Arch-Bishop of Candia, James Camplo Bishop of Spo∣leto, Peter Rosatius Abbot of Aquilegia, Frier Leonard a Florentine, and General of the Preachers, to open the Council; But they found no body yet come from France or Germany, onely two Abbots of Burgun∣dy; therefore they thought fit to defer it, till one at least should be come from each Nation, little of moment being to be transacted without uni∣versal consent. But while they waited their coming, on a sudden Pa∣via was visited so severely with a Plague, that with the Popes leave, the Presidents of the Council remov'd to Sienna; whither people came from all Nations more readily and in greater numbers than to Pavia. Alphonsus King of Aragon, (who was an Enemy to Martin for giving the Title of King of Naples and Sicily to Lewis, which himself desired) sent his Embassador to the Council with Order to delay it as much as he could, and to bring about the Cause of the Anti-pope Peter Luna (yet alive in Panischola) either by Promises or Bribes to those who had greatest Authority in the Council. Wherefore Martin (who knew very well, how great a calamity such a thing would bring upon the Church, and what danger there was in delays) commanded the Coun∣cil to be immediately dissolv'd, approving first of the Decrees made in it, that concern'd matters of Faith. And lest he might seem to fear a General Council, he order'd that another should be held at Basil se∣ven years after. Thus did that prudent, subtil Man root out the seeds of Schism and Discord that were sown in the Council of Siena. Al∣phonso then complain'd of Martin publickly, that by his means he was put by the Kingdom which Joan designed for him, and Lewis was made Heir in his room. Martin easily confuted this charge, and told him that Lewis was confirm'd Heir to Joan by Alexander V. and John XXIII. long before: and that all the blame ought to be laid on the Queen, and not upon him, whose business it was to strengthen rather than weaken the Churches Feudataries, unless they had committed some heinous Offence against the Sea of Rome: and that he did not see, why Lewis might not be lawful Heir to Joan who was Crown'd by his Order. But when Brachius saw the Pope involv'd in so many Affairs, and so distracted by reason of the quarrel between him and Alphonso, he got many of the Church-Towns by force, and laid close Siege to Aquila a City in the Kingdom of Naples. The Pope was angry at that, and raising a good sufficient Army, he attempted to relieve Aquila, assisted by the Army of the Queen and Lewis, and not far from Aquila he conquer'd and kill'd Brachius in the open Field. The Sfortians were in that Battel, under the conduct of Francis Son to Sforza, who some
years before going over the River Piscara (which the Ancients call'd Aternus) was drown'd. Brachius's body was brought to Rome, and bu∣ried in an unhallow'd place without the Porta di Sancto Lorenzo. Upon this Victory there was so great tranquillity (besides that Perugia, To∣di, and Assisi with some other Towns which Brachius had possession of were reduced to the Church) that they thought Augustus's happy days were come again into the World. Then people lived at ease, and could walk even in the Night through the Woods without any danger; no Robbers being abroad, no Russians and Thieves; for he cut off Tartalia, Lauellus, and other Usurpers, that got their living rather by Rapine, than War. But the Hereticks of Bohemia who plagu'd the Catholicks of Germany continually with Heresie and Arms, seemed to interrupt this Peace and happiness. To make them therefore submit to Reason and to the Church, he admonish'd them first of all very gravely, and when that would not do, he sent Legats into Germany, to stir up the Catho∣licks to Arms. And first he sent Henry, Cardinal of S. Eusebius thi∣ther, alone, then Bartholomew of Piacenza; and last of all he recall'd them, and sent Julian Caesarinus Cardinal of S. Angelo, who receiv'd great damage from the Enemy, not by his own fault, but by the cowardise of his Soldiers. However Martin was not discouraged at it, but made greater preparations against the Hereticks; onely before he set about such a grand Affair, he resolv'd to compose and quiet Italy. For when the Peace was made by Martin between Philip and the Venetians, the Florentines bore a grudg at Ladislaus Son to Paul Guinisius, Lord of Luc∣ca, for the assistance he gave Philip in the preceding War, and now he not being mention'd in the Articles of that Peace, they laid hold on it as a fair opportunity to subdue the City, and having raised an Army under Nicolas Fortebrachius and taken some Castles thereabout, they laid Siege to it. Whereupon Philip by the entreaty of Paul, and for fear lest if Lucca fell into the hands of the Florentines, he should find them the sharper, as being the nearer Enemies, he first sent Francis Sfor∣za into Parma with a great body of Horse, to raise Foot-soldiers there. Who passing the Apennine in the beginning of Spring put the Flo∣rentines into such a fright, that before he came into the Cloudy Vale (as the Inhabitants call it) the Enemies had removed their Camp, and rais∣ed their Siege from before Lucca, out of fear. And his coming was so much the more welcome to the Lucceses, because when their Enemies were subdu'd and the Usurper taken, they thought to become absolute freemen by Francis's assistance. But the Florentines bribing Francis with fifty thousand pounds, he left the people of Lucca in a worse condition than ever; having promised for that Sum not to serve Philip for six months. Then the Lucceses were besieged more close than before: Whereupon Philip at the request of Martin (who also pitied the case of the Lucceses) sent. Nicolas Piceninus thither with a great Body of Horse presently; who vanquish'd and routed the Enemy, and not only raised the Siege, but march'd thence, and took many Castles belonging to Pisa and Volaterra by storm, and did the Sieneses a kindness, who then made War upon the Florentines. Martin being now undisturb'd by any forein Foe, apply'd his mind to adorn the City, and Churches of Rome, and to that purpose, repaired the Portico of S. Peters which was falling down, and paved the Lateran Church with Mosaic work,
cieled it anew; and began those Paintings there which were done by the hand of the famous Gentilis. He likewise repaired the old Palace that was ready to fall, near the Twelve Apostles, where he lived some years. The Cardinals follow'd his Example, and re-edified their Churches as fast as they could; so that now Rome look'd something like a City. He also created certain Cardinals, of which his Nephew Prosper Columna, Cardinal of S. George, was one. In the mean time Peter Luna dy'd at Panischola, but lest the Church should be at quiet, those two Anti-Cardinals, that I told you of, were persuaded by Al∣phonso who was Martin's Enemy, to choose Giles Munio (a Canon of Barselona, and a Nobleman) Pope, and call'd him Clement VIII. He was no sooner chosen, but he made Cardinals and acted as Pope. But when Martin and Alphonso were friends again, he sent Peter de Fuso a Cardinal, as Legate from the Sea Apostolick thither: to whom Giles resign'd his Title to the Popedom, at the command of Alphonso. For which Martin was so kind to him afterward, that he made him Bishop of Majorca. And the Cardinals also that were made by Giles did vo∣luntarily lay down their Dignity. But those two that Peter Luna made remain'd still obstinate, and therefore because they would not obey the Pope, the Legate put them in Prison. Thus Martin's industry and prudence removed the Schism from all parts; and when the Church was setled he used as much skill and discretion in conferring of Bene∣fices. For he did not bestow 'em upon every one that ask'd him, but con∣sider'd who was fittest to receive them, and to take such a charge upon him. And if he did not know any body in the Country where Bene∣fices fell, he used to send and enquire of those that knew the place who was qualified with Learning, Birth, or breeding fit for any Office. And thus did he advance the Church and deserving Men at the same time, to his great Honour. In fine, so couragious and resolute he was, that though he had two Brothers, the elder of which (Jorda∣nus, Prince of Salerno) died of the Plague, and the other (Lorenzo) was burn'd to death in a Turret which was casually set on fire, he was not known to say, or do any thing, that argued Impatience, or lowness of mind. But this same Person so exactly good in the whole course of his life, died at Rome of an Apoplexy in the fourteenth year and the third month of his Pontificate, and the sixty third year of his Age: and was by his own Order buried in S. Johns Church near the Heads of the Apostles, in a brazen Tomb, and attended by all the people of Rome, and the Clergy, weeping as if the Church of God, and the City of Rome had been bereft of their onely and their best Pa∣rent. The Sea at that time was vacant twelve days.
EƲGENIƲS IV. EƲGENIƲS the Fourth, a Venetian, of the Family of Con∣delmero, (a common but ancient name) whose Fathers name was Angelo, arrived at the Pontificate after this manner. When Gregory XII. was made Pope (who was of the Family of Coraro, and a Venetian) Anthony Corar Gregory's Nephew, a Canon of S. Georges in Alga going to Rome, took Gabriel Condelmero, who was of the same profession and had lived with him from his Childhood, along with him somewhat against his will. Gregory was so taken with his Wit and Parts, that he first made him his Treasurer, and then Bishop of Siena, having made his Nephew Anthony Bishop of Bologna. The Sieneses refused Ga∣briel at first, and would not have him for their Bishop; alledging that a Foreiner ought not to be set over them in that high Function, but one that knew the customs and usages of their City. But when Gre∣gory afterward upon a distrust of his condition, left Rome for Lucca, and encreased the number of Cardinals, he made Anthony his Nephew and Gabriel Condelmero two, who was made use of by Gregory after that, and (when he was turn'd out) by Martin in many great Affairs; e∣specially in the Embassy to the Marcha d' Ancona, in which he not only confirm'd the Inhabitants in their Allegiance to the Church, by punish∣ing some seditious Conspirators, but also repaired the Church of S. Ag∣nes at Ancona, which was decay'd, and the Port of the same City which was Weather-beaten, very old, and ruinous; so as to make it like Tra∣jans. And afterward when Martin understood that the Bolognians were set upon innovations, he sent Gabriel from Ancona thither, who suppress'd the Sedition as soon as he came. Where coming to Rome, and Martin soon after dying, he alone was thought fit to be made Pope, out of eighteen Cardinals, who at that time were in the Conclave, and changing his name to Eugenius, was brought immediatey to S. Peters, attended by all the People and Clergy, in the year 1431. March 3d. And having re∣ceived the Papal Crown he went to the Lateran, and from thence to the Vatican, where he set a day for a general Consistory to be held. At which there was such a Concourse of People, that the Timber of the building where they met, (and where the publick Consistory now stands) gave way, and put the people into such a consternation, that the Bishop of Sinigaglia, a Citizen of Rome, of the Family of Mella, was trodden to death in the throng: For the Popes House was not built at that time as it is now. When the Consistory was dismiss'd, Eugenius took all care to avoid Tumults. But some Sycophants persuading him that Martin who was very covetous had left somewhere a great Treasure behind him, of which he might be inform'd by Martin's Friends and Re∣lations; they made the Man so mad, that he commanded Oddo Poccio Martin's Vice-Chamberlain to be laid hold on, and gave the charge of the business to Stephen Colonna his General (the onely person of his Party among the Colonna's) Cardinal Ʋrsin and Cardinal Comitum eg∣ging him on, by whose contrivance 'tis thought all these things were
done against the Colonneses, out of an old grudg between the two Fa∣ctions. Eugenius however commanded that Oddo should be brought to him quietly and civily which was quite contrarily executed by Stephen. For not onely his goods were plunder'd by the Soldiers, but he was carried by force, or rather dragg'd like a Robber publickly into the Pope's presence. Eugenius was very angry at this rude usage of him, and check∣ed Stephen for it; nay threaten'd to punish him severely for bringing not onely Oddo but the Bishop of Tivoli, who was formerly Martin's Chamberlain, before him after such an unworthy manner. Hereupon Stephen fearing the Popes displeasure fled to Palestrina, to Prince Colon∣na, and desired him to join with him, to drive Eugenius from the City, because, he said, Eugenius had a Design to extinguish the whole Family of Colonna. And that he knew that to be so; for he was privy to it himself, and that he ran away from the City, because he knew that he also must bear a part in that common Calamity, unless they all avoided it together. The Prince moved with what he said, and with the mis∣fortunes of such as had been Martin's Friends, took up Arms and im∣mediately resolv'd to set upon the Pope, staying onely a little, till his Brother Prosper, a Cardinal Deacon, whom he had forewarn'd of the business, could get out of the City. And as soon as he saw him, he march'd from Palestrina to Marino, and thence to Rome against Eugenius; and having the Gate di Sancto Sebastiano deliver'd up to him by John Baptista, he enter'd the Town at first without doing any violence. But when they were come as far as S. Marks, in the Street called Colonna, the Pope's Soldiers met them, assisted by a great number of people. They fought some time in the City very stoutly; and many were slain and taken on both sides. But the Colonneses seeing the People of Rome otherwise affected than they expected, they resolv'd to retreat out of the City, but as they went they plunder'd all things, drove away the Cat∣tel, and forc'd a great many Men along with 'em. But the Pope's Sol∣diers, mix'd with the Romans requited 'em for it. For they plunder'd and laid waste the Houses of Prosper the Cardinal, and all the Colonneses, together with all those that had been Martin's Friends. Being thus in∣cens'd on either side, they began to make use of treachery as well as open force, to bring about their Designs. For the Arch-Bishop of Be∣nevento, Son to Anthony Colonna, was taken, and one Masius a Frier, who being tortur'd confess'd, that he intended to kill the Governour of Castel S. Angelo, and so taking it by surprise, to betray it to the Colonneses, who, being once Masters of that, might drive the Pope and the Ʋrsins out of Rome, when they pleased. Masius was degraded from the Priest∣hood and quarter'd in Campo di Fiore, and his Limbs hung up at the four chief Gates of the City, nothing being said of the Arch-Bishop of Benevento. But Eugenius falling sick either of grief for these troubles or of Poison, as some said, he clap'd up a Peace with the Colonneses by the mediation of Angelot Foscus a Roman Citizen, whom he not long after made Cardinal at the same time with Francis Condelmero his Ne∣phew. This Peace he made publick with as much speed as possible, because he understood that Sigismund was come into Italy, and design'd for Rome; upon which he made his Nephew Francis Chamberlain: and gave him some excellent Persons for his Assistants in the management of the Church Patrimony. Whilst these things pass'd thus at Rome, the
Florentines and Venetians having routed a Fleet of Philip Duke of Genoa upon the Coast of Genoa in a Sea-fight, and having a Pope who was their Country-man, took the confidence to invade Philip by Land: But he sent for Nicolas Picenninus immediately out of Tuscany, and both beat the Venetian Fleet at Cremona, and easily defeated Carmignola, whom the Venetians beheaded a little after having first (as they say themselves) con∣victed him by Torture, Letters produc'd and Oral testimony that it was through his treachery, that they did not take Cremona, when Ca∣valcabos had seized one Gate of the City: and that the Navy was van∣quish'd before his face, when he might easily have hinder'd it with such a number of men as he had so near. But then the Florentines fearing lest the Emperor now coming into Italy, should favour Philip, they dis∣patch'd Nerius Capponius a Citizen of theirs, if possible, to persuade Eu∣genius, that the Emperors coming to the City, did threaten no less ruin to the Sea Apostolick than to Florence: And that it was an easie matter to keep him from passing over Arno into Siena (which had molested the Florentines a long time) if he would command Nicolas Tollentinas, then in Arms under the Pope, to join Michelett Cotignola, General of the Florentines, and oppose Sigismund at Arno, that he might not pass the River with his German Horse. Eugenius was easily persuaded to it; and upon some Debate about the charge of the War, Nerius took up the bu∣siness and agreed that the Florentines should pay two thousand Horse of Eugenius's raising as long as the War lasted. Then Nicolas Tollenti∣nas at the Pope's command march'd out of his Winter-quarters, and whilst he pillaged the Sieneses, gave Sigismund opportunity to pass the River Arno (by the assistance of Anthony Pontadera, who was an excel∣lent Commander, and a bitter Enemy of the Florentines) and thence pas∣sing through Volaterra in so peaceable a manner, that his Army seemed rather friends than foes, he was received and made welcome wherever he came. The Emperor having tarried six months at Siena, to the great cost of that City, and having in vain attempted to make Peace with the Florentines, applying himself to Eugenius he made a League with him, and then went to Rome; where he was kindly entertain'd by the people and the Pope, and receiv'd the Imperial Crown: And going from the Vatican, where he was crown'd, into the Lateran where he lodg'd, he Knighted several Italians and Germans at Ponte di S. An∣gelo, according to custom. And some say that Eugenius waited on him so far, and then went back to S. Peter's. After that the Emperor took leave of the Pope, and travelling through the Marcha d' Ancona, and Romagna he arrived at Ferrara and Mantoua. Where when he had stay'd some days, he made John Francis, Lord of Mantoua a Marquis, and married Barbara, the Daughter of John, Marquis of Brandenburgh to Lewis, Son of John Francis. This match was thought an honour to the Gonzagan Family, not onely because the Lady was akin to the Em∣perour, but because her Father John was an Imperial Elector. At last the Emperor departed out of Italy, leaving all things in confusion; but Nicolas d' Este, Marquis of Ferrara was persuaded by Philip to go to Venice and exhort them to Peace, and so he did, insomuch that they were induced by the awe he had over 'em, and considering their great expences, to send Plenipotentiaries to Ferrara along with him, where by consent of Eugenius, April 1. 1433. a Peace was concluded upon these
Conditions: to wit, That Philip should depart out of Geradada and de∣liver it up to the Marquis of Monteferrat and Orlando Pallaricini, both whom he had turn'd out of their paternal Inheritance, that all which had been taken from the Florentines, the Sieneses, or those of Lucca should be return'd to the Owners; and that he should be look'd upon as a common Enemy, that did not restore what he had taken in thirty days. Thus having made a Peace in all parts, they hoped for some rest, when on the sudden the whole shock of the War fell upon Eugenius. For Philip who loved Novelties sent Francis Sforza with a great Army into Romagna, pretending to march into Puglia (which Alphonso had in∣vaded) to defend those Towns which his Father Sforza had possess'd there. Who marching through Ancona and Ombria with his Army in good order, surprised and took them in a moment. And Philip not content to do so, sent Nicolas Fortebrachius, a valiant and prudent Commander with chosen Horse so suddenly against Eugenius that he was possess'd of the Ponte Molle and the Porta del popolo, before it was known that any Enemy approached. This Nicolas had formerly fought under Eugenius, and by his Commission had subdu'd the Governor of Vetralla and Civita Ve∣chia, by the help of the Venetian Galleys that attaqued the Castle off the Sea. But when Nicolas afterward demanded his pay, Eugenius answered him, that he had taken as much spoil out of the Castle, espe∣cially out of the Town as would satisfie him. At which Nicolas was so angry, that he went into the parts about Rome, and raised such tu∣mults, taking and driving away such numbers of Men and Cattel, that Eugenius was some time at a stand what to do. The Romans flock'd to him with their complaints; but the Pope, who at that time wanted both advice and health, sent 'em to Francis the Chamberlain, who being devoted to idleness and pleasure, gave 'em no other answer, but that they over-valued their Cattel (for they often complain'd of the loss of them) and told 'em that the Venetians lived more like Citizens than they without Beasts and flocks of Cattel. The Romans were dis∣pleased at this answer, and therefore when Nicolas had taken Tivoli (beating Count Tagliacotius out of it) and Subiaco, and drawn all the Colonneses to his party (Stephen Colonna, who was always of the other side being kill'd by the Prince) they threw off the yoke of Subjection and crying out, Arms, Arms, Liberty, Liberty, they beat out all Eugenius's Officers and taking Francis the Chamberlain Prisoner they created a new Magistracy of their own choosing, consisting of seven Romans whom they called Governors, who had power of life and death. But Eugenius in such an Hurry not knowing what to do resolv'd to flee for't. And immediately changing his Habit for that of a Monk, went on shipboard in a small Vessel along with Arsenius the Monk down the Tiber to Ostia. Whereupon certain Romans, that knew of his going, threw Stones and shot Arrows at him; for they would fain have kept him there till they had got possession of S. Angelo. Nevertheless Euge∣nius went away upon the 7th of July and sailed to Pisa first, and then to Florence in Galleys laid on purpose for his passage; and then the Ro∣mans betook themselves to storm the Castle, raising Mounds and Bul∣warks in all places, that might make it more accessible to the Enemy. On the other side, those of the Castle made some sallies upon them; and the Governor thinking it fit to use some stratagem with the people of
Rome, He (by the assistance and advice of Baldesar Aufido a cunning Cap∣tain, that defended the lower part of the Castle) bad one of his Soldiers that sallied out, that he should suffer himself to be taken by the Enemy, and then blame the cruelty and covetousness of him the Governor, and promise them that if they would give him such a reward, he would kill the Governor and betray the Castle. The Soldier did exactly as he was bid; and when he was taken, said all the ill things he could de∣vise against Antony Ridio (the Governor) and swore, he would bring the matter about to their mind. Thereupon being dismissed he went in∣to the Castle and hung up Anthonies Clothes, with somewhat like his Head on top of them, which was visible a great way off. Baldesar presently cry'd out, the wicked Fellow was justly punish'd, and that some of the chief Roman Commanders might now come in, and, if they paid the reward, take the Castle. They not being aware of the trick, went in, and were strait taken. Immediately there was a joyful noise in the Castle, and Darts and Bullets were thrown and shot upon the Romans without. The Romans being thus deluded advised concerning the enter-change of their Captives, and in order to it, set the Chamber∣lain, Eugenius's Nephew, at Liberty: and unanimously submitted to Eugenius within five months after they thought to have gain'd their freedom. Then there were Magistrates made in the name of the Church, who fortified the Capitol with strong Guards and other provisions. And after upon the arrival of John Viteleschus (whom they call'd, the Patri∣arch) Francis his Nephew being gone to Eugenius, a sudden dread seiz'd the Romans to such a degree that they durst not so much as open their mouths for fear. For Viteleschus was an imperious and cruel Man, and lived like a Tyrant rather than a Christian. These things were trans∣acted at Rome whilst Alphonso besieged Naples and Cajetta, which was stoutly defended by the Genoese Merchants: and the Genoeses thinking it their duty to assist their Countrymen, fitted out a Navy with all speed by the leave and good liking of Duke Philip Viconti, who lent 'em some Foot-Soldiers; and meeting their Enemy Alphonso not far from Ca∣jetta they engaged with him. After a long and a sharp conflict they de∣feated Alphonso, and took him Prisoner, and all his retinue, of which some were Princes. Alphonso was brought to Millain to Philip, but was en∣tertain'd not as a Captive, or an Enemy of the Genoeses, but as a King and a Friend. And when he had been treated honourably for some days, and presented by Philip with many great gifts, he went into his Kingdom and took Cajetta presently. Upon that the Genoeses were so enraged that he should free Alphonso so easily, whom they had taken with such hazard, that by the advice of Thomas Fregoso they revolted from Philip, and made the said Thomas their Duke. Then Picenninus, who was sent against the Genoeses, receiving news that they persisted in their obstinacy, took Sarzana, and marching toward Pisa, under pretence to go and help Alphonso, spoiled many Castles belonging to the Pisans. But the Florentines stopped his career, by sending for Francis Sfortia with the Pope's good liking, who was then in possession of Ancona, and endea∣vour'd, by the assistance of the Florentines and Venetians, to be made Lord of it. But Eugenius was against that; and said, that it became a Pope to preserve the Church-patrimony even by War, rather than alie∣nate it. So they deferred that business till another opportunity: yet Francis in hopes of it, did not onely beat Picenninus from the Siege of
Barga, taking Lewis Gonzaga who fought under Picenninus; but he laid close Siege to Lucca in the name of the Florentines. Picenninus was hin∣der'd from passing the Apennine to their relief, and therefore promised to free them another way. Wherefore he march'd through Bologna with∣out any molestation (onely taking a Town belonging to the Florentines, called Oriolo) and being mindful of the Lucceses, he went thither, and in the absence of Francis Sfortia vanquish'd the Florentines and raised the Siege of Lucca. The Pope being almost distracted with care, as well because he was surrounded with War, as that the Council of Basil, be∣gun by the Decree of Pope Martin, increased daily by the conflux of all the Princes of Spain, France, Germany and Hungary, who referr'd the case of all Christendom to that Council, he contrived how to dissolve it, and to that purpose, would have removed it from Basil to Bologna by general consent of the Cardinals that were there on his side. But the Emperor, other Princes and Prelates, then at Basil, did not onely dis∣obey the Pope, but admonish'd him several times to come himself with his Cardinals to Basil, which was a convenient place that Martin had chosen to hold the Council in, or else they threaten'd to oppose him as a preva∣ricating and an obstinate person. Eugenius was moved at their words and confirmed the Council at Basil by a new Breve, giving every one leave to go thither: for he was so tormented with Wars on all sides of him, that he had hardly time to breath. But having recover'd Rome, he sent John Viteleschus thither immediately, who was a Man indeed very fit for business, but savage and severe: who marching against the Co∣lonneses, the Sabelli, and all the Gibellin faction he sack'd and razed the Castle of Gandulpho standing on the Lago Albano, as also Savello, and Borgeto. He likewise took Alba, Civita Lapuvina, Palestrina and Za∣gatolo, and sent all the Inhabitants, that were alive, to Rome. Then turning his course into Campagna di Roma he brought 'em all over to the Church; and having taken Anthony Pontadera he hang'd him upon an Olive-Tree at Fraselone. Then coming back to Rome he put 'em all in a fear, and pull'd down several Houses of Conspirators, that had taken possession of the Porta Maggiore in a tumult, and declared them Enemies to the Church. Among the rest he took one Pulcellus, and tortur'd him with red hot Pincers and then hang'd him in Campo Fiore. When the Roman people complain'd, that the covetousness of some rich Men had brought a Famine upon the Country, there was so much Wheat immediately brought into the Market by his Order, that there ensued great plenty of all things in a short time; so readily were his Commands obey'd. When he had thus setled Affairs, he went into the Kingdom of Naples, which Alphonso had lately got possession of, and which he said belonged to the Pope and the Church, and there he took the Prince of Tarento with two thousand Horse and invaded the Domi∣nion of the Earl of Nola. He also had like to have taken Alphonso by fraud rather than force, when they had made a Truce, and a Peace was as good as concluded. When he had taken the Towns belonging to the Church he freed the Prince. And going back to Rome he demolish'd Palestrina, which was ready to rebel, by the persuasion of Lorenzo Colon∣na, and turned out the Inhabitants in great numbers to roam about the Country in the year 1435. In which year Eugenius went from Florence, (having first consecrated the Cathedral Church there) and going to Bo∣logna
he built a Fort near that Gate which leads towards Ferrara, and for∣tified the House where the Legate now resides, with a good high and broad Wall (behind especially) and with Turrets. The year after he in a publick Consistory translated the Council of Basil (though he had approved of that place) from thence to Ferrara; and said that the Greeks who had a mind to join with the Church of Rome had chosen that City to meet in. Then the Presidents of the Council at Basil were very ur∣gent with the Greeks and did exhort them with Prayers and Promises, that they would leave Eugenius and come to them. Nor were they con∣tent to do so onely, but they bragg'd that they would depose Eugenius too, if he would not come thither also. Eugenius could not tell for some time what to do, but yet he sent thither, as Legate, one John Francis Ca∣pitelista a Lawyer and a Knight of Padua, to plead his cause. But when Sigismund the Emperor was dead, by whose favour the Council of Basil flourish'd, and Albert Duke of Austria was chosen in his room, the Car∣dinal of S. Crosses began the Council of Ferrara in the name of Eugenius. Eugenius also went thither when he heard the Emperor of Constantinople, whose name was John Paleologus, was coming, with a great many Gal∣lies of his own, as well as what the Venetians for Eugenius's sake sent to meet the Emperor lest any violence should have been offer'd him: be∣cause he had an account, that certain French Gallies were sent by the Council into the Archipelago, with Orders either to bring the Emperor to them, or if they could not do so; that, at least, they should keep him from going to Ferrara. But Eugenius so far corrupted the Admiral of those Galleys with Money, that he left the Council at Basil and came over to his Party. When the Emperour came to Ferrara, he was entertain'd by Eugenius, as the Roman Emperours used to be treated. But Viteleschus when he had quieted the Church Dominions, and pu∣nish'd several Priests that had pilfer'd certain Jewels out of the Heads of Peter and Paul the Apostles in the Lateran Church, to which they be∣long'd, and, after that, had put James Galesius and his Accomplices to death for attempting to make Innovations upon the Government, he went to Ferrara where in a publick Consistory he was receiv'd into the number of Cardinals with great Honour. For he had been made Cardinal six months before at Bologna; and then returning with greater Authority, he put the Governour of Vetralla, and the Lord of Fuligno (after he had expell'd him from his usurp'd Dominion) to death in the Castle of Surio. But Eugenius desiring to unite the two Churches that were so long of different Opinions, in the year 1438, having made solemn Prayers and celebrated the Mass of the Holy Ghost, he went to the Council along with the Emperour and Patriarch of Constantinople, where the Emperour being seated on a Throne suitable to his Dignity, and the other Greeks in a place opposite to the Pope, the question was first ask'd, Whether the Latins and the Greeks who had been so long of different Opinions were willing to be united into one Church? At which they all cry'd out, They would very willingly, provided that their differences, were first reconciled by Reason. In order to which there were Dispu∣tations every day between those that the Latins and Greeks had chosen to debate those weighty Points. But there happening a Plague at Fer∣rara, which continued a good while, it was not safe staying there, and therefore the Council was removed to Florence. And as soon as they
came thither, Picenninus presently took possession of Forli, Imola, Ra∣venna and Bologna, by command from Philip, with a design to thwart Eugenius's intentions, who was a Friend to the Florentines and Venetians, his Enemies. After that he came back into Parma, and raising a great body of Horse he passed the Po, and took (in a short time) the greater Casal, and Platina, my native Country, and all that the Venetians had about Cremona. Then he routed Gattamelata General of the Venetian Army at Calvatoni, and with the Prince of Mantoua his Ally, he be∣sieged Brescia for some months, which was stoutly defended by the Citizens and one Francis Barbar, a very learned Man and their chief Magistrate. Whereupon he pass'd from thence to seize several Castles thereabout, and hinder provisions from being brought into the City, plundering and destroying all the Country as far as Verona and Vincen∣za, so that he left the Venetians nothing to live upon; but yet all this was not accomplish'd without great damage to his Men, especially in the dead of Winter which was the time they took to do it. He like∣wise secured great part of the Rivers Menzo, Adige, Lago di Garda, and Lago d' Iseo, that nothing might be carried that way by Water to the needy Inhabitants. But the fitting up of some Ships, that were remo∣ved out of the Adige into the Lago di S. Andreas, and careened below in the Lago di Garda near Forboli, gave the Venetians some respite. Then seeing nevertheless that Picenninus press'd those of Verona and Vincenza very hard, the Venetians thought themselves quite lost, if they did not get a good Commander, and therefore they sent James Donatus to Florence, then in League with 'em, to desire, that if the Florentines had any re∣gard to the Republick of Venice, or the safety and Liberty of Italy in general, that they would send Francis Sfortia immediately with all his Forces to Venice, now almost ruined by the Arms of Philip and the Man∣tuan. The Florentines being concern'd for their own danger as well as that of their Allies, persuade Francis to take up Arms for the Venetians, and promised him in the name of the City, to defend all the Towns that he had, which belong'd to the Church of Rome; which was his greatest desire. They also got Letters Apostolical from Eugenius with much ado, to declare Francis Marquis and Lord of Ancona: but with these words, Let him take it, and the Devil give him luck with it. Francis going with his Cavalry along the Coast of the Adriatick Sea fell into Ferrara, and passing the Po in Boats, and having augmented his Army in Padua (for he is said to have had twelve thousand Horse, and five thousand Foot) he met the Enemy first at Suave near Verona, where they fought very smartly for some time and neither had the bet∣ter on't. Afterward Picenninus by reason of his indisposition, and want of Men, gave way to his Power, and then Francis having recover'd all the Castles from them of Vincenza and Verona, he was about to raise the Siege from before Brescia, but seeing all other Avenues stopp'd, he pas∣sed the Adige, and marching into the parts about Trent, he went to Ar∣cho, a Town he had a mind to take, because the Earl of Archo was an Ally of Philip. Picenninus also came thither, to assist the Earl; but fighting more eagerly than cautiously (as he used to do) he was desert∣ed by the rest of the Army, and receiving great damage was fain to fly into the neighbouring Vallies, where he had been taken by the Ene∣my, if Charles Gonzaga, son to John Francis had not come between him
and them, and so saved him from that imminent danger; and yet for all that he was taken afterward, the Foe gathering strength, and carried Prisoner to Verona. There are that write, how Picenninus was so wea∣ken'd in one side with Wounds which he receiv'd in the several Battels, that he was not able to ride back to his Army, but was wrapp'd in a Sack, as if he had been dead, and so carried upon a lusty Fellows shoulders even through the Enemies Camp. Whilst these things were transacted in Venice, Philip taking it ill that the Florentines by the help and per∣suasion of Eugenius, had sent Francis Sfortia to aid the Venetians, he treat∣ed with those that were at the Council of Basil, to cite Eugenius before 'em; which they did twice or thrice. But when it did not answer his expectation, he so far infatuated them, as that they deposed Eugenius and chose Amadeus Duke of Savoy (his Father-in-law, who lived like an Hermit at Ripalia with some other Noblemen) Pope, and called him Felix. Hence arose great Seditions in the Church of God; for Christendom was divided into three parts, and some follow'd Eugenius, some Felix, and the rest were Neuters. For all that Eugenius was not de∣jected; but held frequent Assemblies, and Disputations between the Greeks and Latins, till at last it came to this result, that the Greeks were convinc'd that the Holy Ghost did proceed from the Father and the Son, and that he was homusius, that is of the same substance, and did not come forth from the Father onely, as they formerly believ'd: and that they ought to consecrate the Body of Christ with unleaven'd bread made of Wheat, and to believe a Purgatory. Lastly, That the Pope of Rome was Christ's true Vicar, and the lawful Successor of Saint Peter, to whom all the Eastern as well as Western Churches ought to submit, as being the universal Patriarch. The business thus setled, the Greeks went away; and then the Armenians also agreed with us in Faith, their Errors being confuted, and Eugenius's Letters to that pur∣pose promulgated, to shew the reason why they accorded, with this In∣scription, Given at the Holy General Council held at Florence in the Ca∣thedral there, Novemb. 22. 1439. When that was done he contrived how to strengthen himself and at the same time weaken the Council of Basil, and that was by making eighteen Cardinals at once in the pub∣lick Consistory: of which number two were Greeks, to wit Rutenus and Nicenus; that the Greeks might be kept in the Faith by their example and Authority: and yet that Nation fell back in a little time to its old State. Others were Peter Barbo his Sisters Son, and Alouisius Patavi∣nus whom he afterward made Patriarch of Aquilegia and Chamberlain, having advanced Francis Condelmerius to the Vicechancelourship. Whilst these things were acted near Trent, and People thought that Picenni∣nus and the Prince of Mantoua would yield at last, having received such damage, they removed thence with all speed to Verona and took it, by the help of Ladders wherewith they scal'd the Walls and enter'd in at the Cittadelle, unknown to any of the Sentinels, who, to avoid the extream cold of the North Wind (which that Night was very boiste∣rous,) had quitted their Posts, and were got into the Tents. But Francis Sfortia, when he heard that Verona was taken by the Enemy, march'd thither presently with all his Army, to recover it, knowing that the Venetians had still possession of the old Castle, and the Fort of S. Felix in the Mount. And therefore he enter'd the City that way with his
Army, and ran upon the Enemy with a mighty shout. Philip's Men met him with a few Horse (for all his Forces were not yet come up) and they fought very sharply in that part of the City, which they call the Island. At last the few were fain to yield to the many, and Picen∣ninus and the Mantuans betook themselves to the new Bridg (as they call it) where for some time they bore the shock of their Enemies. There, as the Horse were engaging, and a great many crowded in a little room, the Draw-bridg broke with the weight of Men and Horses, and almost all that fell into the River were drown'd, because they were tired with fasting so long, and sunk by the very weight of their Arms. Thereupon Francis flying to a Bridg of Boats, put over his Men and drove Picenninus and the Mantuan (who distrusted the Citizens fide∣lity) quite out of the City, within four days after he had taken it. Then Philip, that he might draw Francis from the Venetians by infesting the Florentines, who had given him the same pay as the Venetians did, sent Picenninus into Tuscany with six thousand Horse, in the midst of Winter. The Florentines seeing that, sent presently for Piergianpaulo, an excellent Commander, and desired Eugenius that he would assist 'em ac∣cording to the League by which he was bound to defend Tuscany; and so were resolv'd to meet Picenninus. But when they found that John Viteleschus had conspired with Philip, though he were at that time Le∣gate and General of the Church-Forces; and that he would not prove a friend (as he pretended) when he came into Tuscany, but an Enemy in the Head of six thousand Horse, and would fight against the Floren∣tines on Picenninus's side, the Magistrates of Florence contrived by real or feigned Letters (no matter which) from Eugenius, to have him kill'd by Anthony Ridius the Governour of Castel S. Angelo, just as his Men were passing the Bridg. And so he was; for he could not be aid∣ed by those that were gone over the Bridg, and therefore was as it were alone, because he brought up the Reer. The Count Aversus, who fought under the Patriarch, having lost his General, convey'd his Carriages a∣long with his own to Roncillione. But the Florentines being freed from so great a Terrour, deal cunningly with Eugenius, to let Lewis of Padua who succeeded Viteleschus, muster up all the Church-Forces and come to their assistance. This Lewis was a politick Man, and it was suppo∣sed that by his means Viteleschus was taken off. But Picenninus march∣ing down into the Vale of Mugello, kill'd and plunder'd all before him as far as Fiesole. Then turning toward Castentino, he by the assistance of Count Popio made many Towns revolt. Thence going to Perugia, he went quietly into the City, and sent the Legat who was then Governour there to the Pope Eugenius upon a certain Message. And in the mean time he took the Treasurer, and alter'd the whole State of the City. For he chose ten Citizens who had Power of life and death over all the rest. But the Perugians fearing lest he should set up a Tyranny upon them, they bargain'd with him to depart the City for fifty thousand pound. He did so and went to Cortona, hoping to take that place by treachery; but the Plot was discover'd and the Conspirators either kill'd or ba∣nish'd, upon which he march'd to Citta di Castello. The Florentines also moved to Aughiera, a Town in their Dominions, to help their Countrymen, if Picenninus should offer 'em any violence. These things pass'd in Tuscany, whilst Francis Sfortia conquer'd Philip's Navy at the
Lago di Garda (of which Italiano Furlano was Admiral) and not onely raised the Siege from before Brescia and Bergamo, but the same Summer vanquish'd Philip's Army at Soncino having taken one thousand five hundred Horse, and in a short time took and subdu'd all the Castles of Brescia, part of Cremona, and Mantoua, with all Gerradadua, and made them tributary to the Venetians. At that time the Prince of Mantoua lost Asola, Lonato, and Pescheria, three Towns of a good bigness without opposition: for when Picenninus was absent, he never durst engage with an Enemy in the open Field. But Picenninus hearing how the state of Affairs was alter'd in Venice, and being sent for by many Messengers and Letters as well from Philip, as the Prince of Mantoua; as also being tired out with the importunities of the Soldiers who were most of 'em Natives of that part of Italy which is near the Alps, he re∣moved his Camp from Cita di Castello to Borgo di Sancto Sepolcro, a Town in his Territories, which lies over against Angliera: with design either by compulsion or stratagem, to fight the Florentines and the Pope's Army, that lay (as I told you) near Angliera. On the 29 of June (S. Peter and S. Paul's day) Picenninus set his Army in Array, which took up a Plain of four thousand paces, but was unfortunately forc'd to choose a disadvantageous place to fight in, (because he under∣stood, that the common Soldiers of the Enemy were gone a foraging, and was not willing to lose the opportunity) For he was to go up the side of an Hill, and so his Enemies upon the higher ground easily kept him off. Yet they fought five hours very smartly, till at last Picenni∣nus, what with the multitude of his Enemies and the folly of his Son Francis, who had forsaken his Post, was overcome, and retreated to Borgo with great damage and the loss of his Ensigns. And the next day leaving Borgo in the hands of the Townsmen and some few of his Soldiers that survived the Battel, he went back through Romagna to Philip. The Townsmen of Borgo fearing they might be hardly dealt withal, because they had revolted from the Pope, employ'd Agents to get their Pardon, and surrender'd themselves to the Legat without loss of limbs or goods. That Victory was very welcom both to Eugenius and the Florentines; and they say Alonisius Patavinus was made a Car∣dinal for that reason. The same Summer the Florentines beat Count Poppio who was Picenninus's Ally, out of Tuscany. But Philip who was environ'd with so many Enemies, fought out for forein Aid, and entreat∣ed Alphonso, who had got possession of the Kingdom of Naples, to storm all the Towns which the Sfortians had in that Kingdom; to draw Francis Sfortia from the Venetians. Alphonso comply'd with his request, but never could recal Francis from the War that he was engaged in. For he, when a sufficient quantity of forage came in, march'd from Pe∣scheria to Brescia with fifteen thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot, and met Picenninus at Cignano, with a design to fight him. Picenninus was as willing to fight as he, and though he had a less number of Men, yet they were stout Fellows and he rely'd upon their Valour. They fought briskly for some time, and parted upon equal terms. Francis thinking he had gotten honour enough in the Wars, for that he had challenged his Enemy into the Field, lead his Army round the Country and retook several Towns which Picenninus had taken that Winter, and made them subject to the Venetians. From thence he went to Mar∣tinengo,
which Picenninus had fortified with a strong Garrison, and be∣sieged it. But when Picenninus had augmented his Army by the arrival of Francis his Son, and the Prince of Mantoua, he went thither and pitch'd his Camp a mile off the Enemy, provoking him by Skirmishes to come and decide the matter in a set Battel: but he not now desiring to fight the Enemy in the Field, grew wholly intent upon taking the Town. Picenninus therefore removed his Camp every day so much nearer the Enemy, and put Francis in such dangerous circumstances, that neither his Soldiers could forrage, nor any Provisions be sent in, nor the Army march out from the place, without apparent danger: and just then be∣yond all hopes there was a Peace declared, which had been in agita∣tion between Philip and Francis by the mediation of one Eusebiolus sur∣named Chain, without Picenninus's knowledg. When Picenninus heard of it, he exclaim'd at Heaven and Earth, and Philip's inconstancy, who with a certain Victory before him desired Peace like a conquer'd Per∣son. The Armies departing, the Peace was declared at Capriana, in the year 1442, upon these terms; That Francis should marry Blanch the Daughter of Philip, and have with her, as a Dowry, Pontremoli and Cremona with all the Country belonging to it, except Picigitono and the Castles which the Mantouan, and Pallavicini possess'd: and that all those places that Philip, and his Allies had taken, as also the Venetians and their Confederates (except Asola, Lonato, and Pescheria which were the Prince of Mantoua's before that War) should be restored: and he that would not accept of these Articles, should be look'd upon as a common Enemy. Eugeneus lik'd not this Peace; because Francis had neglected him whilst he talk'd of restoring what was lost, without mentioning Bologna, which Picenninus had possession of; wherefore he resolv'd to go from Florence to Rome, and there advise concerning the recovery of the Church Patrimony, because that was a place where he might take more freedom. But that he might find all things quiet, he sent Alouisius Pa∣tavinus, Cardinal of S. Laurence before, to put out the Seculars and restore the Canons regular to the Lateran, who had been expelled by the Secular Priests, upon a Controversie that was between 'em, who should carry the Body of Christ upon Corpus Christi day in Procession. Gino Albanese an excellent Soldier was put to death because he would have broken the Peace between Eugenius and Alphonso. Palus Lamolara also a stout Man, of whose parts he was jealous, was also put to death. And when things were setled in this manner, Eugenius came to Rome September 28. 1443. (though the Florentines did all they could to keep him there) being met by all the City with all the veneration ima∣ginable, and lay that night at the Porta del popolo. And the next Day as he was going to S. Peters to Prayers, as the custom is, he walk'd in his Pontifical Robes through the City, and heard the People were in a mutiny for that the Taxes were doubled, and a new Impost laid upon Wine. Thereupon he commanded silence, and in the presence of 'em all, abolish'd that Exaction as tyrannical: at which they immediately cry'd out, Long live Eugenius; whereas before they had cry'd, Down with these new Gabells, the inventors of them. After nineteen Days he went to the Lateran, and declared he would hold a General Council there, and sent Letters and Messengers to acquaint the several Princes with his Design. For he had a mind to weaken and destroy the Council
of Basil by this means. When things were thus composed at Rome, he remember'd the injuries he had receiv'd, and sent Picenninus the Gene∣ral against the Anconeses (whom Francis had subdu'd) who going from Bologna toward Perugia made those of Tiferno who were Allies of the Floretines, revolt, to gratifie Eugenius who was angry with the Floren∣tines, for supplying Francis with Mony to oppose him and keep An∣cona. Alphonso too, who the year before had long besieged Naples and at last through a Common-shore got into the Town and taken it, beat∣ing out René of Anjou, was so far taken with the same and courage of Picenninus that he not onely chose him General of his Army, but, to honour him the more, adopted him into the Family of Aragon: who as soon as he had receiv'd Money of Eugenius and Alphonso to defray the War, went into Ancona, and reduced many Towns to the Church, which Francis Sfortia, who was come thither with a good Army from Cre∣mona, vainly strove to defend. About that time John Francis Gonzaga dy'd, and the Venetians and Florentines who were concern'd for the time to come, made Lewis Gonzaga, Son and Heir to John Francis, their Sti∣pendiary, that he, if occasion were, might oppose Philip. In the mean time things were pretty quiet in those parts of Italy that lie next the Alps, when Hannibal Bentivoglio, who was kept Prisoner sometime in the Castle of Pelegrini, by command from Picenninus, for suspicion of a Conspiracy, escaped and went back to Bologna where he excited the People to liberty and seiz'd Francis Picenninus, Governour of the City, and all his Men. Which done, he recall'd all the Exiles whether of his own or the contrary Faction, especially one Baptista Canedolus by name. After which the Bolognians sent Embassadours to the Venetians and Florentines to desire their Alliance. Which the Embassadours ha∣ving obtein'd they returned home, and presently took the Castle (which was yet in the Enemies hands) by the help of those recruits that were sent 'em from their Friends, and as soon as they had taken destroy'd it, chasing Alouisius Vermes out of Bologna. Then Philip taking it ill that the Bolognians should be in League with the Venetians and Florentines, hired some Friends of Baptista, promising them assistance, to take Han∣nibal off, that themselves and their Faction might be sole Governours in the City. And Canedolus who was ready at Roguery, prevailed with a certain Man of Bologna (who had a Son accidentally then newly born) to choose Hannibal Godfather: and the next Day the Child was carried to be Christen'd; which being over, the Father of the Child invited Han∣nibal to S. John's Church, because it was S. John's Day. Hannibal comply'd with the Traitor in that too, not thinking of any Design; but in the way thither he was set upon by a company of the Conspira∣tors that got about him, and was slain, though two Servants that he had, who loved him, did what they could to defend him. But the people of Bologna, when they knew it were so concern'd for the indig∣nity, that they presently took up Arms and kill'd all the chief of the Canedolian Faction, particularly Baptista, whose body they dragg'd through the City and buried it very ignominiously. At the same time also there happen'd a great piece of villany to be acted at Rome: for Angellottus Cardinal of S. Marks was deprived of his life and all the Money that he had so covetously gathered and scraped together, by his own Valet de Chamber. The Villain was taken and tortur'd to Death,
and then being cut into four parts was hang'd upon the four Gates of the City. But the Venetians and Florentines fearing, lest Bologna, which was very commodiously seated for both of 'em in time of War, should fall into Philip's hands, sent immediately some Troops thither to as∣sist them. The Venetians were not out in their guess; for Philip de∣signed to send Picenninus thither with an Army, at the request of the Exiles, if he had not dy'd before he could set out. They say he dy'd for grief, that his Son Francis, whom he had left behind him in Ancona, when Cardinal Firmanus was Legat, was vanquish'd by Francis Sfortia. But the year after Philip took courage and advised Eugenius to endea∣vour the recovery of Bologna, promising to supply him with Men, and bear his share in the charge of the War. By which the Pope was so wrought upon, that he made a League with Alphonso, and sent Sigismund Malatesta with a great body of Horse into Ancona against Francis; that when the Florentines were otherwise imploy'd, Bologna might be forced to surrender. Now Philip had sent William Montferrat and Charles Gonzaga before with a great Army; who entering the Territory of Bo∣logna in an Hostile manner plunder'd all before 'em. But the Floren∣tines who were concern'd for the danger of their Allies, dispatch'd A∣storgius Faventinus with one thousand five hundred Horse and two hun∣dred Foot, to aid the Bolognians till farther order from them and the Venetians. Things stood thus in Romagna; when Philip, on the sudden, sent for Francis Picenninus from Ancona, and gave him order to go with a great Army upon May Day, against the Cremoneses who apprehended no such thing. He went as he was commanded, and took a great many of the Country Fellows, and strook such terrour into the Citizens by battering their Walls both Night and Day, that he had very near taken the City. But the Venetians and Florentines were troubled at the dan∣ger, which Francis and their Friends were in, and resolv'd to defend Cremona and Bologna at the same time, and sent Tibertus Brandolinus a very active Commander, who taking along with him the Bologneses, and the Auxiliaries from Florence march'd toward the Enemy (who did not well agree among themselves, and were encamp'd at a Town call'd St. John's) and when he had brought William Monferrat over to the Bo∣lognians by Promises and Presents, and easily routed Charles, he quick∣ly retrieved all the Towns which the Enemy had in their hands. Bo∣logna being thus quieted, and the Auxiliaries of Florence and Venice divided, by order, into two parts, the one half were sent to avoid Francis Sfortia whom Eugenius and Alphonso had beaten as far as the Walls of Ʋrbino▪ and the other half to the Cremoneses who were hard put to it by Francis Picenninus. The Venetians resolving upon an open rupture with Philip, sent Embassadours to him, to denounce War unless he would desist from the Siege of Cremona. But they were answer'd by a Messenger (for they could not speak with Philip himself) that they might be safer any where, than at Millain. At which the Venetians were very angry and commanded Michelot Cotignola their General, who was then at Brescia, to march forthwith into Cremona, (which Philip had got most part of,) and engage the Enemy wherever he met them. He readily obey'd their Commands, and passing the River Oglio at Casale with all expedition, found the Enemy encamped upon the Po in an Island, which having forded, he attack'd them in their Camp, and soon rout∣ed
them, taking a great part of their Cavalry. After that he recover'd all the Towns, and freed Cremona from the Siege, and having augment∣ed his Army by Lewis Gonzaga's additional Forces (who had reduced Platina, and some Castles in Cremona to the Venetians) they march'd toward Geradada, and left nothing for Philip but Crema. Then cros∣sing the River they entred Millain, filling all places with fire and rapine. And when they had taken Monte di Briausa and Brevio, where there is a Bridg over the Adda, they attaqued Leco which those within stoutly defended, and batter'd their Ships so severely that whole Men might have got in at the sides of 'em; so that having lost many Men, and being in great want of Forage, they were fain to depart without accomplish∣ing their Design, for fear of Francis Sfortia, who they heard was pri∣vately gone over to Philip's Party. Mean time Aloisius Patavinus the Pope's Legat, General of the Forces which went against Francis Sfortia, into Ancona, hearing that Italiano and James Gatuano (who had fought partly under Philip and partly under Eugenius) were revolting to Fran∣cis, he commanded them to be taken before they could arrive there, and put to Death: for both of 'em had one thousand five hundred Horse under them. Francis Sfortia was much concern'd at that, and finding him∣self not able to sustein the shock of his Enemies any longer, being set upon by so many at a time, and assisted by no body, by the persuasions of Eugenius and Alphonso▪ who envied the Venetians success, he left An∣cona, and went into Philip's Army, over which he was made General. Eugenius, now, lest he should seem to mind nothing but War, made Ni∣colas Tolentinas of the Order of S. Austin, who was famous for Miracles, a Saint, and went personally in Procession from S. Peter to S. Austin's attended by all the Clergy▪ the Roman People and the Cardinals. After that he expelled the Canons Secular from the Lateran and admitted onely the Regulars. He also built the Portico, that goes from that Church to the Sancta Sanctorum, and repaired the Cloister for the Priests to live in. He also augmented the painting of the Church which Mar∣tin had formerly begun; and carried the Mitre of S. Sylvester, which was brought to Rome from Avignion, in his own hands from the Vati∣can to the Lateran with great veneration of all the Priests and People of Rome. Afterward King Alphonso came to Tivoli and would have treated with Eugenius about the management of the War, but he heard he was sick and so-stay'd for some time there. Eugenius had a great mind to have plagu'd the Florentines for helping his Enemies: and doubt∣ed not but, if he attaqued them with his own, the King's, and Philip's Forces all together, he might bring that City to what he pleased. But all his Designs were frustrated by his Death; for he dy'd in the sixteenth year of his Pontificate, February 23. 1446. He was a Man of great in∣constancy; at the beginning of his Reign, he was led away by ill Counsels and disturb'd all things, to that degree, that he incited the Roman People to War, and gave Authority to the Council of Basil (which was the original of much mischief) by approving of their Decrees in Letters Apostolical. But in process of time when he came to himself, he acted very prudently and with good resolution. He had a very venerable aspect; but was rather grave than eloquent in his Speech; an indifferent Scholar, though a knowing Man, especially in History. He was bountiful to all, more especially Learned Men, whose com∣pany
he loved; For he admitted Leonard Aretinus, Charles Poggius, Au∣rispa Trapezuntius, and Blondus, very learned Men, to be his Secretaries. He was not easily provoked to anger for injuries done him, or by the Calumnies, jibes or scoffs of any. He was a great Patron of all Schools especially that at Rome, where he had all kind of Learning taught. He loved the Religious wonderfully and gave 'em many Priviledges, besides Revenues which he added to their foundations. But he loved War so much (which a Man would admire in a Pope) that besides what I have told you of his Actions in Italy, he instigated the Dolphin, Son to Charles the French King (having first made Peace between that King and the Duke of Burgundy) to go with a great body of Horse against those of Basil. He did so, and routed the Assembly. And afterward he sent Ʋladislaus King of Poland along with Julian Caesarinus against the Turks: of whom thirty thousand were slain in one Battel between Adrianople, and the Danube, though the King indeed himself and the Cardinal too, was kill'd at the same time. He was accounted very strict to his word, unless when he had promised a thing which it was better revoke than perform. He kept a very good House, and yet lived on a spare Diet himself, and was so great a stranger to Wine, that he was properly cal∣led, the Abstemious. He had but very few familiar Friends, but they were all learned Men, whose Counsel he made use of in great matters; and used to admit into his Chamber at Supper-time, to be as witnesses of his sober Conversation. And then he would ask 'em, what news in the City, what People thought of his Government since he had been Pope, that he might correct any Errour, if ought were amiss either in his own Person or any body else. He endeavoured to adorn the Church with Buildings and Chappels as appears by the Pope's Chappel and the bra∣zen Door of S. Peter's Church. But he dy'd, (as I told you) after he had done many great Actions, in the sixty fourth year of his age, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, under a Marble Tomb, upon which there are these Verses; Eugenius jacet hic Quartas, Cor nobile cujas Testantur vitae splendida facta suae. Istius ante sacros se praebuit alter ab ortu, Alter ab occasa Caesar uterque pedes. Alter ut accipiat Fidei documenta Latinae, Alter ut aurato cingat honore caput. Quo duce & Armenii, Graiorum exempla fecuti, Romanam agnorunt Aethiopesque fidem. Inde Siri ac Arabes, mundique è finibus Indi. Magna, sed haec animo cncta minora su. Nam valida rursum Teucros jam classe petebat, Dum petit ast illm sustulit atra Dies. Qui semper vanos tumuli contempit honores: Atque hac impressa condita dixit humo. Sed non quem rubro decoraverat ille galero, Non hoc Franciscus stirps sua clara tulit. Susceptique memor meriti, tàm nobile, quod nunc Cernis, tàm praestans surgere jussit opus. After his Death the Seat was vacant twelve days.
NICOLAS V. NICOLAS the Fifth, formerly called Thomas Sarzana, a Town in the Territory of Lucca, was chosen Pope by gene∣ral consent, March 6. 1447. Who though he were a Man but of mean extract (his Mothers name was Andreola, and his Father's Bartholomew a Physician) yet he was worthy of the Pon∣tificate for his Virtue, Learning, Courtesie, good Nature, Liberality and Magnificence; notwithstanding all which he was so modest, that he thought himself undeserving of so great an Honour, and desired the Cardinals to take better care for the Church of God. But when the Cardinal of Tarento exhorted him not to resist the Holy Ghost, he sub∣mitted his shoulders to the burthen, and took it upon him. The Car∣dinal of Portugal being ask'd (as 'tis usual) coming out of the Con∣clave, Who they had made Pope? He answer'd, We did not choose Nicolas, but God has. There are who say, that this Thomas was born at Pisa, brought up at Lucca, and made a Scholar at Bologna, especially in Philosophy and Divinity which he learn'd under Nicolas Albergate, Cardinal of S. Cross, who was extreamly pleased with the Youths in∣genuity, and parts. For which reason he, in his Popedom, assumed the name of Nicolas, because it was the name of one who had deserv'd very well of him. Having gain'd his Degree in the University, by a probation in the most acute Controversies, the Cardinal of S. Cross made him Steward of his Houshold, and of the Clerks of the Peniten∣tiary, till he got a Pontifical Sub-Deaconship by his good Life and Con∣versation, which all People admired, and then he began to think of greater matters. For Eugenius, who knew his Learning and integrity (especially by the Disputations that he had with the Greeks at Florence and Ferrara) had at that time design'd him for a Cardinal. But that he might do it with better pretensions, he sent him into Germany along with John Carvagialla (who was afterward Cardinal of S. Angelo) to dissolve the Council of Basil, and the neutrality. For the Germans were called Neuters, because they would obey neither Felix nor Eugenius; by which means the Church of God suffer'd greatly, and the Papacy lost something of its grandieur. There were frequent meetings to di∣spute that Point before Frederick King of the Romans, by the persuasions of Aeneas Picolhomineus, who was afterward Pope; but at that time only Secretary to the King. And indeed they found it hard to remove the Ger∣mans from their Opinion, though it was altogether false: as on the other side it was difficult to induce Eugenius's Agents to comply with the German Proposals. At last the Agents being mollified, and the requests of the Germans moderated, they had certainly put an end to the Schism and Neutrality (which was so pernicious to the Sea of Rome) if the Germans would have stood to their Promise. So that the Legats went back to Eugenius with that Opinion and were made Cardinals by ge∣neral agreement; to whom Eugenius sent their Hats whilst they were yet at the Porta del popolo, that they might come with greater honour
into the City. Thus in one and the same year Thomas got to be Bishop of Bologna, Cardinal and Pope, to the great satisfaction of the Clergy and People of Rome. And yet when the Cardinals were in the Conclave, there was a small bustle in the City by the instigation of Stephen Por∣caro a Roman Knight, and an eloquent, ingenious Man, who calling his Companions about him into the Church, called Ara Coeli, encouraged 'em to assert their Liberty: for he said that every petit Town (when the Lord of it was dead) was us'd to talk of Liberty, or at least, of limi∣ting the Power of their Governours. But nothing was done to that pur∣pose, because the Arch-Bishop of Benevento then Vice-Chamberlain, was against it. The Romans also feared King Alphonso, who stay'd at Tivoli after Eugenius was dead, and was in doubt with himself, whether he should go back, or make War against the Florentines, as he, Euge∣nius, and Philip had formerly a design to do. And whilst he delibe∣rated, two Sieneses, that got their livings by setting People together by the ears, persuaded him to attempt the Government of Tuscany: which he might easily obtain, if he were once Master of Siena, which would surrender it self upon his arrival there. The King commended the Sieneses, and sending them away to solicite their Fellow-Citizens, he promised them to be there in such a time. But Nicolas the Pope, who was a lover of peace and quietness, after he had kept his Coronation (as the fashion is) and made many Processions on foot in his own Person, he sent Cardinal Morinensis to Ferrara, (a place which being neutral was fit for the Treaty) that by the persuasion and Authority of his Legat, the Factions might be the more induced to a composure. Thither also did Alphonsa, Philip, the Venetians and Florentines send their Embassa∣dours, who after a long Debate gave Philip leave to choose, whether he would make a Truce with the Venetians and Florentines for five years (both sides keeping what they had▪) or conclude a Peace, and change Crema for those Towns which the Venetians had taken upon the River Adda; leaving onely Cassan at the Pope's disposal, as being his due by compact, to make amends for the injuries which he first received. But that also was afterward thrown in, to make the Peace more lasting. And one of Philip's Embassadours was sent to make the Proposal to him; who found him dead of an Apoplexy the day before he came to Millain, August 8. 1447. Morinensis, hearing of Philip's death, sent for all the Embassadours in haste to his House, and urg'd for Peace as earnestly as ever. The Venetians, when they were ask'd if they would continue of their former Opinion, made answer, That they could not tell what they might do now Philip was dead, but that they would write to the Senate concerning that Affair, and do as they should order them. In the mean time the other Embassadours that were there, knowing the Vene∣tians ambition to govern all Italy, dissolv'd the Assembly and went every one to their own Home, the Pope's Legat exhorting them to Concord, but all in vain. But the Venetians, whose Camp was at Sorefina near Cre∣mona, in hopes to take that tumultuous City by surrender with the help of the Guelphs, when they heard of Philip's death march'd presently to Lody; which having taken, they receiv'd those of Piacenza into their Alliance upon the same terms as them of Lodi; and sent one thousand five hundred Horse thither immediately to assist the people of Piacenza if any body should molest 'em. Francis Sfortia, who at that time was
beaten out of Ancona and quartered in Bologna, to refresh his Army, whose Arms, Horses, and Men were almost spent with this long War, when he heard that the Venetians had seiz'd all upon his Father-in-law's death, went great days Journeys till he came to Cremona, and was chosen General by the universal consent of the Millaineses over all their Forces against the Venetians. And having made a Bridg over the River Po, which he fortified with Castles and Artillery, to hinder the Venetians from coming with a Navy to Piacenza, he passed the Adda at Picigitono, and encamp'd not far from the Enemy who lay at Camurago. And there they had some light Skirmishes to try, I suppose, the Enemies courage. The People of Pavia were so much encouraged at Francis's coming, and so glad to see him, because they hated to be subject to the Millaineses upon an old grudg that was between them, and on the other hand, would rather suffer any thing than submit to the Venetians, who had formerly despised their Alliance, insomuch that they deliver'd their City up to Francis without any more ado by consent of the Governour of the Castle: which was such an Addition to his grandieur that Sfortia pre∣sently affected to be Lord of the whole Dutchy of Millain. These things passed in Lombardy and thereabouts, whilst Alphonso at the same time fell down with his Army into the Sea-coast of Siena, and had subdued them (though the Pope was against it) had not the Florentines, who knew the King's intention, sent a Messenger to Siena, to advise them, that Alphonso who was covetous of Dominion, was no less their Enemy than the Florentines. The Sieneses hearing what danger they were in, they did not deny the King any kind of provisions, but yet they would not suffer any of his Soldiers to come within their Walls. So that the King when he observ'd their caution, march'd down into Volaterra, and Pisa, and took many Castles there partly by surrender and partly by storm: which yet the Florentines recover'd not long after, all but Ca∣stiglione, under the command of Sigismund Malatesta, whom they had corrupted to come over from Alphonso to their side. In the mean time Ni∣colas the Pope continually persuaded the King and the Venetians to Peace rather than War; but they, who were grown proud and unruly would not hearken to his good Advice. Thereupon Francis raised a great Army, out of the main strength of Italy, (uniting the Brachian and Sfor∣tian Soldiers) and pitch'd his Camp in the middle of Autumn at Pia∣cenza, in which was a good Garrison of Venetians, and beating down part of the Walls with Cannon he stay'd before it so long till the Po rose to that prodigious heighth that his Galeoones came up to the very Walls, and so attacking it both by Land and Water, at last he took and plunder'd it. This was a great Honour to Francis, to take so great a City and that in the Winter-time, when it rained so hard, that the Soldiers were ready to leave their Tents. Yet Nicolas was even then still talking of Peace, and the Florentines were urgent with their Allies the Venetians, because they fear'd the King's Power, who was then with his Army in Tuscany. But nothing was done in it, because the Venetians were unwilling to restore Lodi to the Millaineses which they earnestly sought. So that Nicolas after so many attempts to no purpose, laid aside all thoughts of making Peace by such means, and applying himself to religious exer∣cises, he order'd Days of Humiliation to be kept for appeasing God's anger, and Prayers for the Peace of Christendom. And at the So∣lemnities
the Pope himself assisted with all the Clergy in Procession from S. Peter's to S. Mark's, with great Piety and Religion. But the wrath of God was not abated for all that, so much had Men probably deserved it. For two years after there was such a Plague in almost all places, that few survived out of great numbers. And this Calamity was fore∣told by frequent Earthquakes, and an Eclipse of the Sun: nay it had been often foretold by the Friers Predicants; especially, one Robert a Franciscan, and famous Preacher, who so moved the people of Rome with his Sermons that the Women and Children ran about the City de∣siring God to be merciful unto them. And least any misfortune should be lacking in Italy, the Wars which we told you were begun before did so increase, that one would have thought it impossible to have put an end to them. For Francis Sfortia (the next Summer) having taken some Castles from the Venetians, went with his Land and Sea-forces a∣gainst their Navy which block'd up the Cremoneses, and forced it to re∣tire to Casal: thither also he follow'd it, and with his Cannon disabled all their Ships as they lay in the Harbour, driving the Admiral of Ve∣nice to such despair that he burn'd his Navy, which he could not keep, and ran into the Town as fast as he could. Francis then went from thence, and took no farther care about Cremona, having destroy'd the Enemies Navy; but march'd toward Geradada, and encamp'd before Caravagio which was well fortified by the Enemies. The Venetians moved thither too, fearing they should lose their reputation, if the Millaineses took the Town, and therefore they lay about a mile off the Enemy, and shew'd the Townsmen that if occasion were they would come in and assist them. They had Skirmishes every day, they were so near one another: but when they came to joyn Battel, it happen'd to be in a narrow way surrounded with Fens, where the Vanguard of the Venetians was so straighten'd, that they could not give back (as sometimes in War, it may be convenient to do) nor yet fight, the Ene∣my came so thick upon them, insomuch that they must of necessity have perish'd, if the Reer had not begun to run away. Francis pursu'd 'em as they gave ground, and not onely made himself Master of their wealthy Camp but took about five thousand Horse and Foot. After that the Brachians were, without Francis his consent, ordered by the Millaineses to attaque Lodi, and he moved toward Brescia with his Army and besieged it. Which so alarm'd the Venetians, that they con∣cluded themselves lost, if they did not make Peace with Francis, now he had a quarrel with the Millaineses; and a Peace they did make upon condition, That joyning their Forces against the Millaineses, all that they should take beyond the River Adda and Po should be Francis's, and that on this side the Adda, should be the Venetians: that they should allow him (the Florentines and the Venetians betwixt 'em) six∣teen thousand pounds a month, and send him in aid still, till he got pos∣session of Millain. Having made this League and drawn what Com∣manders he could to his side by Promises and Presents, he turn'd toward the Millaineses, and took most of their Cities by surrender. At this success of his the Venetians were so concern'd, when they saw his for∣tune much better than they expected, that they took Crema according to agreement and recalling all their Soldiers they made Peace with the Mil∣laineses, as fearing the power of Francis, if he once got into Millain.
But Francis pretended a kindness to the Venetians, and being assisted and supply'd more out of Cosmo di Medices's private Pocket than out of the Treasury of Florence, after a long and tedious Siege, and many bloody Skirmishes, in the middle of Winter, though some of his Men forsook him and joined with the Enemy, and Alphonso was against him, who claimed Millain as his Birthright (and therefore kept Lewis Gonzaga in pay, whom he sent against the Bolognians, that his Men might pass with more safety into Lombardy) he at last took Millain in the year 1449. 'Tis true, the Venetians did assist the Millaineses, under the conduct of Sigismund Malatesta (who was to join with Picenninus, that fought un∣der the Millaineses) but after such a lame rate, that they were famish'd and yielded up the City rather to the Venetians than to Francis. Where∣fore the Venetians seeing the thing went quite contrary to their expecta∣tion, they treated with Alphonso, who was an utter Enemy to Francis, and made a League with him, to rout the ambitious Man out of Millain before he grew too strong. They also sollicited the Florentines to do the same; who said they would never be against Francis, and therefore the Venetians banish'd their Merchants out of their Dominions, and pre∣vailed with Alphonso to do the like. Nicolas the Pope, seeing all Italy in Arms, did often interpose his Authority to make a Peace, that all people might come the next year freely out of all Europe to the Jubilee; for the fiftieth year was acoming wherein the Jubilee was to be cele∣brated after the usual manner. Besides he made six Cardinals, of which number were Latinus, Ʋrsinus, and his own Brother by the Mothers side, called Philip, Cardinal of S. Laurence in Lucina, a very good Man and of a generous disposition. Mean time Frederick the Emperour, at the Pope's request, forced Felix to renounce the Popedom, because he saw how pernicious and destructive so much Sedition had been to the Church of Rome. Yet Nicolas was so civil and kind to Amadeus, that he sent him a Cardinals Hat, with Legantine Power in Germany, that he might not live without some Honour at least. And those Car∣dinals also which Amadeus had made, submitted. This agreement of theirs did so rejoyce not onely all the Clergy, but the people of Rome, that the Night after they heard of it, April 23. 1449. they rode about the City with Flambeaus in their Hands, and cry'd out, Long live Ni∣colas. The Pope, that he might not seem unthankful to God for so ex∣traordinary a benefit, went publickly to Prayers in the Vatican along with the Clergy and the people. The like was done all Italy over, when they saw the Church of God freed from such a pernicious Sedition. Nay the Pope's Authority and esteem was so great, that he restrain'd even Princes for some time, when they had a mind to make War. For James Picenninus, Sigismund Malatesta, and Charles Gonzaga, who were Francis Sfortia's bitter, mortal Enemies, incited the Venetians to that War. The Venetians also had drawn the Duke of Savoy into their Alliance, together with the Marquis of Montferrat and the Lords of Corregio: and try'd to bring over the Bolognians and those of Perugia, but in vain, for the Pope was against it and threaten'd 'em with his displeasure if they offer'd to do it. They likewise indented with Alphonso, that whilst they attaqued Francis, he should engage the Florentines. But Francis relying upon the friendship and power of the Florentines, and having taken Lewis Gon∣zaga Prince of Mantoua into his Alliance, he prepared himself with cou∣rage
for the War. Hence arose great Animosities between Charles and Lewis, that Lewis should court his Alliance, who was Charles's Ene∣my, and because he had kept some Towns from him which his Father left him by his Will. For Lewis was his Brother's security when he was once arrested for eighty thousand pounds; and Charles having no mind to part with his Land, he chose rather to pay the Money to Francis (who was for Money or Towns either) and keep the Towns in his own hands, as being near and conveniently situated. For this reason Charles blamed his Brother and accused him as a Robber, not onely to the Ve∣netians, on whose side he was, but to the Emperour, by whose assistance he expected to have right done him. And now the Year of Jubilee was come, when such a multitude of people flock'd to Rome, as never were seen there before; So that, when they came from seeing our Saviours Picture, in the Vatican, back into the City, a Mule which was in the way, belonging to Peter Barbus, Cardinal of S. Mark's, was throng'd to death, and two hundred Men and three Horses trodden to Dirt and suf∣focated in the crow'd upon the Bridg near S. Angelo. Besides many that fell from the sides of the Bridg into the River and perish'd in the Water. It is certain there were one hundred thirty six buried upon that occasion in S. Celsus's; and the rest carried to Campo Sancto. Here∣upon Pope Nicolas, who was heartily sorry for them, pull'd down cer∣tain little Cottages that straighten'd the way to the Bridg and spent most of that Year in Processions, daily visiting one noted Church or other, whither he was attended by all the Cardinals. He likewise took care, that though there were such a vast number of people, yet they should want nothing that was necessary for them: nor was he wanting with Curses and Guards to deter High-way Men from molesting those Strangers that came to the City at that time. The next year he heard that Frederick the Emperour was coming to the City, to receive his Imperial Crown, and to marry Leonora, Daughter to the King of Portugal, and Alphonso's Niece; wherefore he fortified the Gates and Towers of the City, as also the Castle of S. Angelo as well as he could, out of fear, I suppose, lest the Emperour's coming should make some new commotion there: he being naturally very timorous. For that reason he call'd all his Forces to Rome, and, to oblige the People, chose thirteen Senators, to govern the thirteen Wards of the City, and gave 'em thirteen Scarlet Gowns. The Emperour upon his arrival was met by thirteen Cardinals, with all the Nobility and Magistracy of the City, and having passed the Castle gate was saluted at S. Peter's, by the Pope himself: by whom he was con∣ducted into the Church, with his Empress Leonora, whom he had met at Siena lately arrived out of Spain, upon March 9. 1452. And from thence (after Mass said) they departed, and lodg'd in that House which stands by S. Peter's Stairs to this day, though it looks better than it did, because it was beautified at the cost and charge of the Cardinal of Constance. For some days after the Pope said Mass in his own Person, and blessed the Emperour and Empress after the usual manner at Wed∣dings, before the Bridegroom lies with his Bride: and presented them with the Crown Imperial upon the eighteenth of that month, in the same place. As the Emperour was going, after his Coronation, to S. John's, he made several Knights upon the Bridg at S. Angelo. Then he and his Empress went into Naples, to see King Alphonso, by whom he was
receiv'd with all splendour and magnificence; and afterward returning to Rome by Sea, he took his Journey immediately for his own Countrey, because he heard that some Princes in Germany and Hungary, were upon new Designs on the behalf of King Ladislaus (a fine young Gentleman) whom he had brought along with him. When he departed, two Car∣dinals attended upon him several miles, that is to say, the Cardinal of Bologna, who was the Pope's Brother and Carvagialla Cardinal of S. An∣gelo. Now when the Emperour was gone, the Venetians raised a great Army and march'd into Cremona, where they spoil'd all they came near, besieging Soncio and the adjacent Towns, which they not long after took, together with some Troops of Horse, that fell into their hands, because Francis had not his Men ready so soon as he should have had. But after that when Lewis Gonzaga his Friend and Ally came up, he went into Brescia and brought the Venetians to such an extremity that they durst not venture out of their Fens, to fight in the open Campaigne. For that reason the Venetians were willing to protract the time, as placing all their hopes of Victory in delays, because they thought Francis could not hold out long, at such a charge for want of Money. They likewise ho∣ped, that the Millaineses would think of their Liberty which he had late∣ly extorted from them, and, whilst Francis was engaged in such an im∣portant War, endeavour to shake off the yoke of servitude by some new commotions. Ferdinand, at this time by the command of his Fa∣ther Alphonso marched into Tuscany with about eight thousand Horse, and four thousand Foot, against the Florentines: and when he had tem∣pted Cortona to rebel, he took Foiano a Town near Arezzo after forty days Siege, with the loss of a great many Men on both sides. He march'd from thence into Siena, and after he had vainly attempted the taking of Castellina, he fell down into the Sea-coast of Siena to Winter, but took some Castles from those of Volaterra by the way. Sigismund Malatesta who was General of the Florentine Army observ'd his motions all along, with Design to take an opportunity of doing his business the more successfully. But the Florentines fearing the Power of Alphon∣so and the Venetians both by Sea and Land, resolv'd with the consent of Francis, to call in forein Aid; and upon that account they sent Angelus Accioiolus, a Knight, their Envoy into France, who, recounting the conti∣nual kindnesses between the Florentines and that Crown, induced him to command the Duke of Savoy and the Grisons, that had taken up Arms against Francis, not to injure the Friend and Ally of the Florentines ei∣ther by word or deed, if they would have him their Friend. He also persuaded Renatus to accept of his assistance by Men and Money, in order to retrieve the Kingdom of Naples, from whence he had been ex∣pelled by Alphonso: seeing the King was at that time engaged in the Flo∣rentine Wars. After this Embassy the Florentines and Francis grew so prosperous, that the Venetians were glad to make Peace, their Army which they had sent against the Prince of Mantua under the command of Charles Gonzaga, being routed not far from Godio: This Army had been raised and dispatch'd away under Gonzaga, to hinder the Mantuan and Brandoline, who were bringing together Forces for the service of Sforza, from joyning with him, by which means he would have easily been able to overcome their less powerful Army under Gentilis. Carvia∣galla came the year before to the Armies, to make Peace between them,
in the name of Nicolas; but went away without any satisfaction, calling both God and Man to witness, it was not long of Nicolas that a Peace was not setled in Italy, but that he was desirous it should be so, that War might be made against the Turks by the unanimous consent of Christendom. For he had heard that the Turks were making prepara∣tions against Constantinople, and therefore sent Cardinal Ruten thither, who was a Constantinopolitan born, to promise the Emperour and the Citizens his Assistance, if they would return to the Catholick Church, as they had promised in the Council of Florence. In the mean time Re∣natus, who was desirous to recover the Kingdom of Naples (in order whereunto Francis and the Florentines had promised him their assistance, if he would pass the Alps against the Venetians) attempted, but in vain, to make his way through Savoy with two thousand Horse, and having spent most of the Summer in that Affair, went another way to Savona, and so to Francis. Francis was so proud of the company of so great a King, and was so well recruited both as to Men and Courage, that he chased his Enemy into the Mountains of Brescia. And after that march'd round Brescia and Bergamo, where he took forty Towns partly by storm, and partly by surrender. But the Winter coming on, they all went into their Winter Quarters, and Renatus, leaving his Son at Florence, returned (much dissatisfied both with the Florentines and Francis) into France. All Peoples courage began now to cool with the Season▪ and the States and Princes finding their Treasuries almost exhausted with the continual charges of a War, they began to think of Peace, which Nicolas had formerly attempted: and the Venetians and Florentines who hated the licentiousness of the common Soldiers, were now mightily for it. Nicolas having just discover'd the conspiracy of Stephen Porcarius a Knight of Rome, neglected that Affair, though it were in a fair way, and apply'd himself to remove those civil Animo∣sities. For Stephen had more Courage than Power, and was a very great Master of his Mother-Tongue, and having made broad Signs that he would free his Country (as I told you) was banish'd by the Pope into Bologna, upon condition, that every day he should present himself to Nicen who was Governour of the City. But he pretending himself sick cheated the Governour, and by advise of the Conspirators went back to Rome in all haste, with a Design, as soon as he came thither to cry out Liberty to the People and seize upon the Pope and Cardinals. But whilst he lay down a little while, tired with the length of his Jour∣ney and much watching (for he had been some whole Nights with∣out sleep) he gave them opportunity and time to discover the Plot. When the Pope knew of his audacious Design, he presently sent James Lavagnolus, a Senator, a Veronese and Sub-Chamberlain with a Guard to take and put him into Prison. He hearing of their coming, fled to his Sisters House, and left Baptista Sarra, with a few Servants at his own; who being an active, bold Fellow, got both himself and his Companions out of the House and escaped without any hurt. But being inform'd whither Stephen was gone, they took him at his Sisters, where he lay hid in a Chest, and having confess'd the whole story of the Plot, they hang'd him under Castel S. Angelo. Angelus Massa and his Son had the same punishment in the Capitol, together with their Accomplice, Savus, having first read the Narrative of the Plot publickly, January 9. 1453.
After that he persecuted and destroy'd all the rest of the Conspirators, especially Francis Gabadeus, and Peter de Monterotundo, with Baptista Sarra who was deliver'd up to Justice by the Venetians. For to them had he fled after the Conspiracy was discover'd. But Nicolas who hi∣therto had treated the Romans with all Liberality and kindness, and went about the City with more freedom, than ever any Pope before him, was more cautious for the future, and more morose too not onely to all in general, but especially to the Romans: whom he would not admit to speak with him. Besides he had the Gout very severely; but no∣thing tormented him so much as when he heard that the Turk had ta∣ken Constantinople and Pera at one time, and that the Emperour of Con∣stantinople with many thousands more, was kill'd. He was afraid lest Cardinal Ruten might have been taken and kill'd too (whom he (I told you) sent thither) but he escaped in a disguise. The Pope had a mind to assist the Constantinopolitans with Soldiers and a Navy, as his Letters which he wrote to the Emperour do testifie: wherein among other misfortunes he blames them for their revolting from the Church, and their pretended affection to the Latines: but that City was taken so suddenly, that he had hardly any time to think of sending Aid. Be∣sides all these things, lest any thing should be lacking to torment him, the Count Aversus attaqued Norscia without his Order, being hired to do so by those of Spoleto: for those two People had a Controversie con∣cerning their Bounds. Hereupon he sent Angelus Ronco with the Church-Forces to stop the Count's passage, that he might not return to his own Towns. But he hearing that Angelus was in the fault that the Soldiers did not take the Count as he came back, he sent for him into Castel S. Angelo and put him to death at three of the Clock at Night. Some write, that Nicolas was very sorry for that Action, that the Governour of the Castle should execute what he in passion commanded him, so punctu∣ally. The Venetians now seeing it was to no purpose to talk of Peace, (for they had often attempted it) and fearing lest Francis should slight it by the persuasion of Lewis Gonzaga, they sent James Picennine their General, with a great body of Horse in all speed to Volta: which when he had taken and repelled Angelus into Godio (not without damage to Lewis, who was then sick there) they recalled him into his Winter-Quarters, thinking that Lewis was now sufficiently moved to seek Peace. In the mean time Simonetus, an Ermit, went up and down from one to the other, and persuaded sometimes the Venetians and sometimes Francis to Concord so long till he made 'em agree upon a Peace, which was publickly proclaimed, April 9. 1454. upon these terms, That e∣very one should have all that was theirs before the War restored to 'em, except Geradada and Gastiglione di Pescara, of which the former Francis had taken from the Venetians, and Alphonsus the later from the Floren∣tines. And to make it the stronger, as also that Alphonso might see, they had respect to him as a King, the Princes and States thought fit to send Embassadours to him: where when they arrived from all places, Dominicus Capranius, Cardinal of S. Crosses and great Penitentiary, (a Man of great Prudence and Authority) who was sent Legat from the Pope, by his exhortations and admonitions offering himself the Umpire for the Peace, he brought him at last to agree that the Peace which the Venetians and Francis had made, should be confirm'd, and assented to
by all Parties; and if any quarrel happen'd between them for the fu∣ture, that the Pope should have Power to decide it: as also that whoever should offer violence to the other, should be censur'd by the Pope, and rec∣kon'd a common Enemy. When therefore they had all taken an Oath to perform it, the Peace was confirm'd at Naples, about a year after the former Peace, which was accounted the most firm that ever our Ance∣stors knew. For all except the Genoeses joyn'd in it; but Alphonso could not agree with them by any means, because they promised him Tribute and did not pay it, as he said. There was also left a good pretence for a War either by the neglect or design of the Embassadours, which Al∣phonso made use of afterward against Sigismund Malatesta; that he should receive Money of Alphonso as a Soldiers pay, and yet fight under the Florentines against him. But Nicolas, the Pope, whether for grief at Constantinoples being taken, or whether of a Fever and the Gout where∣withal he was very much tormented, died in the eighth year of his Pontificate, 1455. and was buried in S. Peter's very honourably; upon whose Tombstone this Epitaph is deservedly inscribed; Hic sita sunt quinti Nicolai antistitis ossa, Aurea qui dederat secula, Roma, tibi. Consilio illustris, virtute illustrior omni, Excoluit Doctos doctior ipse Viros. Abstulit errorem quo Schisma infecerat urbem Restituit mores, moenia, templa, domos. Tum Bernardino statuit sua sacra Senensi, Sancta Jubilei tempora dùm celebrat. Cinxit honore caput Frederici conjugis aureo Res Italas icto foedere composuit. Attica Romanae complura volumina linguae Prodidit, en! tumulo fundite thura sacro. He was commendable for his Liberality toward all, especially Learned Men, whom he advanced with Money, Court-preferments, and Bene∣fices; whom he would sometimes put upon reading publick Lectures, sometimes upon writing some new thing, and sometimes upon transla∣ting Greek Authors into Latin, insomuch that the Greek and Latin Tongues which had lain hid for six hundred years, at last regain'd their splendour to some considerable degree. He also sent those Learned Men all over Europe to find out such Books, as had been lost either by the negligence of Antiquity, or the brutal fury of the barbarous Na∣tions. So that Poggius found out Quintilian; and Enoch Asculanus, Mar∣cus Caelius Appicius, as also Pomponius Porphyrio, a famous Writer upon Horace. Besides, he erected most stately Buildings in the City, and the Vatican: in the City, a noble House for Popes, near S. Marie the Greater, and repaired S. Stephen's Church that stands in the Mount di S. Giovanni, but built S. Theodores, that stands upon the Plain between the Palazzo Maggiore and the Campidoglio, from the ground. He like∣wise covered the roof of S. Mary the Round which stands in the middle of the City, an ancient Temple built by Agrippa, with Lead. And in the Vatican he not onely beautified the Pope's House after that man∣ner which we see, but he began the Walls of the Vatican, very large
and high, laying foundations for Towers, and a vast Superstructure, whereby to keep the Enemy from plundering the Pope's House, or St. Peter's Church, as formerly was often used. Furthermore, at the up∣per end of S. Peter's he began a great Gallery to make the Church more glorious, and hold more People. He also repaired Ponte Melle: and built a fine House at Viterbo near the Baths. Nor onely so, but he lent many others Money who were a building in the City; and by his order the Streets were paved. He was very Charitable, especially to Persons of Quality if they happen'd to be reduced to poverty; and gave poor Maids a competent Portion when they were married. He always received forein Embassadours very honourably and freely. He was ea∣sily anger'd, to say the truth, being a cholerick Man, but he was easily pleased again: and that gave some ill-natur'd People the occasion to carp at him, though he deserved extreamly well of God and Man. Then he was so far from Covetousness, that he never sold any Place, nor ever was guilty of Simony. He was kind to them, who had deserved well of himself and the Church of God, a lover of Justice, the Author and preserver of Peace, merciful to Offenders, a diligent observer of Cere∣monies, and would omit nothing belonging to Divine Worship. The Vessels of Gold and Silver, Crosses set with Jewels, Priestly Robes adorn'd with Gold and Pearls, the Arras Hangings interwoven with Gold and Silver and a Papal Crown are yet to be seen as Monuments of his Munificence. I do not mention the many holy Books that were transcribed by his Order and embossed with Gold and Silver: but you may see the Pope's Library, which was wonderfully augmented by his care, and at his charge. He was so kind to the Religious that he gave 'em a great deal of Money and Ecclesiastical Benefices besides; and Ca∣nonized S. Bernardine of Siena, a Frier Minor, because by his Preaching, Admonitions, and Reproofs, he had almost extinguish'd the Factions of Italy, that is to say, the Guelphs and the Gibelline Faction, and shew'd Christians the way to live well and happily: whose Body is now to be seen, and daily visited with great veneration, at Aquila. CALIXTƲS III. CALIXTƲS the Third, first called Alphonso Borgia, a Spa∣niard, born at Sativa in the Diocese of Valenza, (whose Father and Mother were called John and Francis, of a Gentile Family, and gave him good Education) was made Pope by consent of the Car∣dinals, April 8. 1455. First for his Education; he was but fourteen years old when, having laid the foundations of Learning elsewhere, he went to the University of Lerida, where he attained to such perfection, that in a short time he commenced Doctor in Civil and Canon Law, and made very learned Readings to those that came to hear him. So that Peter Luna (called Benedict the XIII.) on his own accord and without asking, gave him a Canonship of the Church of Lerida. And now be∣coming famous for his Learning he went to Alphonso King of Aragon; and was made his Secretary and one of his Privy Council. Afterward he
was made Governour of the Church of Majorca, and his Friends per∣suaded him to be Parson of that Church; he refused it, and said, he ex∣pected to be Bishop of Valenza, as not long after he deservedly came to be. For when Benedict the XIII. was dead, and those two Anti-Cardi∣nals, which I told you of in the life of Martin, had made one Giles, a Canon of Barcelona, Pope (in the room of the other that dy'd at Pani∣schola) whom they called Clement the eighth, Alphonso Boria was present∣ly sent thither by King Alphonso, (who was now agreed with Martin) not without apparent danger of his own life as well as those that atten∣ded on him: So tyrannically was Panischola kept, and govern'd by those chiefly whose interest it was to breed discord. This Alphonso then made Giles so sensible of his Errour by his Reason and Authority, that upon the arrival of Peter the Pope's Legat, he quitted the Popedom and sub∣mitted to the Papal jurisdiction. Upon this account Martin made Giles Bishop of Majorca, and Alphonso Bishop of Valenza. After that, when Wars arose between Alphonso of Aragon and James King of Castile, Alphon∣so Borgia was thought the onely fit Man, to go and exhort the two Kings to peace and amity; which after seven years Wars he procured, and made such a lasting Peace, by conjugal Alliances as well as other means, that some Conditions of that League are observed even to this day. But when the Council of Basil was at the heighth, King Alphonso, who was then at War in Naples, being desired to send some body thither, he order'd Alphonso Borgia to go: who taking it ill that a thing of such perni∣cious consequence should be committed to his management, he got leave of the Queen, to go into Italy to the King with Ferdinand the King's Son, and exhort him, that after so many dangerous expeditions, and difficul∣ties with which he was even at that time surrounded, he would return into his own Country. But the King told him he would not, but sent him to Eugenius, who was then at Florence, to treat concerning a Peace. For Viteleschus having enter'd the Kingdom of Naples in Eugenius's name with an Army, plunder'd and spoil'd all that came before him, to hinder the King from taking Naples, which at that time he laid Siege to. But the business taking up time, and the Pope intending in the mean time to make twenty Cardinals, among the rest design'd the Bishop of Valenza should be one: though he refused the honour with all the earnestness imaginable; because, he said, it was not fit for him to re∣ceive especially till he had done the business that he came for. Afterward Eugenius return'd to Rome, the Patriarch of Aquilegia, whom he sent to Tarracina to the King, having made a Peace between the Pope and the King, upon Conditions, at the making of which the Bishop of Va∣lenza was present, and interposed his Authority and care, for which the Pope began to love him so well, that he soon after made him Cardinal Sanctorum quatuor, and sent for him to Rome, where he used no less mo∣desty in his Cardinalate, than he had before in his Bishoprick, be∣ing always free and far from pomp and vain-glory. When he spoke in the Senate, he was reckon'd so grave and sincere a person that he never spake any thing out of flattery, or to win favour. But Eugenius dying and Nicolas after him, this Alphonso Borgia, as I told you, was made Pope in S. Peter's Palace, taking upon him the name of Calistus, and immediately proclaimed War against the Turks: shewing his own hand∣writing whereby he had vowed to do so even before his Pontificate in
a Book of his to this purpose; I Calixtus do vow to God and the Holy Trinity that I will persecute the Turks those Enemies of Christianity, with War, Curses, Interdictions, Execrations and by all the ways I am able. All that were by admired at it, that he should arrogate to himself the name of Pope before he had the honour conferr'd, and that a Man who was so old and decrepit, should have so much courage. But that he might really perform his promise, he sent Preachers through all Europe, to animate all Christians against the Turks, and to persuade such as were able to lend their helping hand in that momentous Expedition. And of these he sent sixteen Gallies full, built at Rome; over whom the Pa∣triarch of Aquilegia was Admiral, and harass'd the Sea-coasts of Asia for three years together; where he took several Islands, and did the Ene∣my a great deal of damage. King Alphonso, and the Duke of Burgundy also took upon them the Cross, and profess'd that they would either go against the Enemy in their own persons, or at least would raise Men to send. Yet this Affair as it was moved at an heat, so it as easily cool∣ed again, whilst the Princes indulged their pleasures and neglected that which would have gain'd them immortal Fame. Whilst the Pope was Crown'd in the Lateran, two Soldiers, one under the Earl Aversus, and the other under Neapolio Ʋrsin (Men of diverse factions and parties) who quarrelling about a young Lad, did so wound each other, that they both dy'd upon the spot. For that reason Neapolio, raising the Ʋrsine Faction, invaded the House where the Count Aversus lived: but the Count being from home, he would have gone to the Lateran, to seise him, but was with much ado kept back by his Brother Latinus, the Pope's Chamberlain. And indeed Neapolio could not have gone thither without great damage to the City, because all the Faction of the Colon∣neses, who favour'd the Count, were then in Arms. The Pope also had sent John Baruncellus, and Laelius de Valle (two Advocates of the Con∣sistory) to both of 'em, to make 'em Friends: so that by this means the present disturbance was appeased, but the old grudg betwixt them still remain'd. For they had many trials of Skill to the great disadvantage of their Adherents. The Pope however apply'd his mind to his Ponti∣fical Affairs, and Canoniz'd S. Vincent a Spaniard of the Order of Preachers, and S. Edmund of England: and upon that occasion said Prayers and Thanksgivings from Ecclesia Minervae to S. Peter's with a long train of Clergy and Laity following him. But lest any thing should be wanting to disturb the Church, some Country Fellows of Palombara a Town in Sabina, who were formerly banish'd thence by James Sebel∣lus, Lord of the place, return'd home, and killing two Sons of James's, promised to surrender the Town to the Church: which Calixtus not only refused to accept, but sent Cardinal Columna thither, to appease them. Neapolio fearing the Cardinal should seise Palombara in his own name, he went thither with his Army and besieged the Town for some days: Though when Matthew Poianus and Francis Sabellus with other Com∣manders came up by order from the Pope and the Cardinal, they raised the Siege, enter'd Palombara, and hang'd twenty of the Country Fel∣lows, of those especially that had made the disturbance, and quarter'd 'em, to give example to others, and warn 'em never to attempt so great a piece of Villany against their rightful Lords. Soon after appeared a Comet for some days hairy and red; of which when the Astrologers
said that it portended a great Plague, Dearth, or some mighty Slaughter, Calixtus appointed a Fast, for several days, to pray to God, that if any judgment hung over them, he would be pleased to avert and turn it up∣on the Turks the Enemies to Christianity. He gave order likewise that God should be supplicated every day, and that a Bell should be rung about Noon, to give people notice when they should joyn in Prayer for the Christians against the Turks. So that the Christians assisted by the Prayers of the whole Church, fought against the Turks at Belgrade un∣der the conduct of John the Vaivod an excellent Person, and John Capi∣stranus of the Order of Minors, bearing the holy Cross, and conquer'd 'em when they besieged Belgrade, six thousand of the Enemies being slain by a few of our Men, as Carviagalla, Cardinal of S. Angelo wrote to the Pope and to Dominick Capranicus Cardinal of S. Crosses: besides that all their Carriages and an hundred and sixty Guns were taken; a blow, that so much scar'd the Turk that he retir'd in haste to Constanti∣nople. And no doubt but that cruel, barbarous Nation had been de∣stroyed, if the Christian Princes would but have laid aside their civil A∣nimosities, and have pursu'd that great Conquest by Land and Sea, as Calixtus advis'd. But the Turk recovering strength took Trabisond, kil∣ling the Emperour, and then Bossina, where he took and slew the King. All wise Men perceiving as from a Watch-Tower, and advertising the Christians of the Calamities that were like to befal. Calixtus especially never desisted from exhorting the Christian Princes by Letters and Mes∣sengers, to open their eyes at last amidst such great dangers, for that they would seek a remedy in vain, when the Enemy was recruited. But whilst the good Man was thinking and talking of these things, James Picenninus revolted from the Venetians and march'd into the Territories of Siena with a numerous body of Horse and Foot, to demand of the Sieneses some thousands of pounds, which, he said they ow'd him upon his Father Nicolas's account, who had formerly fought under their Com∣mission. The Sieneses fearing the worst, sent to the Princes of Italy to as∣sist 'em, as they were bound by Contract; especially the Pope, who first advised 'em, not to give James one farthing and then sent his Forces against him and admonish'd the Princes of Italy to do the same, lest a flame should break out in Italy, which might be too fierce for them to quench. The Italians fearing the Pope's words would prove too true, sent speedy suc∣cours to the Sieneses: onely Alphonso favoured James and sent for him to his House, as being mindful of the Friendship he had formerly contract∣ed with Nicolas Picenninus his Father, nor would he assist the Sieneses as he ought to have done; nay he so far animated Count Petilian against them, that he seemed to be the chief cause of all the mischief. But when the Auxiliaries came in, not onely from Francis Sfortia, but the Venetians also, Picenninus was reduced to that pass in some few Bat∣tles, that if he were not routed, he was mightily weaken'd, especial∣ly at Orbitello; insomuch that he was fain to take shipping in Alphon∣so's Gallies, that were sent to him in his distress, and sail into his own Country without any success in that great Attempt. Thus by the as∣sistance of Calixtus and his Allies were the Sieneses freed from great danger; though they were still troubled with intestine and domestick as well as forein broils, by reason of some Citizens that contemn'd their present Liberty and follow'd Alphonso's Faction, by whom also 'tis
thought that great War was first raised. But the honest Citizens turn'd out, or kill'd the rest and do to this day retain that Liberty which they purchased at so dear a rate. Nor did they omit to punish the licentiousness of the Soldiers or those that fled from their Colours, as Gilbert Corrigia, whom they put to death, and gave his Men for a com∣mon prey to the rest. Sigismund Malatesta had like to have been serv'd in the same sauce, who at that time fought under them, for protract∣ing the War, and driving away their Cattel out of their grounds, as if he had been an Enemy. That year there happen'd such an Earthquake in the Kingdom of Naples upon the seventh of December, that many Churches and Houses fell down, to the great destruction of Man and Beast; especially at Naples, Capua, Cajetta, Aversa, and other Cities in old Campania, whose ruines I since have seen with great astonish∣ment, when I went thither to look after Antiquities. Then also did Alphonso often repeat his Vow which he had made against the Turks, and said he would shortly perform it; but he could never be brought to the Holy War for all that, so mightily was he taken with the de∣lights of Naples. But Calixtus, when he had setled the Affairs of Italy, created nine Cardinals, of whom two were his Nephews by two Sisters of his, to wit Roderick Borgia and John Miliano his Sisters Son. He also made Aeneas Bishop of Siena a Cardinal, and made use of him to procure the peace of Italy whilst the Sieneses were teazed with War. The Earl Tagliacocius being dead whom the Pope had made Governour of the City the year before, there rose a Controversie between Nea∣polio Ʋrsin and the Count Aversus, for that the later had possession of Monticello, not far from Tivoli, he pretending it belong'd to his Daugh∣ter-in-law who was the Count's Daughter; and Neapolio urg'd on the other side that it ought to be his, himself being reckon'd to be of the Ʋrsine Family. Whilst these two contended thus for their Patrimony and that with Arms too, the Roman people suffer'd very greatly. But when this Controversie also was over, and both sides commanded to lay down their Arms, Calixtus made his Nephew Bor∣gia not onely Governour of the City in the room of the Count deceas∣ed, but made him General of the Church-Forces, that he might keep the great Men of the City the better in order. Alphonso not long af∣ter dying without a lawful Heir, Calixtus had the courage to demand that Kingdom, and said it belong'd to the Sea Apostolick as an Escheat. Whereupon Armies were raised on both sides, and Ferdinand, Alphonso's Heir fear'd Calixtus's resolution: for he knew his nature, and the great∣ness of his Soul. But his death also put all things into confusion, and freed Ferdinand from great consternation of mind. Calixtus died in the third year, the third month, and sixteenth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in the Vatican on the left hand of St. Peter's, in the Round Church, dedicated to St. Marie del Febri, which was formerly repair∣ed by Nicolas. Borgia also, his Nephew died, not long after, at Civita Vechia, whither he had fled to save himself from the Ʋrsins whom he had disobliged by favouring the opposite Faction. But to give you a short Character of Calixtus; He was a very upright Man, and is to be commended for one thing above all; That when he was Bishop or Cardinal, he would never keep any Benefice in Commendam, but
said, he was content with one Wife, and that a Virgin, i.e. the Church of Valenza, as the Canon Law ordains. Besides, he was very chari∣table to poor Christians both in publick and private: and gave por∣tions to several poor Virgins when they married; kept indigent Noble∣men at his own charge: and when occasion was he was munificent to Princes, especially those that could assist the Church of Christ. He likewise sent Lewis of Bologna, of the Order of St. Francis, Ʋsun-Cas∣sanus Prince of Persia and Armenia, and to the King of the Tartars with many great Presents, to animate them against the Turk; and by his persuasion they did the Enemy great damage, and sent their Embassa∣dours, that were design'd to come to Calixtus, after he dy'd, to Pope Pius: which was an admirable Rarity to us, not onely upon account of the distant Countries from whence they came, but their habit which was unusual, and very strange to our eyes. They say that Ʋsun-Cas∣sanus after many Victories over the Enemy, wrote to the Pope, that he had conquer'd the Foe by the Pope's prayers, and that he would one day thank him for his kindness which was Divine rather than hu∣mane. That Alliance was begun by Calixtus, and is preserv'd to this day between all Christians and that Prince, who vexes the Turk with continual War. He laid out but little in building, because he dy'd too soon, and gather'd up all the Money that he could, to maintain that great and perillous War against the Turks. Onely he repair'd St. Prisca upon the Mount Aventine, as also the City Walls that were bro∣ken down almost to the ground. Yet some Hangings of Gold there are, which he bought. He was sparing in his Diet, very modest in his Discourse; and very accessible, as much as his Age would suffer him to be: for he was eighty years old, and yet as studious as ever. For he either read himself, or heard those that did, whenever his important Affairs would give him leave. He composed the Office for the Transfi∣guration of our Lord Jesus Christ, and order'd it to be said in the same manner, and with the same Indulgences for which Corpus Christi Day is so much valued. He receiv'd all Embassadours that came to him with great kindness, but would not yield to any of their Proposals or Demands, which were not consistent with Virtue and Justice. And that was the cause why he fell out and had a long quarrel with Alphon∣so, who sometimes would ask him to give Bishopricks to such as either upon the score of their Age, or ignorance in Books as well as Men, ought not to have them. When Calixtus dy'd he left 115000 l. be∣hind him, which he had heaped together to make warlike preparations against the Turk. As Calixtus was going to be buried, Dominick Cardinal of St. Crosses and chief Poenitentiary, died also (a Man of gravity and great Wisdom) and was buried in Minerva's Temple; to the grief of all good Men.
PIƲS II. PIƲS the Second, before called Aeneas Picolhomineus, an Ita∣lian, of Siena, and born at Corsignano (whose Father's name was Sylvius and his Mother's Victoria) was chosen Pope by ge∣neral consent of the Cardinals, August 20. 1458. Formerly his Father and the rest of the Nobility being banish'd, or expelled the Republick of Siena by the Commonalty of that place, he went to Cor∣signano, the Seat of his Family, and there had a Child by his Wife. Which Child as soon as it was born the Father christen'd Aeneas Sylvius. Now his Mother, when she was big with Child, dreamed that she had brought forth a Boy with a Mitre on his head; as which she was affraid (as people are apt to think the worst of things) that her dream beto∣kened some dishonour to their Child and Family: nor could she be eas'd of her fear till she heard her Son was made Bishop of Trieste. And up∣on that news she was freed from all fear, and gave God thanks, that she saw her Son more happy than she expected. As soon as he was ca∣pable of learning any thing, he, having a good memory, and being very docile, went through his Grammar at Corsignano where he lived but poorly, being forced to undergo all the troubles of a rural employment. But when he was eighteen years of age he went to Siena, where, by the help of his Friends, he first learn'd the Poets and then the Orators, in which he was so skilful, that in a short time he put forth Poems in Latin and Italian, of which if the Subject was Love, it is to be ascri∣bed to his Youth. Thence he apply'd himself to the Civil Law, the study of which not long after he was forced to leave. For there arose a War between the Sieneses and the Florentines, which made him fear a Dearth; and seeing the Commonalty of Siena suspected the Nobility, he chose as it were a voluntary Exile, and follow'd that excellent per∣son, Dominick Capranicus, who then passed through Siena, in his way to the Council at Basil, to complain of the injury Eugenius had done him in denying him a Cardinals Hat, which Martin even in his absence had bestow'd upon him, for his Virtue and Integrity. In his Retinue he went, and after long tedious Journeys over the Alps (that reach to heaven almost, and are cover'd with Snow) he travailed over Ponte del Inferno, the Lake of Lucern, and through Switzerland, till he at last came to Basil. In which Assembly though he had much to do, being Domi∣nick's Secretary, yet he stole always some hours for his Book. After that, he was forced not without tears to leave Dominick, because he was extream poor, Eugenius denying him the Revenue of his Benefices and of his Paternal Estate too; he went to wait upon Bartholomew Bi∣shop of Novara, with whom he came to Florence, where Pope Eugenius at that time was. But he was forced to leave Bartholomew also, (he being accused by the Pope of high Treason) and betook himself to Ni∣colas, Cardinal of St. Crosses, and a very excellent and religious person in all Mens judgments; who going to Artois by order from Eugenius (where there was a Convention of all the French Princes) he made a
Peace between the Duke of Burgundy (an Ally of England) and the King of France. After that, Nicolas returning into Italy, made a Peace between the Venetians and Philip Duke of Millain to their great satisfaction; and Aeneas, who was not very acceptable to Eugenius, went to Basil, and was in great esteem among all Men. He was made a Secretary in that famous Council, and Abbreviatour of the Pope's Breves, as also a Duodecimvir, or one of the Twelve who in that great Assembly were as Censors. For no∣thing could be done relating to the publick, but what pass'd their graver approbation; and if any were admitted to the Council that were not fit, they were removed by their Order. There were in that Council four Sub Conventions or Committees, one debated concerning Faith, ano∣ther of Peace, a third of Reformation, and the other of promiscuous matters. Over each of these there was a several President plac'd every month: and Aeneas was often Chairman of the Committee for Faith of which he was a Member, and was also chosen twice one of the Collators, or disposers of Benefices. He made several Speeches in that Assembly, but one more remarkably elegant, to prove that Pavia was preferable to Avignion, Ʋdine or Florence for a place convenient to hold a Council in, by reason of its plenty, situation, magnificence of the Houses, good Air, and the liberality of Philip their Duke. When any thing was to be done by the several Nations together, he was the onely person chosen for Italy, to manage their business, he was a Man so courteous and in∣genuous. He went also on several Embassies from the Council; to Stras∣burgh, three times; to Trent, once; to Constance, twice; to Frankfort, once; and into Savoy twice. But when upon a long Debate the Council chose Felix Pope, and deposed Eugenius, and eight were chosen out of every Nation, to be managers of the Council Affairs, Aeneas, who was the Pope's Secretary refused to be one, though it was offer'd him. And afterward when he was sent Embassadour from Felix to Frederick the Emperour, he so far prevailed upon him by his ingenuity, that he made him a Poet Laureat, his Companion, and a Prothonotary, which, in Ger∣many, is a Secretary of State. Not long after he was made a Counsel∣lour of State, and shew'd such Learning and Authority, that he was rec∣kon'd the most ingenuous Man there by far, although he wanted not Rivals and Detractors. When Eugenius and the Emperour first treated about putting an end to the Schism, and Aeneas went to the Pope upon that account, he stay'd some time at Siena, where his Friends desired him not to go to Eugenius; for they feared the Pope would use him severely, because his Authority was often opposed (as people said) by Aeneas in Epistles and Orations at the Council of Basil. But he was resolute and trusting to his own innocence slighted the intreaties of his Relations and went to Rome; where in the first place he acquitted himself before Eugenius, in an elegant Oration, for submitting to their Opinion, who approv'd of the Council of Basil. And when he had so done, he began to treat with him about that which the Emperour sent him to nego∣tiate. Thereupon two Agents were sent from Eugenius into Germany, of whom one was Sarzanus and the other John Carvagialla, by whose good management, and Aeneas's industry together, the Neutrality (as I told you in the Life of Nicolas) was taken off. But that it might appear really to be so, and not in words onely, the Emperour sent Aeneas him∣self to Rome, to make a publick Declaration of Submission in all mat∣ters
to Eugenius, in the name of himself and all Germany. Eugenius dy∣ing about this time, Aeneas was President of the Conclave, till another Pope was chosen in the room of the deceased; there being no Orator in the City, more fit for so great an Employment. Nicolas being chosen Pope, he had leave to depart, and as he went into Germany, he (having been made Sub Deacon by Eugenius) was made Bishop of Trieste (that Bishop being just then dead) by the Pope and the Emperour, without his own knowledg. After which Philip Viconti dying without an Heir, the Emperour sent him Envoy to Millain: where he made an Oration con∣cerning the descent of the Inheritance of that City, and exhorting to Alle∣giance, which if they preserv'd inviolate, they might enjoy their liberty still. He was sent thither another time, when they were besieged by Francis Sfortia, and suffer'd great extremities in defence of their Liber∣ty; at which time he enter'd the City with great hazard alone; for his Collegues left him at Como, and durst not go on for fear. But he de∣parted thence without any success, and whilst the Emperour sent him to Alphonso King of Aragon, the Pope Nicolas, made him Bishop of Siena, the place of his Nativity. And when the Emperour and Alphonso had contracted an Alliance by Marriage he return'd into Germany, where he persuaded the Emperour to go as soon as possible into Italy and receive his Imperial Crown. Upon that advice Frederick went thither, but sent Aeneas before, to meet and complement his Wife Leonora, who was to come from Portugal into Tuscany. Who when he came to Siena, stay'd not long there, but he began to be suspected by the people, as if he de∣sign'd (because the Emperour was coming) to turn out the populace and make the Government an Aristocracy. Aeneas therefore, to free the people from that jealousie, went to Talamone, where he thought Leonora would arrive; and yet the people were not satisfied. For they banish'd the Nobility into the Country for a time; and a little while af∣ter (according to the mutable humour of the Mobile) gave 'em leave to come back again, when they understood the integrity of the Emperour and the modesty of Aeneas. Hence he went to Pisa, where he heard the Portugueses were landed, and brought the Infanta (who was commit∣ted to his sole care) to the Emperour, then at Siena. Then going to Rome he managed all things (whilst the Emperour was crown'd) both private and publick. Afterward the Emperour went to visit Alphonso, and left Ladislaus (a Princely Youth whom the Hungarians and Bohe∣mians had often endeavour'd to steal away from him) under the tutelage of Aeneas, who kept him very faithfully. When the Emperour came back to Rome, and had given the Pope thanks, he went for Ferrara, and having made Borsius d' Este Duke of Modena, he departed▪ And no sooner was he come into Germany, but he presently dispatch'd away Aeneas by the Pope's Order as Envoy extraordinary into Bohemia and all the Cities of Austria. For there was a Controversie between them and the Empe∣rour about King Ladislaus whom they would needs have him send into their Country. But the Dispute was ended, and a Peace made between 'em, so that Aeneas was not long after sent to the Assembly at Ratisbone: where he, in the name of the Emperour, and in the presence of Philip Duke of Burgundy, and Lewis of Bavaria, spoke of the Turks cruelty and calamities of Christendom with such vehemency and passion, that he forced sighs and tears from every one there; but especially he seem∣ed
so far to animate the Duke of Burgundy, that a War was decreed im∣mediately by general consent: though it was after laid aside through the ambition and folly of those, who thought too well of themselves. And now Aeneas was grown old, and tired with the tedious Journeys he had taken into forein parts; wherefore he resolv'd to return to Siena, his na∣tive Country: but the Emperour easily chang'd his mind, by telling him, that he yet design'd to make War upon the Turks. Thereupon he was sent to the Convention at Frankfort where all the German Princes were met together, and in a grave, long Oration persuaded them with many reasons to undertake that dangerous, but necessary War. And indeed he seemed to move 'em all exceedingly: though it is natural for those to cool soon whose affections are quickly heated. There was also a third Convention in Cittanova about the same thing, wherein Aeneas employ'd all his endeavours to bring about what he desired; exhorting every one of them both in publick and private to assist in that War, up∣on which the safety of all Europe, the Liberty of both Princes and people, and the honour of Christianity did depend. And just as he expected to do the business, there was news brought, that Pope Nicolas was dead; which put all things into a new Confusion. For the Convention broke up, and the Germans, desirous of Novelty, endeavour'd to persuade the Emperour no longer to obey the Pope unless he would grant them some certain Demands, for they said, the Germans were in a worse condition than either the French or Italians, whose Servants they might be termed (unless things were alter'd) especially to the Italians. And truly the Emperour had hearken'd to those Mutineers, if Aeneas, with his gravi∣ty, had not interposed, and told the Emperour, That though one Prince may possibly keep peace with another, yet there always is an immortal jealousie between Prince and People. So that, he thought it better for him to agree with the Pope, than give way to their desires, whose minds are led by Appetite and Fancy, not by Reason. The Emperour was persuaded: and slighting the peoples petition, sent Aeneas to Calix∣tus. He, when he came to Rome, and had given Frederick's Oath to the Pope, as the custom is, commended them both in an Oration, where∣of the greatest part inforced a War against the Turks; so mighty zealous he was for it. For he was a wise Man and foresaw what afterward came to pass; That the Barbarians would not be quiet when they had gotten all Greece; they were so puft up with their Victory. For that reason he apply'd himself to make peace in Italy (before he made War with the Turk) and so exhorted the Pope to do the same with all earnestness. At that time the Sieneses were hard put to it by Count Petilian and James Picenninus, who carry'd on that War more upon Alphonso's account than their own. Wherefore Aeneas, to make a final conclusion of it, went by command from the Pope and at the request of his Fellow-Citizens and Countrymen to Alphonso, at Naples, where almost all the Embassa∣dours of Italy were met to treat of Peace, but had done nothing in it to that time. But when Aeneas came, he said he would agree to a Peace then without any more ado, since that person was arrived, whom he loved above all mankind. Having obtein'd a Peace, and freed his Country from the Enemy he stay'd with Alphonso some months, because he loved his Conversation; and in that time took his opportunity to make an elegant and a large Discourse to him, by which he induced
him to engage by Sea against the Turk. And having so done he went for Rome, with a design to go into his own Country, but was stopp'd by the Pope, and not long after made a Cardinal. Now he was in such favour with Calixtus and bore such a sway, that he persuaded him to send Em∣bassadours to Siena, which was all in an uproar among themselves, to exhort the People to peace and unity. But whilst he was at the Bath at Viterbo upon account of his health, and had begun the History of Bohemia, Calixtus died, and then he return'd to Rome: where he was so much desired, that great part of the people ran out to meet him, and saluted him, prophetically, by the name of Pope. For indeed he was chosen Pope by universal consent not onely of the people but the Cardi∣nals: and having received the Papal Crown upon the fifth of September he went into St. Peter's Church in his pontifical Robes, where he gave thanks to Almighty God, and immediatly betook himself first to settle the Churches Patrimony, and then to endeavour the advantage of all Christen∣dom in general. For he ended the War in Ombria (which broke out be∣fore his Pontificate, under the command of that seditious Innovator James Picenninus) as soon as he was Pope, and took back Assisi and Nocera from the Enemy. He likewise made a Truce (which seemed a difficult thing to do) between Sigismund Malatesta, and King Ferdinand, that all might safely pass to Mantua, where he had order'd a general Council. And ha∣ving made the Prince of Columna Governour of the City in the room of Borgia, who was dead, and left Nicolas Cusa, Cardinal of St. Peter's in vinculis, his Legate at Rome, he departed the City in the midst of Win∣ter, and pass'd through those Cities which seemed more inclining to War than Peace, exhorting the People to unity and concord. In fine, they met at Mantua from all quarters, where there was a great number of Princes and Embassadours. For of all Europe there was no Nation, but sent either Princes, or Embassadours thither; and in that famous As∣sembly it was enacted by Pius, (who made an Oration himself) that a War should be proclaimed against the Turks, which they all agreed to. He proposed Methods for carrying it on, and shew'd the danger of Chri∣stendom: nor could they forbear to weep when they heard the calami∣ties laid open, to which poor Christians were exposed, who lay under the bondage of Barbarians. Beside he moved them to consider that the Turks having already possessed themselves of Greece and Schlavonia, would shortly get into the innermost parts of Europe. And indeed he omitted nothing that might excite their resolutions: for he was an excellent Ora∣tor, and seemed to draw his Arguments from new Topicks still, though he spake of the same thing, such an elegant and copious faculty he had. He confuted the complaints of the French and the calumnies of King Re∣natus (for his having confirm'd Ferdinand, Alphonso's Son, in the King∣dom of Naples) in three several Speeches. These things were transacted in the Council at Mantua, whilst almost all Europe employ'd their thoughts and Weapons in civil Discords, and neglected the forein War. The Germans arose partly against one another, and partly against the Hungarians: by whose assistance that great and necessary War might have been in a great measure managed and ended. England also was divided into two Factions: whereof the one would keep their old King, whilst the other strove to banish him and set up a new one. In like man∣ner did the Spaniards rise to help those of Barcellona, whom the King of A∣ragon,
assisted by the French, oppress'd. And lest any thing should be lacking to disturb the World, Italy, the chief of Europe, laid by all thoughts of forein War, and bent all its strength upon intestine quarrels. For at that time there was a War in Puglia, John Renatus's Son, endea∣vouring to drive Ferdinand out of his Kingdom, which occasion'd a double Faction through all the Province, whilst some favour'd Ferdinand, and others, Renatus. Pius therefore, to allay these heats, dismiss'd the Council at Mantua, and came back into Tuscany, where he easily regain'd Viterbo, which was in the possession of the adverse Party. Those of Anco∣na, who had harass'd one another miserably about their bounds and limits, he quieted partly by fear and partly by reason: as likewise the Ombri∣ans, who had embru'd their hands in each others blood upon the like account. He also setled the State of Siena, which had been engaged in great tumults for three years before; and restored several worthy Per∣sons, who had been banish'd thence, giving the Government of that Re∣publick (as formerly) to the Nobility. But he was very severe upon the Sabini for their falshood, in supplying a common Enemy with pro∣visions, and letting him pass through their Country. At Rome, he sup∣press'd the shameful Riots of Ruffian-like Men, and imprison'd Tiburtius Son to Angelus Massianus (who we told you, was put to death by Nicolas for a Conspiracy and hang'd up by the Capitol) and his Accomplices, who possessing themselves of the Church of St. Maria Rotunda, would sally from thence, as from a Castle, and commit outrages upon the Citizens. Furthermore, he exterminated some Tyrants who studied innovations, out of the Church Dominions: but never medled with any one, till he had first sent an Embassadour or Legate to 'em, to reduce 'em, if it were possible, by fair means. After that, he sent Frederick of Ʋrbino his Ge∣neral with Alexander Sfortia to Tagliacozzo to stop James Picennenus, who fought under Renatus, from going into Puglia to assist the French a∣gainst Ferdinand. And besides, he succour'd Ferdinand at Sarno, when he had like to have lost his Kingdom, for fear, the French, when they had once gotten that Kingdom, would make use of their Victory to sub∣vert the Liberty of Italy. He slighted the Threat and Promises of the French Embassadours that endeavour'd to bring him over from Ferdi∣nand to Renatus; and by his Censures as well as Arms he tamed the fury of Sigismund Malatesta who was a Feudatary of the Church, and yet contemning the League, which the Pope had made between him and Fer∣dinand, storm'd and took all the Castles, which he had given for caution, against Law and Reason; and having driven the Churches Legate as far as Nulasture, he made War upon the Anconeses. But his extravagance was corrected the year after at Sinigaglia, under the conduct of Frederick of Ʋrbino and Neapolio Ʋrsin, in a sharp engagement, wherein they retook Sinigaglia, the Town called Fortunae Fanum was taken by Nicolas of Pi∣stoia Cardinal Legate of St. Cecilys, and great part of Rimini taken from him, lest he should rebel any more. Ferdinand also had the same happy success not long after at Troja, a Town in Puglia, by which the Prince of Tarento and many others, who, being desirous of change, were on the French side, were so consternated, that they came all upon their knees to the King and begg'd pardon of him; but some few continued obstinate, whom the King afterward prosecuted so severely, that he either drove 'em out of the Kingdom, or brought 'em to know themselves. When
this was over, Pius, now freed from two great and troublesom Wars, renew'd the thoughts of his Expedition into Asia, which had been so long omitted from the time of the Mantuan Council through the ambi∣tion and avarice of the several Kings and Princes: and makes the King of Hungary, the Duke of Burgundy, and the Venetians his Confederates, because they seemed more inclined to it, than any body else. He like∣wise sent Nuncioes with Letters Apostolick to the several Nations of Christendom, to exhort the Princes and people to so great and necessary a War: Himself in the mean time went to Siena, with a design to go as soon as the Season permitted, to the Baths at Petriolana, that seemed best for his Distemper. And there he heard the Duke of Burgundy, who had vowed to come with a Navy well Man'd, had desisted from his resolu∣tion: as also, that many other Princes and people not onely Foreiners, but of Italy, led by ambition and envy, endeavour'd to frustrate that great Design, because they saw, that they were likely to have the richest spoils and rewards, that underwent the greatest brunt of that War. Thereupon (as it became a Pope to do) he try'd to persuade 'em by kind words at a distance: and soon after leaving the Bath he went to Rome, where he lay sick for some days of the Gout and a Fever, and therefore could not be at Ancona upon the seventh of June as he had pub∣lickly declared he would. But when his distemper was somewhat as∣swaged, he gave Audience to certain Embassadours that came from the King of France, and Duke of Burgundy to excuse their delay. And then calling all the Cardinals before him he appointed a day to hear the charge against the King of Bohemia, who was said to be heretically inclined: and when he had done, he was carried in a Litter through Sabina, Ombria, and the Marcha till he came to the City of Ancona. By the way be found great numbers of Men, that came out of Germany, Spain, and France, in∣tending for the War against the Turks: of whom he sent a great part, e∣specially of the Germans (having absolv'd 'em) back into their own Country, because he thought 'em unfit for the toil of War; and because they had not brought their pay along with 'em, as he had order'd in the Letters Apostolical. But in the mean time, whilst he waited at Ancona for the Navy that was a building in the several Ports of the Tyrrhene and Adriatick Seas, and also for the Duke of Venice his Ally, he was afflicted with a tedious Fever, and dy'd in the year 1464. upon the 13th of Au∣gust about three of the Clock in the Night, six years wanting six days af∣ter he was made Pope. He was a Man of such constancy and courage of mind, that in all his sickness, which was long and painful, he never omit∣ted any business that concern'd his understanding onely, whether it were to hear the causes of several Nations, to inhibit, to decree, to judg, to sign, to admonish, to chastise, or correct. And that day whereon he dy'd, about two hours before he expired, he call'd the Cardinals about him, and with a resolute Heart and a good audible Voice exhorted 'em to Unity in the choice of a new Pope: commending to their care (in a grave Speech) the honour of God, the dignity of the Church, the War which he had undertaken against the Turks, the salvation of his Soul, all his Family, and especially his Nephews, if they proved worthy of commendations. He desired all the Sacraments of his own accord, and shew'd great tokens of a true Christian. But besides that he dispu∣ed very acutely with Laurentius Roverella, Bishop of Ferrara, a learn∣ed
Divine, whether it were lawful for him to receive the Extreme Un∣ction again, having been anointed once before at Basil, when he was sick of the Plague. Nor could he be entreated by all his domestick Servants to forbear saying the Canonical Prayers, though he were in such an Agony. He repeated the Athanasian Creed with great strength and Emphasis; and when he had done, he said, it was most true, and most holy. He was not affraid to die, nor did he shew any sign of trouble or inconstancy to his last breath. But indeed he may be said rather to have been kill'd than to have died, he was so tortur'd with tedious Diseases. He commanded his Friends to carry his Body to Rome: where those that embalm'd him affirmed that his heart was very sound and vivid. His funeral pomp from Ancona to Rome was made up of his Family, who were all in mourning and in tears. And when that was over, he was buried in St. Peter's at the Altar of St. Andrew, in a Tomb, which was built at the charge of Francis, Cardinal of Siena, with this Epitaph, Pius II. Pont. Max. natione Tuscus, patriâ Senensis, gente Pocolhominea. He enjoy'd the Sea onely six years: But though his Pontificate were short, yet it was full of great Actions. He held a Council at Mantua to maintain the Faith; resisted all the opposers of the Church of Rome both within and without Italy; he canonized Catha∣rine of Siena, and abrogated the French Pragmatic Sanction. He restored Ferdinand of Aragon to the Kingdom of Naples; encreased the Churches Patrimony, and made the first Allum Mines at Tolfa; He was an Ad∣mirer of Justice and Religion, and an excellent Orator: But he died at Ancona as he was going to the War against the Turks, where he had his Navy ready, and the Duke and Senate of Venice for his fellow Sol∣diers in Christ. He was brought thence into the City by order of the Cardinals, and buried in the place where he commanded St. Andrew the Apostle's head (which was brought hither to him from Morea) to be laid. He lived fifty eight years, nine months and twenty seven days; and when he dy'd, left the College of Cardinals forty five thousand pound gather'd out of the Church Revenues, to maintain the War against the Turks. But the Cardinals committed all this Money and the Galleys, that were then in the Port of Ancona, to Christopher Maurus Duke of Venice, who arrived there two days before Pius died, upon condition, that he should use the Ships according to their directions, and should send the Money to Matthias King of Hungary, who was continually at War with the Turk. Thus died Pius, who was a personage of such true courage and singular prudence; as he seemed to be born not to ease or pleasure but to manage the most important Affairs. He always endea∣vour'd to augment the Majesty and grandieur of the Pontifical Chair; nor did he ever leave chastizing of Kings, Dukes, States, Usurpers, that wronged either himself or any other Church-Man, till he made 'em ac∣knowledg their Errour. And therefore he was an Enemy to Lewis King of France, because he endeavour'd to diminish the Liberties of the Church, and extorted from him the Pragmatic Sanction which was most pernicious to the Sea of Rome. He threaten'd Borsius Duke of Modena, who being a Feudatary of the Church of Rome, yet favour'd Sigismund Malatesta and the French, who were no Friends to the Church. But he censur'd Sigis∣mund Duke of Austria most grievously, for taking Nicolas Cusanus, Car∣dinal of St. Peter ad vincula, and keeping him some days in Prison. He
deprived Dieterus Isimbergensis Bishop of Mayence, who hated the Church of Rome, and put another in his place: and so likewise he displaced the Arch-Bishop of Benevento, who was upon new projects, and endeavour'd to betray Benevento to the French. He likewise deprived Francis Copi∣nus, who in his Embassady to England, assumed more Power, than the Sea Apostolick had given him (to the destruction of many Men) him he deprived of his Bishoprick of Teramo. He also made Terracino, Be∣nevento, Sora, Arpino and a great part of Campagnia subject to the Church. He never granted any thing to any King, Duke, or State for fear or co∣vetousness; and would reprove Men severely, that ask'd what he could not grant without detriment to the Church and dishonour to himself; and strook such terrour into some Lords of Italy especially, that they continued very true to their Faith and Allegiance. But as he always plagued his publick Enemies, so likewise he Cherish'd his Friends as much. He dearly loved Frederick the Emperour, Matthias King of Hungary, Ferdinand Son to Alphonso, Philip of Burgundy, Francis Sfor∣tia, and Lewis Gonzaga. He added twelve Cardinals to the former num∣ber, the Cardinal of Rieti, Spoleto, Trani, Alexander Saxoferratensis, Bartholomew Roverella, James of Lucca, Francis Son to his Sister Lao∣damia, Francis Gonzaga Son to the Marquess Lewis, all Italians. But then there were others from beyond the Alps; as, Salseburgensis, Lewis Libretus of Artois, and Vergelensis. Moreover, he so ordered his me∣thod of living, that he could never be accused of idleness or sloth. He rose as soon as 'twas day for his health sake, and, having said his Prayers very devoutly, went about his worldly affairs. When he had done his mornings work, and walk'd about the Gardens for his recreation, he went to Dinner; in which he used an indifferent sort of Diet; not curious and dainty. For he seldom bid 'em get him this or that particular Dish, but whatever they set before him, he ate of. He was very abstemious, and when he did drink Wine, it was always diluted with Water, and pleasant rather than rough upon the Palate. After Meals he either dis∣coursed or disputed half an hour with his Chaplains, and then going into his Bed-Chamber he took a nap, after which he went to Prayers again, and then wrote or read, as long as his business would permit. The same also he did after Supper; for he both read and dictated till midnight as he lay in his Bed, nor did he sleep above five or six hours. He was a short Man, gray-hair'd before his time, and had a wrinkled Face before he was old. In his aspect he bore severity tempered with good-nature; and in his garb was neither finical, nor negligent, but so contrived it, as to be consistent with the pains which he usually took. He could patiently endure both hunger and thirst, because he was natu∣rally very strong; and yet his long journeys, frequent labour, and Watchings had impair'd him. His usual Diseases were the Cough, the Stone, and Gout, wherewith he was often so tormented, that no body could say he was alive but by his Voice. And even in his sickness he was very accessible, but sparing of Words; and unwilling to deny any Man's Petition. He laid out all the Money he got together; and did neither love Gold nor contemn it: but would never be by, whilst it was told out, or laid up. He seemed not to cherish the Wits of his Age, be∣cause three grievous Wars which he had undertook had so continually exhausted the Pontifical Treasury that he was oftentimes much in Debt:
and yet he preferred many learned Men to places both in the Court, and Church. He would willingly hear an Oration, or a Poem, and always submitted his own Writings to the judgment of the Learned. He hated Lyars and Sycophants, was soon angry and soon pleased a∣gain. He pardon'd those that reviled, or scoff'd at him, unless they injur'd the Sea Apostolick; the Dignity whereof he always had such a respect for, as upon that account often to fall out with great Kings and Princes. He was very kind to his Houshold Servants; for those that he sound in an errour, through folly or ignorance, he admonish'd like a Father. He never reproved any one for speaking or thinking ill of him; because in a free City he desired every body should utter their minds. And when one told him, that he had an ill Report, he re∣ply'd; go into the Campo di fiore, and you'l hear a great many talk against me. If at any time he had a mind to change the Air of Rome for a better, he went, especially in the Summer, to Tivoli, or his own Country, Siena. But he was mightily pleased with the retirement of an Abby in Siena, which is very delightful, and cool too by reason of its situation and the shady Groves that are about it. He frequented the Baths at Macerata and Petriolana for his healths sake. He used thin Cloths, and his Expences in Silver look'd more frugal than Princelike. For his whole delight (when he had leisure) was in writing and read∣ing: because he valu'd good Books more than precious Stones; for in them he said there was great plenty of Gems. He so far contemn'd a splendid Table, that he went oftentimes to Fountains, Groves, and Country recesses for his own humour, where he entertain'd himself not like a Pope, but an honest humble Rustick. Nor were there wanting some who found fault with this his frequent change of places, especi∣ally his Courtiers; because no Pope had ever done so before him, unless in time of War, or of a Plague. But he always slighted their Cavils, and said, that for all his pleasure he never omitted any thing that be∣fitted the dignity of a Pope or tended to the good of the Court. In all places he Sealed, heard Causes, Censur'd, Answer'd, Asserted and Con∣futed; to give full satisfaction to all sorts of Men. He could not eat willingly alone, and therefore invited either the Cardinal of Spoleto, of Trani, or of Pavia commonly to Dine or Sup with him. At Supper he used to discourse of Learning, and rubb'd up his old Notions of the Ancients; shewing how commendable each of 'em was in this or that par∣ticular. He frequently exhorted his Relations to Virtue, and deterr'd 'em from Vice, by recounting the good or ill actions of others. Augu∣stine Patritio was his chief Reader, and Amaniensis. He was also some∣times pleased to hear Wit, especially when he had nothing to do: and therefore he had one Grecus, a Florentine, who would mimick and ridi∣cule any ones behaviour, garb, or way of speech with great diversion to the Audience. He was an honest, upright, plain Man, without fal∣lacy, or guile. And so zealous a Christian he was, that there appear'd no colour of Hypocrisie in him. He frequently confess'd, and receiv'd the Communion; and at divine Service either performed the Priestly Office himself, or assisted at the Ceremonies. He always contemn'd Dreams, Portents, Prodigies, Lightning, and the like. There was no sign in him of fear or inconstancy: but he seemed as little elevated at his good, as dejected at his ill Fortune. He often reproved his Friends,
for Cowards, and sneaking Fellows, that they should be affraid of tel∣ling him what mischances they had (as it sometimes happens) in the War: because, he said, those things might have been remedied, if he had known of 'em in time. He never forsook his Allies, either upon account of Charges, or fear of his Enemies. He went to War with an ill will, but fought for the Church and Religion when he was forced to't. He was mightily pleased with Building: and at his charge were the Steps in the Vatican Church repaired; the Portico of it made glori∣ous and strong: And he had a design to carry away the rubbish from before the Church-door, and pave the Piazza. He was about to make a Portico, from whence the Pope might bless the People. He built a Castle at Tivoli before people thought he had begun it: and at Siena he built his Countrymen a Portico of square stone very high and very fine. As likewise he made Corsiniano (which he called Pienza, from his own name, Pius) a City: and built there a noble Church with a Cupalo, to∣gether with a fine House. He erected also a Tomb for his Father and Mother at Siena in St. Francis's Church, with this Distich for an Epitaph. Sylvius hic jaceo, conjux Victoria mecum est, Filius hoc clausit marmore Papa Pius. He had four Nephews by his Sister; of which the two youngest through his Authority, and the respect that was shewn him, were made Knights by the King of Spain. The eldest, who had married King Ferdinand's Daughter, was made Duke of Malphi; and the second, whom Pius (as I told you before) had made a Cardinal, lives yet in such repute of in∣tegrity and Vertue, that there is nothing wanting in him that is requi∣red in an excellent Person: being adorn'd with Wit, Manners, Policy, Religion, Modesty and Gravity. But to return to Pius; who never omitted his Studies though he were advanced to such an eminent Station. When he was a Youth indeed and not yet initiated into Divinity, he set out Poems, that were rather light, and jocular, than serious and grave: and yet sometimes even in them he was elevated, nor did he want satyrical sharpness amidst his merry Conceits. There are Epigrams of his extant, that are full of Wit, and he is said to have written about three thousand Verses, which were lost most part of 'em at Basil. The remainder of his life he wrote in Prose onely, his grand Affairs rather inclining him to it; but he also loved a mixt Stile, more fit for Philoso∣phy. He set forth several Books of Dialogues about the Power of the Council at Basil, about the Rise of Nile, of Hunting, of Destiny, of God's Prescience, and of the Heresie in Bohemia. He left an imperfect Dialogue which he began against the Turks in defence of Christianity. He digested his Epistles into their several occasions and seasons when they were written: and those that he wrote when he was a Layman, a Clergy, a Bishop, or Pope he put into distinct Tomes: Wherein he excites Kings, Princes, and others to engage in the War for Religion. There is an Epistle of his extant which he wrote to the Turk, to per∣suade him from Mahometanism to the Christian Faith. He also wrote a Book about the Life of Courtiers; as likewise a Grammar for Ladislaus the young King of Hungary. He farthermore composed thirty two O∣rations, exhorting Kings, Princes, and Commonwealths to Peace, and in
defence of Religion, to promote the quiet and Concord of the whole World. He perfected the History of Bohemia, but left that of Austria imperfect. And though he was upon a History of all the remarkable Actions in his Time, yet he was never able, for his business, to finish it. He wrote twelve Books and began the thirteenth of things done by himself. His Stile was soft and easie, in which he made several excellent, and pertinent Sermons. For he could readily move the Affections with handsom and graceful Expressions. He very aptly describes situations of Places and Rivers, assuming various ways of Eloquence, as the occasion required. He was well acquainted with Antiquity; nor could any Town be mention'd, but he could tell its rise and situation: besides that he would give an account in what Age famous Men flourish'd. He would sometimes take notice of Mimicks for his pleasure: and left many Say∣ings behind him, of which I thought fit to add some to this account of his Life: to wit; That the Divine Nature was better understood by Be∣lieving than by Disputing. That all Sects though confirm'd by humane Authority yet wanted Reason. That the Christian ought to be receiv'd upon its own credit, though it had never been back'd with Miracles. That there were three Persons in the Godhead, not proved to be so by Reason, but by considering who said so. That those Men who pretend∣ed to measure the Heavens and the Earth were rather bold than certain what they did was right. That to find out the motion of the Stars had more pleasure in it, than proit. That God's Friends enjoy'd both this Life and that to come. That without Vertue there was no true Joy. That as a covetous Man is never satisfied with Money, so a Learn∣ed Man should not be with Knowledg; But that he who knew never so much, might yet find somewhat to be studied. That common Men should value Learning as Silver, Noblemen, as Gold, and Princes as Jewels. That good Physitians did not seek the Money but the health of the party diseas'd. That a florid Speech did not move wise Men but Fools. That those Laws are Sacred which restrain Licentiousness. That the Laws had Power over the Commonalty, but were feeble to the greater sort. That great Controversies were decided by the Sword and not by the Laws. A Citizen should look upon his Family as subject to the City, the City to his Country, his Country to the World, and the World to God. That the chief place with Kings was slippery. That as all Rivers run into the Sea, so do all Vices into Courts. That Flat∣terers draw Kings whether they please. That Kings hearken to none more easily than to Sycophants. That the tongue of a Flatterer was a King's greatest Plague. That a King, who would trust no body was good for nothing, and he that believed every body was no better. That it is necessary he that governs many should himself be rul'd by many. That he deserv'd not the name of a King who measur'd the Publick by his private abvantage. That he who neglected holy Duties did not de∣serve the Church Revenue, nor a King his Taxes, that did not constant Justice. He said those that went to Law were the Birds, the Court, the Field, the Judg, the Net, and the Lawyers, the Fowlers. That Men ought to be presented to Dignities and not Dignities to the Men. That some Men had Offices and did not deserve 'em, whilst others deserv'd 'em and had 'em not. That the burthen of a Pope was heavy, but he was happy who bore it stoutly. That an illiterate Bishop was like an
Ass. That ill Physicians kill'd the body, and ignorant Priests the Soul. That a wandring Monk was the Devil's Bondslave. That Virtue had enriched the Clergy, but Vice made 'em poor. That there was great reason for the prohibiting of Priests to marry, but greater for allowing it again. That no Treasure was preferrable to a faithful Friend. That Life was like a Friend and Envy like Death. That he cherishes an Ene∣my who pardons his Son too often. That a covetous Man never pleases any body but by his Death. That Mens faults are conceal'd by Libera∣lity, and discover'd by Avarice. That it was a slavish Vice to tell Lyes. That the Use of Wine had augmented the Cares and the Distempers of mankind. That a Man ought to take as much Wine as would raise and not overwhelm his Soul. That Lust did fully and stain every age of Man, but quite extinguish old Age. That Gold it self, and Jewels could not purchase Content. That it was pleasant to the good, but terrible to the bad, to die. That a noble Death was to be preferr'd before a dishonourable Life in the Opinion of all Philosophers. And this is all or most that can be written of Pius: except I add, that he canonized St. Catharine of Siena; and laid up St. Andrew's head, that was sent from Morea to Rome▪ in St. Peter's Church with great Veneration, and Processions perform'd by the Clergy and People, in a Chappel built on purpose: after he had clear'd the Church in that place especially, and removed the Sepulchres of some Popes and Cardinals, that took up too much room. PAƲL II. PAƲL the Second, formerly called Peter Barbo, a Vene∣tian, (whose Father's Name was Nicolas and his Mothers Polyxena) Cardinal Priest of St. Marks, was made Pope August 30. 1664. being Pope Eugenius's Nephew by his Sister, he was just going as a Merchant to Sea (an Em∣ployment not ungentile among the Venetians, and not disapproved of by Solon) and having carry'd his Scritore, and other Implements on Board, he heard that his Uncle Gabriel Condelmerius was chosen Pope. Whereupon he stay'd ashore, and at the request of his Friends and his elder Brother Paul Barbo, apply'd himself to his Book though he was pretty well in years, under the Discipline and tutelage of James Ricio∣nius, who used to commend his Diligence. He had also other Masters, but made no great proficency, considering his Age; however he preferr'd 'em all when he came to be Pope (excepting only Ricion) to shew that it was none of their faults he was not made a Scholar. But Paul Barbo who was a stout and a wise Man, and knew his Brother's nature inclined him ra∣ther to ease than business, intreated Eugenius (whom he went to visit at Florence) to send for Peter, and give him some Ecclesiastical preferment. He did so, and Peter was made first Arch-Deacon of Bologna, with which not long after he held the Bishoprick of Cervia in Commendam, and was made a Protonotary; one of that Rank who receive the greatest Fees. In this condition he lived for some years, till at last he was made a Car∣dinal
at the same time with Alouisius, a Physician of Padua, whom they afterward call'd Patriarch and Chamberlain: which was done at the re∣quest of some Friends of Eugenius's, who desired to have a Man that might thwart Alouisius upon occasion. And indeed it happened after∣ward that they grew such Enemies as never were known, by the insinua∣tions of others especially whose interest it was to foment the Quarrel. For Peter was vexed that he should be inferiour to any Man about Eu∣genius, since he was his Nephew, and of a Patrician Family in Venice. Upon this account he fell out most grievously with Francis Condelmerius the Vice-Chancellour, who was Eugenius's Cousin-german: and when he died, he turn'd all his fury upon the Patriarch, though they two had been often seemingly reconcil'd by the intercession of Friends. Hereupon they were such Enemies to one another in several Popes Reigns, that they did not spare each others either Estate, or honour: but mutually re∣viled each other in words, which I will not relate, lest I should seem to believe 'em. But when Eugenius was dead and Nicolas the Fifth in his place, he prevailed so far upon him by his kindness and flattery, that he not onely got the uppermost place of all his Nation in Nicolas's Court, but by assistance of Nicolas's Brother, did so animate him against Alouisius, that he retrenched the Chamberlain's Office. For Peter Barbo was naturally fair spoken, and could feign good nature, when occasion serv'd. But he was sometimes so mean spirited, that when he could not obtain what he aimed at by praying, intreating, and requesting, he would joyn tears to his Petitions to make them the sooner believed. And therefore Pope Pius used sometimes to call him the godly Mary, by way of joke. He also used this wheedle with Calistus, and persuaded him to send Alouisius with certain Gallies against the Turk; shewing him by Ar∣gument that such a Person was fittest for such an Expedition, because he had not onely been a Commander formerly, but had stoutly defended the Church-patrimony against all its Enemies. Peter being at last deli∣ver'd from that eye-sore, made Calistus always so far of his Opinion, that he used no bodies advice more than his, as long as he lived. So that he easily obtain'd of the Pope whatever he ask'd either for himself or his Friends. For he was ready to do friendships and kindnesses for any Man whom he undertook to protect or assist not onely before the great Men in general, but with the Pope also. Yea such was his humanity, that he would visit his Domesticks that were sick (if they were Men of any account) and apply Remedies to 'em. For he had always at home Medicaments brought from Venice, with Oil, Treacle, or other things fit for Medicines; and some of these he often sent to the sick. He took care that the Wills of sick People should be intrusted with himself rather than any body, to dispose of as he thought fit; for if any thing in them concern'd him, he presently sold part of the goods by Auction, and turn'd it into Mony for his own use. He was pleased with the Conver∣sation of some particular Romans, whom he often invited to Dine with him, for his diversion: and was often very well pleased at the Wit, Mi∣mickry, Gibes, Taunts and civil Affronts that came from Priabisius and Francis Malacaro. By this means he engaged the respect of the Citizens of Rome and even the Courtiers also. But that he might not seem powerful at home onely, he endeavoured to make an Interest abroad too. For he went into Campagna di Roma to appease certain People that
were at variance about their Confines: and whilst he endeavour'd to reconcile the Count d' Aversa to Neapolio Ʋrsin, he had like to have been taken and put into Prison for words which the Count resented very highly. Wherefore he went away without his Errand, and from that time always shew'd himself Aversa's Enemy. After that Calixtus died, into whose room Pius succeeded, when he, endeavouring to change his Bishoprick of Vincenza for that of Padua, by troublesom importunities, and requests, so far provoked Pope Pius and the Venetians, that they turned out his Brother Paul from being a Senator, and interdicted him from enjoying any Church Benefice, if he would not alter his mind. At which the Man was so angry that he waited onely for a time to re∣venge himself, and was very invective in the mean while against those, that obstructed his Design, But when Pius was dead and he put in his place, he no sooner came to the honour but immediately he turned our all the Clerks of the Breves, which Pius had put in, pretending they were either useless or unlearn'd: whether he had so promised, or that he hated Pius's Acts and Decrees, no body can tell. For he strip'd them of their goods and preferments without hearing what they could say for themselves, whom he ought to have invited from all parts of the World with Encouragements and Rewards; that College being then full of good and learned Men. For there were Men very skilful in the Laws both Divine and Humane: as likewise Poets and Orators, who were as great Ornaments to the Court, as that was honour to them; yet Paul turn'd 'em all out, though it had been order'd by Letters Apostolick and the Judges of the Pontifical Treasury, that no Man who bought his place honestly should be put out of it. And yet those that were concern'd did what they could to change his mind: and among the rest I entreated him, that it might be referr'd to the publick Judges, whom they call Auditors of the Rota. At which he look'd upon me with a stern aspect, and told me, Do you (said he) refer me to Judges, as if you were igno∣rant, that all the Laws were laid up in my Breast? I am resolv'd (said he); let 'em all be gone whither they will I value 'em not; I am Pope, and I may do as I please, either in rescinding or approving the acts of others. When we heard this severe Sentence, we travel'd about and strove to rowl an unmovable stone, attending Persons of the Court Day and Night, and vainly beseeching every mean Servant to procure us admission to the Pope. For we were rejected with reproachful Lan∣guage, as if we had been excommunicated persons, or Pagans. But not∣withstanding we attended twenty Nights together; because he did no∣thing in a manner, but what he did by Night. At last I was so concern'd for the disgrace which he put upon us, that (seeing I and my Associates could not come to speak with him) I was resolv'd to send him a Letter, which I wrote to this purpose: If you had power to strip us of all we had just and lawful right to, then it ought to be in our power to com∣plain of the injury and disgrace that you have done us. And therefore seeing we are rejected by you with so much ignominy, we will appeal to all the Kings and Princes far and near, and desire 'em to convene a Council, where you may be forced to shew thy reason, why thou rob∣best us of our Livelihoods: When he had read the Letter, he sent for Platina, as a Traytor; put him into Prison and fetter'd him; and then sent Theodore, Bishop of Treviso, to examine him. He soon con∣cluded
me guilty, for dispersing Libels against Paul, and mentioning a Council. The first Objection I thus refuted; to wit, That those were called Libels, in which the Name of the Writer was conceal'd; but my name was at the bottom of the Letter, and therefore it was no Libel. And as to my making mention of a Council; That I did not think so great a fault, seeing the fundamentals of true Faith were esta∣blished by the holy Fathers in Synods, which had been sown by our Saviour and his Disciples, to the end, that all both great and small might live peaceably together and have right done them. And that by the Laws of Rome, not onely private but publick persons were to give an account of their lives and how they discharged their Trusts. But when I could do no good this way, I was forced to be content and lie in massie Chains in the middle of Winter without any fire, and in an high Tower, which was exposed to all the Winds that blew for four months together. At last Paul was tired with the importunity of Francis Gonzaga Cardinal of Mantua, and freed me from the noisom Pri∣son, though I could hardly stand upon my Legs; and withal he bids me not stir from the City: For (says he) if you go into India, Paul will fetch you back. I obey'd his Commands; and stayed three years in the City, hoping to find some remedy for my misfortunes. But Paul, when he was Crown'd, according to custom, remembring that the Ca∣nons Regular were formerly turn'd out of St. Giovanni Laterano by Ca∣lixtus, though Eugenius had placed 'em there; he recall'd 'em, to per∣form Divine Service apart from the Canons Secular. And because he had a mind to extirpate the name of Seculars from that place, if any one of 'em died, he put no body into his place; or if any Benefice were vacant, he made them renounce their Canonships and so translated 'em to other Churches, till at length the profits of that Church being reduced into one body might satisfie the Canons Regular without any charge to him, he being before forc'd to keep 'em, they were so poor. But by this means Paul did much estrange the Citizens minds and af∣fections from him: because (as they said) he gave those Revenues which their Forefathers had setled (instead of Citizens) to foreiners. Nor was Paul content to do so, but he spoke to some Canons by them∣selves, and threaten'd 'em till they quitted their Canonries. Some in∣deed contemn'd his Menaces and expected an opportunity of vindica∣ting their Liberty, which happen'd not till he was dead. It was now reported that the Turks had taken most part of Epirus and were coming into Sclavonia, he therefore sent Nuncio's immediately to all Kings and Princes, to advise 'em, to compose their civil Discords and make War a∣gainst the Turk the common Enemy; but there was nothing done in it, because they were up to the ears in blood one among another: the Ger∣mans in one part and the English in an other, some of whom desired a new King, others would retain their old one. And then the Spanish and French Princes, fear'd their King's Power, who attempted to bring them to a total subjection. But more than this, the King of Bohemia's Apo∣stacy vexed Paul very much, in that he withdrew himself from the Church of Christ by little and little; and therefore he design'd to send the King of Hungary with an Army against him, if the War which he had under∣taken against the Turks, would give him leisure; and that he could com∣pose the difference between the King and the Emperour. For when
Ladislaus King of Hungary and his Nephew was dead, without issue, the Emperour himself pretended a right to that Kingdom, which Matthias Son to the Vaivod was in possession of. Thereupon Paul thought it best to defer that matter till another time, and apply'd himself to make up some breaches between certain Citizens of Rome. For there was a quar∣rel between James Son to John Alberinus, and Felix Nephew to Anthony Capharellus: and therefore he sent for the two old Gentlemen, the Fa∣ther and Uncle of 'em, and caused 'em to put in Sureties, that they would be friends, though they stood out a good while. But James Son to Alberinus, who could not endure that any Affront should be put up∣on his Father, attempted soon after to murther Anthony Capharellus, and gave him several such grievous wounds that he left him for dead. At which Paul was very angry, that Alberinus's Son had broken his Fa∣ther's Oath, and therefore he demolish'd their Houses, confiscated all their goods and banished them from the City, but he afterward recal∣led 'em and took 'em into favour, restoring all their goods; and made Peace between the parties after they had been both sometime in Prison. In the year 1465. Alouisius Patavinus the Pope's Chamberlain dy'd. He was Cardinal-Priest of St. Laurence, a very rich Man and prudent in the management of business, but not so wise towards his later end: in that he left most of his Estate to his two Brothers who were call'd Sca∣rampi. Men that were good Gentlemen, but yet not worthy of such a vast fortune as he had got out of the Church Revenues (I know what People thought) whereupon Paul, who had given him free leave to make a Will and bequeath it to whom he pleased, seized upon the E∣state, took the Scarampi who had fled and kept 'em (though in no scan∣dalous place) till he had those things brought him which were carried away to Florence; which done, he freed the Scarampi, to whom he gave a good share, and was more liberal to the other Legatees than the Testa∣tor himself had been. And thus Alouisius's Estate, which he got with great industry and preserv'd with greater, (as if in the strength of so much Wealth he could have lived Mathusalem's Age) was seized and distributed by one with whom he had had so many quarrels, ill words and Animosities, and before whom he would have chosen the Turk for his Executor. Nor was Divine Providence thus satisfied, but was pleased that his body also which was already buried should be made a prey; for the Grave was open'd in the Night-time by those to whom he had given the Revenues of St. Laurence in Damaso, and he stript of a Ring and all his Cloths. But indeed Paul, when he knew of it, was very angry at them. About that time Frederick a fine Youth, Son to Ferdinand, who passing to Millain, to fetch Francis Sforza's Daughter, his Brother's Wife, to Naples, arrived at Rome, where he was met by the Nobility and Rhoderick the Vicechancelour, and kindly entertain'd by the Pope him∣self, who presented him with a Rose, which the Popes use to give to some Christian Prince every year. Ferdinand now minding to punish those of his own Kingdom, who had revolted from him when he was engaged with the French, sent some Forces to set upon the Duke of Sora; but the Pope was desirous to divert that War, and therefore sent the Arch-Bishop of Millain thither with all speed, to pray him, that he would send those Men to him (as he was obliged by his Tenure to do) because he had a Design to destroy and take off the Count Aversa's Sons that
had denied Obedience to the Church. For about that time the Count Aversa died, when Paul was made Pope; and his body was brought to Rome, where it was buried in St. Maries the Great. The King, who was Deiphobus's bitter Enemy, as having been attempted by him with Plots, Poison and open force in the late War, gave Order to the Captains of his Army, cited to go where the Pope bad them, upon the first Sum∣mons. He had Deiphobus and Francis to him before and given 'em charge to clear the Road of Thieves, (who used to rob Travellers at the very Gates of Rome, as it were) and that they should restore Capra∣rola (a Town so called) to the Son of Securanza, the greatest part of whose Estate they had possest themselves of: they not onely refused to do either, but threaten'd him, and brag'd that they were Count Aver∣sa's Sons, nor would they spare any one that gave 'em a provocation. Paul therefore having privately prepared all things that were necessary for a War, with assistance of the King's Forces, he surprised and subdued 'em within fourteen days after he attaqued 'em, reducing nine Castles under the jurisdiction of the Church: of which some were so well forti∣fied both by Art and Nature, that they seemed impregnable. Deiphobus fearing lest if he were taken he should be sent to the King, made his escape. But Francis his Brother and his Son were taken and kept five years in Castel St. Angelo, till upon the Creation of Sixtus, they were freed. And hence afterward arose great enmity between the Pope and the King; when Ferdinand demanded that Paul would remit the Tri∣bute which he was to pay the Church, as a reward for his great merits: and would retrench or take off part of it for the future, seeing his Uncle enjoy'd the Kingdom of Sicily, though he paid Tribute for that and Naples too: and told him, That he ought to consider his Deserts and what might happen; for that he had always some Batalions in Arms, not more upon his own than upon the Pope's account as he found in the late War against the Aversans. Paul on the other hand recounted the Churches merits toward Ferdinand; and so they spun out the De∣bate a long time by these kind of wranglings, each of 'em seeking an opportunity to recover their Right. In the mean time the King was very cautious how he caused any new Commotions, because he fear'd James Picenninus's Power, who had Sulmona in Abruzzo, and some other Towns in his possession: whom afterward his Father-in-law Francis Sfor∣tia sent to the King, who gave him his word that he should come and go in safety when he pleased. But all things did not go according to James's expectation: for he was taken at Naples by Ferdinand, as so was his Son, and there thrown into Prison, and not long after put to Death; though there was a false report given out, that he fell down in the Prison and broke his Leg, as he was inconsiderately staring through the Window to see the King's Galleys that came from Ischia, with Victory over the French. There were who thought him still alive: which I can never be∣lieve, because there was no Man in all Italy more fit (if you look upon him as a Soldier) to subvert the Government of King Ferdinand. The Duke of Millain's Daughter, when she heard of it, tarry'd by the way at Siena, as she was going to her Husband at Naples, to persuade the World, that her Father was not any way concern'd with Ferdinand in contriving the Death of Picenninus. But what People thought of it, we very well know. There were likewise some, that said, the Pope knew
of it before hand, because at that time the Arch-Bishop of Millain went often from the Pope to the King, and from the King back again: and be∣cause Paul said, when he heard of his Imprisonment, that the Judg of Appeals was taken off. But that of Virgil is too true, Nescia mens hominum fati, sortisque futurae. Little do Men their future Fortune know. For Paul could not have made use of any one to fit to curb Ferdinand as James Picenninus was, if he had been alive, when their Debate arose a∣bout the Tribute, for which a War was like to have been proclaimed. For when he had kept his Daughter-in-laws, and his Son's Wedding, and that thereby and by the death of James his Kingdom was setled, Ferdi∣nand was instant with the Pope, that he would retrench the Tribute, and give him back certain Towns which belong'd to the Kingdom but were in possession of the Church. Thereupon Paul sent to him Bartho∣lomew Roverella, Cardinal Priest of St. Clements, as Legate; who did in some measure satisfie the King. And at that time I believe, they both fear'd, lest the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, which all Men were then astonish'd at, might portend some changes in Government. Nor can you think the heavenly Bodies have no efficacy; for the year after Francis Sfortia Duke of Millain and Genoua died. For he had gotten Genoua two years before, being after a long War surrender'd by the Citi∣zens. For they having rejected the French Government which they had formerly courted, kill'd six thousand of the French under the Nose of King Renatus, who came with some Galleys well arm'd, to retrieve the City that had now revolted from the French. When Francis Sfortia Duke of Millain was dead, Paul summon'd the Cardinals to consult what was to be done. They all concluded that he must send Letters and Nuncioes to all the Princes of Italy, and to all States, to persuade 'em against Innovations, and to maintain the establish'd Peace; especially at that unhappy time when we were so threatned by the Turk the com∣mon Enemy. And afterward he sent the Bishop of Conca to Millain, to persuade that State, to have regard to the Allegiance they had sworn to Galeatius, Francis's Son. At that time Galeatius was absent in France, whither his Father had sent him with an Army, to assist King Lewis against the Princes of his Kingdom, that acknowledg'd not his Authority. For Francis was bound by the League he made with him, when he possest himself of Genoa, to supply him with some Auxiliaries: Besides the Al∣legiance which they had contracted obliged him to it; for he had mar∣ried the Sister of the Queen and the Duke of Savoy. When he heard of his Father's Death, he relinquish'd the War which he engaged in upon the King's account against the Duke of Burgundy, and going from Lions return'd with a small Retinue and in a disguise to his own Country, where he peaceably possess'd himself of his paternal inheritance by the help of his Mother who kept the people in Obedience till he came. But Paul, when the Affairs of Italy were thus composed, hearing that the Rhodian Soldiers were ready to starve, he summon'd the Grand Master (and the great Clergymen) to Rome, to consider of a Relief, who after frequent meetings in St. Peters, died for grief and Age, and was buried in that Church, not far from St. Andrew's Chappel: in whose room
Charles Ʋrsin was chosen and sent immediately to defend the Island. In the mean time when Paul heard that there were a great many Hereticks in Tagliacozzo, he having heard their cause severely branded the Lord of the place, eight Men and six Women (which were caught and brought before him) being those that were most obstinate; but dealt more fa∣vourably with those that confessed their Error and begg'd pardon. They were of those perverse sort of Hereticks who say, there never was any true Vicar of Christ since St. Peter, but who had imitated Christ's Po∣verty. Then he encreased the number of Cardinals; and made ten at one time, of which number were Francis of Savona General of the Order of Minors, M. Barbo, Bishop of Vincenza, whose Advice he always took in great Affairs, Oliver Arch-Bishop of Naples, Amicus Bishop of Aquila, and Theodore Montferrat; and the rest were partly French, Hungarians and English. Having thus augmented the College, he apply'd himself wholly to settle the peace of Italy. For certain Florentines, who were banish'd by Peter Medices's Faction in a civil Tumult (as Detesalvus Neronius, Angelus Accioiolus, and Nicolas Soderinus) had persuaded Bar∣tholomew of Bergamo, who had a good Army of Horse and Foot, to march into Tuscany, and restore them and all the other banish'd Persons to their Country, the Venetians under-hand lending their assistance; these seem'd to be able and to design to overthrow the State of Italy at first dash. But Galeatius D. of Milan with the Forces of the King and of the Florentine people posting himself in his way, he slacken'd his march and endeavour'd to get the better rather by protracting the War than by fighting. One fierce Battel however under the conduct of the Count of Ʋrbin they fought in the Territories of Bologna near a Town call'd Ri∣cardina, where no doubt the Bergamese had been utterly ruin'd, if Ga∣leatius had been there; but he was gone to Florence a little before, to settle matters relating to the War. Those that were present at this Battel say, that it was fought with the greatest obstinacy and the most nume∣rous slaughters of any in our Age. But now the Venetians bethink themselves for their own safety, rather than that of the Bergamese, and though they sent some Forces to his assistance, yet they sought earnestly a Peace, and referr'd the whole matter to the Pope; who also lying un∣der great apprehensions, if the King of Naples and Duke of Millain should obtain a compleat Victory, urg'd on the Peace too. It was in∣deed the Opinion of many Men of Understanding, that the Pope was not altogether against Bartholomew's Design, knowing that if an altera∣tion were made in the Government of Florence, he might with greater facility make War upon Ferdinand, whom he so hated, that he endea∣vour'd to raise him up more Enemies in Italy. Having hereupon called together the Embassadours of the several Princes, he mediated a Peace upon these terms, That each Party should restore what they had taken in the War, That Bartholomew should retire with his Forces into Lom∣bardy, and That for the rest the Conditions of that Peace should be ob∣served, which had been made at Lodi between Francis Sforza and the Venetians. One Point was yet to be Disputed, Whether the Duke of Savoy and his Brother Philip should be included in this Peace, who that year taking pay of the Venetians, had ravag'd Galeatius's Country with their Forces. Galeatius denied to yield to it, professing no Man should ever be his Ally and Friend, who was an Enemy to the King of France.
But Paul with Promises and fair words made shift to get Galeatius's Em∣bassador to sign it contrary to his Master's order, which so enrag'd Galea∣tius that he banish'd the said Embassador, Lorenzo da Pesaro, and so in∣fested the Savoyards, that they were forced to sue for Peace, which by the intercession of the Queen of France and Duchess of Milan, both Sisters to the Duke of Savoy, they at last procur'd, upon conditions pro∣posed by the King of France. Affairs thus setled, Paul had a little lei∣sure; and instituted sumptuous Plays, and made noble Feasts after the ancient manner for the people of Rome, Vianesius of Bologna, Vice-Cham∣berlain to his Holiness taking care of them. He proposed eight Cloaks to be run for each day in the Carneval; old Men, middle-ag'd, young Men, nay Jews, took their fortune in the Races, as also did even Horses, Mares, Asses, Buffals, to the incredible pleasure of the Spectators. The Race was from Domitian's Arch to St. Mark's Church, where the Pope himself stood to behold it with great satisfaction; who after the sport was over gave to every Boy that ran (daub'd all over with Dirt) a Carlin [a piece of Money]. But Paul amidst all this publick Jollity was on a sud∣den seiz'd with a terrour unexpected; for news was brought him, that se∣veral young Men, whose Ring-leader was one Callimaco, had form'd a Plot against him; and the Narrative of it was no sooner made out to him, when (he being already almost dead with fear) comes a Fellow that call'd him∣self the Philosopher, a sad Wretch and a banish'd Man, who (first begging pardon for his life and liberty to live in his Country) shams a Story upon him, that he saw in the Wood of Velitre, one Luca Tozzo, a Citizen of Rome but banish'd, with a great number of other Banditi, and that they were just coming upon him. This made Paul tremble for fear, apprehending that now, being attack'd both without and within, he should surely be undone: and therefore he clapt up a great many both Citizens and Courtiers. Vianesius gave him occasions of fear, and so did any one about him who from a turn of Affairs could probably expect an augmentation either of Dignity or Estate. They broke up Mens Houses without distinction, and drag'd to Prison any body they suspected, and lest I should have miss'd my share in so great a calamity, they came by Night and set a Guard about my House, broke open the Windows and Doors, and seiz'd my Servant Demetrius a Lucchese, who told them I sup'd that Night with the Cardinal of Mantua; hither then they fly and taking me in his Chamber, they bring me before Paul, who as soon as he saw me, Are you too (says he) in the Plot with Callimaco against me? But I, conscious of my Innocence, answer'd him so fearlesly, that no sign of guilt appear'd in me. He being negligently drest and looking pale urg'd me still, and sometimes threatned me with Torments and some∣times with Death, unless I would confess. I seeing all places full of out∣rage and tumults, and fearing lest we should suffer mischief, by reason of the terrour and rage that I saw had possess'd them, shew'd many rea∣sons, why I could not believe Callimaco would attempt nor so much as to think of any such Design, being without cunning, an ill speaker, unactive, regardless, without Wealth, wanting Forces, Dependents, Ammunition, and beside being almost blind; more drowsie than P. Lentulus and more unfit for action, by means of his corpulence, than L. Crassus. Moreover, he was no Citizen of Rome, that he should concern himself for the liberty of his Country; nor was he a Prelate
that upon the taking off of Paul, he should expect the Papacy. What could Callimaco do? What dare he do? Was he good either at Dis∣course or Action? Had he listed any Men to assist him in bringing about so important a Design; unless you will make Glaucus and Petreius, the Companions of his flight, to be other Gabinii and Statilii. At this Paul turns him to Vianesius, and looking sternly upon me, (says he) this Man is to be forced with the Rack to confess the truth; for he understands the true Art of Plotting. Would to God Paul had dealt more considerately with me, he had not then applyed tortures to me. For when the Truth is to be gathered from circumstances, the matter of fact not being sufficiently made out, then those Actions are to be taken notice of that either preceded or ensued upon the Enterprise; the life of the Complotter is to be considered and his way of living, his Ambition and greediness, either of wealth or honour, and what he had before talk'd or written or done, that look'd that way, But Paul with∣out regard had to any of these, clap'd us all up in Jail: and yet taking advice of some who knew the thing well enough and knew that Luca Tozzo had never departed a foot from the City of Naples, to create so great a commotion with such danger to himself, he recall'd a Proclama∣tion he had published three days before, wherein he had proposed re∣wards to them that should bring his Traitor Luca to him either alive or dead, not discharging however the Quadratii, whom he had seiz'd and tortur'd upon suspicion of the same. He design'd it should be thought that there was something in it yet undiscover'd, lest he should be charg'd with levity. But Paul being rid of that fear, begins to think of us; and sends into the Castle Vianesius, John Francisco, Sanga of Chiozza and one of his Guard, to force us with any kind of torture to confess what we knew nothing of. The first and second day many were put to the Rack, of whom a great part died of their pains under the hands of the Execu∣tioner. You would have taken Castle St. Angelo for Phalaris his Bull, the hollow Vault did so resound with the cries of those miserable young Men. Lucidus as innocent a Man as any in the World suffer'd the Rack, as did Marsus Demetrius and Augustinus Campanus a hopeful young Man and an honour to his Age for Wit and Learning, who I think died soon af∣ter of pain and anguish. The Tormenters were yet not satisfied, though weary, having tortur'd twenty Men in those two days, but sent for me to take my turn too. The Executioners set themselves to their busi∣ness, the Instruments of Torture were ready, I was stript, torn and used like a Murtherer or a Thief; whilst Vianesius sat like another Minos upon a Tapestry-Seat, as if he had been at a Wedding or rather at Atreus and Tantalus's Feast; a Man (I say) in Holy Orders whom the Ecclesiasti∣cal Canons forbid to be Inquisitors by Torture upon Lay men, lest if Death follow, as it often does, they should become Irregular (as they term it) and profane. And to add to my misery, while wretched I hung on the Rack in torment, he play'd with a Jewel that Sanga had, asking him of what Girl he had got that Love-token; and then the Love-talk being over, he turns to me and bids me give him a full Narrative of the Conspiracy or rather Sham-Plot contrived by Callimaco, and to tell him why Pomponio writing to me from Venice should call me Holy Fa∣ther? What, says he, the Conspirators had agreed to make you Pope! Beside he examin'd me whether I had not sent Letters by Pomponio to the
Emperor or any other Christian Prince in order to raise a Schism or pro∣cure a Council? I answer'd that I never was a party in the Counsels of Callimaco, for there was an old grudg between us; that I knew not why Pomponio should call me Holy Father, himself could best tell, who, he said, was to be brought Prisoner quickly; as for the Popedom, they need not trouble their heads about me, I having been always content with a private life; that I never sent any Letter to the Emperor, or made use of Pomponio to that purpose, which also might be known from him. At last having a little pleased but not satisfied himself with my Tortures, he ordered me to be let down, that I might undergo torments much greater in the Evening. I was carried half dead into my Chamber, but not long after, the Inquisitors having din'd, and drunk lustily, I was fetch'd again, and Lorenzo Arch-Bishop of Spalato was there. They ask'd me then what discourse it was that I had with Sigismund Malatesta who was then in the City? I said, the discourse we had was onely concern∣ing the ancient and modern Learning, way of fighting, and famous Men, or such like things as are the common subjects of talk. Vianesius then threatned me bitterly with yet greater tortures, unless I would confess the truth, and told me he was to come again the next day, advising me in the mean time to consider where I was and whom I had to do withal. So I was carried back to my Bed-chamber, where I was seized with such extream pain, that I had rather have died than endur'd, all the aches of my shaken and batter'd limbs coming afresh upon me. But I was not a little refresh'd by the kindness of Angelo Bufalo a Knight of Rome, who had been committed to Prison a year before by Paul, because his Son Marcellus had killed Francis Cappocio, which was charged to be done by his instigation. This Angelo and his Nephew Francis being my Chamber-fellows did with their own hands assist me both with Food and Physic, otherwise I had died of pain and want: Two days after Paul's Physician, Christopher of Verona, came to me from the Pope and bad me have a good heart and hope well of him, and I should soon have my liberty. I asked him in how long time it might be expected? Nay (says he frankly in the hearing of every one) not so very soon neither; lest the Pope should be charg'd with levity and cruelty for having with so much noise taken and tortur'd so many Men and then letting them go immediately as innocent. But Paul left not the matter so, but altering his mind upon a running report, accuses those now of Heresie whom he had before charged with Plotting of Treason. Pomponio was at this time brought from Venice like another Jugurtha, in bonds to be tried, a down∣right honest Man and guilty neither of the Plot nor any other ill thing. Being examined why he changed the names of the Men he wrote to, he answer'd boldly as his humour was, that it did not concern either his Judges or the Pope, under what name he pleased to go, so that he had no naughty end in it; for that out of respect to Antiquity he was wont to make use of many antient names, as spurs to egg on the modern Youth to a virtuous Emulation. Lucillus also who led a very reserv'd life in the Country near Rome, was fetch'd up before them for Treason, because in a Letter of his to Campanus which they had intercepted, he had faln foul upon some body, under the name of Heliogabalus, for his Love-tricks, but with such conceal'd expressions, that no one who was not conscious would take it to himself. Our diligent Pastor, Vianesius, frequently vi∣siting
us with tortures, and having tormented Petreius the Companion of Callimaco (whom they had taken endeavouring to make his escape, and he confessing nothing, but saying that the drunken talk of Callimaco was not to be regarded) casting his eyes about as if he fear'd we should have got Wings like Daedalus and fled out of our Prison, he projected the making a dungeon for us and set Workmen about it. When it was finished he put into it Francisco Anguillara, Gattalusco, Francisco Al∣viano, and Giaiomo Ptolemeo who had already pin'd away four years in Prison. But not a word yet could we hear of our freedom. At this time the Emperor came to Rome, (according to a Vow he had made) with a splendid Attendance, whom Paul entertain'd with great magni∣ficence, at the expence of eighteen thousand Ducats. I saw them from the Castle returning under the same Canopy from the Lateran with a noble retinue; and Paul stood still upon the Bridg, while the Emperor made several Knights. The Emperor departing, and Paul by having quarter'd the greatest part of his Forces both Horse and Foot in the City, being rid of the fear he had lest the People should have raised tumults upon him when the Emperor was there, after we had lain ten months in Jail, he comes to the Castle himself, and that it might seem, that he made so great ado not without cause, he charged us with many things, but especially that we had disputed concerning the Immortality of the Soul, and that we held the Opinion of Plato, which S. Augustin says is very like to the Christian Faith. 'Tis with good reason (says the Saint) that Cicero makes Plato a God among the Philosophers, who certainly out-went them all for Wit and Understanding: and with him therefore I chose to dispute, because he reasons concerning the last end of Man and the Divine Nature better than any of the rest. But, says Paul, By disputing you call'd the Being of a God into question. Now this was no more than may be objected to all both Divines and Philosophers of our times, who for Discourse-sake and that the truth may appear, do fre∣quently make a question of the beings of Souls and of God and of all separate Intelligences. Besides, as S. Austin says, those are Heretics, who defend with earnestness any false Opinion they have taken up. We ne∣ver declin'd sound Discipline, which (as Leo says) is wont to be done by the Ringleaders of Error, who are deservedly called Heretics, accord∣ing to S. Jerom, for maintaining Opinions in opposition to the Church. I could give you an Account of my Life from my youth till this time, ever since I came to years of understanding. No ill action can be charg'd upon me, no theft, no pilfering, no sacriledg, no cheat upon the publick, no murther, no rapine, nor Simony. I have lived like a Christian, con∣fess'd and receiv'd the Communion at least once a year. Nothing ever fell from my mouth against the Faith or relishing of Heresie. I follow'd neither Simoniacs, the Carpocratiani, Ophilae, Severiani, Alogii, Paulini, Manichees, Macedoniani, nor any other heretical faction. But beside, Paul accused us as too great admirers of Pagan Antiquities, of which no Man could be more fond than himself, for he procur'd all the Statues of the Antients that he could throughout the City, and plac'd them in his House which he had built near the Campidoglio; among the rest he took away a Porphyry Tomb of S. Constantia out of the Church of S. Ag∣nes, maugre the denial of the Monks of the place, who yet after Paul's death, got it again of Pope Sixtus. Beside, after the old Heathen way,
he coin'd an infinite number of Medals with his own Image, of Gold, Sil∣ver and Brass, and laid them in the foundations of his House; herein imi∣tating rather the antient Paynims, than S. Peter, Anacletus or Linus. Up∣on a debate of our matter before the Court-Bishops and two Friers, one a Franciscan, the other a Dominican, they agreed all, that nothing could be charged upon us that savour'd of Heresie. But Paul coming to the Castle, and having on purpose excluded Francisco who favour'd us, that so Leonardo our Accuser, might speak the more freely, he repeated what he had said the day but one before; and then ask'd the Opinion of those that were present, who though they spoke somewhat to please the Pope, yet they made a light business of it, and endeavour'd to persuade him into a milder temper. Amongst them all Lelio del Val, a Citizen of Rome and an Advocate in the Consistory, defended our Cause very generously. He confuted all that Leonard had said and what the other Advocate had as∣serted; but as they were arguing, mention chanc'd to be made of the Academy, which was no sooner said, but M. Barbo Cardinal of S. Mark, cries out that we were not Academicks but a scandal to the name. Now I cannot think how we should bring any reproach to it at all: we were neither thieves, nor pilferers, nor incendiaries, nor prodigal fools; we were sectators of the old Academy, despising the new as establishing no∣thing certain upon which Science might be built; but Paul would not have the Academy so much as mention'd under pain of being pronounc'd Heretical, which was a reflection upon good old Plato and let him look to it. Paul lov'd in every kind of learning to be thought an acute and skilful Man; he desir'd too to go for a facetious Person, so that he derided and contemn'd almost all Men. He after a scornful manner ask'd Pomponio, what was the name his Parents gave him? who answer'd he was Binomius [i.e. had two names] which Paul not understanding, persisted to ask his name still. At last turning to me, he fell into a rage to such a degree that, beside charging me with the Plot, Heresie and Treason, of which I had cleared my self; he upbraided me too with Ingratitude against so kind a Friend as he had been to me: If it be a kindness for a Man to be turn'd out of that which he has bought with his Mony without telling any reason; if to be imprison'd, tormented, disgrac'd and slander'd be a kindness, then Paul was my special bountiful Friend, and I was very ungrateful, who unmindful of such Courtesies, did not depart the City in obedience to his command, when I had been so often deceiv'd by his Promises. He went away threatning us and kept us in Prison a whole year as I believe he had sworn he would, when he took us first and clap'd us up; and he was not willing to seem forsworn. At length how∣ever we were enlarg'd so far as to have the liberty of his own House, but not to stir a foot out of it; and soon after we had the freedom of the Vatican, and in the end, being wearied with the Intercessions of the Car∣dinals, he set us free. Not long after I was sent for by Lewis Gonzaga Duke of Mantua to the Baths, in order to cure my right Arm which had contracted a great indisposition during my imprisonment; which Paul forbad me at first to do; promising to do great things for me in a little time; but I went and return'd, Cardinal Bessarion a Person of great wit, and learning, being Security for my coming back. Paul commended me that I was as good as my word, and would often boast what a kindness he had for me, and what great things he would do for me as soon as
Borsius d' Este was gone, who coming to the City with a great Equipage was very magnificently and splendidly received by him. The same he had often promised to the Ambassadours of Venice and Milan, who had spoken on my behalf. For two years I was led on or rather beguil'd with these hopes, till at length I resolv'd to go with the Cardinal of Mantua to Bononia, of which he was Legat. But Paul forbad me, and (after his jesting manner) said I had wit enough already, and wanted Wealth rather than Learning. And now while I was in expectation that I should be reliev'd after so many troubles and afflictions, behold the Pope dies of an Apoplexy about two hours within night, being alone in his Chamber, having been well that day and held a Consistory. His death happened July 28. 1471. in the sixth year and tenth month of his Pon∣tificate. As to his Personage, it was Majestic and becoming a Pope; for he was so portly and tall, that he was easily distinguishable from the rest, when at Mass; In his dress though he was not curious yet he was not reputed negligent. Nay, 'tis said that when he was to appear in public, he would use to paint his face. In his Pontifical Vestments he outwent all his Predecessors, especially in his Regno or Mitre, upon which he laid out a great deal of Mony in purchasing at vast rates, Diamonds, Sapphyrs, Emeralds, Chrysoliths, Jaspers, Unions, and all manner of precious stones, wherewith adorn'd like another Aaron he would appear abroad somewhat more august than a Man, delighting to be seen and admir'd by every one. To this purpose sometimes by deferring some usual Solem∣nities he would keep Strangers in Town, that so he might be view'd by greater numbers. But lest he alone should seem to differ from the rest, he made a Decree that none but Cardinals, should under a Penalty wear red Caps; to whom he had in the first year of his Popedom given Cloth of that colour, to make Horse-Cloths or Mule-Cloths of when they rode. He was also about to order that Cardinals Caps should be of Silk Scarlet; but some Persons hindred it by telling him well, that the Ec∣clesiastical Pomp was rather to be diminished than encreased to the de∣triment of the Christian Religion. Before he was made Pope, he used to give out, that if ever he came to that good fortune, he would give each Cardinal a Castle in the Country where they might retire conve∣niently to avoid the Summer-heats of the City: but when he was once got into the Chair, he thought of nothing less. However, he endea∣vour'd by his Authority and by force too to augment the Power of the Papacy: For he sent the Bishop of Tricarico into France to hear the Cause of quarrel between the Duke of Burgundy and the People of Liege, and upon their reconciliation, to take off the Interdict laid upon the Lie∣geois for wrongfully expelling their Bishop; but while the Legat took great pains to subject all matters to the Pope's Judgment, he and their Bishop too were clapt up by the Liegeois. Hereupon the Duke of Bur∣gundy makes Peace with the French King (with whom he was before at War) and with his aid, gives those of Liege several great defeats and at length sacks their City and sets free the imprison'd Bishops: Moreover, Paul hearing of the Apostasie of the King of Bohemia, he by his Legat, Lorenzo Roverella Bishop of Ferrara, raised the Hungarians and Germans upon him, so that he had certainly cut off both the King George and his Progeny, and utterly rooted out the Heretics, had not the Polanders, who laid claim to that Kingdom, held Matthias King of Hungary employ'd
in War, lest he should have made himself Master of it. He undertook two Wars of no great moment in Italy, which being not openly decla∣red, but begun by picqueering Parties, he afterwards abandon'd. For first he attempted the seizing the Signeury of Tolfa by cunning wiles, which failing, with open force, under the conduct of Vianesius he set upon it and besieged it; but the King's Army (in which the Ʋrsini serv'd) returning from the War they had now ended with Bartholomew of Ber∣gamo, on a sudden he raised the Siege in great disorder, though the Ene∣my was not within sixty miles of the place; so that after a long conten∣tion in which he had extreamly disobliged and almost enrag'd the Ʋrsini against him, he was fain to purchase Tolfa for seventeen thousand Ducats of Gold, for fear of that potent Family who were related to the Lords of the place. After the same manner he set upon Robert Malatesta Son of Sigismund, when having taken the Suburbs of Rimini by a Stratagem, and for sometime having besieged the City, Lorenzo Arch-Bishop of Spa∣lato being the chief in the Enterprise, Frederick D. of Ʋrbin came upon him with the King's Forces and those of the Florentines, who forc'd him to raise his Siege, and foil'd his Army shamefully, so that he accepted of a Peace upon very dishonourable terms. Lorenzo charg'd the reason of the loss of Rimini upon the niggardliness of his pay to the Soldiers; and to the great slowness of his Resolution, while through ignorance in affairs of that nature, he deliberated long about actions which should be done in a moment. Paul was indeed so awkward at business, that, except he were driven to it, he would not enter upon any Affair however plain and unencumbred, nor when begun would he bring it to peofection. This humour of his, he was wont to boast, had done him great service in ma∣ny concerns, whereas (to speak truth) it had been very mischievous both to himself and the Church of Rome. He yet was very diligent in getting Mony, so that he generally intrusted the disposal of Bishopricks and Benefices to such Courtiers, whose Places being saleable, nothing could be bestowed without a Present. All Offices indeed in his time were set to sale, whereby it came to pass, that he who had a mind to a Bishoprick or Benefice, would purchase of him at a good rate some other Office, and so get what he would have, in spight of any other Candidates, who could pretend upon the score of either Learning or good Life to be capable of whatsoever honour or preferment. Beside when Bishopricks were vacant, he would remove the more worthy (as he call'd them) to the more wealthy Seat, by these Translations raising vast Sums of Mony, because more Annates became due at the same time. He also allow'd the purchasing of Salaries. With these Moneys he would sometimes be very liberal, giving exhibitions to the poorer Cardinals and Bishops, and to Princes or Noblemen that were driven out of their Country, and relie∣ving poor Maidens, Widows and sick People. He took great care too, that Corn and all manner of Victuals should be afforded cheaper at Rome than formerly. He was at the charge of several magnificent Buildings near Saint Mark's and in the Vatican. An instance of his Munificence was, the Hunting which with great charge he caused to be represented in the Campo di Merula, for the entertainment of the Duke of Ferrara: The management of which was committed to his Nephew by his Sister, whom he had made Cardinal of S. Lucia, and at the same time conferred the like honour of a Cardinal on Baptista Zeno his other Nephew. It
was a hard thing to gain access to him, considering he would sleep in the day-time and be awake in the night looking over his Jewels and pretious Stones; and if after long waiting you came into his presence, you might hear him indeed, but your self could not be heard; he was so very talkative. He was morose and peevish as well to his Courtiers as Strangers, and would often alter his mind from what he had promised. He had a great mind to be thought a politick Man, and would therefore give very ambigu∣ous answers; so that he continued not long his Friendships with any Princes or Commonwealths, himself having several different Interests. He lov'd to have great variety of Dishes at his Table, and generally eat of the worst; but would be clamorous if what he used to like were not pro∣vided. He drank often, but his Wine was small and diluted with Water. He loved Melons, Crabs, Sweetmeats, Fish and Bacon; which odd kind of Diet, I believe, caused the Apoplexy of which he died; for the day before his death he had eat two very large Melons. He was reputed a just and yet a merciful Man; endeavouring to amend even Thieves, Murderers, Traitors and perjur'd Villains, by tedious Impri∣sonment. But he was a great Enemy and Despiser of Human Learning, branding those for Heretics that gave their minds to it: and dissuading the People of Rome from putting their Children to be brought up to it, telling them that it was enough if they had learn'd to write and read. He was known to be ill-condition'd and inexorable to Petitioners, not onely denying, but reproaching and abusing them; but yet he would make a show of doing less than he would do. Lastly, one thing he was highly to be commended for, that he kept no ill Men about him; but contain'd his Family and all his Domestics in their due bounds; that their pride and insolence might not procure him the hate of the great Men and People of Rome. The End of the Lives of the POPES, Written by B. Platina.
A CONTINUATION OF THE Lives of the Popes. SIXTƲS IV. FRANCIS della Rovere, born the 21. of July, Anno 1414. at Celle, a Village near Savona, a City under the Dominion of the Republick of Genoua, was created Pope on the 9th. of August, 1471. he was (as some write) the Son of a Fi∣sherman: tho Onofrio Panvinio in the History of his Life deduces his Original from a noble, and ancient Extraction of the Lon∣gobards; and reports, that Simon della Rovere, in the year of our Lord 700. transplanting himself from Premont to Savona, was the first of that Family, from whom this Sixtus IV. descended. His Fathers name was Leonard, a person of Authority and Reputation, having managed many publick Offices for the Service of his Country. This Francis della Rovere was in the time of his infancy dedicated by the Vow of his Mother to the Order of S. Francis, and at the age of nine years was put into a Con∣vent, and committed to the charge of John Pinarolo a Frier of that So∣ciety; by whom he was instructed in the Rules of the Franciscan Or∣der, and in the first Rudiments of Grammar: and being of good Wit and Capacity, he became Master of the Ciceronian Stile and Language. He afterwards went to Cheri, where he studied Logick, and thence tra∣velled to Pavia and Bologna, where he became a great proficient in Philosophy and Divinity. Being of twenty years of age, he disputed with great acuteness and subtilty in the Schools at Geneva; and after∣wards taking the degree of Doctor in Padua he was made Reader of the Divinity and Philosophy Lectures at Padoua, Pavia, Siena, and other parts in Italy. In process of time his abilities being made known, he was esteemed and courted by all; and having many Scholars and admirers, amongst which Cardinal Bessarion was one, he gained a great esteem and interest in all Courts of Europe; so that in time he was constituted Ge∣neral of his Order, Procurator of the Court at Rome, and Vicar-Gene∣ral of all Italy. He was highly esteemed by Pius the second, and Paul the second being a great admirer of his abilities and Learning, did at the in∣stance and persuasion of the Cardinals Bessarion and Francis de Gonzaga, ad∣mit him, with seven others to the order of Cardinals, without any motion In process of time his abilities being made known, he was esteemed and courted by all; and having many Scholars and admirers, amongst which Cardinal Bessarion was one, he gained a great esteem and interest in all Courts of Europe; so that in time he was constituted Ge∣neral of his Order, Procurator of the Court at Rome, and Vicar-Gene∣ral of all Italy. He was highly esteemed by Pius the second, and Paul the second being a great admirer of his abilities and Learning, did at the in∣stance and persuasion of the Cardinals Bessarion and Francis de Gonzaga, ad∣mit him, with seven others to the order of Cardinals, without any motion
or address from himself, or so much as his own knowledg, being then at Pavia, with design to go for Venice. On this occasion coming to Rome he was created Cardinal the 17th. of September, 1467. and being by the beneficence, and favour of the Church assisted with many large Contri∣butions, he was enabled to repair the Palace of S. Peter ad Vincola, where he formed, and kept his Court after the Rules and Customs of a Convent. The exercise of this eminent Office, and his attendance on the Government of the Church, could not so distract, or divert his mind from his Studies; but that he found time to write many Tractates, and Treatises in Divinity, namely, a Tract of the Blood of Jesus Christ; of the Conception of the Virgin Mary, de futuris contingentibus; and of the Power of God, against the Opinion of a certain Carmelite Frier, who held, that God could not by his Omnipotent Power, save any person whom he had predestinated to damnation. He also wrote a Tractate re∣conciling the opinions of Aquinas, and Scotus, shewing that they did not differ in substance, or reallity, but in words, or ways of expression. All which procured him such fame and credit, that Paul the second dying sud∣denly on the 28th. of July, he was in a Conclave of seven and twenty Cardinals elected Pope on the 9th. of August, 1471. After his Election he was Crowned the 24th. of September following, after which he esteemed it his first business to reconcile the Discords amongst Christian Princes, and to turn the hatred they conceived one against the other, upon their common enemy the Turk. To which end Bessarion was Commissionated to be his Legat to Lewis XI. of France, Roderigo Borgia Vice-Chancellor to go his Legat into Spain, Marco Barbo into Germany. and Hungary, and Oliviere Carafa to Venice, and the Knights of Rhodes; to every of which Legats he assigned a Pension of 500 Crowns in Gold per Month, but the success answered not the charge, all the Le∣gats returning without any effect, or fruit of their Negotiations. For Lewis the 11th. had already levied War against Charles of Burgundy, and the Duke of Brittany. Ferdinand King of Aragon made War on the King of Portugal to decide the dispute between them for the Kingdom of Castile. The Kings of Hungary and Poland were in actual Wars, fighting for the Kingdom of Bohemia; so that the Oratorical persuasions of these Ministers of Peace, were not able to prevail on the incensed, and resolved minds of these warlike Princes. And being now fixed and esta∣blished in his Apostolical Seat, he received with a serenity of counte∣nance, and chearful affability, the Addresses and Congratulations which Forein Princes by their respective Ministers made to him at his first pro∣motion to the Papal Dignity: which Ceremony being performed, he pub∣lished and declared two persons to be by him created Cardinals, namely, Peter Riario, and Julian della Rovere; the first was of a mean Family at Savona, and educated by this Sixtus in the Franciscan Order, and made Bishop of Trevisi: The other was Son of his Brother Raphael della Rovere, whom he had constituted Bishop of Carpentras. The first took the Title of S. Sixtus, and the other of S. Peter ad Vincola, who was afterwards Pope Julian the second. And such was the affection which this Pope indulged to his own na∣tural Relations, that he never refused to grant their demands, or yield to the most exorbitant of their desires; for which he was much blamed, and hardly censured, with many reflections on his conduct and wisdom:
for he had enriched this Peter Riario with several fat Benefices, on the Revenue of which he might have lived with splendor, and greatness. But so exorbitant were his expences, that in the space of two years only he spent two hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, leaving a debt of seventy thousand Crowns, with three hundred pounds weight of wrought Plate; and then being discontented with disappointments of his ambitious de∣sires, he died at 28 years of age, and was buried in the Church of the holy Apostles. His Brother Jeronimo, tho (as we have said) of mean ex∣traction, was yet by the favour of this Pope made Prince of Imola, and Forli, and married to Catherine natural Daughter of Galeazzo Duke of Milan: and on this account and reason Ascanius the Son of Galeazzo was created Cardinal. And farther did the affection of this Pope extend to∣wards his Nephews, and Relations, that he married Leonard his Brothers Son to the natural Daughter of Ferdinand, King of Naples, and ordained him Governor of Rome: and he dying soon after, his place was bestow∣ed on John the Brother of Cardinal Julian, with augmentation of the Signiories of Sora and Senegaglia; on the reputation of which he married Jane the Daughter of Frederick Duke of Ʋrbin by whom he had one Son called Francisco Maria, who succeeded in the Dukedom of Ʋrbin af∣ter his Uncle Guy Ʋbald, who died without issue. This Pope moreover created his Brother Christopher, and Domenico della Rovere Cardinals, as also Jeronimo Basso his Sisters Son, Raphael Sanson, a youth of 17 years of age, Son of his Sister the Wife of Peter Riario, also Schiafinato of Milan, who was his Chancellor, and Bishop of Parma; likewise John Baptista Cibo of Genoua, who afterwards succceeded in the Popedom, under the name of Innocent VIII: and besides these he raised many others to the number of 34, whom he successively created Cardinals during his Reign. And so free and liberal was Sixtus in his Promotions and Gifts, that nothing was asked of him which he denied; which liberality gave occa∣sion oftentimes to many Disputes, when the free nature of the Pope had given Donations to three or four persons of the same thing: to prevent which for the future, the Privy Signet was given to John de Montemira∣bile, a severe and reserved person, and one well practised in the Affairs of the Court, who keeping an account of all matters which had passed the Seal, vacated such Donations as were not regularly granted. It is doubtful amongst the Writers of Ecclesiastical History, whether it was this Pope Sixtus, or Paul the Second, that reduced the year of Ju∣bile to 25; howsoever it is certain, that this Pope in the year 1475. did Celebrate the Jubile, which brought a great concourse of people to Rome, amongst which were several Kings and Princes present, such as the Kings of Denmark, Sweden and Norway, of Bosna and Walachia, the Dukes of Calabria and Saxony, with many others of great Quality, who in person made their Pilgrimages to Rome to gain the Indulgences, Pardons, and Pri∣vileges which were granted at that Solemnity. About this time Mathias King of Hungary being desirous to create an Alliance between himself and Casimir King of Poland, did in the year 1476. make demand of his Daughter in Marriage; but before Casimir would assent thereunto, he sent his Son Vladislaus to Frederick the Em∣peror then at Vienna, to desire that he might be established and confir∣med in the right of the Kingdom of Bohemia, notwithstanding that it had formerly been given away by Paul the Second to Mathias King of
Hungary. On which Quarrel the Knights of the Teutonick Order did not only at the instigation of Balthasar the Popes Legat make War against the King of Poland, with assistance of the King of Hungary; but likewise the Legat Excommunicated Vladislaus the new King of Bo∣hemia and his Father Casimir, upon pretence that they favoured the Do∣ctrin of the John Huz. Hussites. That long continued Difference and Dispute between the Secular Priests and the Mendicant Friers, which had lasted for above two hun∣dred years, was afterwards by the Sentence of this Pope determined in this manner, That the Seculars should never hereafter tax, or impeach the Mendicants as Authors of Heresie, but honor and respect them, as those, by whose Preaching the truth of the Gospel had been greatly enlightned. That all Communicants should be obliged to hear Mass said by their Parochial Priests, every Sunday, and solemn Festival, with∣out which the Mendicants were not admitted to Preach. That the Mendicants should not declare the people disobliged from making their Confessions to their Parochial Priest, at least every Easter, according as they are directed by the Ecclesiastical Canons; provided still that the Mendicants retain their Privilege of hearing Confessions, and enjoyning Penance. These, and some other particulars being declared, and de∣termined by this Pope, the animosity and hatred between the Seculars, and the Religious, was much abated, and the long continued Contro∣versie brought to an issue. But to pass now from the matters of Spiritual Government, to temporal and secular Affairs, it is to be noted, that about this time most mortal feuds and quarrels arose between this Pope Sixtus, and the two Brothers of the House of Medicis, Julian and Laurence, the original of which proceeded from the great displeasure which Laurence took at the Pope for not conferring a Cardinals Cap on his Brother Ju∣lian, in revenge of which he being very potent in Florence, gave assi∣stance both of men and mony to Nicolas Vitelli, Count of Tiferno, and Lord of the City of Castello; whereby after he had been subdued, and banished by the Pope, and had resigned his Right and Possession to him, he returned again, with the favour of the people, and re-assuming his In∣heritance, he demolished the Citadel which Sixtus for his better security had made and fortified with a good Garison: Upon revolt of the City, the Pope sent his Nephew Cardinal Julian with a strong Army against it, and by a long Siege of three months became master of it. Nor did Lau∣rence de Medicis only show his indignation against the Pope by furnishing men and mony to Vitelli, but likewise by disappointing him of the pur∣chase of Imola, the Prince whereof being reduced to great necessities for want of mony, offered to sale; to prevent which, and that it should not fall into the hands of the Pope, who now grew above measure great and powerful in Italy, Laurence supplied the mony, and so eased the Prince of those necessities which compelled him to a sale of his Patrimony. The Pope growing very angry hereat, and resolving to revenge these affronts, entered into a secret conspiracy with Francis de Pazzi, who was head of that Faction, which was contrary to the House of Medicis, whereby it was resolved, that both the Brothers Laurence and Julian should be mur∣dered, and that the Commonwealth of Florence should be disposed of, according to the pleasure of the Pope. But that a design so impious as this, should not seem to have entered into the heart of a Pope, the whole
management was committed to the conduct of Jeronimo Riario, who in the first place prevailed with Ferdinand King of Naples to send an Army into Tuscany under the command of Alonso his Son, and compel the Flo∣rentines either to extirpate the Family of the Medicis, or force them to abandon their Country; and that then under colour of the Papal Digni∣ty, the King of Naples might introduce his own Authority, and set up for himself: but to make all things sure in case this should fail, Jeronimo communicated his design to John Baptista Montesecco, a man very expert and ready in such attempts, who quickly engaged several with him in the Conspiracy; namely Bartholomew Salvian Arch-Bishop of Pisa, who had conceived a private pique against Laurence; also Francis de Pazzi, and James Poggio, whose Father was a famous Orator in his time. And to put a better face on the matter, and countenance the Plot, Raphael Ria∣rio Cardinal of S. George, a youth, and Nephew of Jeronimo, was sent to Pisa on pretence of his Studies; under whose protection the Assassinates having performed their work might be the better secured. Sunday be∣ing the 26th of April, was the day appointed for this murder, and ac∣cordingly the Conspirators, who were many, assaulted the two Brothers in the Church, whilst they were hearing Mass: Julian was there killed, but Laurence having received a slight wound, sled into the Vestery, where he was saved from the violence of the Assassinates; and in the mean time the Archbishop of Pisa, and James Poggio endeavoured to possess themselves of the Palace belonging to that Signiory: But the rumor hereof spreading quickly over all the City, and that Julian was killed, and Laurence still living, the Party of the Medicis took courage, and with Arms in their hands seized the Arch-Bishop of Pisa, and James Poggio, together with their Companions; and putting a Halter about their necks, they executed speedy Justice, hanging them out at a win∣dow. Antonio da Volterro, and Stefano a Priest who attempted Laurence, incurred the like fate. Montesecco was tortured to make Confession, which having done, he was likewise put to death. The Cardinal at the time of this Combustion flying to the High-Altar, was scarce protected by the sa∣credness of the place, and the earnest intercession of Laurence; notwith∣standing which having for some days been committed to safe custody, un∣til he had cleared his Innocence, he was out of respect and favour to the Pope set at liberty. Howsoever Sixtus was not so well pleased with the grace showed to the Cardinal, but that he resented the severity they had used against a Priest, and an Arch-Bishop, to that degree, that at the per∣suasion of Jeronimo Riario, he interdicted the people of Florence, and made War upon them. Frederick Duke of Ʋrbin was made General of the Papal Army, and Alfonso Duke of Calabria, Son of Ferdinand King of Naples was also ready with another Army in favour and assistance of the Pope. On the other side Lewis the 11th. King of France sent a Suc∣cor of 300 Horse to Florence, under the Command of Philip de Comines, Lord of Argenton; and farther to affright the Pope, he ordered a Synod of Prelates assembled at Orleans, to Decree that no more mony should be carried out of France to Rome for vacant Benefices. The Venetians, and Dukes of Milan, Mantoua, and Ferrara concerned themselves in the League, that they might repress the ambition of the Pope, whom they esteemed to be full of designs to advance his own power, and glory in Italy. Laurence de Medicis by his vigilance, good address, and conduct,
so well accommodated matters with Ferdinand King of Naples, that he engaged that King to his Party, and into an agreement of an Offensive, and Defensive War; with which Union and Alliances the Pope being discouraged,Anno 1479. the War concluded without any remarkable successes; the Pope suppressing his resentments until a more seasonable time, when he could with better effect reak his anger, and revenge on his enemies: which he had certainly performed with the first opportunity, had he not been surprized with a suddain alarm from the Turk; who having unex∣pectedly seized the City of Otranto, put all Italy into fear, and confusi∣on. This accident confirmed the Peace more firmly between Sixtus and the Florentines; on whom by way of Penance for their late crime, he imposed a charge of maintaining 15 Gallies against the Turk; whose great force having entered into Italy would certainly in despight of all the power of that Country, have made great devastations, had not the death of Mahomet the Great, who had taken Constantinople, put a stop to the progress of his Arms, and moved Bajazet his Son, and Successor to re∣call Amet Pasha his General with his Army out of Puglia: and this happened in the year 1481. when the King of Cyprus, and his Son be∣ing dead, and the whole power remaining in the hands of the Queen (who was of the noble Family of Cornaro) the Venetian Senate laid claim to the Kingdom, as devolving to them by right of inheritance, which for many years they maintained against the power of the Turk, who made many attempts to make seizure of it. About the same time also Dabuson the Great, Master of Rhodes, valiantly defended his City against Maho∣met, causing him to raise his Siege, and retire with disgrace. The fear of the Turk by their Retreat out of Italy being extinguished, Sixtus re-assumed his former designs, and in order thereunto favoured the party of the Venetians who made War upon Hercules da Este Duke of Ferrara: by these means all Italy was put into a new flame of War, being divided into diverse Parties and Factions. On one side were the Pope, the Venetians, Genoueses, and those of Siena, with other Ci∣ties allied in a Confederacy. On the other were Ferdinand King of Naples, the Florentines, Lodowick Sforza Protector of the State of Milan during the minority of the young Duke. The Pope in favour of his own Party managed his War with the Spiritual as well as with the Temporal Arms; for in the year 1482. he Excommunicated all his Enemies, and as many as took their part, or favoured their Cause; and encouraged René Duke of Lorain and Anjou to return into Italy, and recover his Kingdom of Naples. But René being otherwise employed, could not make use of this opportunity, which was offered; and therewith Fer∣dinand being enraged, entered the Dominions of the Pope with a great Army, and approached to the Gates of Rome; with which Sixtus being greatly incensed, issued out an Army against him under the command of Robert Malatesta; and both Armies joyning Battel in a place called Campo Morto, near Velitri; Sixtus had the fortune of the day, and to over∣throw his Enemy; many were slain on the place, many principal Offi∣cers taken and carried in triumph into Rome, and Ferdinand himself nar∣rowly escaped by flight. Three days after which Victory Malatesta died, not without some suspicion of being poisoned. Not long after a Peace being concluded between Pope Sixtus, and the King of Naples, all the Prisoners were set at liberty; amongst which were the Cardinals Colonna
and Savelli, who at the beginning of the War, were as disaffected per∣sons committed to custody. This War being in this manner ended, the Pope turned his Arms upon the Venetians in favour of Hercules Duke of Ferrara, lest that State being too powerful for him, should augment their Force by the addition of that Dukedom: and in regard that State would not give ear to his admonitions, and desist from prosecution of their War at his command, the Pope made use of his spiritual Arms, Ex∣communicating all the Subjects under the Dominions of Venice, and en∣tering into League with all the Confederate Princes of Italy, waged the most dangerous War, that ever the Venetians had sustained; and certain∣ly had proved fatal to them, had not Lodowick Sforza Duke of Milan made a separate Peace with them, against the sense, and opinion of all the other Confederates. Sixtus having by these many Wars, and seve∣ral ways exhausted his Treasury, contrived by sale of new Offices, never before known, to replenish his Coffers; he also imposed new Taxes, and raised the old ones: but that which most reflected on his Reputation, and blemished him with the character of a covetous person, was that he de∣cimated the Prelates, and laid new impositions on the Clergy: but to do this Pope justice, and give him his due, never was any more gene∣rous, or munificent in his gifts, or more delighted to do good offices than this; for he freely, and at his own charge maintain'd Andrew Paleologo Prince of the Morea, with Leonard di Focco Despor of Albania, who had been deposed, and exterminated their Dominions by the Turk: he like∣wise with great magnificence and courtesie treated the Queens of Cyprus and Bosna, whom the Turk had forced to abandon their Dominions, and fly for refuge under his protection, Also when the Kings of Denmark, Swedeland, Norway, and Gothland, with the Dukes of Saxony, and Cala∣bria being moved, and guided by their Devotion, came to visit the Ro∣man Sea, he received them with great State, and treated them with a magnificence becoming Kings: And when in the year of Jubile Ferdi∣nand of Aragon King of Naples came to gain Indulgences at Rome, he re∣mitted to him the yearly Tribute which he was obliged to pay for that Kingdom, and in lieu thereof contented himself with the yearly acknow∣ledgment of a White Horse with its Furniture, which is continued to this day. And farther to demonstrate his generous and great Soul, he re-built the Hospital of S. Spirito for maintainance and education of young Children: he built the Church of S. Mary of Peace: he adorned the Ba∣silicon of S. Peter with new Windows, making the Church more light∣some and pleasant than before: he repaired the Palace of Lateran, as al∣so the Churches of the Holy Apostles, with several other Churches. The Pons Janicularis, or the Bridg of Janicula being ruined, he took up all the Stones, and built an other Bridg over Tybur in the place thereof, which since that time is called by the name of Ponte Sesto, or the Bridg of Sixtus. He cleared all the Common sewers of Rome, making convey∣ances for the sullage of the City to run into the Tybur: he repaired ma∣ny Aquaeducts and Fountains, and brought the brazen Statue of M. Au∣relius from an obscure place, and erected it in the more open Area of the Capitol. It was he that reduced the Vatican Library into such a condi∣tion as hath made it famous through all the world; for he not only brought Books thither from all parts of Europe, but left also certain Rents and Revenues for the increase of them, with Pensions also to the
Library-keepers, and under-Officers. On the Pedestal of his Statue in the Library, these Verses are written. Templa, Domum expositis vicos, fora, maenia, pontes Virgineam Trivii quod reparatis aquam. Prisc a licet Nautis Statuas dare commoda Portus. Et Vaticanum cingere Christe jugum Plus tamen urbs debet, nam quae squalore latebat Cernitur in celebri Bibliotheca loco. In short, there was nothing which tended to the glory and ornament of the City which was neglected by him; and such was his zeal and power in defence of the Privileges of the Church, that he would never suffer them to be infringed, nor did any Prince offer him an injury, or indigni∣ty which he did not return with due revenge. As for instance, appears by the War he made in confederacy with Venice and Genoua against the Duke of Ferrara and his Allies; the which he managed with so much heat, that when the Venetians made a separate Peace without his consent, or approbation, he so highly resented it, that it brought him to a fit of the Gout, which increased on him with that violence, that he died there∣of on the 13th. of August, 1484. having held the Pontifical Sea for the space of 13 years and four days, having arrived the age of 70 years and 22 days. At his Death this Distick was made. Sistere qui nullo potuit cum foedere Sixtus, Audito tantum nomine pacis obit. His Body was interred in S. Peters Church under a Monument of Brass, which Julian Cardinal of Liens caused to be erected for him before the High-Altar. After which the Chair was vacant 16 days. INNOCENT VIII. SIXTƲS being dead the Cardinals entered the Vatican, where in the space of 16 days after the decease of the former Pope, they elected John Baptista Cibo Cardinal of S. Balbina, to suc∣ceed in the Papal Chair: He was a Native of Genoua, and born of an il∣lustrious Family in the year 1432. his Father being a Knight, and Count of the Empire, and Senator of Rome: He lived a long time in the Family and Service of Ferdinand King of Naples, and afterwards coming to Rome, was received into the Family of the Cardinal of Bologna, Brother of Pope Nicolas V. He was created Bishop of Savona by Paul II. and of Melfy and Priest Cardinal, with the Title of S. Balfina by Sixtus IV. after whose Decease he was by the common suffrages of 24 Cardinals elected Pope, and on the 29th. of August 1484. was Crowned by Francis Piccolomini, calling himself by the name of Innocent the Eighth, and at his Inauguration he used these words, Ego autem in Innocentia mea ingres∣sus sum. Tho Guiccardin will not allow this Motto to correspond with
his manners, and Onufrius saith, that he often covered his avarice and covetous desires, with Drollery, and some pleasant expressions. How∣soever he is stiled by most Writers with the honorable character of pious and affable, and commended for his sanctity of life, and profound lear∣ning. The first business he took in hand after he came to the Papal Chair, was to take off the Excommunication which Pope Sixtus had laid on the Venetians, and being himself in perfect amity, and maintain∣ing a fair correspondence with the Christian Princes, he endeavoured so to reconcile them one with another, that being united in a strict confe∣deracy, they might convert their Arms against the Turk, who was now become the formidable, and common enemy of Christendom: for tho he was naturally averse to War, yet his zeal for the Christian Religion moved him to equippe a Fleet at the cost and expence of 150 thousand Crowns; which being successful in their enterprise, gained him great renown, and esteem with all the Christian Princes; the which he also improved by various good offices, nd acts of justice performed towards them; for he re-blessed the Venetians after they had been desecrated and attainted by the Excommunication of Sixtus, he eased the Church from the burden of extraordinary Taxes, he retrenched many superfluous charges of his own Family: he conferred many benefits, favours, and privileges on the Orders of S. Francis, S. Augustin, and S. Dominick, and thundered out his Excommunications against Women that used Poisons, and Incantations, and such as cheated and purloined from the Dataria, or Exchequer. But all these good actions, and just intentions were interrupted by ci∣vil Discords at Rome arisen between the Families of Colonna and Orsini, on the ground of ancient hatred, and resentments between them; and had proceeded to worse effects and more evil consequences, had they not been asswaged for a while by the breaking forth of a forein War with Ferdinand King of Naples; who having oppressed, and ill treated many Lords and great personages, and particularly the Count De Montorio, who was of great repute and popular in the City of Aquila; they all, together with the City of Abruzzo had recourse to the Pope for sanctua∣ry, protesting, that in case he would not receive them into his protection, that they should be forced to yield, and resign themselves into the hands and power of some Forein Prince. The Pope being moved by their sup∣plications, and incensed against Ferdinand for his ill deportment towards the Papal See, for he had denied to pay the yearly tribute of twenty thousand Ducats, and had disposed of the Ecclesiastical Benefices accord∣ing to his own will, and pleasure▪ he therefore resolved to receive Aquila and Abruzzo and the other complainants into his care and prote∣ction, and to declare War against the King of Naples: for carrying on of which with better success, he entered into a League with the Venetians, and drew to his Party the Princes of Colonna, of Bisignano, Salerno, Al∣tamura. and Duke of Oliveto, with many other Lords, and great men of Naples, making Robert Sanseverino the General of his Army. On the other side the King combined with the Florentines, and joyned the Orsii to his party; and such were the animosities on both sides, that a furious and bloody War began, which was maintained for some time with changes and variety of fortune: the evil consequences of which being by good and wise men esteemed fatal to Italy, induced the Count De Piti∣gliano,
and the Cardinals of Angioio and Sforza to intercede and medi∣ate between the two parties for a Peace: but the Pope who conceived that he had reason and justice on his side, refused to condescend unto equal terms, and being farther encouraged by the aids given him from Charles the Eighth King of France, of 300 thousand Crowns in mony, with the recruits of 4000 Savoyards, and 3000 Switzers, he became inflexible, and for some time continued resolute to maintain the War: but at length considering the fatal conquences of it, and how ill the ef∣fusion of blood becomes the gentle spirit of a Prelate, he hearkened, and condescended to Articles of peace on these following conditions. That the King should pardon and forgive all the Lords, and Barons who were his Subjects, whether they belonged to the City of Aquila, or to any other Town, or part of his Dominions who had fled to the Pope for his succour and protection. That he should not farther pretend to any Col∣lation of Benefices. That he should pay all the arrears of his Tribute at a convenient time appointed. That Verginio Orsino should humble himself at the foot-stool of the Pope, and demand his pardon. All which Articles being agreed, the King of Spain, Lodowick Sforza, and Lorenzo de Medicis, with two Cardinals, and James Trivoltii a great Favourite of the Popes, became Guarrenties for the peace. But no sooner had the Pope disbanded his Forces. and Ferdinand freed from the apprehensions of War, but with violation of his own Faith, and in despight of the ob∣ligation of those, who were engaged for him, he refused compliance with the conditions he had agreed and concluded; for he not only imprisoned the Barons, and others, who had sided with the Pope, and four months after cut off their Heads, and confiscated their Estates, but likewise de∣nied to pay his annual Tribute to the Papal Sea; covering the breach of his Faith,Phil. Comin. Onuf. and the persidiousness of these acts with vain and frivolous pretences. The Pope greatly incensed with extreme indignation against this dishonest treachery, in which the Guarantees for the late Peace ac∣knowledged him to have reason, disposed his affairs for a second War; in order whereunto he in the first place Excommunicated Ferdinand, absol∣ved his Subjects from their Obedience, and deprived him of his Kingdom; but because this would prove insignificant, unless it were made good by some more effectual means, he sent to the King of France for the aid he had formerly promised, and having raised a considerable Army of Swit∣zers and Italians under the command of Francis Cibo; and having also the countenance of all Italy in detestation of this false treatment: Fer∣dinand being terrified therewith, inclined to a Peace, and really to accept with unfeigned devotion, and obedience, such conditions as the Pope should be pleased to impose upon him; and in farther pursuance of this Peace, the Ʋrsini were induced to prostrate themselves at the feet of the Pope; in which humble posture he generously granted to them all those Petitions and requests which they submissively offered to him; and at the same time bestowed the like favours in the pardon of Cardinal Bal∣dri a Frenchman, who had treacherously conspired against him. And far∣ther to evidence his natural inclinations to Peace, he reconciled the en∣mities of Colonna and Ʋrsini, two potent Families in Rome, who by their Dissentions and Wars had miserably spoiled and vexed each other. This Peace produced a League between the King, the Venetians, the Florentines, and the Duke of Milan, and in short begat a general peace in all Chri∣stendom,
which continued for the space of five years; during which time, great preparations were made against the Turk, which had in all probability happily succeeded, had not that honorable and glorious de∣sign been unhappily interrupted by the Death of this Pope. Yet some time before his decease, being in the year 1488. he had the honor to have Zizimé the Brother of Bajazet Emperor of the Turks to be his Prisoner, being taken, and sent to Rome by the Knights of Rhodes. And tho this Sultan was splendidly received, and treated, yet he could not be induced either by fair persuasions, or ruder menaces to prostrate, or humble himself at the feet of the Pope; wherefore being remanded back to safe custody in the Vatican, he lived there for all the time of this Pope, during which his Brother Bajazet Emperor of the Turks sent yearly to Rome forty thousand Crowns for his maintainance: and to render his Brother more acceptable there, he sent with an honorable Embassy the Key of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem to the Pope, together with the Lance with which Longinus pierced the side of our Saviour; both which he received with great humility and devotion, lodging the Key in a Chap∣pel in S. Peter's Church, where it is to be seen unto this day: and laid the Spear in a Marble Chest, which he purposely erected in a Chappel within the Church of the Vatican. In the time of this Pope Innocent, there was but one Creation of Cardinals, at which eight only were made; amongst which Laurence Cibo the natural Son of his Brother was one. In the year 1489. he permitted, that the Mass might be celebrated in Norway without Wine, because that the Country being cold, and the distance far, the Wine was either frozen, or turned Vinegar before it could be brought thither. This Pope as we have said,Du Cheshè. was generous and magnificent in all his actions, performing many things at his own cost and charge for the honor and adornment of the City. For he built a house of pleasure and delight for recreation of the Popes, called the Belvedere; he re-built the Deanry of S. Narcis from the foundation; he made ma∣ny Galleries in the Palace of the Vatican; he erected a Fountain in the front before S. Peters, and adorned many other places in the City; and having disposed all things in order to the quiet and happiness of Italy, he ended his days, and died the 25th. day of July, 1491. being about the age of sixty years. He was buried in a Sepulchre of Brass, near the Al∣tar which he had lately made for the Spear. Lionel Bishop of Concordia Preached his Funeral Sermon, wherein he recounted the most memora∣ble passages of his life. Over his Tomb this Epitaph was Engraven, Ego autem in Innocentia mea Ingressus sum Redime me Domine, & miserere mei.
ALEXANDER VI. INNOCENT being deceased, Roderigo who was made a Bishop, and afterwards Cardinal Albano; and Porto by Sixtus, was ele∣cted Pope, calling himself by the name of Alexander the Sixth, and fate in the Papal Chair for the space of eleven years and upwards: he was born at Valentia in Spain, his Father was Geoffery Lenzola, a rich and noble Gentleman, and his Mother was the Sister of Pope Calixtus the Fourth; by the favour of which Uncle he was designed from his Youth to be created Arch-Bishop of Valentia, and in the year 1456. was actually made Cardinal-Deacon of S. Nicolas, and Chancellor of the Roman Church; and was afterwards by Sixtus the Fourth employed up∣on many important Affairs, and Embassies for the Church; and parti∣cularly to intercede and mediate in the differences between the Kings of Spain, Portugal, and Aragon, who had all pretensions to the Kingdom of Castile; by which Offices and places, having gained great honor and in∣terest, he was by the suffrages of two and twenty Cardinals elected Pope. But several Writers, such as Guicciardin Onufrius and others, brand the Election of this Pope with the infamy of Simonaical corruption; for re∣porting that most of the Cardinals were bribed by sums of Mony, and promises of Offices, and high Preferments to give their Votes in his fa∣vour, those who were most active, and had taken the greatest Bribes for this promotion, were the Cardinal Ascagnus, who in reward had the Of∣fice of Chancellor conferred upon him, likewise Julian Bishop of Ostia, and Raphael Riario, who were busie, and talking Cardinals. But Alex∣ander who was an excellent dissembler until his turn was served, and who loved the Treason, but not the Traytor, or the Office, but not the cor∣rupt ways to it, hated this abominable practice in his heart; so that by violent deaths, by Banishment, and other various calamities, he found means to bring all those unto ruine, who had thus basely conspired to his promotion; and particularly Baptista Orsino (to whom was given the magnificent Palace of Borgia, and John Michael, on whom was confer∣red the Bishoprick of Porto, with all the Wardrobe of the Pope, which was of inestimable value) were both put to death; one being publickly executed in the Castle, and the other secretly made away by Poison. This sort of treatment towards his Friends induced Guichardin in his Hi∣story of this Pope to represent him under the notion of a person without Truth, without Faith, or Religion, of an unsatiable avarice, and insu∣perable pride, and passionate in the raising and advancement of his Ba∣stard Sons (which were many in number) to places of dignity and pro∣fit; the which character is farther confirmed by all the Italian Poets and Historians of those times, who ascribe strange and monstrous cruelties to him, making him the Author of all those Calamities and Miseries which in his Reign over-whelmed Italy, rendering its condition slavish, and contemptible to Forein Nations. Howsoever his temper was not so alto∣gether flagitious, but that it admitted of some alloy, and mixture of
Virtue: for he with great care attended to the government of the City, and regulation of the Courts of Justice; to which end he ordained Vi∣sitors of the Prisons to examin, and know the causes for which persons were imprisoned, and created four Judges for the tryal of all criminal matters, so that Justice was the more punctually executed, than in for∣mer times. But not to remain too long on his personal qualities, let us proceed to the important affairs of his Government. And in the first place, being created Pope, he was according to custom saluted, and congratulated in his Papal Dignity by the Ambassadors of Kings, Princes, and States, whom he respectively treated with affabili∣ty and respect; persuading them to peace and concord amongst them∣selves; and by the virtue of such union and confederacy to joyn, and em∣ploy their Arms against the Turk, who was the common Enemy of Chri∣stendom. And at that time being about the year 1493. in honor to Ferdinand King of Spain, he gave him the Title of Catholick, in ac∣knowledgment and memory of the many Victories he had obtained over the Moors; and gave him a Title to all those Lands and Countries in America, which were or should be discovered there. And thus as he was civil to Kings, so he was kind and more affectionate to his Family. For in the first Consistory that he held, he created John Borgia his Sisters Son Arch-Bishop of Montreat, Valentine Borgia his Natural Son Arch-Bishop of Valentia. At this time the Emperor Frederick died, having reigned for the space of 54 years. Likewise Ferdinand King of Naples being dead, he sent his Legat with power to confirm his Son Alonso in the succession to the Kingdom; and having contracted an Alliance with him, he ordered him to be Crowned, and invested with the Regali∣ties. At this time being the year 1494. Charles the Eighth, King of France, who was of a martial and ambitious spirit laid claim to the Kingdom of Naples, by virtue of the last Will and Testament of René Duke of Anjou and Lorain; and being encouraged in that enterprise by Lodowick Sforza, the Guardian of John Galeas Duke of Milan, he entered Italy with a pu∣issant Army, consisting of 25000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, with a great train of Artillery. The Pope apprehending the great ruine and damage which this incursion of the French would bring upon Italy, entered into League with the City of Florence, and both agreed and resolved to leavy Soldiers, and joyn in a defensive League with the King of Naples, but the Venetians and Ferdinand King of Spain who were likewise moved to enter into the League, did positively refuse to accept the proposals, be∣ing more inclinable to be unconcerned and Spectators than Actors in that hazardous War. Charles being entered into Italy, marched victorious thro Lombardy, and having overthrown the Army of Florence, soon af∣ter became Master Of the City it self: thence he proceeded towards Rome, where he entered on the first of January 1494. without any oppo∣sition; it being agreed that in case the Romans would peaceably open their Gates, and give free admission to the French, that no hurt, or vio∣lence should be offered by them to the Inhabitants, but that on the contrary, if they made opposition, they would put all into flame and confusion. The Romans therefore finding themselves in no condi∣tion to resist, readily gave a reception to the French, affording them plenty of Victuals, and Provisions; and they on the other side performed their
conditions, severely punishing such as were guilty of Riots, or Tumults. The Pope at first being affrighted with the approach of the French, fled for security into the Castle, but at length finding all things quiet and secure from the outrages of their Ghests, adventured abroad, and much against his will and inclinations entered into a League with them. But Charles not much confiding in the Faith which the Pope had given, requi∣red for better security thereof, and by way of Hostage, that Cesar Bor∣gia who was called Cardinal Valentino, should under colour of being the Popes Legat, accompany him in the War, together with Zizimé the Bro∣ther of the Grand Seignior, on pretence, that having overcome the King∣dom of Naples, he would make use of him in the War, which he inten∣ded to make upon Constantinople; but he died soon after of a Bloody-Flux at Capua. Upon approach of the French near to Naples, King Alonso be∣ing conscious of his ill government, whereby he had contracted the ha∣tred of his people, and despairing of the success of his Affairs, surren∣dred up the Kingdom into the hands of his Son Ferdinand, and with great fear and ignominy embarked himself with the best part of his wealth, and fled into the Island of Sicily; and soon after Ferdinand considering the weakness of his Force, and the inequality of the Match between him and the French, betook himself also to the Island of Ischia. Charles fol∣lowing the favourable course of his good, and victorious fortune, with great expedition made himself Master of all the Kingdom of Naples: the which success giving an alarm to all the Christian Princes, a general confederacy was agreed amongst them, for intercepting the French on their return out of Italy; so that the Pope, the Emperor Maximilian, the King of Spain, Lodowick Sforza Duke of Milan, and the Venetians, uni∣ting their Forces for the common safety of Italy, composed an Army of forty thousand men. Notwithstanding which Charles boldly returned out of Italy, and with great difficulty having passed the Apenine Mountains with sixteen pieces of weighty Cannons which were drawn over by 300 Swissers, and having by the greater error and neglect of the Enemy pas∣sed all the narrow and inaccessible ways about Zerzana and Petra Santa at length descended into the Plains of Lombardy. The Confederate Ar∣my to hinder the Kings farther passage had encamped themselves at Fornovo, near Tarro, and at no far distance from Parma; and there both Armies were engaged. The French did not consist of more than 9000 men, and the Confederates of 40000; and yet the French had the ad∣vantage, and won the Field: and as Philip de Comines saith, the King en∣tered triumphant into Asti; tho Panvinio and other Italian Writers relate the Battel to have been bloody, but the success and advantage doubtful. Howsoever the news hereof being reported at Naples to the great advan∣tage of the Confederates, King Ferdinand re-assumed his courage, and adventured out of his retirement at Ischia; and then the French Forces being grown weak, and all Recruits failing them, he recovered his King∣dom with the assistance of the Catholick King: Not long after Charles the Eighth died, and Lewis the Twelfth Duke of Orleans succeeded in his Throne: Likewise Ferdinand dying without Issue, Frederick his Uncle became his Successor. Lewis XII. continuing his claim by right of Inheritance to the King∣dom of Naples, and also to the Dukedom of Milan in right of his Grandmother the Daughter of John Galeazzo, entered into a League
with the Pope, which was fatal to Italy; and with them the King of Spain, the Florentines, and the Venetians, were all combined against Duke Lodowick Sforza, and King Frederick, on conditions that Lewis having conquered Milan, should cause Cremona to be restored to the Venetians; and that Caesar Borgia who was the Popes bastard Son, having renoun∣ced his Cardinals Cap, and taking Carlotta de Alebretto, Daughter to the King of Navar, and Kinswoman to the King of France for his Wife, should be invested in Romagna, Marca, and Ʋmbria, and that the Kings of Spain, and France should equally divide the Kingdom of Naples be∣tween them. Lewis entering Italy with a powerful Army, drove out the Duke of Milan from his State, and shortly after took Cardinal Ascanius Prisoner, whom he sent into France, where he died in a short time afterwards. The Venetians by virtue of the League had Cremona consigned to them; and all matters succeeded so prosperously for Lewis in Italy, that Frederick King of Naples being thereby wholly dis-anima∣ted, cast himself with all humble confidence into the arms of King Lewis, who treated him basely, and with the highest indignities imaginable. In the mean time the French and the Spaniards being to divide the spoils of the Kingdom, such differences arose betwixt them, as being only to be decided by the Sword, the French were all cut in pieces by the valor of Gonsalvo a brave Captain, by which means that Kingdom fell into the hands of Spain. In the mean time Pope Alexander being attentive to nothing more than to raise and enrich his Bastard Children, encouraged and countenanced his Son Caesar Borgia in the grievous oppressions he laid, on all the Ba∣rons of the Ecclesiastical State; for he designing and aspiring to make himself sole, and absolute master of it, made the Family of the Orsini the most remarkable examples of his insolent indignities, spoiling and harassing their Country for the space of a whole Summer. As yet Cae∣sar Borgia had not renounced his Cardinals Cap, and therefore continu∣ing still under the notion of a Prelate, Guido Ʋbaldo di Ʋrbino, and John Borgia, an other of the Popes Bastards, were made Generals of the Ecclesiastical Army, who over-running several Countries, reduced Bra∣ciano by Siege, and proceeded every where victoriously, until Charles the natural Son of Virginio Orsino, joyning Battel with them, routed their Army, and took the Duke of Ʋrbin prisoner. After this a Peace being concluded with the Orsini, and the Pope perceiving that his busi∣ness did not thrive well by War, he endeavoured to advance his designs by fortifying the interest of his Family with great, and potent alliances; and in the first place he gave his Daughter Lucretia in Marriage to John Sforza, Lord of Pesaro, breaking his promise to a certain Nobleman of Spain to whom he had formerly contracted her; then he took her from Sforza, and gave her to Lewis of Aragon, Bastard Son of Alfonso King of Naples; who being killed, she was given to Alfonso da Esté Duke of Fer∣rara, with whom afterwards she ended her days. This Pope had also three Sons, Geoffery the youngest was made Prince of Squillaci, Caesar who was the second was Cardinal, and John the el∣dest was sent into Spain, and there made Duke of Candia; but he ram∣bling one night in his pleasures about the Streets of Rome, was by the treachery of his Brother the Cardinal assassinated, and his body thrown into the ybar; which kindness he did him after they had supped the
same night together at the Table of their Mother Vanoccia; with which horrid act the Pope was not so much displeased, as he was terrified, fear∣ing that upon the least displeasure the spirit of this miscreant would be provoked to add parricide to the murder of his Brother. After this he made little account of his Scarlet, or degree of Cardinal; but turning his thoughts wholly to War, he was made General of the Popes Army, and uniting his Forces with the French, and joyning with their interest, he became master of a considerable Principality in Italy: for having expel∣led Sforza from Milan, and imprisoned the Chiefs of that Family, with assistance of Lewis the 12th, he with great cruelty and blood possessed himself of all the Cities of Romagna, (Bologna only excepted) banishing, or putting to death all the ancient Lords and persons of quality belong∣ing to it. He also took Imola and Forli, banishing all the Children of Riario, to whom the Inheritance belonged, only their Mother Catherina he took prisoner, and carried her in triumph with him to Rome. Next he took Sinigaglia by force of Arms, and by treachery surprized the State of Ʋrbin; for being with all his Army at Cagli where he was kindly re∣ceived, upon the signal given, he seized that City, and marched imme∣diately with the same design to Ʋrbin. Guido Ʋbaldo da Feltro, Prince of that State, surprized with this suddain attempt, and fearing to fall into the cruel hands of this Tyrant, left the City, and with some few of his domesticks saved himself by flight. Then this Borgia turned his Arms upon Camerino, which he took, and put many of the ancient Lords, and Barons of it to death: with the like cruelty and wickedness he treated all the Lords, and Barons about the parts of Rome, particular∣ly that noble Family of the Gaetani, which were Lords of ancient posses∣sions in the Volsci; of which he put James the Son of Honorato Gaetano to death, then Protonotary of Rome: He also ordered that Cola Gaetano a youth, who was the only Son, and hopes of the Family, should be re∣moved out of the world. He in the next place by assistance of the French, attacked the Family of Colonna, and seized on all their State, forcing them to fly into Puglia, and Sicily for refuge. His next and last work was to subdue the Orsini, but they having always been constant and firm friends to the Pope in all times, and against all Factions, he wanted some colourable pretence to fix a quarrel on them: but at length the occasion which he sought, the Orsini themselves administred; for they growing jea∣lous of the successes, and fortune of Borgia, and fearing lest his insati∣able avarice should transport him also to an appetite of devouring them, they considered it prudence to provide in time against a danger so appa∣rent, and imminent as this: wherefore consulting with others, who were possessed with the like apprehensions and fears; such as Bentivolio Lord of Bologna, Paolo Baglione the Usurper of Perugia, Vitellozzo Vitelli, Lord of the City of Castello, Liverotto Lord Fermo, Pandolfo Petrucci of Siena; they appointed a Council to be held at Perugia, where they agreed upon an alliance, and confederacy together against Borgia; and accordingly setting out an Army into the Field, they took Ʋrbino, and Camerino, and overthrew the Forces of Borgia which came to relieve them, and thence made an incursion into all the Country of Romagna. The Pope being greatly troubled, and concerned for these losses, and turn of fortune, used all his subtilty and artifices to reconcile these dif∣ferences; and his Authority being very prevalent, he persuaded the Orsini
into a Peace, and into an assurance of all security; in short therefore with promises, and protestations, and conditions of great advantage, he deluded them into a Peace, and into Articles which he never designed to perform. With these feigned appearances of reconciliation, the Towns taken from Borgia were surrendred to him; and Paul, and Francis Or∣sino Duke of Gravina, Vitellozzo, and Liverotto then together at Sene∣gaglia went to attend Borgia at Imola, and to receive his Pardon. Bor∣gia went forth to meet them; and gave them a most courteous reception; and conducting them into an inward Room in his Palace; as if he had had something of importance to communicate to them, he on a sudden encompassed them with his Gascon Soldiers, and strangled Vitellozzo, and Liverotto, and in a short time after bestowed the like fare on the two Orsini; all which proceeded from the credulity and easiness of Paul Orsino, who against the Opinion, and Protests, and Dissuasions of Vitellozzo, being corrupted, as was supposed, by Mony, condescended to the terms of Borgia, and to trust, and believe his Faith, who was a known Tyrant, bloody, and false, and his life blackned already with a thousand instances of Murder and Perjury: hereupon Perugia, and the City of Castello surrendred themselves into the hands of the Pope, the Families of Baglio and Vitello being banished thence. This success was followed by the imprisonment of Baptista Orsini the Cardinal, who was by order of the Pope committed to the Castle of S. Angelo: in like man∣ner Renold the Bishop of Florence, and James de Sancta Croce being of the same Family, were likewise imprisoned; James howsoever had liberty to go out upon Bail, but the Cardinal was in a few days poisoned in the Prison. In vigor of this success Borgia, now called Duke Valentino, prosecuted the other Confederates with an Army of 15000 men, for fear of which Pandolfo Petrucci leaving his Town of Siena, fled to Lucca for succor and refuge, whilst Borgia became Master of all the Castles, and Fortresses belonging to the Family of the Orsini. Thus did he continue his Wars with such great expence, and with a magnificent Equipage agreeable thereunto, that the Coffers of the Pope became exhausted, the Reve∣nue of the Church, not being able to provide for such vast designs. To supply which, this Pope Alexander renewed the ancient form of eighty Writers of Breviates, according to the custom of former Popes, every of which Offices were sold for 750 Crowns of Gold: he sold also all other Offices at excessive rates, and created Cardinals for Mony: he also entertained the Marrani at Rome, whom the King of Spain had Ba∣nished from his Countries, preferring the profit which he squeezed from them, more than all the favour and interest of that King. In fine, he omitted no ways and arts, honest, or dishonest, to raise Mony, setting every thing to sale. that was vendible, or could yield a benefit: But all the Revenue of the Church, and these contrivances, and artifices for raising Mony, not being able to answer the expences of the War, and the immense luxury and prodigality of Duke Valentino, it was resolved by the Pope to poison all the rich Cardinals, and Prelates at Rome, and then seizing their Revenue and Estates, to sacrifice their Riches to the lust and insatiable avarice of his wicked Son. The Plot being thus laid, the rich Cardinals and Prelates were invited to a Banquet in the Garden of Belvedere, where a Table was spread near a Fountain, and
Bottles of excellent Wine provided; those for the Pope and his Son were set apart, from those into which the poison was infused, being designed for the Guests only: But here let us observe the just Judgment of God, for the Butler and Cup-bearer mistaking the Bottle, gave the poisonous Dose to the Pope, and his Son, and to Cardinal Adrian their sole Con∣fident, instead of that which was to have been given to the Cardinals, and his other Guests. The Pope being aged at the years of 72, and not able to struggle with the violence of the Poison, died at the Vatican in the month of August, 1503. and was buried obscurely in a Chappel of St. Peter's Church, under a poor and ignoble Monument: but Borgia applying present Antidotes, and being a man of a young and robust na∣ture, was able for some time to struggle with the prevailing force of the Poison; howsoever the malignity of it so crept into his Vitals, and affe∣cted his Blood, that his Body growing macerate and weak, and being ill disposed, and faint, he was not able to attend to his Affairs, and the discipline of his Army; for want of which, and the encouragement of his presence, the Soldiers forsook their Colours, as being ashamed of the detestable Villany of their Commander, and therewith his whole Army disbanded, leaving him naked, and exposed to the displeasure of two Popes, which in a short time afterwards appeared, that were his mortal enemies. After which, all the Cities and Fortresses which he had by force, and rapine possessed, returned again to their ancient Masters; the Families of Colonna, Ʋrsini, Savelli, Vitelli, and Barons of Rome, reassumed their former right; and likewise the Lords of the Signories of Ʋrbin, Pesaro, Camerin, and Senogalla were again re-instated into the Dominions of their Paternal Inheritance; so that every Bird taking his own Feather, left him a poor Caesar, being devested of all his Power, and ill acquired Riches. Notwithstanding the wickedness of this Pope Alexander the Sixth, there are those who will allow him some grains of Virtue. They say that he was of a ready Wit, of a great Memory, and profound Judg∣ment; and of that persuasive Eloquence, that it was impossible almost to refute his Arguments, or deny his Demands. He treated the Cardinals with great affability, and respect, and gave high demonstrations of his care, and concernment for the Christian Cause. He knew so well how to accommodate himself to the humor of the French, that he reconciled their Party to him in a firm and strict Alliance; and so well how to go∣vern, that amidst all the violences, and slaughters which he caused to be committed in Rome, no tumult, or insurrection of the People ensu∣ed thereupon. He always went late to bed, contenting himself with little sleep, and a moderate diet: he was a great lover of Learning, and men of Literature; so that tho he was covetous, yet he was said, never to have detained the allowance to Doctors, nor pay of the Soldiery, nor wages of Workmen. Howsoever his Vices were so enormous, that these mean Commenda∣tions could bear no ballance with them. For he was a man of no Faith, nor Honor; he was Cruel, Covetous, and insatiable of Riches. At any time of vacation from business, he gave himself up wholly to delights, and pleasures, especially to Women, whom he loved in excess; but the Mistriss of his Affection was the fair Vanoccia, a Roman Lady, whom in the time of his private fortune and condition he kept and owned as a
lawful Wife. He was a great lover of Plays and Comedies, and would be always a spectator of Shows, and pleasant divertisements. In his time he created 43 Cardinals, of which 18 were Spaniards. In the year 1500. he celebrated the Jubilee according to ancient customs, giving Bulls, and Indulgences, for Sins, to all those who personally visited the Church of Rome, and to such also who being hindered by their occasions were made partakers of his bountiful remissions. Thus he who could so easily pardon the sins of others, must expect the final Sentence of him, who is the just Judg, and renders to every one according to his demerit. PIƲS III. ALEXANDER the Sixth being now deceased, the Duke Valentino seized on all his Plate, and Jewels, and whatsoever was of value, and fortified himself in the Vatican, and Ca∣stle of S. Angelo with 12000 men, supposing that he might be able by such a force to over-awe the Cardinals in their Suffrages, and force them to elect such a person, as was most acceptable to himself. The Cardinals, to avoid the awe of such a force, assembled themselves in the Minerva, which is a Convent in Rome; but that place also was presently surrounded by a Band of Soldiers commanded by one Captain Coreglia, by order of Borgia, who himself at that time lay sick in bed. The news of this restraint on the Cardinals, put all Rome into an alarm, and great confusion, so that the Citizens shut their Shops, chained up their Streets, and took Arms in their hands; all things seeming in that fear, and dread, as if Hannibal had been at the Gates of the City; so that Coreglia find∣ing himself in some danger, gave way to the present necessity, and set∣ting fire to the Palace of the Orsini, retired without doing other damage. In the mean time the Cardinals having gathered a force of 4000 Foot, resolved contrary to custom, to suspend the Election, until such time as the Cardinals resident in foreign parts beyond the Alps could convene in some other place, where they might be more secure, and free in their Voices. Prospero Colonna coming then to Rome with Fabius Orsino (the Son of him whom Borgia had put to death) were by order of the Car∣dinals sent to Borgia, to intreat him, that he would be pleased to remain quiet, and suffer the Election to proceed free, and without disturbance. The like request also the Embassadors of France, and Spain made to him; with which suffering himself to be persuaded, he withdrew his force from Rome, and departed thence in a Horse-litter, being in a weak state, and condition of health: Howsoever his own Soldiers kept the Castle, tho the Governor of it at the instance of Cardinal Bernardino Carvagi∣ale, promised to act every thing by the order, and direction of the Col∣lege. In this manner the Vatican being cleared, the Cardinals employ∣ed themselves nine days in performing the solemn Obsequies of the Pope, during which time the French Army was persuaded also to quit the Town at the instance of the Cardinal of Rouen, who had great interest with that Party. So that all things being left free, without appearance of any Commotion or Disorders during the Election; the Cardinals entered
into the Conclave to the number of 38,Guicciardin, l. 6. where the disagreement which at other times kept things in delay, was now the cause, that matters were put to a speedy issue, and a new Pope created in a few days. Car∣dinal Amboise the Arch-Bishop of Rouen being supported by the interest of France, and the power of Borgia seemed to stand the fairest of any for the Election: but the French Forces being withdrawn to engage the Spaniards in the Campagna of Rome; the greatest, tho not the best num∣ber of the Cardinals agreed in the Election, and on the 21. day of Septem∣ber, 1503. chose Francis Piccolomini Cardinal of Siena for their Pope, who to renew the memory of Pius the Second his Uncle, took upon him the name of Pius the Third, and was solemnly Crowned on the 8th. of October following; the Sea having been vacant six months, and three days. Cesar Borgia who had during this Election remained with his Army at Nepe, so soon as he received intelligence, that the Pope was Created, returned to Rome, attended with 150 men at Arms, with the like num∣ber of Horsemen, and 800 Foot; and having paid his Reverence, and Obeysance to the Pope, he returned his thanks to the College of Cardi∣nals, for having Elected a person so wise, so religious, and good, and so worthy of the Papal Chair. Borgia having performed this Ceremony, took up his Lodgings in the Vatican, where the Ʋrsini, thirsty of Re∣venge, assaulted him with armed force, and he as valiantly defending himself, many were killed on both sides: and at length Borgia by order of the Pope was for his better security sent to the Castle of S. Angelo, whence without license from the Pope, he had not liberty to go abroad, all his people forsaking him, and lying where their fear or fortune led them. These troubles to a person aged and sick as this Pope was, hastned the accomplishment of his days, so that he expired his last breath on the 18th. of October, 1503. being the 26th. day after his Election; not without some suspicion of Poison: for having a sore Leg, it was ima∣gined that by the suggestion and contrivance of Pandolfo Petrucci the Tyrant of Siena, some Poison being injected to the Wound, he was thereby greatly afflicted, and more speedily brought to his end, being aged 74 years, 5 months, and 10 days. He was afterwards buried in the Chappel of S. Andrew, belonging to S. Peter's Church, under a fair Monument of Marble, near to the Sepulchre of his Uncle. After which the Sea was vacant 14 days only. JƲLIƲS II. THE Funeral Obsequies of Pope Pius being performed, the very first night that the Cardinals entered into the Conclave, being the 9th. day of October, Julian de la Rovere, Bishop Cardinal of Ostia was Elected Pope, with the common consent of 37 Suffrages, all of them so unanimously concurring together, that before his choice, all reports fixed and concentred upon him; and afterwards he gave himself the name of Julius the Second. He was born in Savona, within the Do∣minions of Genoua, his Fathers name was Raphael, the Brother of Sixtus
the Fourth, whose Pedigree we have already mentioned; he had two Brothers, Bartholomew who was a Frier of the Order of S. Francis, Bi∣shop of Ferrara, and Patriarch of Antioch; and John who was Prefect of Rome, and Duke of Sora, and Senegaglia, and he himself from Bishop of Carpentras, was at the same time with Peter Riario created Cardinal of S. Peter ad Vincula, by the said Sixtus the Fourth. Having obtained this Dignity, Julius appeared extremely grave and modest in all his actions, so that he acquired the good esteem and opinion of all persons, obliging all those with whom he treated by his courteous and affable be∣haviour: he afterwards obtained the Title of Bishop of Albano, then of Sabino, and great Penitentiary, and lastly of Bishop of Ostia, Velletri, and Legate at Avignon. In the time of Innocent the Eighth he had gained great power, and interest in the Court of Rome: but in the time of Alexander the Sixth, he was forced to give way to other Favorites, and the difficulties of those times, and retire into France, where he remained for the space of ten years: At length (as we have said) having amassed great wealth, he was almost by the common agreement of the whole Conclave promoted to the Papal Chair, not without the astonishment, and displeasure of many, who being acquainted with his fierce and im∣petuous Spirit, did admire (as Guicciardin saith) how a man known to be impatient of rest, and tranquillity,Lib. 6. who had consumed his Youth in continual Travels, offended many by necessity, and exercised hatred, and hostility, could so speedily operate on so many dissenting Spirits, and cause them to conspire in an unanimous agreement for his promotion. But on the contrary, it will not seem so strange, if it be considered, that he had been a long time Cardinal, and by degrees gained such interest, and authority in the Court of Rome, that he was stiled the principal Defender of the Ecclesiastical Dignity, and Authority, that he was mag∣nificent in his Buildings, generous in his benefits, and so punctual to his word, that Pope Alexander, who was otherwise his mortal enemy, would yet do him that right, as to confess him faithful, and just to the perfor∣mance of his promises: but yet this good quality which he was so care∣ful to preserve in his private condition; he made no scruple, or consci∣ence to violate that he might become Pope: for the obtaining of which, he made such immoderate promises to Cardinals, Princes, and Barons, that he well knew the whole Revenue, and Price of the Papal Sea, if set to sale, had not been able to have satisfied; and therefore 'tis not dif∣ficult to imagin, how the promises of a person, not used to beguile, should procure a confidence in the minds of the most scrupulous, and wary persons. Nor were the Cardinals only possessed with these expe∣ctations; but Cesar Borgia himself conceived hopes upon his promises of being confirmed General of the Armies of the Church, and of a Marri∣age between his Daughter, and the Popes Nephew called Francis Maria de la Rovere, the Prefect of Rome. But he soon discovered the vanity of these hopes; for Julius being Crowned the 26th. of November,1503. and set∣led in the Papal Chair, would afford him no other grace, or favor, than his liberty, and freedom from imprisonment, upon condition that he should deliver up into the Power of the Church, the Fortresses of Ce∣sena and Forli, which were the retirements of his impious Guards. Bor∣gia who had deserved a thousand deaths, being in this manner set at li∣berty from the Castle of S. Angelo, embarked at Ostia in a Boat for
Naples, where so soon as he arrived, he was seized by the great Captain Gonsalvo, by order from the Catholick King, and being thence transpor∣ted into Spain, he made his escape, and fled to John King of Navarre, where in a certain fray, he was cut in pieces by the Cantabrians, who are a people that border upon Asturias. Julius being thus rid of this Pest of mankind, by whom all Italy was embroiled, and several dominions dismembred from the Church; he en∣deavoured to recover all back again; for being a true Defender of the Ecclesiastical Possessions, and Rights, he would compound for nothing, but rather amplifie, than retrench the Dominions of the Church. The first enterprise therefore that he undertook, was to drive out and expel John Bentivoglio, his old inveterate enemy, who had unjustly usur∣ped a power over the City of Bologna; forcing him with his Wife, and Children to remain banished in Bassetto, a Country belonging to the Dominions of Parma, and contentedly to consent to the destruction of his Palace, which was a fair and noble structure. His next design was against the Venetians, for recovery of Arimino and Ravenna with the Territories thereunto belonging, by force of Arms from the Venetians; and to that end entered into a League with Maximilian the Emperor, the Kings of France, of Spain, with the Dukes of Ferrara, and Mantoua, all conspiring to the total ruin and subversion of the Vene∣tian State; the which League was agreed, and signed at Cambray, a City of Flanders. Moreover the quarrel between the Pope and the Ve∣netians was augmented by the dispute they had for the City of Faenza, which the Pope laid claim unto, as having always been a part of the Ecclesiastical State; the which he resolved to wrest from their hands by the Spiritual, as well as by Temporal Arms, having thundered out his Excommunications both against the Senate, and People. On the con∣trary the Venetians pleaded, that the City of Faenza was no part of the Possessions of the Church, in regard that the Pope, and Cardinals had in a full Consistory amply transferrred the Rights and Jurisdiction thereof to Cesar Borgia formerly Duke Valentino. That before that Grant, the Popes had never possessed Faenza, but from time to time had given it to new Vicars,Guicciardin, lib. 6. without acknowledging other superiority, than the Tri∣bute, which they offered to pay readily, when it should be required. These Arguments were seconded by the Venetians, with an Army, which appearing before Faenza, and the Batteries began, the City yielded it self into the hands of the Enemy; they might with like facility have ta∣ken Imola and Furli; but not to excite the indignation of the Pope too far, they abstained from farther proceedings, being masters already of Faenza and Rimini in Romagna, with their Countries Montefiora, S. Arch∣angeo, Verruca, Gattere, Savignano, and Meldole, with the Haven and Country of Cesena, and in the Territory of Immola, of Tossignana, So∣larvola, and Montfattagla. Notwithstanding this success, and force of the Venetians, the storm and power of so many potent Confederates raised against them, was too furious, and a match unequal for them to contend with. The first begin∣ning to so great a War was made the 15th. of April,1509. when Monsieur de Chaumont with 3000 Horse, passed the Ford of Adda, and joyning af∣terwards with the other Confederates, gave Battel to Alviano, the Gene∣ral of the Venetian Forces: the Fight was continued, and maintained
with great bravery, and resolution on both sides; but at length the Ve∣netians being overwhelmed with the number of their Enemies, and de∣prived of strength rather than courage, without turning their backs to the Enemy, they remained almost all dead upon the place. After this Defeat, which happened on the 14th. of May, 1509. at Guiaradadda,Guicciardin, lib. 8. the Emperor Maximilian took possession of Verona, Vicenza, Padoua, and Trivigiano. The King of France, of Bergamo, Brescia, Cremona, and Crema. The King of Spain of Trani, Monopoli, and Barletta in Puglia. The Pope had Ravenna, Arimino, and all Romagna delivered to him. The Duke of Ferrara was made master of Rovigo, and the Duke of Mantoua was re-possessed of Asola. So that this Republick, which had not long since been so renowned, and famed for greatness thro the whole world, was now confined within those Fortifications which the Sea had made them, and wherein their Commonwealth took its first beginning. When the news of so great a Calamity arrived at Venice, great was the con∣sternation of the Counsellors, and the cries and lamentations of the Ci∣tizens, placing before their eyes nothing but the utter ruin and destru∣ction of their Government, and Country, whose glory, and puissance a few months before had been such, that they promised to themselves no less than the Empire of all Italy. But now being reduced to a low, and despang condition, they resolved to cast themselves at the feet of the Pope, hmbly supplicating his Pardon, and Mercy; and that he would be pleased as a tender Father to receive them with pious compassion into his Arms, and Protection. And now Julius having gained all the Cities and Countries from them, to which he could lay any Claim or Title, began to melt with pity in consideration of their afflicted State: And therefore to comfort them again, he openly Absolved their Embassador in the Portico of S. Peter's Church, and by them in a solemn manner took off the Excommunication from the People: Then Articles of Peace were made, and a League between them: The Pope was to have a full power and authority to bestow all the Benefices, Livings, and Pre∣ferments belonging to the Church within their Dominions: and on the other side the Venetians were to have Padoua restored to them; and their Title and Dominion over the Seas confirmed, and continued. The Concession of Padoua was greatly displeasing to the Emperor Maximi∣lian; nor was the French King contented with the Reconciliation which passed between the Pope and the Venetians: so that a misunderstanding being hence created between the Pope, and these two great Princes, mat∣ters broke out into an open War. Julius that he might weaken the French Interest and Party, endeavoured to withdraw Alfonso de Esté, Duke of Ferrara from the friendship of King Lewis; but he having an∣ciently conceived an implacable hatred against the Venetians, and being bribed also by the French Mony, refused to give ear to the persuasions, or injunctions of the Pope. Julius highly enraged hereat, thundered out his Excommunications against him, warning the French King not to take part against him in defence of the Contumacy, and Rebellion of the Duke of Ferrara, who was a Feudatary, and held all his Lands and Dominions in right of the Church, and for the better, and more con∣venient prosecution of this War, he removed his Court to Bologna. But these menaces and motions not being able to divert the French King, nor Emperor from their Alliance with the Duke of Ferrara, nor their design
of utterly subverting the Venetian State; the Pope resolved to fortifie himself by a League with Spain, and having hired a great number of Switzers, he joyned the Army of the Church with that of the Venetians; and having thereby composed a Body or about 12000 Foot, under the command of Francisco Moralva, he took the City of Modena, and the City and Territory of Mirandola, and then returned triumphantly to Bologna. But this good success continued not long; for the French grow∣ing strong, did first by an Army under Monsieur Claumont, attempt the Siege of Bologna; but the Pope being recruited with the Forces of Venice, and Spain, obliged Chaumont to withdraw his Army, after the propositi∣ons of Peace negotiated by Laurence Pucci the Popes Datary of Florence, were rendred ineffectual. Afterwards the Pope recommending the de∣fence and safety of the City of Bologna to the care of the Magistrates, and exhorting them to be loyal, and faithful to the Church, departed thence for Ravenna, with intention speedily to return to Rome. After his departure Trivulse who was constituted General of the French Army in the place of Chaumont, approaching Bologna with all his Force, so ter∣rified the Cardinal of Pavia, who was left there for Legat, or Gover∣nor of the City, that he immediately fled, and surrendred all without striking of one stroke: the like panick fear possessing the Army of the Church, which lay quartered not far from thence, they all fled, leaving their Cannon, Provisions, and Baggage to the Enemy. Trivulse enter∣ing the City of Bologna, delivered it into the hands of Bentivoglio, whose Family had been ancient Lords of it; and not farther to irritate the an∣ger, and displeasure of the Pope, he proceeded no farther, but retired with his Army into the Dutchy of Milan. The Pope (as he had just cause) resenting this loss of Bologna, being the chief City next to Rome of the Ecclesiastical State, did seem inclin∣able to Articles of Peace, and Accommodation; but his actions were gui∣ded in such sort, that they seemed rather to proceed from an intention to avoid the present danger, than from any desire he had to Peace: fear, obstinacy, hatred, and disdain striving together in him. In the mean time several accusations were brought to him of Treason and Cowardise against the Cardinal of Pavia, whom the Pope so entirely loved, that no prejudicate thoughts could take place in his mind against him; and therefore when the Cardinal came to Revenna to clear himself of the aspersions which were cast upon him; the Pope seemed so little to be touched, or affected with them, that as soon as the Cardinal arrived and demanded Audience, he rejoyced much, and invited him to Dinner. But as he was going to the Popes Palace, attended with a Guard of Horsemen, the Duke of Ʋrbin bearing an ancient grudg, and hatred to him, reproaching him of Cowardise, which had caused the loss of Bo∣logna, and the slight of the Army; he with a small train rusht in amongst his Guard of Horsemen, who out of reverence and respect made him way, and with a Poniard slew the Cardinal with his own hand: who, tho for the degree he held, ought to have been treated at another rate; yet for his infinite Vices deserved a more cruel punishment. The death of the Cardinal of Pavia by the many ill circumstances of it, did more nearly affect the Pope; for the murder having been perpetrated by his Ne∣phew upon his dearest Favourite, on a Cardinal of his high Degree, and in a place so near his person, were all aggravations to increase his grief,
and shame, who had made professions to preserve and exalt the Ecclesia∣stical Dignity. The Pope not able to beat this grief, nor attemper his fury, departed the same day from Ravenna to Rome: and for the greater augmentation of his trouble, and grief, he was overtaken in his jour∣ney as he travelled, with a report, that at Bologna, Modena, and other Cities, Placarts were affixed in all publick places, denouncing and pub∣lishing a Council to be held, and celebrated on the first day of Septem∣ber following at Pisa, where the Pope himself was also cited to appear. This Council was convened by the Authority of the dissenting Cardi∣nals, such as Bernardino Carvagiale a Spaniard, who was the chief lead∣er and director of the Schism, William Brisoner a French Bishop, Francis Borgia a Spaniard, Cardinal of S. Cecilia, Renat de Brie a Frenchman, Cardinal of S. Sabina, and Frederick Sanseverino, an Italian, Car∣dinal of S. Angelo: all which agreed, and pretended that a Council might, where was apparent necessity, be judicially convoked by them: and that when a Pope was guilty of Simony, infamous and damnable in his manners, Author of so many Wars,Guicciardin, lib. 10. and notoriously incorrigible to the universal scandal of all Christendom; that then the power of convoca∣ting a Council (which was the only remedy, and redress for so many evils) did lawfully devolve unto them, especially having the Authority of the Emperor, and the consent of the most Christian King, together with the Clergy of Germany, and France concurring. The Pope enra∣ged with this bold attempt of his contumacious Cardinals, issued out his Excommunications against them, depriving them of their Hats, Honors, and Dignities Ecclesiastical: notwithstanding which, the design of the Council proceeded, and on the first day of September, the Proctors of the Cardinals being come to Pisa, did there celebrate the Acts for open∣ing of the same: with which the Pope conceiving yet higher indignation, against the Florentines, for that they had suffered the Conventicle, (for so he called it) to take beginning in their State, did declare, and publish, that whosoever did favour the Conventicle of Pisa, did stand actually Excommunicated, Interdicted, and subject to all the Penalties severely ordained by Laws against Schismaticks and Hereticks; and that accord∣ingly Lewis XII. King of France, together with the Cities of Florence, and Pisa, did stand actually Excommunicated and Interdicted. And far∣ther to countermine this Council, he published a General Council to be held at the Lateran; and to do the greatest despight imaginable to the Florentines, he constituted Cardinal John de Medices, who with his whole Family was exiled from Florence, Legate of Bologna, Romagna, and of the whole Army of the League: and to give farther diversion and trouble in France, he incited Henry VIII, King of England, and Ferdinand King of Spain to joyn in a League with him; the first to enter his Forces into Aquitaine, and the latter to wage War on the King of Navarre, who being joyned in Confederacy with Lewis, did likewise lie under the cen∣sure of Excommunication. Matters being thus disposed, he finished the Articles of a League made with the Catholick King, and the Senate of Venice, which was solemnly published on the 5th. of October in the Church of Santa Maria del Popolo, the Pope and Cardinals being pre∣sent. where it was solemnly declared, that the intent thereof was to pre∣serve the Unity of the Church, to defend her from the present Schism, to recover the City of Bologna, which was the right of the Church, to confound the Assembly at Pisa, and finally to chase, and expel the French
by force of Arms out of Italy. Lewis finding himself on all sides hard∣ly beset, hastned the Recruits of his Army, and withdrawing the For∣ces he had in Brescia, which he had lately recovered from the Venetians, and from Bologna, which composed in all a Body of about 15500 men, he marched by Ravenna, in order to joyn with the Troops of the Duke of Ferrara, who was then Confederate with France. The Popes Army, with the Allies consisting of about 13000 Foot, and 1800 men at Arms, marched towards the relief of Ravenna, which was then hardly besieged by the French Army, under the Command of Gaston de Foix a valiant, and experienced General. The Papal Army being encamped at no far distance from the French, endeavoured to avoid a Battel, which the Enemy frequently offered them; but finding that unless they did fight, Ravenna would be taken, for such wide breaches were made in the Walls by the Cannon, that the Enemy was ready to enter, and in sight of their Army to make themselves Masters of the City; to prevent which, and the disgrace of such a mischief, time was not farther to be lost, nor an Engagement to be longer declined; so that on Easter day both Armies joyned Battel: The Fight continued so very long, and bloody, that in the space of six hours, it was scarcely discernable to which side the Victory inclined. At length, by direction of the Duke of Ferrara, the Cannon being brought by a long compass about to play on the Flank of the Army, the Spaniards and Italians began to fly, lea∣ving their Baggage and the glory of the day unto the French, which they gained with so much blood, and loss of the principal Comman∣ders, and flower of their Army, that they seemed rather vanquished, than Conquerors, and to remain in a condition which afforded them no cause of triumph in their Victory. It is said that twenty thousand men were slain in this Battel, and the numbers almost equal on each side: amongst which 150 Gentlemen belonging to the Court of the French King were killed, five of the Family of Colonna, with Gaston de Foix their General. Of the Popes Army the Legate John de Medices, with several other Captains was taken Prisoner. The first news of this Defeat, and the ill consequences thereof, (which was the taking and sacking of Ravenna) was entertained at Rome with great fear and tumult; so that the Cardinals running hastily to the Pope, urged and pressed him with earnest and vehement Petitions to conclude the War, and accept such reasonable and moderate conditions, as they were assured the King of France would be ready to offer. On the other side the Embassadors of the King of Aragon, and the Senate of Venice entertained other senti∣ments, judging from the advices they had received, that matters were not reduced to such extremities, as the fears and melancholy fancies of the Cardinals suggested: for that the French Army had not gained this Victory with so little loss, but that the great effusion of blood which it had cost, had weakened their Force to a degree, as was not in a short time to be recovered; nor was the death of that valiant and wise Gene∣ral Gaston de Foix,Guicciardin, lib. 10. and other Captains slain on the French side to be re∣paired in this age. Likewise it was further urged, that the Vice-Roy was escaped with the greater part of the Cavalry, and that the Spanish Infantry were retreated from the Battel in good order, which being joyned with the Swissers, which were daily expected, there would be no necessity at present of yielding to the conditions of the French, which
in this conjuncture, would be very unequal, and dishonorable, and that therewith they must expect to receive Laws from the pride of Bernardin Carvagiale, and the insolence of Frederick de Sancta Severin, and the other dissenting and Schismatical Cardinals. Things being in this man∣ner debated before the Pope, he remained doubtful what to conclude, or resolve, fear and hope striving within him: But whilst he thus re∣mained in suspense, the course of fortune began to turn; for Monsieur de Palissa, who succeeded Gaston de Foix in the command of the French Army on a suddain departed from Romagna, and drew all his Forces in∣to the Dutchy of Milan, being alarmed by descent of the Swissers into Lombardy, leaving only 300 Lances, 300 Light-Horsemen, and 6000 Foot, with eight pieces of Artillery behind, under command of the Le∣gate of the Council. This news delivered the Pope from the fear of be∣ing forced to leave Rome, and confirmed the state of his affairs in such manner, that he resolved to continue the War with better hopes, and ex∣pectations of success. For the Pope's affairs having regained their reputation, the new Coun∣cil lately convened, was on the first of May opened in the Church of S. John Lateran at Rome; to this Assembly the dissenting Cardinals were cited to give their attendance; but they not appearing, were on the 8th. day of the Sessions declared contumacious, and Excommunicated, and deprived of all their Temporal and Spiritual Degrees, Honors, and Of∣fices, and the people absolved from their Submission, and Obedience to them. It was farther also declared, That their Council held at Pisa, and afterwards removed to Milan, was but a Conventicle, and an un∣lawful and Schismatical Meeting, and all their Acts rendered void, null, and of none effect. In the mean time the Cities of Lombardy being en∣couraged by the Swissers, who were now come into Italy in favour of the Pope, revolted, and re-assuming their ancient Liberty, assailed the French with open force, and overthrew them. The Venetians also joyning with them, prosecuted their Victory in such manner, that in the space of 70 days after the Battel of Ravenna, the French Army was almost wholly defeated; and the remainder by order of King Lewis, was recalled to his assistance against the Kings of England and Spain, who at that time mi∣serably infested his Country: so that in a short time all Italy was freed from the slavery of the French. The dissenting Cardinals having lost their protection at Milan, fled from thence to Lions, where they were kindly received, and entertained at the charge of King Lewis. The French being thus driven out of Italy, all the Cities and Towns belonging to the Pope, did by consequence return to the Ecclesiastical State: Parma, and Piacenza being dependencies on the Exarchat of Ra∣venna, voluntarily yielded to the Pope, all the other Towns of Romagna followed their example, together with Bologna; which casting off all respect to the Family of the Bentivogli, expelled them from their Con∣fines; with which the Pope not being satisfied, pursued them with the thunder of his Excommunications. Genoua being also abandoned by the French, was possessed by Fregoso. The Venetians seized on Crema, and Brescia, such of the Family of the Medices, as had followed the Popes Party, were re-instated in Florence; Peter Joderini, who had been crea∣ted perpetual Gonfaloniere, being expelled thence. The State of Milan was resigned to Maximilian Sforza, as the true, and lawful Prince; all
which benefits, and happy successes being procured by the Arms of the Swissers, they were in the Council of Lateran adjudged and declared to be the Restorers of the Liberties of Italy. And now all things being restored to this happy state, the Pope re∣quired the Venetians in virtue of the late Articles to deliver Verona, and Vicenza to Maximilian; which they obstinately refusing to perform, he entered into a League with the Emperor against them. The Venetians on the other side being well acquainted with the temper of the Pope, con∣federated themselves in an Alliance with Lewis the French King, hoping by his assistance and protection to defend themselves from that League: to this interest likewise the dissenting Cardinals adhered; who instigating Lewis every day against the Pope, and raising tumults in several places, gave out a report, that the Abbot of Clugni was to be created Pope in the place of Julio; the which extremely incensed and moved him with choler, and disdain, for he had a mind always unquiet; not sooner end∣ing one enterprize, before he began another; his Plots and designs al∣ways increasing.Guicciardin, lib. 11. He determined now at the beginning of the Spring to attempt Ferrara, a design so much desired: He had bought the City of Siena for thirty thousand Ducats. He agreed to lend the Emperor forty thousand Ducats, receiving Modena in pawn. He threatned Luca for sei∣zing Garsagnana. He testified some anger against the Cardinal de Medicis, because he seemed more inclining to the Party of the Catholick King than to his; and studied new Plots and Practices to alter the Estate of Florence. And in this manner having a thousand irons in the fire, he was continually plotting how he might drive the Spanish Army out of Italy by the help of the Swissers, whom he always extolled, and embra∣ced; it being his great design, as he often uttered, to expel all Forein Force out of Italy. He had also moved Henry VIII. King of England to make War upon France, and in detestation of Lewis, he had trans∣ferred by a publick Decree of the Council of Lateran, the Title of Most Christian to the King of England, for which there was a Bull prepared, and written, containing also in the same, a deprivation, and deposing of the King of France from all his Power and Dignities, giving that King∣dom for a prey to any who could conquer it. With these great thoughts, and perhaps many other more secret intrigues, he fell sick of a violent Fever, caused perhaps by the violent agitations of his mind; and in a few days died in the Vatican,Anno 1513. on the 21. of February, 1513. the Coun∣cil of Lateran still sitting: He was aged above 70 years, and held the Papal Chair for the space of nine years, three months, and five and twen∣ty days; and was buried in S. Peter's Church, in the Chappel of his Uncle Pope Sixtus. This Julius the Second had a spirit more agreeable to a Soldier, or Martial Governor, than a Pastor of the Church. He was a Prince of incredible constancy, and courage, but so violent, and of such unmeasurable apprehensions, that the Discord of Princes, and the Reverence which some of them bore to the Church, preserved him from ruine, more than his own moderation, or discretion: And yet neverthe∣less he was lamented by such, who knew not how to distinguish between the tempers which are decent, and agreeable to difference a temporal, from a spiritual Prince: for certainly, had he been a Secular, his inclina∣nations, his industry, and zeal, to enlarge, and advance his Dominions, might have been more commendable, than in him, who pretended to be Vicar to the Prince of Peace.
LEO X. POPE Julio being dead, and his Funerals performed according to the accustomed Rites: the Cardinals being four and twenty in number, entered the Conclave in a peaceable manner, with∣out any appearance of outward force over-awing their Election, or practices of Simony, and corruption, or other bad Arts, by which it was manifest that the two former Popes had acquired their Dignity, and so on the 11th. of March, being the seventh day after, the Cardinals entered the Conclave. John de Medicis of that great and illustrious Family in Florence, (now Dukes of Tuscany) was by the common Suf∣frages of 23 Cardinals elected Pope, taking upon himself the name of Leo X. At the age of 13 years he was made a Cardinal by Innocent VIII. and now was about the age of 37 years, when he was created Pope; a thing rare, and unusual to have a Pope so young, and which had not otherwise been practicable but by the concurrence of the young Cardinals, such as the Cardinal of Aragon, Gonzaga, Cornaro, Petrucci, &c. the Conclave before they came to this Election, proposed, and with many warm Debates considered of the ways, how the Secular Power which the late Popes had exercised in a disorderly manner, sacrificing all to their lust and ambition, might be restrained within some limits, and bounds of moderation: but those rules, and terms agreed upon, were speedily relaxed, and dispensed with, so soon, as a new Lord or Gover∣nor appeared, whom every one courted, being desirous with humble ob∣sequiousness to gratifie; and freeing him from all the clogs, and limits to his power, endeavoured to testifie the confidence they had in him. Be∣ing thus chosen on the 11th. of March, he was crowned on the 19th. and on the 11th. of April following, in a most pompous, and solemn manner he went to visit the Church of S. John Lateran, and with such magnificence, and State, as was never equalled by former Popes. The world conceived great joy, and expectations of good at the first news of his Election; for being a person of unspotted Chastity, of ex∣emplary Piety, and unblemished in his manners; and the Papal Dignity obtained fairly by him without Simony, Corruption, or evil Arts, it was reasonable to expect, and presage from such happy beginnings, times of more calmness, and blessings to the Church, than under the turbulent Reigns of the two former Popes. The exiled Cardinals, (of which those of greatest note were S. Croia and S. Severin) hearing of the death of Julius II. began their Journey towards Rome; and being landed at Livorn, they went to Pisa, and thence had safe conduct to Florence. The Pope having received intelli∣gence of their arrival in that City, sent the Bishop of Orvietto to advise them not to proceed farther, until such time, as it should be determined in what manner they should be received at Rome. For considering they had been judicially deprived, and their deprivation confirmed in the Council of Lateran, that they should forbear to go in the habit of Car∣dinals, but present, and offer themselves in some other modest, and pe∣nitential
dress whereby they might testifie their repentance and humili∣ty, which would be the best motive, and arguments to restore them again to their pristine condition; the which being accordingly agreed, the Cardinals renouncing their late Schism with all submission, and hu∣mility returned to Rome, and kissed the feet of the Pope. Notwithstand∣ing which, it was judged fit, that the Council of Lateran should still be continued, until many disorders which had crept lately into the Church, were wholly redressed. And now Leo being setled in the Papal Chair, shewed himself desirous to continue, and conserve the Peace of Christendom, which he thought would be most easily effected by persuading the warlike and martial spi∣rits of those times to spend their fury upon the Turk, and in the mean time endeavoured to accommodate, and compose the differences between Maximilian the Emperor and the Venetians touching Verona, and Pia∣cenza by an amicable agreement. At the same time also he hired the Switzers with a great sum of mony to assist Sforza Duke of Milan against the French; for notwithstanding his inclinations in the general were to∣wards a peace, yet his dislikes to that Nation, and the displeasures he had taken on many accounts against Charles the 12th. moved him with ear∣nest desires to chase the French out of Italy. To perform which the Switzers were esteemed the only instruments capable for this exploit, and to engage them therein, a largess was sent them of 42 thousand Ducats with pretence, (in case the matter should come to light) that twenty thousand of them were upon account of their yearly Pensions, and that the other twenty two thousand were due on Arrear by prece∣ding Popes, to the three Cantons. The Switzers being satisfied, and animated with this payment, resolved to accept of no conditions with the French, who being now in Lombardy, had forced Milan to surrender, with all other Cities belonging to that Dutchy, except Novaro, and Coma, which being defended by the Switzers, held out as yet in the name of Maximilian Sforza. Wherefore the French having no other work re∣maining,Guicciardin, lb. 11. besieged Novaro, and had so battered the Walls, and made such breaches, that they were ready to enter their men. Howsoever fearing the Resolution of the Besieged, who all the time of the Siege, had not so much as shut their Gates against the Enemy; and understanding that Relief was coming to the Town, and an Army under the command of that renowned Captain Altosasso, they retired at two miles distance from the Walls of Novaro; with which the Switzers were so encouraged, that not staying for the Relief expected, they made a Sally on the Enemy, and gave them a total Defeat, taking all their Baggage, with two and twenty pieces of Artillery, remaining a prey to the Conquerors. After which the City of Milan with all the places belonging to it, returned again into the possession and power of their Duke; the people of Milan giving two hundred thousand Ducats as a Reward to the Switzers for the restoration of their Liberty. All things now putting on a face of Liberty, and Peace in Italy, the French King seemed willing to demonstrate a filial obedience, and sub∣mission to the Church, and declared himself well pleased with the Pope. for receiving the Dissenting, and Schismatical Cardinals to pardon, and Grace. The Pope was also in like manner successful in his Negotiations of Peace between the Emperor, and the Venetians: for both Parties ha∣ving
referred the determination of their case to his Arbitration, and compromise, a Peace ensued, tho the Sentence and Determination was not Pronounced and Published until the year following. Lewis likewise the French King, at the persuasions and instigation of the Clergy, was very desirous to come in, and be reconciled to the Papal See; and to that end sent the Bishop of Marseilles his Embassador to Rome, to treat, and con∣clude all matters in dispute, either relating to Spiritual, or Temporal Af∣fairs. At the arrival of this Embassador, the Pope by a Decree of the Lateran Council, which still continued, gave Licence to the Bishop of France, and other Prelates, against whom his Predecessor Pope Julius had proceeded by censure of Excommunication to come in, and in the space of one years time to purge themselves of the contumacy with which they stood charged. In pursuance of which Decree, the Embassador, and other Agents from France, did in the name of the King abjure all the Acts, and Decrees made, and ordained by the Conventicle at Pisa: promising to acknowledg and hold for true and sacred, all those Acts, and conclusions which should be declared by the Council of Lateran, and that six of those Prelates which were present at the Convention of Pisa, should repair to Rome, and in the name and behalf of all the Gallican Church renounce, and disown that Convention; and promise to submit, and hold, and esteem for Sacred, and Obligatory, whatsoever should be determined in their case, or in any other matter by the Lateran Council; and that then upon such submission, the Council should grant a full and plenary Pardon, and Absolution for all those Crimes committed by them against the Church of Rome. But whilst these things were in Treaty, Lewis XII. being surprized by a Fever, died the first day of January 1515. at Paris, in whose place Francis de Valois the first of that name, Duke of Angolesme succeeded. Francis having made a Peace with the King of England, assumed the Title of Duke of Milan, as appertaining to him not only by the ancient right of the Dukes of Orleans, but also as comprehended in the Investiture made by the Emperor in the Treaty of Cambray▪ to recover which he made a League with the Venetians, and passing into Italy with a powerful Army, declared War against Maximi∣lian Sforza Duke of Milan, who on the other side had made an Alliance with the Emperor, the Switzers, and the King of Spain. The Pope be∣ing jealous of the French, believing that so soon as they were become Masters of Milan, they would also design upon Piacenza, and Parma, fa∣voured the cause of Duke Sforza, and encouraged the Switzers by his Legate the Cardinal of Sedan, to continue firm, and constant in defence of Italy against the French Arms, that so their ancient glory which had been in former years crowned with so much success, might be maintain∣ed by them, and the Title of Restorers of the Italian Liberty be for ever continued to their Honor. The Switzers having their valour provoked by such incitements as these encountred the French Army, which under the auspicious Conduct of King Francis, was passed into Italy, near Ma∣rignan, where after a sharp conflict, the Venetians coming in to the assi∣stance of the French, the Switzers were overthrown, and forced to retreat into Milan, which afterwards was surrendred▪ and Duke Sforza being taken Prisoner was sent into France, with an allowance of five and thirty thousand Crowns a year, which he agreed to receive in lieu of his Duke∣dom. After this success, Parma and Piacenza which had been annexed
to the Church by the Arms of Julius II. fell into the possession of the French; for Leo not having the courage to defend them, made them a Sacrifice to the Conqueror, and the price of his Peace with France, the which was concluded at Bologna, where an interview was appointed be∣tween the King and Pope Leo. The Pope entered the City on the 8th. of December 1515. and the King two days after, having been received on the Confines of the Country of Reggia by the Cardinals of Fieschi and Medi∣cis, whom the Pope had appointed to be his Legates Apostolical to him. The King, so soon as he entered was immediately conducted into the Con∣sistory, where before the Pope by a Speech delivered by his Chancellor, he professed all Obedience to the Papal Chair, and afterwards was lodged three days in the same Palace with the Pope, during which time all the signs of good will, and amity interceded between them, and all matters agreed which had relation to Naples, Modena, and other controversies: and thus all things being amicably concluded, the King returned to Milan, and in a short time after into France; leaving the Duke of Bourbon Lieu∣tenant in his place: The Pope also went to Florence, where having pas∣sed the Winter, he in the Spring returned to Rome. And now Pope Leo being a little at repose, designed the assistance of Maximilian the Emperor (with whom he was in League) to make his Brother Julian Lord of Siena, and Lucca, and thereunto to adjoyn the Dukedoms of Ʋrbin and Ferrara: but Julian unexpectedly dying, the same fortune was intended for Laurence his Nephew, Son of his Bro∣ther Peter de Medicis; and in the mean time, until this design could be ri∣pened and put in practice, the Pope committed to him the Government of Florence, with condition that he should act nothing without the pri∣vity and consent of the Citizens. And now to prepare a way for taking the Dutchy of Ʋrbin from Francisco Maria de la Rovere, the Pope began with his Church Censures,Guicciardin, lib. 12. causing the Accusations against him to be pub∣lished, wherein he expressed, that being in Pay, and under a Sallary from the Church, he had denied him the Service of those Regiments for which he had received Pay, and had secretly compounded with the Enemy. That he had killed the Cardinal of Pavia, for which he was alsolved by Grace, and not by Justice, as also for many other Murders committed by him. These and other were the Crimes, which were alledged against him; but yet nothing animated the Pope so much with anger, and dis∣dain against him, as that he had denied unto his Brother Julian his aid, and assistance to return to Florence. The success of the War was this. So soon as Renzo di Cere the Popes General with a considerable Army showed himself upon the Frontiers of the Dutchy, the City of Ʋrbin with other Towns belonging to it, surrendred to the Pope, the Duke himself retiring to Pesaro; which also yielded together with Sini∣gaglia, and in the space of four days all submitted to the obedience of the Pope; and then the Duke with all his Family saved himself in Mantua. These successes were followed by new designs upon Siena, from whence by force of Arms he compelled the Prince Borghese, and Cardi∣nal Alfonso his Brother, both Sons of Pandolfo Petrucci to retire, and make place for Raphael Petrucci, his old Friend, and Companion in his Exile: at which the Cardinal was so enraged, and excited beyond all patience, that he conspired against the life of the Pope, which not suc∣ceeding, proved afterwards the cause of his own destruction. For this
Alfonso Cardinal of Siena revolving often in his mind the ingratitude of this Pope, who by the labors and dangers of Pandolfo Petrucci his Father,Guicciardin, lib. 13. was with all his Family restored to the Government of Florence; and yet had in recompense of these benefits, caused him and his Brother Bor∣ghese to be thrust out of Siena; the which thoughts boiling in his mind, he resolved once with his own hand to stab the Pope; but being diverted from that intention by the danger of the Fact, and by the ill fame of a wickedness without example, to have a Pope killed by the hand of a Cardinal, he changed the Plot of the Dagger to Poison, which by the help of Baptista Vercelli a famous Chirurgeon, and his familiar Confi∣dent, he hoped to effect in this manner. The Pope being greatly affli∣cted with an old Fistula in his Fundament, this Baptista was to be prefer∣red as an able man for this work; and then in dressing of the Wound he was to have injected Poison into it: but Baptista being long in getting admission to the Popes privacy, Alfonso grew impatient of delays, and not being able to contain himself, continually uttered something of pas∣sion, which gave the Pope just cause of suspicion, that this Alfonso was practising something against his life: at length by some Letters which were intercepted, the Conspiracy was detected, which the Pope dissem∣bling, invited Alfonso to Rome, with promises of Reconciliation and Preferment; and for his encouragement thereunto, he gave him Letters of safe conduct, and his promise to the Spanish Embassador not to violate the same. But so soon as Alfonso arrived, the Pope so little esteemed the Faith he had given, that he caused him to be Arrested, with his Friend Cardinal De Sauli, a Genoese, one so familiar and intimate with him, that it was believed, that one could not be guilty, or designing any acti∣on without the privity, and consent of the other. These two Cardinals being committed to Prison in the Castle of S. Angelo,Ibidem. the Spanish Embas∣sador complained of the breach of Faith, which being given to the Kings Embassador, ought to have been observed with the same sacred fidelity, as given to the King himself. Whereunto the Pope made answer, that in matters of a Conspiracy, designing against the life of the Pope, no safe conduct was sufficient, unless in some clause of it, the Crime it, self had been specified with a peculiar Proviso; and that in cases of Poisoning, which is detestable to God and man, no sufficient provision can be made for security of the Offender, unless the Crime it self be first mentioned, and pardoned. The matter being fully examined, and Alfonso▪ and Ban∣dinello in a full Consistory being found guilty, they were by publick sen∣tence of the Consistory deprived of the Dignity of Cardinals, and de∣livered over to the Secular Power: which being done, the night follow∣ing Alfonso was Strangled: but the Sentence of Bandinello was changed to a perpetual Imprisonment; from which afterwards for a certain sum of money he gained a release. The success which the Pope had against the Duke of Ʋrbin, was dif∣ferent to that which he had against Alfonso Duke of Ferrara, for he be∣ing a watchful man, and a good Soldier, defended himself against all the contrivances, and attempts of the Pope. Towards the end of the year 1517. the King of Spain died, leaving his Nephew Charles of Austria, sole Heir of all his Kingdoms, and Do∣minions in Naples, Sicily, and Spain, between whom, and the French King, there passed as yet, a fair, and amicable correspondence, Not∣withstanding
which things were troublesom in Italy, and  espight of all the endeavours of the Pope, who desired nothing so much  peace, all things were unquiet, and tended to War: for the Switzers  hose minds were rather inflamed with indignation, in remembrance of their late Defeat at Marignan, than abated, or humbled, entered into a League with Maximilian the Emperor, to drive the French out of all their Possessions in Italy: in opposition whereunto, the French joyning with the Venetians, recovered Brescia out of the hands of the Spaniards, and Verona from the Emperor: and the Venetians by the support of this Alliance, made no account of any amity with others, nor offered their Obedience to the Pope, notwithstanding the endeavours of Altobello Bi∣shop of Pola, whom he had commissionated to be his Legate at Venice, not without some just reflections, as a matter unworthy the Pontificial Majesty. Francisco Maria Duke of Ʋrbin continued still his War against the Pope for recovery of his State; but his success was ill both against the City of Osimo, and also before the Town of Corinaldo, from whence with great blemish of honor he was forced to raise his Siege: Nor was he more fortunate in his attempt to recover Pesaro; for having put to Sea several Ships to cut off all Provisions from the Town, they were en∣countred by another Fleet set out by those of Rimini, consisting of six∣teen Sail, with Barks, and Brigantines, which going in convoy with Vessels laden with Provisions to Pesaro, met the Navy of Francisco Ma∣ria, and engaging with them, sunk the Admiral, and destroyed their whole Fleet; with which ill success, Francisco Maria despairing of his enterprize, departed thence. At Rimini he also was worsted, and for∣ced to return with his Army into Tuscany, where being in great want of Provisions, and the Soldiers without Pay, lived by Prey and Pillage, whereby they began to be no less terrible to their friends, than to their enemies; and to grow weary of the War, having no hope to better their condition either by a Battel, or protraction of time. The Pope also on the other side became poor, having exhausted his Treasury, and doubt∣ful of the Faith of his Allies, especially of the King of France, who was slow and backward in the payment of those monies agreed by Articles; so that Peace being the best expedient for good to both parties, propo∣sitions were made for a Peace between the Legate, and Francisco Maria, which by the Mediation of Monsieur D'Escut, General of the French Forces in Italy, and Don Hugo de Monaco Vice-King of Sicily, was ac∣corded on these conditions, That the Pope should pay to the Spanish Foot∣men five and forty thousand Ducats, and to the Gascoins and Germans threescore thousand; and that upon such payment they should all depart within eight days out of the State of the Church, the Jurisdiction of Florence, and the Territories of Ʋrbin. That Francisco Maria should leave, and abandon all his Possessions in that State within the term afore∣said, with Licence to carry with him all his moveables, and Artillery, with his famous Library, which with great charge and diligence had been collected by Frederick his Grandfather by the Mothers side. That the Pope should absolve him of all Censures, and pardon all the Subjects of the State of Ʋrbin, and those who had been enemies in this War the Spaniards, Gascoins, and Germans having received their monies, march∣ed to the Kingdom of Naples; and Francisco Maria abandoned of all
his Allies, returned to Mantua, accompanied only with one hundred Horse, and six hundred Footmen. In this manner ended the War with Ʋrbin, which tho it continued but eight months, yet had exhausted the Coffers of the Pope of eight hun∣dred thousand Ducats, the greatest part of which he had drawn from the Commonwealth of Florence, on the score of his great interest in that City: and indeed his Charges were the greater, because that with much ignominy, he was forced to purchase his peace with paying the Armies of his Enemy: Nor was the advantage which he gained at the conclusion, acquired by the valour of his Arms, or Virtue and Conduct of his Captains; for they being men of lewd lives, cowardly, and base, were prosperous in nothing, all their actions tending to increase disorders, and multiply errors; whereby the Pope being at length forced to crave the assistance of all men, paid dearly for the purchase of Ʋrbin. In this manner the year 1518. began, and continued with peace, and with an unusual calmness in all the Regions of Italy, only the success of Sultan Selim Emperor of the Turks, who had been victorious in Persia, Syria, and Egypt, alarm'd the Pope and the Christian Princes; who ap∣prehending with great dread the progress of his Arms, the number of his Ships, and Gallies, which he was building, and all other Provisions necessary for War, feared lest he should invest Rhodes, the Bulwark of Christendom in the Eastern parts, or perhaps fall into Hungaria; which tho formerly defended by the Valor of the Inhabitants, yet now lay ex∣posed by its own Civil and Intestine Dissentions; and by the minority of a King, governed by Priests, and Jesuitical Councils. Nor was Italy free from the like fears of Invasion by that Potent Prince, which had under meaner circumstances of power entered the City of Otranto, and put all Italy into a fear and consternation: And therefore now to obviate, and pre∣vent the like dangers at a distance, the Pope caused most devout Proces∣sions, with the solemn Pomp of Images, and Relicks of Saints to be made at Rome, and in person walked bare-foot with all his Court from S. Peters to the Minerva, where Prayers were made to God, that he would be pleased to divert the fury of this Common Enemy to Christendom. And because Prayers without human endeavours are not available, Let∣ters were wrote to all Christian Princes to joyn in this War; for the more orderly management of which, the task, and enterprise which every one was to undertake, was allotted, and contrived in the Consistory, and an Universal Truce for five years was published amongst all Christian Prin∣ces, and States, with grievous censures on those, who should be repugnant thereunto. In pursuance of this method and design the Emperor and King of Poland were to invade the Turk on the parts of Servia and Bulgaria. The French King, Venetians, and other Princes of Italy were to Embark at the Port of Brundusium, and pass into Albania, and invade Greece on that side. The Kings of England, Spain, and Portugal were to Rendez∣vous at Caragena in Spain, and with a Fleet of 200 Sail enter the Helie∣spont, and attack Constantinople it self; and for carrying on of this Holy War, voluntary Contributions were to be made, and Impositions to be laid as well on the Clergy, as the Laity. Now tho these matters were begun with great expectation, and the Universal Truce accepted with a specious show, and mighty promises made of advancing this Enterprise, with ostentation and bravery of words; yet at length private Interests,
over-ruling the zeal for Religion, and the Universal Union, the minds of the Princes became slackned in the design, and the thoughts of War va∣nished; every one looking at the peril as uncertain, and far distant. The Peace still continuing in Italy until the year 1520. Martin Luther a Frier of the Order of S. Austin began to make some disturbances in Ger∣many, which greatly opposed the Authority of the Church of Rome; The beginnings thereof had their original from certain Indulgences which Pope Leo exercised in a more ample, and licentious manner than was cu∣stomed and practised by former Popes. For in the year 1100. being in the Reign of Ʋrban II. Plenary Indulgences for Pardon and Remission of Sins were bestowed on those only who went to the Holy War with in∣tent to deliver the Sepulchre of Christ out of the hands of Infidels. These Indulgences were afterwards in like manner dispensed unto those, who either were not able, or willing to undertake the design in person, provided that they entertained or payed another at their own charge. Afterwards Indulgences and Pardons of this nature became more com∣mon, being enlarged to those who took part in the Wars against those who resisted the Secular Arms of the Pope; tho the same were Christi∣ans, and Princes, who in defence of their own Kingdoms, and States, opposed the Encroachments and Extravagancies of the Ecclesiastical Claims. But now Pope Leo by the Counsel of Cardinal Puccio bestowed his Indulgences in more ample form, and dispersed them in all parts of the Christian World, without distinction of times, persons, or places, not only for the help of such, who were yet living, but with power to deli∣ver the souls of the Dead from the pains of Purgatory; it being manifestly known, that the design of these Indulgences was only to obtain money from the people, which the Collectors exacted with an unparallel'd im∣pudence, the matter became scandalous, especially in Germany, where the Officers set the Indulgences to sale at a small price; and sometimes in a Tavern this power of redeeming Souls out of Purgatory were set for a Stake at a Game at Tables. This shame, and dishonor was increased in the Country of Saxony, and other parts of Germany, when it was known, that the proceed, and benefit of those Indulgences, extorted with great rigor and avarice by the Bishop of Arembauld, (a man fit to be employ∣ed in such a Commission) was not to be paid in to the Apostolical Chamber at Rome, but given to Magdalen, Sister to the Pope, and devo∣ted to the avarice of a Woman; for then the matter became detestable, and the cries and exclamations lowed in all parts of Germany. Luther being supported by the favour of the Duke of Saxony, took this occasi∣on to contemn these Indulgences, and preach every where against them, which being a matter very plausible, his Sermons were heard with great attention by the people, and his Doctrin approved by his Auditors, who came from all parts to hear him: Having this encouragement, he began to question the Power of the Church, and the Authority of the Pope; and as matters grew higher, he disputed against Pardons, and Penance, and Purgatory, upon which the Doctrin of Indulgences had its foundation: on the truth of which Doctrins, he laid so much stress, and was so po∣sitive in the certainty of all his Conclusions, that he would often say, he would not refer or submit them to the judgment of Angels. After these beginnings,Ocil. Trent. which seemed plausible and honest, and which made great noise, and were highly controverted in the world by the most acute
and subtil Wits of that Age; Luther proceeded to preach against Ima∣ges in Churches, against Prayers to Saints, to question Transubstantia∣tion in the Holy Eucharist, and to allow Marriage to Priests, Monks, and Friers, the which he not only maintained by force of Argument, but con∣firmed by his own example, The Pope in opposition hereunto sent ma∣ny Religious, and learned men into Germany to hinder (if possible) by their Preaching, and Disputations the farther spreading of these Doctrins: The Emperor Charles the Fifth in a Diet at Ratisbon made a publick, and solemn Edict against Luther and his Conclusions; the University of Paris condemned them; and the King of England, Henry VIII. wrote a Book against them, for which he afterwards received from this Pope Leo, the Title of Defender of the Faith. But Luther being a man of great cou∣rage, and supported by the favour of the Duke of Saxony, little regarded either the Arguments of the School-men, or the Authority of the Prin∣ces; saying, That the Prophet forbad to trust in men, or Princes, before whose judgment, the Word of God, and the sentence of Scripture was to be preferred. These disturbances in Germany were followed by the like in Switzerland, where Zuinglius by force of Argument disputed in favour of the Doctrin of Luther; which caused such confusions, and discord, that for the settlement, and quiet thereof the Senate of Zurich, convened all the Preachers and Doctors of their Country, and requested the Bishop of Constance to depute such wise, and learned persons, (as he should think fit) to assist at this Conference, for determination of the matters in que∣stion: Great numbers of people being assembled at this Convocation, Zuinglius proposed his Thesis, and all the points in dispute, and offered to answer the Arguments of any Opponent, which should be set up against him. Peter Faber a man holy in his life, and of profound judg∣ment, having heard, and weighed all the strength of Argument which the Jacobins, and others had alledged, refused as Moderator in those Controversies to determin any thing in those matters, which more pro∣perly belonged to the cognizance of that General Council, which was shortly by Authority of the Pope, and the consent of all the Christian Princes, to meet, and assemble, consisting of all the Prelates of Chri∣stendom. This Sentence gave Zuinglius advantage to advance his Do∣ctrin, and say, that these were but delays to amuse the people, and lull them in their ignorance; that doubtful matters were proper to be treat∣ed, and discussed, and determined by the Authority of General Coun∣cils; but that matters certain, and clear by Scripture, which was the Word of God, and the rule of our lives, and confirmed by the practice of the Primitive Christians, stood in need of no other Authority, than their own plain evidence to confirm them. In fine, the Assembly broke up, and the Senate concluded with this result, that the Gospel should be Preached according to the Canon of the Old and new Testament, and not according to the Decrees, and Constitutions of men. This matter began daily in the Court of Rome to seem of greater im∣portance, fearing lest it should greatly shake the Power of the Popes, and abate the profits of the Church of Rome, and discompose the Uni∣on of the Christian Religion; for which occasion, many Consistories were summoned at Rome, and many Consultations held in the Chamber of the Pope amongst the Cardinals and Divines, for remedy of this growing evil. The Duke of Saxony, and Luther were at these Meet∣ings
condemned, and Excommunications thundered out against them with most grievous Anathemaes, the which served only to exasperate the Duke of Saxony, and caused him to become a more severe and vehement Protector of that Cause; which began now to dilate and spread more diffusely amongst the people, by how much the more it was persecuted by vigorous, and violent courses. At length the Court of Rome, as well as other People, and Nations, did conclude, that the only means to quiet mens minds, and settle them in a true Belief and Faith, was to establish all doubts and Controversies by the Authority of a General Council: the which was desired by Princes, and Lords of Countries, in hopes that thereby the disorderly lives of Priests and Friers would be regula∣ted and reduced to their Primitive Constitutions; and that the Regalia and Temporal Jurisdictions, which had long been usurped by the Ecclesi∣astical Power, would at length be restored to the Secular Dignity of Princes. But to reduce matters to this estate, they did not judg it ne∣cessary that Ecclesiasticks should be the sole Members to compose such an Assembly, whose interest it was to maintain their own Corruptions, and determin all matters in favour of themselves against the Rights and Pre∣rogatives of Christian Princes; in whose Affairs their consents and Suffra∣ges ought to be consulted. The common people also, who had some competent knowledg in the Affairs of the world, were desirous of a Council, in hopes, and expectation, that the libidinous Power of the Church, which had for a long time tyrannized over them, might at length be limited, and moderated; and that the Exactions which were charged upon them, under the specious pretences of Alms, and Indul∣gences, might not be forced, and distrained by the violence, and rude∣nesses of the Episcopal Officers. The Court of Rome did likewise desire a Council, in hopes the Authority of the Church, which began to be shaken by the opposition of Adversaries, and the encroachments which Princes made on its Jurisdiction, might thereby be confirmed: but they were for having it regulated according to the practices of modern times, which should not touch on the present Abuses and evil customs introdu∣ced in favour of the Papal Power; but such an one as was called by the preceding Pope, and Assembled at the Lateran, which had produced ma∣ny happy and advantageous successes; for it had extinguished the Schisms of the Cardinals, reduced the Kingdom of France, which before was se∣parated, to an Union, and abolished that Sanction which highly entren∣ched on the Temporal and Spiritual Monarchy of Rome: and lastly had conferred the collation of Benefices on the Pope, which was the great foundation of the Papal Grandeur. Howsoever Pope Leo still doubted, that this remedy was not entirely adapted to the nature of this evil: for tho the power of a Council might have an influence over Princes, and great Prelates, against whom their Decrees, and Determinations might avail, yet could not reach the minds of the common people, or produce that real alteration, and change, which was necessary for the quiet, and settlement of the Ecclesiastical State. In this condition of affairs Leo died, about the end of the year 1521. But these Divisions and Dissentions in Spiritual Controversies did not only disquiet the Pope; but likewise the Plots of certain Cardinals which designed against his Life and Government; of which a discovery being made, several of them were deprived of their Hats, and Ecclesiastical
Benefices: and Alfonso Petrucci being chief in the number of the Con∣spirators, was taken, and strangled by a Negro Slave in the Castle of St. Angelo at Rome. Adrian da Cornetro being fled, and escaped from Justice, was for ever without hopes of Restauration deprived of the Character and Honor of Cardinal. Raphael Riario, and Bendinello Sauli were suspended, but afterwards restored to the Dignity of Cardi∣nals. Saderini was condemned to live in perpetual banishment. Thus by the punishment and degradation of several Cardinals, the College be∣ing wanting and unprovided of its due numbers; the Pope with much liberality created one and thirty at one time; all persons of quality be∣longing to several Countries of Christendom; some of which were ad∣vanced for their Virtue and Merit, and others by the Favour and Interest of great Personages. This Pope created two and forty Cardinals in all during the time of his Reign, besides the restauration of the four rebel∣lious Cardinals deprived by Julio; amongst these Cardinals which he had ordained, Julio de Medici his Kinsman was one, whom he made his Vice-Chancellor, and was afterwards Pope under the name of Clement VII. About this time Maximilian the Emperor dying, Charles King of Spain, Naples, and Sicily was elected to the great regret, and indignati∣on of Francis King of France, who with much envy and emulation was displeased to see the Imperial Dignity added to the many Kingdoms, and Estates holden by the King of Spain: And because according to the an∣cient Rule and Canon the King of Naples was excluded from all capa∣city of being Emperor; a Dispensation was purchased from the Pope, with expence of 7000 Ducats, qualifying the King of Naples for the Election. Afterwards the Pope having favoured the cause of Charles, and he by his assistance being Elected Emperor, an Alliance, and League was agreed between them to drive the French out of Italy, a design ever pleasing to the Popes; and particularly to Leo, who was impatient of the infamous loss of Parma, and Piacenza, which being gained with so much glory and trouble by Julio, he hoped to regain and restore to the Possessions of the Church. In pursuance of this enterprize, a consider∣able Army of Germans and Switzers were sent by the Emperor into Italy, and joyned with the Forces of the Pope. Prospero Colonna was made Generalissimo, and Frederico Gonzaga of Mantoua General of the Army of the Church, and Julio de Medici Legate of the whole Army. The success proved agreeable to the preparations, for the French were droven out of Italy, which had long groaned under their pride and tyranny▪ after which Milan was according to Articles surrendred into the hands of Francis Sforza the true and natural Lord, and Parma and Piacenza restored to the Church; with the news of which, the Pope conceived such extremity of joy, that he died suddenly on the first of December 1521. at the Village of Magliana, where he used often for recreation to retire himself, from whence the next day his body was removed to Rome; not without suspicion of having been poisoned by his Chamberlain Ma∣lspina; who thereupon being imprisoned, was afterwards released by Cardinal De Medicis, so soon as he came to Rome, no farther proceedings being made thereupon, lest the matter being examined should reflect too far in disgrace of the French King. Thus died Leo X. at the age of 45 years, 11 months, and one day, having held the Papal Chair for the space of eight years and twenty days; having at the hour of his death
testified the great satisfaction he received by the restitution of Parma, and Piacenza to the Ecclesiastical State, without the effusion of the least drop of blood. This Pope was esteemed a great lover of Justice, having been severe against Thieves and Robbers. He was a great lover of his Recreation, and Pleasures, spending much time in Hunting, and Banquets; and was more delighted with Musick, than became the gravity and severity of a Pope. He was highly magnificent in his Buildings, and munificent in his gifts, with which and by his Wars he had consumed so profusely beyond his Revenue, that for maintenance of this charge he was forced to exact mony for making Cardinals, and to set several Offices of his Court to sale. He was a great lover of Learning, and learned men, to whom he was very liberal in his gifts, imitating therein the spirit of his Father Laurence de Medicis. He enlarged the Power of the Potesta, or Civil Magistracy of Rome, and bestowed on them several Privileges and Im∣munities; for which reason by a Solemn Decree they made Julian his Brother a Citizen of Rome, and treated him at the Campidoglio with Feasting, and other Entertainments; where they also erected a Statue of Marble, and dedicated it to Leo, with this Inscription, Optimo Principi Leoni X. Med. Joan. Pont. Max. ob restitutam instauratamque Ʋrbem, aucta Sacra, bonasque artes, adscitos Patres, sublatum vectigal, datum congia∣rium S.P.Q.R. In fine, the face of the City of Rome was never more pleasant, nor chearful, than in the time of Leo X. His body was bu∣ried for that present in a Sepulchre of Brick erected in S. Peter's Church, and for afterwards by direction of Paul III. translated to the Minerva, to∣gether with the body of Clement VII. ADRIAN VI. POPE Leo being dead, and his Obsequies solemnly performed, the Cardinals on the 16th. of December 1521. assembled in the Chappel of Sixtus Quartus in S. Peter's Church; and thence ad∣journed to the Vatican, where 29 Cardinals entered into the Conclave, and having sang Veni Spiritus, they for some days were em∣ployed in giving Audiences to Forein Ministers, in ordering matters for the more orderly Government of the City, and regulating the Conclave in relation to their choice: so on the 20th. they began seriously to pro∣ceed to an Election. Cardinal De Medicis aspiring to that dignity, seemed to stand the most fair for it, because that by the reputation of his greatness, and by the interest of his Revenues, and his glory lately acquired in the Conquest of Milan, he had obtained the Voices of 15 Cardinals: howsoever many considerations crossed his desires; for it seemed irregular, and against the common Policy for one of the same Fa∣mily to succeed in the place of the Pope deceased; for that such Presi∣dents might soon bring the Popedom to a state of being disposed by Suc∣cession: for which cause all the ancient Cardinals who pretended to be of the French action; and all those who were enemies to Leo, and dis∣contented by him, stood in opposition against him: Moreover all the
Cardinals who were Competitors, and lived in hopes of succeeding, could not endure, and suffer the Election of a person under the age of fifty years. These difficulties occurring, retarded the Election for several days: at length as they made scrutiny according to the custom of the Conclave, Cardinal Adrian a Hollander by Nation was proposed, one who had been School-master to the Emperor, and by his means made Cardinal under Pope Leo: so soon as he was nominated, the Cardinal S. Sixtus began to recount, and amplifie his Virtues in a long Oration, which so took, that the Cardinals began to yield, and give up their Voi∣ces for him, the residue followed from one to another, seeming guided rather by chance, than Counsel; so that by the common Suffrages of all the Cardinals, Adrian was Elected and Created Pope on the 9th. of Ja∣nuary 1522. the parties themselves not being able to render a reason, why amidst so many dangers, and troubles of the Ecclesiastical State, they had chosen a stranger for Pope of a remote Country, who had ne∣ver seen Italy, and perhaps might never have seen it, but upon this oc∣casion; and who had neither been acquainted with the customs of the Court of Rome, nor yet had entertained such conversation with the Cardinals, as to have hoped by their interest, or his own merit to have attained to the Election: of which the Cardinals not being able to ren∣der any solid reason, gave out in excuse of themselves, that it was an im∣pulse of the Holy Ghost which did often inspire the hearts of Cardinals in Election of Popes. The news of this Election was brought to Adrian, then residing at Victoria, a Town on the Confines of Biscay; upon advice whereof ta∣king no other name, than his own, he caused himself to be called Adrian the sixth. He was born at Ʋtrecht a City in Holland, his Father's name was Florent, one that by Profession made Tapestry Hangings; and this his Son being a Youth of an ingenious, lively spirit, was sent to Stu∣dy in the University of Lovain; where afterwards being a great profi∣cient in Learning, Margaret the Daughter of Maximilian, then Gover∣ness of the Low-Countries, receiving information of his Virtues and Abi∣lities, made him Curate of a Parish-Church in Holland: afterwards he was preferred to be Dean of the Cathedral in Lovain, and then made Vice-Chancellor of that University. During this time Philip Arch-Duke of Austria, Son of Maximilian the Emperor died, leaving a Son of seven years of age, named Charles; for whose Education, and Instructi∣on, a Tutor and School-master being sought in all parts, none was esteem∣ed more proper either for his Virtue, or Learning, than this Adrian. Having for some time honorably acquitted himself in this Office, he was sent Embassador to Ferdinand King of Spain, with whom he acquired so much favour and interest, that in a short time he was made Bishop of Tortosa; and afterwards Chief Counsellor of State to the Emperor Charles V. Likewise by the recommendation of the Emperor Maximi∣lian, and on account of the great esteem, and reputation he had acqui∣red, he was created Cardinal by Pope Leo X, with the Title of S. John and S. Paul, in the year 1519. And Charles his Scholar being chosen Emperor, he committed to his care, and charge the whole, and entire Government of Spain; in which Country Adrian resided when the news was brought him of his Election to the Popedom.
Charles the Emperor having about that time passed by Sea into Spain, sent an Express to congratulate his Promotion, desiring him, that he would be pleased to make some little stay at Barcelona, that so he might have opportunity to pay his Respects in person to him, and perform that Reverence, and Obedience which he owed to the Apostolical Sea; but Adrian was in so much hast, fearing some Revolutions in Rome, and Italy, that he would make no stay at Barcelona; but Embarking at Taragona, on the 11th. of August, he soon after with a placid Navigation arrived at Genoua, where he was visited by the Prelates of France, thence pro∣ceeding to Ligorn, he was there received by Cardinal De Medicis, and five other Cardinals, as also by the Embassadors sent from several Prin∣ces of Italy, and by Francis de Gonzaga, who was General of the Army belonging to the Church. At Pyrgos he was met by Pompey Colonna, and Francis Ʋrsino, who were Cardinals delegated by the Senate of Rome; and thence proceeding to Ostia, he was carried up the River to the Mo∣nastery of S. Paul, where he lodged for one night: And lastly on the 29. of August, the people of Rome, with the several Orders of the Clergy, accompanied him with great pomp to the Palace of the Vatican; and the next day he was solemnly Crowned in the Portico of S. Peter's Church. Pope Adrian being now seated in his Throne, employed his whole time at first to hear, and understand the Affairs of Rome, for as yet he was altogether ignorant of the State of Italy; the which in such an exigency, in which things at that time were, was a great trouble to considering men, who thought it a miserable disadvantage to have at that time a Pope a stranger, and altogether unexperienced in the Affairs of Italy and of the Court; when the Pestilence grievously afflicted the City, a matter which was interpreted for an ill Prognostication, and omen of his future success: The Treasury also by the Wars, Disorders, and Luxury of pre∣ceding Popes exhausted, and drained to a farthing; and all the Jewels, and Ornaments of the Pontifical Dignity pawned, and placed in the hands of Usurers, first by Leo, and afterwards more monies raised up∣on them by the College, to supply the necessities, and exigencies of the Church. Arimino also was seized and possessed by Sigismund Malatesta. And news was come that Soliman the Great Turk had invested Rhodes, and put it into great danger, and prepared with a great Army to invade Hungary: all which being matters of great difficulty, did much puzzle and distract the mind of Adrian, who was as yet raw and unexperien∣ced in the Affairs of Rome: the which troubles were soon followed by the unhappy news of the loss of Rhodes, having been surrendred up on conditions after a six months Siege. And now Adrian being warm in his Seat, began in the first place to design the recovery of Rimini, which was seized and possessed by Sigis∣mund, and Pandolfo Malatesta, and next to compose those differences which the Duke of Ferrara had continued with his two late Predeces∣sors; for the more effectual performance whereof, he sent 1500 Spanish Infantry which he had brought with him out of Spain, for security of his passage on the Sea into Romagna, the which with addition of other Forces so affrighted Sigismond and Malatesta, that by the mediation of the Duke of Ʋrbin, they surrendred Rimini to the Pope, upon hopes that the Pope would in lieu thereof, assign them some other honorable support and maintenance. Afterwards the Duke of Ʋrbin went him∣self
to Rome, where the memory of Pope Julian was still so precious, as to entitle him to some kindness from this present Pope; on which mo∣tive the Ecclesiastical Censures, which were issued out against him by Leo were reversed, Plenary Absolution given him, and he again restored to the Dutchy of Ʋrbin by Adrian: howsoever with this clause, salvo jure, &c. that it might be without prejudice to that Grant made to the Flo∣rentines of the Country of Montfeltra, in considerarion of the sum of 350000 Crowns, which they had lent to Pope Leo for defence of that Country. With the like frank generosity Adrian received Alfonso Duke of Fer∣rara into his favour; and not only invested him in the Dukedom of Fer∣rara, and in all those Lands which depended on the Church before the War which Pope Leo ade against the French; but also in the Towns of Felix, and Final, which he had taken from the Church during the time of the last Sede Vacante, on conditions, that he should hold those Lands of the Church with obligation of assisting the Pope with a certain num∣ber of men, to be ready at his command, when his occasions should re∣quire: and in case at any time he acted any thing to the damage, and prejudice of the Church, that then he should incur severe Forfeitures and Penalties, and lose his Investiture, and be actually deprived of all those Liberties, Immunities, and Rights to which he pretended and laid a claim. After these Affairs the Pope re-assumed the thoughts so often medi∣tated by his Predecessors, of driving the French out of Italy, the which was also greatly desired by the Emperor Charles, on supposition that the matter was practicable and easie in case they could induce the Venetians to separate from the French King: to incline them hereunto, Embassadors were dispatched from the Emperor, and the King of England (who at the same time sent a Herald to denounce War against the French King, in case he would not make a Truce with the Emperor in all parts of the world for three years) in which also the Pope, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines were to be comprehended. The pretence of this Truce was grounded on agreement of all Christian Princes to turn their Forces against the Turk, who was now grown formidable in Hungary, to which place Cardinal Cajetan war sent his Legate with a supply of fifty thou∣sand Crowns to carry on that War. But this design was disappointed by a discovery made by some Letters intercepted by Cardinal Julio de Me∣dicis, wrote from Francis Soderino one of the old Cardinals, and much trusted by the Pope in all his secrets, to Francis the first, King of France; wherein he persuaded him to invade the Kingdom of Sicily, laying down the Plot, and Design as easie, and hopeful. The Pope being greatly mo∣ved, and enraged against Soderino, who was Cardinal of Volterra, for this perfidious disturbance of the quiet of Italy, and disappointment of the Holy War, greatly inveighed against him in a full Assembly of the Car∣dinals, and afterwards committed him Prisoner to the Castle. Soderino's Letters were then produced and read, being full of reflections on the Pope; saying, That he was a person to whom no Faith, or Credence could be given; for tho he pretended the quiet and peace of Italy, and the benefit of the Church, yet he designed it no farther than was consi∣stent with the advancement of his own Charles the Emperor, to whose concernmentr all other considerations were to yield and give place: The
Pope took measures of the affections of all the other Cardinals by this character which Soderino had given of him, and believing them to be all of the same humor, entertained a like jealousie and suspicion of the Cardi∣nals in general; so that he made Confidents of none but of such men on∣ly, as were of his own Country: his Secretaries that were most intimate with him, and privy to all his designs and secrets, were William Eiken∣wort, whom he had made Chief Datary, and Bishop of Tortosa, and the only Cardinal created by him, and Theodorick Hetius, both Dutch-men, and John Rufus, who had been his old Acquaintants and Creatures, by whose counsels, and advice he contrived and acted all matters which had relation to the Government; and seldom communicated his Counsels and designs to the College, but only to his Dutch-men, whom he often prai∣sed, for their sincere and real intentions, without aud, or artifice, and for being truly faithful to the Church, and loyal to him. This ill corre∣spondence between the Pope, and his Cardinals was augmented by the offence he gave to the College, by disanulling all the Acts and Ordinances they had made, during the vacancy of the See, and before he came to Rome; which being made in favour to themselves, and for their own be∣nefit, he made void for the greater good, and emolument of the Church, revoking and taking into his hands those Benefices which the Cardinals had out of favour, and courtesie voted and bestowed on each other: and such Offices as Pope Leo the tenth had conferred on able and good men, in reward of their Learning, and Virtue, he took away to raise mony, wherewith to supply, and satisfie the urgent necessities of the Church. This manner of proceeding added to the fuel of the last discontents made Adrian appear not only distrustful, but covetous in a high degree, and every day seem more odious, and wearisome to the Clergy and Grandees of Rome: of which the Pope being sensible, would often say, that the happy conjuncture of Affairs was greatly conducing to a Prince, who desired to illustrate his Virtues, and Actions to the most advan∣tage: witness the happy state of affairs in the time of the late Pope Leo, which were so flourishing and chearful, that they seemed to be the golden days, which afterwards by that licentiousness which was crept into Rome, during the long vacancy of the Sea, and absence of this Pope, were changed, and altered by a total corruption of manners: to which a contagion of Pe∣stilence supervening, joyned with Famine, and War, which greatly afflicted Italy; the miseries of men caused them to retort their remembrances on the late more chearful days of Leo, and by such unreasonable comparisons to pass a judgment between the Wisdom and Worth of Leo, and Adrian; ma∣king the unavoidable miseries of those times, a matter and subject of odium and detestation of the present Pope; tho in reality he was a person of a severe life, of great temperance, and desirous to reform abuses, which were crept into the Church; and correct, and severely chastise the dissolute manners in the City, such as Simony, Extortion, and Sodo∣my; to which end he called to his assistance Caraffa, Arch-Bishop of Chieti, and Marcello Gazella of Gaeta, both persons of gravity and so∣briety, and of singular Wisdom and Learning; with whom he consulted touching a reformation of manners, and amendment of abuses: and to set by his own example rules of moderation and temperance, he appear∣ed extremely severe towards his own Relations and Kindred: an instance whereof he gave in his deportment towards a Cousin of his, whom he
having setled in his Studies at Siena, came one time from thence to Rom, without the order or command of the Pope; at which he conceived so much anger, that he presently returned him back again on a hired Horse, reproving and telling him, that he should learn modesty, and temperance by his example: several Relations also of his being in a mean condition, travelled afoot through Germany, and came to Rome in expectation of arising to some considerable Preferments: but he disappointed them of their hopes, and returned them back again with no greater largess, than a plain Suit of Cloth to each, and with so much mony as might serve to bear their charges and expences back into their own Country. And in this manner whilst Adrian was intent to introduce honesty of life, and manners into the world, and bring Virtue into fashion; and employed in perfecting the League and Confederacy between the Emperor and the Venetians, and other Allies, in order to the main design of expelling the French out of Italy: It happened that he was seized by a Fever, which affecting him at first in a gentle manner, was lightly esteemed by the Physicians, but the disease afterwards increasing, he summoned the College of Cardinals to him, recommending to them the care of the Church, and the welfare of Christendom. He bestowed his own Cardi∣nals Hat, with his Title on his great Friend, and Confident Eikenwort, in gratitude for his faithful services performed towards him. After which he died in the Vatican on the 14th. of September 1523, having held the Papal Dignity no longer than one year, eight months, and six days; and having lived 64 years. three months, and 13 days, he departed this life, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter, with this Epitaph. Adrianus Papa VI. hic situs est Qui nihil sibi infelicius in vitâ Quam quod imperaret, duxit. But afterwards Cardinal Eikenwort in grateful remembrance of the be∣nefits he had received from him, erected a fair Monument of Alablaster over him, with this Inscription, Adrianus VI. Pont. Max. ex Trajecto insigni Inferioris Germaniae Ʋrbe Qui dum rerum humanarum Maxime aversatur splendorem, ultrò à Proceribus ob Incomparabilem Sacrarum disciplinarum scientiam Ac prope divinam castissimi animi moderationem Carolo V. Caesari Augusto Praeceptor, Ecclesiae Derthusensi Antistes, Sacri Senatus Patrium Collega, Hispaniarum Regnis Praeses, Reipub. denique Christianae divinitus Pontifex absens adscitus. Vixit annos 64 menses 6 dies 13, decessit 18 Cal. Octobris Anno à partu Virginis 1523. Pontificatus sui Anno secuna:
In this manner Pope Adrian died, to the great disappointment of the Confederates, to whom not only the benefit of the Papal Authority fail∣ed by his death, but also the Contribution of that mony, to which he had obliged himself by the capitulations of Confederacy. He left behind him a mean esteem, and opinion in the world of his Wisdom, or abili∣ties of mind, either because in that short time of his Reign, he was not able to give better proof; or else because he wanted experience in Af∣fairs: howsoever he departed this life to the incredible joy of all the Court, who desired to see an Italian in that Seat, or one at least who had been trained up and practised in the Affairs of Italy. CLEMENT VII. POPE Adrian the sixth being dead, and his Funeral Obsequies performed, the Cardinals to the number of thirty, entered in∣to the Conclave for Election of a new Pope. The two which were chiefly in nomination, and which stood most fair for the Election, were the Cardinals Medici and Colonna; the first supported by the Faction of the Emperor, and the other of France: but that which made most against Colonna, was the inveterate enmity which Cardinal Ʋrsino bore to him on account of that ancient hatred and quarrel which was hereditary between the two Families, who therefore opposed him with all his power and interest: And farther upon promise given by Me∣dici to Ʋrsino to confer on him the Office of Vice-Chancellor: the contest was no longer doubtful, every one pressing to give his voice that he might not seem the last to appear in favour of Medici: by which means two thirds giving their suffrages for him (which is necessary to the Election of every Pope) an end was put to this Controversie which had lasted two months and four days. Thus Julio Medici being declared Pope, was con∣ducted by all the Cardinals, together with great numbers of Prelates, and Clergy-men to the Church of S. Peter, where being seated upon the High-Altar ad limina Apostolorum, he was there worshipped, and reve∣renced by all the Clergy, who presented themselves before him to pay him rheir respects, and obedience, and receive his blessing. He there took upon himself the name of Clement VII. and was afterwards condu∣cted, and attended with a numerous train to his Lodgings in the Vatican. This Julio, now Clement VII. was the natural Son of Juliano de Medici, who was murdered by the Pazzi, and other Conspirators, as before de∣clared in the life of Sixtus IV. He was born a month after the death of his Father, whom he greatly resembling in all the lineaments of his face, and vivacity of his spirit, was committed to the charge and care of his Uncle Lorenzo, who educated him in all sorts of Liberal Sciences, and elegancy of manners, which might serve to render a person of his qua∣lity and condition accomplished. His Family being afterwards expelled out of Florence by the power of Charles the Eighth, King of France, he continued in exile from his own Country for the space of 18 years; du∣ring which time, he was created Knight of Rhodes, and Grand Prior of Capua: and afterwards advanced by his Kinsman Leo X. to the Arch-Bishoprick
of Florence, and the year following was created Cardi∣nal of S. Clement, and then instituted Chancellor of the Roman Church, which is the supreme Office in the Popes Court: and lastly, being ascen∣ded to the high dignity of Pope, he was crowned on the 25th. of No∣vember 1523. with the common joy, and satisfaction of all in general, who were pleased with the promotion of a person of his great Authority and Sobriety, wholly addicted to business, and counsel, without mixtures of pleasures, or divertisements; for which reason the world expected great and extraordinary matters from him. Howsoever all these excellencies in a person of his high condition could not hinder or prevent the evils of an insuing War: nor could the Pope, when the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Francis the French King sent their Embassadors to Rome to complement him upon his late Election, please them both, by keeping that even hand of moderation and tempe∣rance which became his Office, when Christian Princes are at variance: for the Emperor expected the same strictness of Alliance as was between him, and Pope Leo his Predecessor, and challenged his favour and partia∣lity on his side, for being assistant and instrumental in his promotion: Howsoever the Election of a person of his Authority and Interest had a considerable Ascendant over the Affairs of the Church: For the Duke of Ferrara, who during the vacancy of the Sea, had seized upon Reg∣gia, having understood that a Pope of so much reputation in the world was Elected, desisted from prosecution of his design of taking Mode∣na, and so retired peaceably to Ferrara: and John de Sassatello, who had for some time vexed, and harassed Romagna, from whence he had been expulsed by the Gibelines, under the Reign of Adrian, did now retire with his contrary Faction of Guelfs, being appeased by the Authority and influence of this new Pope. But the spirits of mightier and more puissant Princes were not so ea∣sily allayed by the charms of mediation, or the force of reason; for tho Clement being desirous of the repose, and quiet of Italy, proposed to Francis the French King in behalf of the Vice-King of Naples, a Truce for five years, with condition, that during that time he should quietly enjoy all the Country on the other side of the River Adda, the Town of Loda only excepted: yet he could not prevail, the French King refusing this fair offer, which afterwards turned to his great misfortune. Where∣fore the Pope finding the difficulty, or impossibility almost of making this Peace, he remained doubtful to which of these two Princes it was most to the interest of the Church, and security of Italy for him to in∣cline, in which suspense the Count Carpy arriving at Rome with chara∣cter of Embassador from the King of France, so well mannaged his de∣sign, that he persuaded the Pope to lay aside, and forget those ancient discontents and animosities, which arose between his Master the King, and Pope Leo the 10th. his Kinsman, and to enter into a firm Alliance with him, as the most secure, and wholesome means to preserve the quiet of Italy. Clement hereby being well affected towards France, dis∣patched an Embassador to the King for confirmation of the Alliance, ad∣vising him to undertake the Conquest of Naples, which he represented as an enterprise easily effected, in regard that there was no Garrison there, all the Emperors Forces being at that time employed in the Duke∣dom of Milan. The King well approving this design, ordered John
Stuart, Duke of Albania, who was of the Blood of the Kings of Scot∣land, and his Lieutenant-General in Italy, to march with a considerable force into the Kingdom of Naples, asking license of the Pope to pass thro his Dominions. But the Pope seeming outwardly, and in appea∣rance averse hereunto,Da Chesne. persuaded the King to desist from this design, as a matter of jealousie to the Venetians, and all Italy; with arguments al∣so inciting to Peace, and accommodation, as best became the Office and quality of a Pope. But the Duke of Albania without attending an an∣swer,Onuf. Panv. had (as assured of the Popes consent) passed the River Po; but be∣fore he had marched five days, he was called back again by the King; who understanding that some Forces and new Supplies were already ar∣rived in the Enemies Camp, and more daily expected, he judged it more advisable to keep his Army entire, until the new Recruits of Switzers and Grisons were come which he had sent to levy, rather than to wea∣ken his Army by that considerable detachment which the enterprise of Naples would require; during which time the King continued the Siege of Pavia. But the Switzers and Grisons being at length arrived in the Kings Camp, the Duke of Albania repassed the Po to invade the King∣dom of Naples; in which design, that the Pope might seem to have had no contrivance, he dispatched away Paul Vettorio, Captain of his Gallies, to the Vice-Roy, letting him know, that tho he had used all diligence to divert the King from his purpose to invade Naples; yet he could not pre∣vail; nor could oppose, or obstruct his passage thro his Country, unless he would draw upon himself the difficulties of that War, which he was not able to master: and that tho he was forced to secure himself by new Articles, and Contracts, yet he would never assent, or agree co any thing, which might be prejudicial to the interest of the Emperor. In fine, he exhorted both Parties to a Peace, and in order thereunto pro∣posed several expedients for accommodation; but nothing prevailed: the Duke of Albania continuing his march, and the King the Siege of Pavia. And now the Imperialists drawing near to the relief of Pavia, the treaties and practices of Princes, and the endeavours and studies of Em∣bassadors availed little; all the difficulties and dangers of many months being reduced to the fortune and success of a few hours. In short, the Battel of Pavia was fought on the 24. of February, 1525. in which the French Army was entirely defeated, and the King himself taken Prisoner; and all the flower of the Nobility of France either slain or taken: of which the Duke of Albania having received intelligence, he raised his Camp from Monte Rotondo near Aquila, where he was lodged, and re∣turned into France; but the greatest part of this Soldiery being compo∣sed of Italians, and Corsicans, returning to Rome, were for the most part rifled and pillaged in their way by the people of Campagna, who were Subjects to the Prince Colonna, and by some Imperialists who be∣layed the ways for them, killing them within the very Walls of Rome; to which place they fled for sanctuary. All the Princes of Italy, espe∣cially the Pope, being extremely affected with this unexpected success, obtained by the Imperial Forces, conducted chiefly by the valour, and wisdom of the Marquess of Pescara, remained doubtful in what manner to govern, and mannage their affairs: for the ballance being now no longer in an equality, but carried down with too much weight on the
side of the Emperor, his Captains were elevated with this Victory, that they became insolent beyond all human sufferance, seeming to aspire to an universal Monarchy: the which insolences were also rendered more intolerable by the complaints brought daily to Rome from Parma, and Piacenza, which Countries the Imperialists had exposed to plunder, and desolation: and the suspicions and jealousies of the Pope were increased, by the refusal the Emperor made of restoring Francis Sforza to his right of the possession of Milan, whom the Imperialists besieged in the Castle, and afterwards banished from the precincts of that Country. And far∣ther, these misunderstandings were increased for want of a faithful com∣pliance on the Emperors side with the Pope, who having paid a consi∣derable sum of mony to Charles de Lanoia the Emperors Agent, on con∣dition to have Reggio restored to the Popedom, which after the death of Adrian had been seized by Alfonso Duke of Ferrara: when these condi∣tions came to be performed, and the ancient League renewed with Charles the Fifth, he disowned the agreement, lest thereby the Pope should grow more potent, and enlarge his Dominions, endeavouring to lessen his pow∣er by the loss of his mony, and exclusion from the possession of Reggio. All these umbrages, and matters of displeasure being revolved in the mind of Clement, with extreme melancholy, and desire of redress, ad∣ministred cause sufficient to him of ill will towards the Emperor, moving in him at the same time compassion of the unfortunate state of Francis the French King, then a Prisoner, in respect to whom he sent the Bishop of Pistoia to condole with him for his unhappy success. Whilst the Pope meditated on these matters with some sort of indignation and fear, the Venetians, who were troubled at the same time with the like thoughts, unexpectedly, sent with many pressing instances to persuade the Pope to joyn with them in the good cause for preventing the total servitude of all Italy; which they proposed to effect by a force of ten thousand Switzers, which they might cause in a short time to descend into Italy; which being added to the Italian Bands, would be able to make head against the Imperial Army; and for their parts they promised according to their custom, far greater matters, than they were able to perform: and for farther encouragement hereunto, they represented the state of the Imperial Army in Italy, to be tumultuous and inclinable to Sedition, having for want of pay seized the Artillery, and fortified themselves in Pavia. Farther, it was not to be doubted, but that Loüisa the Queen Mother, and Regent of France would concur with these Counsels, and be assistant to this design with all the power of that Kingdom. Moreover, it was not to be doubted, but that the Duke of Ferrara, who favoured, and depended on the French felicity, would also enter into this League; the conjunction of whom was of great importance, considering that he was a Prince very rich, his Town of Ferrara strong, and furnished with all stores of Ammunition. But the Pope considering the difficulty of this enterprise, and the un∣certain concurrence of those many circumstances which were required to make it successful, did for some time suspend his resolution, until the Arch-Bishop of Capua who had been his ancient Secretary and Counsel∣lor, brought him such agreeable propositions from Don Carlos de Lanoy, Vice-Roy of Naples, as gave him assurances of an advantageous accom∣modation with the Emperor; for then disposing his mind wholly to the
thoughts of peace, he labored to get the Venetians comprehended in the same terms of accord: but in regard the chief points insisted upon by the Imperialists were sums of mony to be paid, their Army already mutining for want of their Arrears, the Venetians, who judged it a piece of folly and cowardise to compound with their enemies on the condition of putting weapons into their hands, absolutely refused any agree∣ment on such terms; which made well for the Pope, and facilitated his negotiations with the Vice-Roy, who interpreting this refusal of the Ve∣netians to be an indication of new stirs, and commotions, intended against the Imperial interest in Italy, was the more ready to condescend to the more easie terms with the Pope. In short therefore 25 thousand Ducats being by the Popes order paid by the Florentines to the Marquiss of Pescara, Chief of the Emperors Forces in Milan, a Confederacy was concluded at Rome between the Pope and the Florentines on the one side, and the Emperor on the other, viz. That the Pope, and the Emperor should be in a perpetual League, and Alliance, and that the Dutchy of Milan should be always defended by the Arms of the Pope, and the Em∣peror with such numbers of men, as should be agreed by a certain Ar∣ticle, and that the same should be possessed, and governed under the Em∣peror by Francis Sforza, particularly nominated in that Capitulation. That the Emperor should take into his protection all the Estate which the Church held; and particularly should have a care of the House of Me∣dicis, to maintain and preserve them in all the Dignities and Offices which they hold in that City: to which Treaty the greatness of that illustrious Family is in some measure obliged. That the Florentines should pre∣sently pay to the Emperor a hundred thousand Ducats more, in recom∣pence of that which they had engaged to contribute to the last War, in virtue of that Agreement made with Pope Adrian, which was not to ex∣pire until one year after the death of one of the Confederates. That the Duke of Ferrara should immediately render to the Church Reggia, Rubiera, and other Towns which he had unjustly seized, and usurped, during the last vacancy of the Papal Sea; of which so soon as the Pope was possessed, he was in consideration thereof to pay unto the Emperor one hundred thousand Ducats. Lastly, as to Modena, and those Towns, consideration was to be had, and the matter examined, whether they of right appertained to the Church, or the Emperor, and being found only belonging to the Ecclesiastical State, they should be freed from all ac∣knowledgment, and dependance on the Empire. In this manner this Al∣liance was concluded and determined, and the designs of uniting with France, and Venice, which were at first laid open as the fairest game, were now diverted by far different measures. Matters being thus agreed, and concluded in the year 1525. between the Pope and the Vice-Roy, the Cardinal Salviati was sent to the Em∣perors Court with Character of Legate, for confirmation of the Articles; his reception was very honorable, but in debating of particulars on the Commission, the Vice-Roy, who for the common safety and quiet of Italy, allowed that the Investiture might be given to the Duke of Mi∣lan, did dissuade the restitution of Reggia, and Rubiera; which being a scruple started after the Accord, did ill affect the mind of the Pope, and confirmed the opinion he had of the Emperors designs, not to endure any increase of power and greatness in the Church. And farther whilst
these things were debating, there fell out in Lombardy several events which hindred the Investiture of Sforza in the Dutchy of Milan, and therewith broke all the agreements, and measures which were formerly taken; for the Emperor not willing to yield to this Investiture, made pretences of forfeiture thereof by Sforza, and earnestly pressed the ta∣king of the Castle of Milan: so that now the Pope having no expectati∣ons from the Emperor, began to incline again, and be biassed on the side of France; and the other Confederates, knowing that whilst his successes were prosperous, and towering in Italy, the Emperor might easily dis∣pose of the Pope, and oppress him at his pleasure; which he would cer∣tainly do, either out of revenge, or ambition, which is known to be almost natural in Emperors, against the Pope. Wherefore a League and Union being proposed between the Pope, the French, the Venetians, and Duke of Ferrara, with hopes also that the King of England would joyn in it; all things were designed and laid down in a regular manner, and form for carrying on the War, and sup∣pressing the suspected greatness of the Emperor: But this Pope Clement, who was of a temper naturally slow, and irresolute, weighing the con∣sequences of these matters with his Servants, and Ministers of his Coun∣cils, found them so divided, each of them abounding in his own sence, that belabouring the Pope on all sides, he became much more perplexed and distracted in his thoughts, after, than before his consultations. The truth was, there were two men of great Authority with him, one Nicolas Scomberg a German, and John Matthew Giberto a Genoese; Scomberg was much honored, and almost feared by the Pope, but Giberto was more favoured and beloved: these two having been ancient, and intimate friends to him, whilst he was Cardinal, agreed well together; but after∣wards Ambition, and different Interests put them at variance; for Scom∣berg being a German, naturally affected the interest of the Emperor; but Giberto loved no man but the Pope: and tho he had formerly been an enemy to the French interest, yet now upon the change of Affairs, he sided with them against the Emperor. Thus the Pope being distracted between the different Councils of these bosom Friends, he that was irre∣solute in his own nature, suffering himself to be guided by the last advice of different judgments, seemed always so tottering and wavering, that he rendred himself contemptible and ridiculous to all that knew him. The Arguments used by Scomberg to dissuade the League, were, that according to observation, Leagues and Alliances of several Princes had seldom, or never any good effect; for that the conjunction of the Armies, and the due provisions for them, do seldom arrive in season, or at convenient times; that where so many minds and opinions are to concur, and divers interests are carried on, there distrusts, and discontentments do easily happen: whereby the favour of fortune, and benign occasions are disap∣pointed: howsoever at length being over-born by Giberto, he inclined to go through with the League, and in company with the other Confede∣rates to begin a War against the Emperor. For Francis the French King being now at liberty, and holding himself not obliged to the terms he had made, encouraged and gave life to the League▪ and the people of the Dutchy of Milan being greatly oppressed by the Imperialists, were ready on all occasions to make insurrections, and mutinies in the City against the Soldiery, and Collectors of the
Contributions: so that the Pope being well settled, and confirmed in his opinion of the necessity of a War, readily entered into confederacy with the French King, and the Venetians, making the subject and ground of the War to be the re-possession of Francis Sforza into the Dutchy of Milan, and the restoring to liberty the Kings Children, which were given for Hostages: so that the Forces of these Princes being united together, a most cruel War was again renewed in Italy; the success of which in short was this: Lodi was at the beginning of all taken, and then the Confederate Forces joyning with the Switzers, took also Cremona, and besieging the Castle of Milan, forced it to surrender upon Articles, and then resigned it into the possession of Sforza; the Pope also sending some Forces against Arimino, which was seized and possessed by Sigismondo Malatesta, he recovered the City, and expelled the Usurper: but all these successes received some alloys, by the ill news arrived from the King of Hungary, who being overcome, and slain in battel, the City of Buda yielded to the Turk; the which being grievously resented by the Pope, he called the Cardinals into the Consistory, where having com∣plained of the great ignominy and damage to the Christian Cause by this late disgrace, he with great gravity proposed, that for the common good of Christendom it was necessary to surcease the Wars in Italy; and that in order thereunto, laying aside all the considerations of incommo∣dity, danger, and dignity of his person, he resolved to meet the Christian Princes in some convenient place, where he would with Tears and Pray∣ers incline them to an universal Peace, and unite them in a Holy League, and Confederacy against the common Enemy of Christendom. But whilst these things were meditating, all the design was diverted by the treason and conspiracy of the Family of Colonna, which succeeded in this manner. The Family of Colonna which was always favourable to the Imperial interest, observing the proceedings of the Pope, was desirous to act some thing in prejudice to the Allies, and of advantage to the Emperor: and therefore Cardinal Pompeo a near Kinsman of that Family, retiring from Rome to Frescate, with pretence of remaining there to watch against any attempts, that might be made upon the Kingdom of Naples, made great levies of men to be ready at any time to execute his designs. The Pope growing jealous hereof, increased his own Forces, and commanded the Colonnians to depart, and withdraw their Soldiers out of the Dominion of the Church; the which being effected at the instance of the Cardinal De la Valle, who persuaded them to quit the Ecclesiastical State, which they could not disturb without great scandal; the Pope thereby judged him∣self secure, and trusting to the power, and protection of the League, did against the common advice, and persuasion of all his Friends, for the cause only of saving charges, disband his Forces. The Colonnians ob∣serving now the Pope deprived of all his Guards, and exposed, as it were naked to their pleasure, assembled their Forces, being about 3000 Foot, and 800 Horse near Anagnia, assuming to their society Cae∣sar Filettin, their Confederate, and taking a compass to Rome, to be the less suspected, they surprised three Gates of the City, making their en∣try by that of S. John de Lateran; and having passed the Bridg of Sistus with their Battalions orderly drawn up, they entered some Forces by the Burg of S. Spirito. At this action there were present Don Hugo de
Moncada, Ascanio Colonna, and Vespasian Colonna, which last had been instrumental in soliciting the late accord, and given his Faith to the Pope, as well for himself, as for the residue of his Companions. Likewise Car∣dinal Pompeo was there, being so far transported with ambition, that he not only conspired, and resolved to put the Pope to death, but to con∣strain the Cardinals by force of Arms to elect him to the Papal Chair. The Pope surprised with the unexpected arrival of these Guests,1525. who by break of day on the 20th. of September entered Rome, resolved once after the example of Pope Boniface VIII. to seat himself in his Pontifical Chair, and there receive the utmost violence of these Traitors; but be∣ing dissuaded from that resolution by his Friends, he retired to the Ca∣stle of S. Angelo, where he in vain called for the assistance and succor of his friends. For Clement, notwithstanding the great opinion which at his first Inauguration the world conceived of his worth, and merit, was now fallen so low in the esteem of the people by his avarice, and mean practices, that there was not one man, who seeing him betrayed, and contrary to Religious Oaths, and the common Faith of mankind falsly treated, conceived any kind remorse, or compassion of his fate. But on the contrary they began to enumerate the many miscarriages of his Government; That he had laden the Benefices of the Clergy with new and unusual decimations; That he had taken away the Revenues belong∣ing to certain Colleges, made void the Stipends which were given to the Professors, and Readers of Diverse Sciences: Nor was the Commonalty less disgusted against the Pope than others of greater note; for by rea∣son of the Monopolies he had granted upon Corn, to increase the benefit and income of his Exchequer, Bread was risen to that excessive price, that it seemed as if a Famin had been in the City. He had also destroyed, and plucked down several houses, for making the Streets more large and beautiful, without consideration given to the Proprietors, tho to the enriching of his own Creatures, whom he had made Superiors over those contrivances. Thus the people being full of hatred, and disdain against the Pope, refused in the time of his greatest exigency to afford him any relief, and defence against his enemies; who therefore without opposition entered into the new Suburbs, which being sacked by them, they passed no farther for fear of the Cannon from the Castle; then they proceeded to the Popes Palace, and the great Church of S. Peters, which they plundered, and rifled, laying their Sacrilegious hands on every thing that was rich, or of value: but at length the tumult being appea∣sed (for this Riot did not continue above three hours, by reason that they did no hurt, or damage to any particular person) the Pope, who found himself within the Walls of the Castle, without any provision, or sustenance for himself, or his defendants, sent to Don Hugo de Mon∣cada, desiring that he might have a parly, and treaty with him, for the better understanding of matters between them. Tho Cardinal Pompeo was greatly averse to all proposals, or addresses for accommodation, yet Don Hugo under the Popes Faith, having received the Cardinals Cibo and Rodolfo, who were of the Popes kindred, as Hostages for his security, went into the Castle to treat, and discourse with the Pope; where after many words had passed, an agreement was concluded in these terms. That a Truce should be made between the Pope and the Confederates on one side, and of the Emperor on the other, for the space of four
months: That in the mean time the Pope should withdraw his Army out of the Dukedom of Milan, causing them immediately to retire on the side of the River Po towards Rome, and call home his Fleet at Sea un∣der the command of Andrew Doria: That he should pardon the Cardi∣nal Pompeo, with all others of the Family of Colonna; and for security hereof, should deliver Philip Strozzi, a wealthy person, who had mar∣ried the Daughter of Peter de Medicis, and one of the Sons of James Salviati, for Hostages; and to send them to Naples within the space of two months, on penalty of thirty thousand Ducats for default thereof. And lastly, that Don Hugo should depart from Rome with his whole Army, causing every thing to be restored, which had sacrilegiously been robbed, and plundered from the holy places. The Truce being thus concluded, much to the dissatisfaction of Cardinal Pompeo, and others of the Family of Colonna, Don Hugo chearfully departed from Rome, supposing that he had thereby performed sufficient service for the Empe∣ror; and the Pope as readily accepted the Agreement, wanting provisi∣ons in the Castle, and all other means to make a resistance: But the Pope so soon as he found himself at liberty, and freed of those fears, and dangers which encompassed him, having no regard to that Faith, he had given under such compulsive circumstances, as Imprisonment, and Arms, nor care of the Hostages he had delivered, resolved not longer to maintain the Truce; and thereupon recalled his Forces to Rome, being two thousand Switzers, and seven Companies of Italian Infantry, under the command of John de Medicis; to which adding new Le∣vies as an Auxiliary force, he in the first place deprived Pompeo of his Cardinals Hat, and published both him, and all the Family of Colonna Excommunicated, and enemies to the Church; and so farther prosecu∣ting them by Arms, he demolished and laid wast Jubiaco, which was the Country House, and only place of Pleasure, in which Pompeo delighted, and divertised himself; and sent Vitelli with his Companies to burn and destroy all the Towns, and Countries of the Colonnians; as namely, Marina, Montfortin, Gallicano, and Tagarolo. Whilst these things were in action, the Emperor judging it not time to sit quiet, and secure, commanded Charles de Lonoia Vice-King of Naples to put in a readiness six thousand Spaniards, and ordered thirty Sail of stout men of War to be speedily equipped, and sent to the Coast of Italy; and wrote also to his Brother Ferdinand to persuade George Franispergio a Captain of great authority, and renown in Augu∣sta, that he would speedily with three Regiments of Germans pass into Italy; whose march, aed passage over the Po, whilst John de Medicis en∣deavoured to hinder, he was unhappily killed by a shot from one of the Enemies Sakers, which breaking his thigh a little above his knee, he was carried to Mantoua, where he died within a few days after, to the great prejudice of the Enterprise, and loss to the Pope, for being a young man of nine and twenty years of age, whose Arms alone the Ene∣my feared; whose time and years his Experience, and Virtue surpassed; and being of a most excellent temper, neither too forward, and precipi∣tate, nor yet too wary, and diffident, gave evident indications of be∣coming with time one of the most eminent Captains in the world. In this manner the Truce being absolutely broken, a most cruel War began again in Italy; for the Imperialists entering the Ecclesiastical
State, had some skirmishes with the Popes Forces about Frosolone; and matters pressing hard to their disadvantage, the French King was intrea∣ted to make a diversion by attempting the subjection of the Kingdom of Naples. Hereupon it being determined to invade Naples both by Sea and Land, Monsieur De Vaudemont who by the ancient Right of King René laid claim to that Kingdom, was appointed for that enterprise, and being arrived with his Fleet, he at the first on-set took Salerno; and thence with great courage, and hopes marching to Naples it self, was repulsed by the Forces under the command of Don Hugo de Moncada. Howsoever the Pope re-inforcing his Army with new Levies under the command of his Legate Augustin Trivultio, one greatly affected to the French interest, the Imperialists were worsted, and at length forced to raise their Siege from before Frosolene, and retire farther within the Ju∣risdiction of that Kingdom. But this good fortune passed no farther. For after various successes, and many troubles, and desolations in Italy, the Pope wanting mony, grew weary of the War; and being dis∣appointed by the French King, who was great in his promises, but little in his performances, having always failed in his times of payment, and neither complied in the supplies of men, or mony, he resolved to close with the propositions made him by Francis de Quignones, in behalf of the Emperor; in reward of which mediation, he was afterwards promoted to the dignity of Cardinal. In short, the Articles agreed were these: That there should be a cessation of Arms for eight months, the Pope paying 60000 Ducats to the Imperial Army: That whatsoever had been taken from the Church, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Family of Co∣lonna, should be made good and rendered: That Pompeo Colonna should be restored to the dignity of Cardinal, and absolved from all Ecclesiasti∣cal censures; which condition was more grievous to the Pope than all the rest: That the French King and the Venetians should have liberty within a certain time to enter into the League, if they pleased: That the Pope should pay forty thousand Ducats in the space of two and twenty days, and the residue in a month after: That the Vice-Roy of Naples should come to Rome, to confirm the Articles; it being judged a good expedient to cause the Duke of Bourbon to observe the accord. The Ca∣pitulations of Peace being in this manner signed, both parties speedily retired their Forces; and the Pope resolving sincerely to keep and execute the Articles, was also persuaded, that the other party would do the like; of which being assured by the coming of the Vice-Roy to Rome, he un∣advisedly disbanded all his Soldiers, excepting only 200 Horse, and 2000 Foot, which he still continued in his Pay, being of those valiant Black Bands which had been commanded by John de Medici. Matters continued in this posture for the space of eight days: by which time the news of this accord being made known to the Duke of Bourbon and his Army, the Soldiery became enraged, and the Duke raised infinite diffi∣culties about standing to the Agreement; and especially the Spanish Sol∣diery were so violent therein, that a Gentleman sent by the Vice-Roy to the Duke to persuade him to accept the Agreement, had been killed by them, had he not conveyed himself away from their fury: wherefore the Duke either not being willing, or not able to restrain his Soldiery, marched with all speed imaginable to the Walls of Rome; to which without far∣ther demur, applying his Ladders at the side of the Vatican, was the first,
(that he might give courage, and example to his Soldiery) to scale the Walls; in which attempt being shot by a Cannon-Bullet, he fell dead from the Walls: and lest his body lying exposed to the view of the Sol∣diery should give them cause of discouragement, the Prince of Orange who was near to him covered his Corps with his Cloak: Howsoever the storm succeeded more prosperously towards the Mount of S. Spirito, where they entered on the 14th. of May, 1527. with the slaughter of some few, who had the courage to make any resistance; and passing the Bridg of Sistus, the whole Army consisting of Germans, Italians, and Spaniards, to the number of 40000, entered the City, where they com∣mitted all the slaughter, rapin, and violence which enraged and licentious Soldiers were capable to act, without respect to things sacred, or pro∣phane, or to those Cardinals, who had the name, and report of being inclined to the Emperors Faction. Rome never saw so sad and dismal a day, no not when they had been sacked by the Goths, and other barba∣rous Nations; for whomsoever they met, they killed, and cut to pieces, the Streets ran with blood, the Altars were despoiled, the Churches and Monasteries plundered, the Nuns and Women ravished, and the Pala∣ces of the Pope, Cardinals, and Princes rifled and sacked; so that it is impossible to express, what Wealth and Riches lay in heaps, and what precious Commodities belonging to Merchants were made the prey of common Soldiers. And what made the spoil yet more great, was the number of Prisoners, every one of which was forced to cut his ransom, and redeem himself at a certain price: and to augment the ignominy, as well as the desolation of this miserable fortune, the Prelates were taken by the Soldiers, and in all their Pontificalibus and Habits, were set upon Asses, and Mules, and led through the streets with contempt and derisi∣on. The Pope amidst these distractions fled to the Castle of S. Angelo, his usual Sanctuary, where being streightly Besieged, with great num∣bers of those who retired thither for refuge, he soon began to want Pro∣visions; so that Famin constrained him to yield himself into the hands of his Enemies upon discretion, and on conditions of doing whatsoever the Emperor should as a Conqueror impose upon him: And in the mean time, until Messengers could be sent into Spain, and return to Rome with the Emperors pleasure, it was agreed that the Pope should pay to the Army 400000 Ducats, for raising of which, all the Vessels of Gold and Silver belonging to the Churches, which were saved from the rapin of the Enemy were to be melted down, and coined; and farther for raising mony, divers Cardinals Caps were set to sale, as by publick out-cry to whomsoever would give most, who upon payment of the sums agreed, were to enter into the College and dignity of Cardinals. The persons who with their mony had purchased this quality were Marino Grimano, and Francis Cornaro, both Venetians; likewise Sanseverino, Carrafa, and Parmerio, Neapolitans, and Cardona a Spaniard; and for an Auxiliary help to these payments, an impost of mony was to be charged upon the whole state of the Church. It was farther agreed that the Pope should de∣liver into the hands of the Emperor, to hold them so long as he pleased, the Castle of S. Angelo, Ostia, Civita Vechia, Castellano, with the Cities of Parma, Piacenza, and Modena: That the Pope and the thirteen Car∣dinals with him should remain Prisoners in the Castle of S. Angelo, until the monies were paid, and afterwards should go to Naples, or Gaietta,
Gaietta, until the pleasure and determination of the Emperor was ar∣rived. The Duke of Bourbon being dead, the Prince of Aurange was made Ge∣neral in his place; to whom whilst things were acting in this manner, advices came, that Monsieur De Lautrec, with a very great Army, by order of Francis the French King, to which also Henry the Eighth of England had joyned his Forces, was marching towards Rome, with de∣sign to rescue the Pope from those insolent hands, under which he was a Prisoner: The news of which caused great tumults and mutinies amongst the Soldiery, who being desirous to depart quietly with their prey, before they were forced to disgorge it again, used all imaginable insolences towards the Pope, to compel him to a payment of their Ar∣rears, with the monies promised: but he not being master of one peny, was constrained to deliver into their hands the persons of several rich men, which they had named, for security of the mony promised. But the ill fortune of Clement stopped not here, for so soon as the news of the Popes imprisonment was heard at Florence, the Inhabitants judged it a seasonable opportunity to recover their liberty, and thereupon beta∣king themselves to Arms, they forced the Cardinal of Cortona, with Hippolito, and Alexander de Medicis to abandon the City, and so reas∣sumed unto themselves the free administration of a Common-wealth, un∣der the Authority of a Gonfalonnier, created according to their ancient otitution for the space of a year: for indeed the hatred they had con∣ived against the House of Medicis, was for many reasons, great and eous; especially because they had been forced with their own mony to bear out the pride, and greatness of that Family, in all the Wars they made in defence of the Dutchy of Ʋrbin, and in the Wars which Pope Leo made against the French: for which reasons, they persecuted those Citizens that had been friends to the Medices; they reversed, and defac'd through the City the Arms of that Family; they brake the Images of Leo, and Clement, which were rare pieces of Sculpture, and famous through the world; and in short they omitted nothing which might af∣fect the Pope with indignity, and dishonor, and nourish division, and discord in the City. At Rome the Army was very disorderly and tumultuous, governing themselves, rather than obeying the command of their General the Prince of Aurange; for they were wholly disposed to prey and violence, to get Ransoms, and receive the mony promised them by the Pope, no care be∣ing had of the interest of the Emperor; nor was there any resolution ta∣ken to remove the Army from Rome, where the Pestilence raged, and was entered into the Castle of S. Angelo, to the great hazard of the Pope's life, many being dead thereof who served about his person: du∣ring which time, as the Imperial Army yielded little obedience to their Captains, so they made no great disturbances, nor gave fears to their enemies; for the Spaniards and Italians flying from the infection of the Plague lay dispersed about the Confines of Rome; and the Prince of Aurange was gone to Siena to avoid the Plague, and keep that City in De∣votion, and Obedience to the Emperor. Wherefore all matters of action at that time were quiet, and in repose, until Monsieur De Lautrec who was Captain General of the League made between Henry the Eighth of England, and Francis King of France, for setting the Pope and all Italy
at liberty, appeared in Piedmont, whose success was so fortunate, that he took Genoua, compelled Alexandria de la Paglia to surrender, and having for four days battered Pavia, he forced it to yield at discretion, giving it up to the plunder and cruelty of his Soldiery; and lastly ended that years Champaign with glory, wintering his Army in the City of Bologna. The Imperialists being a little mortified, and abased with this success of Lautrec, were desirous to make the best bargain they could with the Pope, before he were forced from them, and agreed upon the payment of 60000 Ducats to the Germans, and 30000 to the Spaniards, with en∣gagement to pay the residue at a certain time, to set the Pope and Cardi∣nals at liberty, and afford them safe conduct to Orvieto, which was no∣minated and chosen by the Pope for the place of his security, and retreat. Upon this accord the Pope being guarded by the Imperialists, with less caution than before, gave him opportunity in the disguise and habit of a Merchant to make his escape; which he rather determined to do, and re∣cover his freedom in that manner, than to expect the formal conduct of the Imperial Guards, suspecting that Don Hugo de Moncada who was Vice Roy of Naples in the place of Lanoia dead of the Plague, and who had no good will towards him, would play him some trick, and baffle with him at the conclusion of all. The Pope being now at liberty in Orvieto, after seven months impri∣sonment, was instantly congratulated by the Duke of Ʋrbin, the Mar∣quiss of Salutta, and other Captains of the League, to whom having returned thanks for their kind and obliging Offices, he desired them to withdraw their Forces out of the Dominions of the Church, assuring them that the Imperialists had promised to depart thence, in case the Confederates would shew them the first example: He wrote also Letters to Monsieur Lautrec, giving him to understand, that he with great sence acknowledged the influence which his appearance in Italy had contribu∣ted towards his liberty, having much facilitated, and eased the conditi∣ons on which he was to receive it: and that the reason why he did not expect the glorious time, in which he was to have been delivered by his powerful hand, was, because his necessities compelled him to procure his liberty with the greatest speed; for he observed, that the conditions im∣posed on him, always changed from bad to worse; that in the mean time the Church was oppressed, his Authority contemned, and he ren∣dred uncapable of being that happy instrument of mediation, which was now required to settle peace among Christian Princes. Thus far were excellent words, and such as became a Bishop under his mortifying cir∣cumstances; but his words, and answers in other things, according to his natural temper, were in substance different at one time, to what they were at an other. For when Gregory Castle, the King of Englands Em∣bassador came to him about the beginning of the year 1528.1528. desiring him to continue firm to the Confederates, he would some time give him hopes, and then again excuse himself, as being so unfortunate, as to have neither Men, Mony, nor Authority remaining to him. The Pope having now abandoned Rome, and Monsieur Lautrec upon his march towards Naples,Ibidem. the Imperialists on the 17. of February left the City in a naked and poor condition, despoiled of all its Ornaments, and Riches, and applyed themselves to Counsels in what manner they
might give a stop to the proceedings of Lautrec, who departed from Bologna the 9th. of January. No sooner were the Imperialists departed, than the Ʋrsins with their Tenants and Paisants entered to complete the spoil and desolation of that City, of which not only the Houses were rui∣ned, and the Riches carried away, but all the Statues, Columns, and curious pieces remained a prey to these Locusts. Lautrec in his march towards Naples, took not the nearest way, but rather for the more commodious carriage of his Cannon, and for the benefit of Forrage, and other Provisions, fetched a compass by the way of Puglia: his Army consisted of 400 Lances, 6000 Footmen, old and Veterane Soldiers; besides the Forces of the Marquiss of Salutta, who marched in the Van, and the Regiments of the Venetians, and the Black Bands of Florence which were in much esteem, and reputation with Monsieur Lautrec. In short, at the first appearance of Lautrec within this Kingdom, Capua, Nola, Acerra, Aversa, and all places yielded to him; but Naples endured a long Siege: at which Monsieur Lautrec dying of a Fever, and most of the Captains and Soldiers dead of the Plague, caused by the Contagion of those that were privately sent out of the City to infect the Camp, the enterprise upon that Kingdom had an end. In the mean time whilst these things were in action, Sassatello rendred to the Pope the Rock of Imola, and Sigismond Malatesta upon some con∣ditions resigned Rimini into his hands; and the Pope having a great de∣sire to re-instate his Friends and Relations, and advance his own Interest and Power again in Florence, he seemed inclining to the party of the Em∣peror, in whose power only it was to settle the Affairs of his Family in their pristine state: and therefore perceiving the Affairs of the French, and the other Confederates to decline in Italy, he forgot all the former in∣juries done to him by the Emperor, and entered into a perfect friendship, and fair correspondence with him. And farther to advance himself in the good opinion of the Emperor, he called for a review of the cause of Divorce between Henry VIII. of England, and Catharine his Queen,1529. and Aunt to the Emperor; for which having at the time of those great op∣pressions he lay under from the Emperor granted a Bull, did now on terms of reconciliation, cause the same to be revoked. And now the Pope following his resolution, and closely attending a fair conclusion with the Emperor, a Peace was concluded between them at Barcelona, much to the advantage of the Pope; proceeding perhaps (as may be be∣lieved) from a sense the Emperor might have conceived of the unjust and hard usage he had exercised towards him: and because the urgency of his Affairs did call him into Italy, he might imagin that the countenance, and favor of the Pope might be useful: and for these reasons it was ac∣corded, and agreed, That a perpetual Peace, and Confederation be made between the Emperor, and the Pope: That the Pope should grant free passage to the Emperors Army through the Ecclesiastical State, in case it should depart out of the Kingdom of Naples: That the Emperor should re-instate the Son of Laurence de Medicis in the same condition of great∣ness and power at Florence, as they had been in before their expulsion thence, or their Predecessors had enjoyed at any time before: That the Emperor should by such ways and terms as were most convenient, ei∣ther by force of Arms, or otherwise, cause the possession of Cervia,
Modena, Reggio, and Rubiera to be restored to the Pope. That these particulars being performed, the Pope should in consideration thereof yield unto the Emperor the whole and absolute Investitute of the King∣dom of Naples, with the Tribute only of a White Horse yearly to be given in acknowledgment of Fealty; together with the nomination of four and twenty Cathedral Churches, which had formerly been in dis∣pute, but now were determined to belong to the Emperor; the Churches only which were not under Patronage to be reserved to the Pope: That when the Emperor should have passed into Italy, that the Pope and he should have an interview, and meet at Bologna, or some other conveni∣ent place, to consult about their Affairs, and matters relating to the Peace and settlement of the Church. And that the Emperor, and his Brother Ferdinand should exercise their Temporal Arms against the Lutherans, and others who had revolted from the Roman Church, and second the Spiritual Weapons of Excommunications, and Ecclesiastical censures, which were issued against them: That the Pope should grant Plenary Absolution to all those, who had lately been injurious to the Apostolical Sea, or had by any violent, or hostile acts committed outrages against it: And lastly, to confirm, and consummate all these Articles by the more endearing terms of Alliance, the Emperor was to give Margaret of Austria his natural Daughter in Marriage to Alexander de Medicis Son of Laurence, late Duke of Ʋrbin, with twenty thousand Ducats of yearly Revenue; on whom the Pope intended to establish the temporal greatness of his Family; having not long since created Hippolito Cardi∣nal, who was the Son of Julian. This Peace was soon afterwards followed by another between the Em∣peror and the French King,1529. treated at Cambray, of which the Pope was the chief Mediator by the Arch-Bishop of Capua, who was sent thither as Legate. The conclusion of this grand Affair did much facilitate the Emperors design upon Florence, which he committed to the charge, and management of the Prince of Orange; who in pursuance of those com∣mands having mustered his Forces about Aquila, he was desired by the Pope to come to Rome, that he might the better consult, and resolve with him upon the provisions, and ways of carrying on the War. The Prince of Orange accordingly coming, was received by the Pope with great respect, to whom towards payment of the Army, thirty thousand Ducats were issued out of the Popes Treasury, and soon after forty thou∣sand more; with which, and with three pieces of Cannon taken out of the Castle S. Angelo, the Prince departing, he encamped before Perusa, which was in the first place to be reduced to the obedience of the Church. This place being held by Malatesta, Baillon was surrendred upon com∣position; and thence the Prince entering on the Lands, and Country be∣longing to the Florentines, encamped before Spella, which was in a short time delivered to him. Whilst these things were acting, the Emperor departed from Barce∣lona with a great Fleet, wherein were a thousand Horsemen, and nine thousand Foot, with which he arrived at Genoua, to the great terror of all Italy, and especially of the Florentines, who thereupon made choice of four Embassadors to congratulate his arrival, and endeavour to make some agreement with them for composition of their Affairs. When these Embassadors were admitted to the presence of the Emperor, and that
the Ceremonies of Congratulation were past; they declared, That their City was not ambitious, or desirous of great enlargements, or extents of jurisdictions, but only to conserve their own with their Rights and liber∣ties, being willing to be beholding to the power of any mighty Monarch, who would be pleased to take them into his protection. That they had associated and entered into Confederacy with France, it was no matter of their own choice, but in obedience, and compliance with the Pope, who at that time commanded them; but that now they had thrown off all considerations of his Temporal Power, or his Families over them; and that their Commission extending no farther than to a Treaty with the Emperor, they could not give ear to any thing which had reference to the Pope. This answer being unpleasing to the Emperor, the Embassa∣dors were refused farther Audience at Piacenza, tho they had followed the Court of the Emperor with that expectation from Genoua to that place; so that their Negotiation was at an end for that time. By this time being about the beginning of the year 1530.1530 the Pope arrived first at Bologna, and the Emperor soon after came to him; where he was received by the Pope with great honor, and lodged in the same Palace with him; and such signs of familiarity and friendship passed, as if there had never happened any of those disgusts, and violent actions between them, which we have formerly mentioned, or at least that they had with a real and unfeigned pardon been entirely forgotten. Thus mat∣ters appearing fair, and clear between them, the Emperor intended to pass some time in Italy, in regard his Affairs in other parts seemed not much to require his presence: for that Soliman the Magnificent, who was then Grand Signior, and had besieged Vienna, was forced to raise his Camp, and return to Constantinople; and the Peace being newly con∣cluded with France, nothing seemed in outward appearance which might give him cause of avocation, or diversion from the Affairs of Italy. Wherefore it was resolved that the Emperor should proceed to Rome, and there be Crowned, taking Siena in his way, for better dispatch, and ex∣pedition in the design upon Florence: but whilst these things were medi∣tating, Letters came from the Electoral College to the Emperor, earnestly intreating him, that he would be pleased speedily to return into Germany, to consider about the matter of Summoning a General Council for Refor∣mation of Religion, and Election of his Brother Ferdinand to be King of the Romans; and also to prepare matters for resistance of the Turk, who had sworn to return thither again in a short time. These matters seeming of considerable importance, were the cause that the Emperor changed his resolution of proceeding to Rome, and was Crowned at Bologna by the hand of the Pope, at which there was a great confluence of people, tho not that magnificence and pomp as had been usual at the Inauguration of other Emperors. The day of his Coronation was the Feast of S. Mat∣thias, a day thrice auspicious to him, being the day of his Nativity, the day on which he took the French King Prisoner, and the day on which he was invested in the Imperial Dignity. This Solemnity being past, the Emperor prepared for his Journey into Germany; howsoever before his departure, the Pope having setled his own business with him touching the subjection of Florence, other mat∣ters of difference relating to the Venetians, to the Investiture of Francis Sforza into the Dutchy of Milan, and Alfonso d' Este, Duke of Ferrara,
were referred by compromise to the sentence and determination of the Emperor; the expectation of which judgment gave for some time quiet and repose to the Affairs of Italy. After which, the Emperor proceeded to Germany, and the Pope returned to Rome; where after some short time, he received the joyful news of the surrender of Florence; which having endured a long Siege by the Emperors Army under the command of the Prince of Aurange, and after his death of Don Ferrand de Gonzaga, yielded it self by common consent of the people to the government of twelve Citizens, who being of the Faction of the Medices, did without attending the Declaration of the Emperor, leave Florence entirely to the pleasure and disposal of the Pope; at whose instance and persuasion the Emperor declared Alexander de Medicis Prince, and Duke of Florence; and the same right of Honor and Dignity to descend from him, to his Heirs for ever: the which power and title hath since that time continued in that Illustrious Family. Whilst these things were acted in Italy, a Diet was assembled at Ausbourg, at which Ferdinand the Emperors Bro∣ther was elected King of the Romans; where also notice being taken of the great increase of the Lutheran Doctrin, which had spread it self in all parts of Germany, and had taken root in the greatest and most Prince∣ly Families; it was concluded by all sides, and parties, as well Lutherans, as others, that the only means to reform Affairs, and confirm those Do∣ctrins which were sound and Orthodox, was only in the Power, and Authority of a General Council: for the moderate Party which was in∣clined to the Papal Interest, considering the many abuses crept into the Church, and the exorbitant power of the Clergy, hoped that a Coun∣cil would reduce matters to more equal terms. The Lutherans on the other side, having formed a great and numerous Party, did apprehend that many of the dignified Clergy, that were to be Members of that Council, would prove well inclined, and affected to them; where mat∣ters being debated with freedom and candor, the nakedness of the Church of Rome would be exposed, and its Corruptions discovered. This being the general sense of all Germany, which the Emperor was willing to satisfie, he sent to the Pope, urging him to summon a Council; to persuade him whereunto, he desired him to recal unto his memory, the personal Conferences they had entertained at Bologna, and the assuran∣ces he had there given him of faithfulness, and adherence to the Church; promising him, that neither his Authority nor Dignity should be brought into any danger; for that he would be there present in person to over∣awe any contrivances which might be designed against either. Nothing could come more ungrateful than this Proposition to the Pope and Car∣dinals, who were not willing to expose the excessive abuses and exacti∣ons of the Court of Rome to the test of a Council; where perhaps, the authority of Indulgences, the largeness of Dispensations, and other Er∣rors being discussed, would give admission into those secrets, which were not to be touched, or opened. The Pope also had some secret reserves of his own, which he would not have committed to the scrutiny of a a Council: he was not willing perhaps to have it debated, that he was born Illigitimate which incapacitates him of being a Cardinal, and consequently of being Pope. Nor would he have the suspicion of Simo∣ny, with which he practised with Cardinal Colonna, called into question; besides many other particulars, of which he feared to be censured by
the Council: upon consideration of all which, after consultations had with the Cardinals deputed to the discussion of that matter, many rea∣sons were given to the Emperor, against the present Assembling of such a Council; but when the time should appear more seasonable, that then the Indictions might be regulated with many proper and cautious cir∣cumstances; as that the Council should be celebrated in Italy, and that the Pope should be personally present at it: and that the Lutherans should promise to submit the determination and decision of their Contro∣versies and Opinions, to the judgment and sentence of a Council, and in the mean time desist from the declaration, or propagation of their Doctrins: the which being a matter difficult, and unpracticable, the proposition for a Council became ineffectual, and the thoughts thereof laid aside until the Reign of another Pope. Tho the Pope did not think fit to gratifie the desires of the Emperor, and all Germany with a General Council; yet the Emperor not unmind∣ful of the Arbitration he had accepted for settlement of the Affairs of Italy, did about the beginning of the year 1531.1531. reassume the conside∣ration of those matters. In the first place therefore he decreed that the City of Florence should be governed by the same Magistrates, and by the same model, and form of rule, as it had formerly been in the time of the Medices; that Alexander the Popes Nephew should be chief in the Government, and so successively his Heirs for ever: all the ancient Pri∣vileges and Immunities formerly granted by him, or his Predecessors were again restored and confirmed; with condition notwithstanding of forfeiture, in case the Magistrates or People of that City should attempt any thing against the authority and greatness of the Medices: the which Sentence he pronounced with a Despotick power, not by virtue of a compromise, or reference to him by the parties concerned, but by an Au∣thority inherent in the Imperial Dignity. And tho this determination was pleasing to the Pope, yet by the other relating to the Duke of Fer∣rara he was much offended: for after that Controversie had been open∣ed, heard, and examined by many Doctors and Testimonies, and Wri∣tings produced, the Emperor according to the counsel, and report made him, pronounced, that Modena and Reggio appertained of right to the Duke of Ferrara; who paying a hundred thousand Ducats to the Pope, the Tributes should be reduced to their ancient custom, and he invested in the Jurisdiction of Ferrara. But the Pope would neither allow that part of the Sentence, nor accept the payment of the mony, wherein the Duke was condemned, refusing the Tribute which was offered to him according to the usual custom: so that there was neither open War, nor a setled Peace between the Pope, and the Duke of Ferrara; for having a regard, and some respect to the Emperors Award, and Sentence, he feared to assail him with open force, contriving in the mean time secret plots, and devices wherewith to ensnare him. Matters thus continued with some tranquillity, until the year 1532.1532: which was more signal for Forein Wars, than for the Commotions of Italy: For Francis the French King, not forgetting the sufferings he had sustained by the Emperor, contrived all ways imaginable for his revenge, not being scrupulous or ashamed of secret practices and treaties with So∣liman Emperor of the Turks, in despight of his Title of Most Christian, to stir him up, and incite him to a War against Charles the Emperor; in∣viting
him to make a second attempt by laying siege to Vienna. Soliman being full of anger, and disdain for the late foil he had received before that City, was easily persuaded to try his fortune in another Expediti∣on; but the Princes and Free Towns of Germany concurring with their Forces, and uniting them to the Imperial Troops, composed a most for∣midable Army, which being conducted by Charles the Emperor, who was the greatest Captain of his age, and his name terrible to the Turks: Soliman made only some incursions into Hungary, and then returned again to Constantinople. But before this news came, and whilst these things were in action, Henry VIII. King of England, and Francis the French King being both highly displeased with the Emperor, met together at Boloign in France, where they held several Consultations how to improve the present state of Affairs to their own advantage. And giving it for granted, that the Turk would Winter in Hungary, and afford the Emperor sufficient em∣ployment for the year following; they resolved to make use of this con∣juncture of Affairs to their mutual benefit: in pursuance of which, it was determined between them, that the French King was to invade the State of Milan, and the Pope was to be induced to assist in the same de∣sign, and to determin the cause of Divorce of Queen Catharine in fa∣vour of King Henry, then depending in the Court of Rome: with which message and instructions the Cardinals of Ternon, and Gramont were sent Embassadors to the Pope. But King Henry having not the patience to attend the result, contemned the authority of a Divorce by the Pa∣pal Power, contenting and satifying his own Conscience with what had before been disputed, and determined in the Courts of England about that matter: and having understood, that the Legate Campeius had been sent into England with a Bull of Divorce, which afterwards upon change of the Pope's mind he had burnt, the King was so enraged thereat, that he resolved not to have farther dealings with the Pope;Baker's Chron. and thereupon Proclamation was published, that no person of what estate or condition soever,c. should purchase, or attempt to purchase from the Court of Rome, any thing prejudicial to the Jurisdiction, or Prerogative of this Realm, upon pain of Imprisonment, or other punishment, according to the plea∣sure of the King. But the retirement of the Turks out of Hungary put a period to the design of Invading the Dutchy of Milan, and to the expectation the King of England had of receiving a favourable sentence at Rome in the point of Divorce; for the result of the Interview of these two Kings be∣ing known at Rome, hastned the Pope to make a League with the Em∣peror, which was concluded at a second meeting at Bologna, where the same Ceremonies, and terms of amity, and friendship passed between them, as had been formerly at the first. After which the Emperor by the way of Genoua passed into Spain; and the Pope returned to Rome, ac∣companied thither by the two Cardinals, Ternon, and Gramont; the which according to their Commission insisted greatly to have the Divorce of Queen Catharine confirmed by the Popes Authority; alledging the great damage, and ruine that an obstinate persistance to the contrary might bring to the Church: but the Cardinals of the Emperors Faction labouring to the contrary, and the Pope understanding what Henry had already acted in that point in England, issued an Excommunication
against him, and his whole Realm, unless before the end of September following, he did revoke all the Acts he had made, to the prejudice of the Apostolical Sea, and the Papal Authority. These French Cardinals finding their Negotiations in reference to Eng∣land to be unsuccessful, and desperate; treated notwithstanding an inter∣view between the Pope and the French King, to be held at Marseille; co∣louring their design with the specious pretence of finding some expedi∣ent to accommodate matters between King Henry and the Pope; a Cha∣rity so great, and Christian, and of that high importance, as might chal∣lenge the labors and endeavours of the most Christian King: and farther it was pretended that a League and Union between the Christian Prin∣ces was there to be negotiated against the Turk. But the desire of the Pope being in reallity to marry his Niece Catharine de Medicis to the second Son of the King of France, was easily persuaded to condescend to a proposition so agreeable to his own inclinations: in pursuance whereof the Pope with a great retinue of Cardinals Embarked at Pisa on his own Gallies, and in a few days of prosperous Navigation, he landed at Marseille, where being saluted with three hundred pieces of Cannon at his arrival, he was lodged for the first night in the Palace of the Duke of Montmorency, Grand Master, and Mareschal of France. The next day he made his entry through the City, habited in his Pontifical Vestments, and carried in his Chair upon mens shoulders; before him a White Horse was led by two men, with silken Reins, carrying the Sacrament of the Altar; then followed the Cardinals in their Habits, mounted upon their Mules; after which came Catharine de Medicis, Dutchess of Ʋrbin, attended with a great number of Ladies and Gentlemen, both of the French and Italian Nation; in which equipage the Pope passed the Streets to the Lodgings which were provided for him. The day fol∣lowing the French King came, and with great solemnity went to per∣form the Offices of Duty, and Obedience to the Pope. These Solemnities and Ceremonies being past, matters of publick concernment were in the first place taken into consideration by those who were by the King and the Pope delegated to consult thereof: and tho the Marriage was the main point, which moved the Pope to under∣take this Journey, yet it was in the last place, and as it were accidental∣ly, and by the by treated of: The first thing assumed, was the proposal about a General Council, but that was soon rejected, and executed with the same reasons, and replies as were given to the Emperor. In the next place the King of Englands case was warmly insisted upon by the Commissioners of the French King as it had been formerly agreed be∣tween the two Kings at Bulloin; but those instances produced little ef∣fect; for the Ministers of the King of England being in a huff, were al∣ways to the diminution of the Popes Authority appealing to a Council; with which the Pope referred their Cause to be farther debated at his return to Rome: and the French King being desirous in all things to satisfie, and comply with the Pope, he told him, that it would not be displeasing to him, in case he proceeded against that King according to the Rule of Justice, and the ancient Canons of Ecclesiastical Censure; by which fair and friendly compliance, the Pope would not refuse at the instance of the French King to create four Cardinals, tho much against his own inclinations, fearing thereby to have rendered the French
Faction too strong, which already was more prevalent in the Court of Rome, than the Pope desired. In the last place, tho the first in design, the Marriage between the Duke of Orleans, and the Pope's Niece was treated and concluded; and the parties married by the Pope himself: by which a strict and firm Alliance, and friendship being created between the French King and the Pope, it seemed as if all those professions of ami∣ty and good will, which had lately interceded at Bologna between the Emperor and the Pope had vanished, or signified little; and now amongst other Articles, it being capitulated, that the Duke of Orleans should be invested in the Dukedom of Milan; it was with no less wonder consi∣dered, that the interest of Francis Sforza the true and right Heir to that Dutchy, and for which both this, and other Popes had so earnestly con∣tended, could so easily be made void, and transferred over to a Forein Prince, who could pretend no other right thereunto, than the might, and power of his own Arms. With entertainment of these Affairs, a months time being spent at Marseille, the Pope returned to Rome; where, so soon as he arrived, he foretold his own death, acquainting his Friends, and Domesticks about his person; that he had not long to live; and therefore in order to his Burial, he commanded the Ring to be provided, and the Vestments in which Popes were usually interred: howsoever before his death, he thundered out his Bulls of Excommunication against Henry VIII. King of England, and all the people of his Realm; with which the King be∣ing highly incensed, immediately withdrew his Obedience from the Pa∣pal Sea, and declared himself Head under Jesus Christ of the Church of England; forbidding mony to be transported out of England to Rome, and commanded the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury to renounce his Title of Legate from the Pope: the which was the beginning of that blessed Re∣formation,1534. which hath purged the Church of England from Errors, ren∣dred it pure in its Doctrin, introduced the true, and glorious light of the Gospel, which will with Gods assistance for ever remain sure, and im∣movable in despight of all the contrivances either of the Fanatical irre∣ligious malice, or the power, or policies of the Roman Church: And moreover it was the beginning of that liberty which we now enjoy, and the enrichment of this flourishing Nation, which now keeps its Treasures and Acquisitions to its self, which in former days were emptied into the Coffers of the Pope to make Foreiners opulent, and its people poor. But to return to Pope Clement; being taken with a pain in his sto∣mach, a Fever ensued upon it; of which according to his own predicti∣on, he departed this life the 25th. day of September, 1534. leaving be∣hind him in the Castle of S. Angelo, many Jewels, in the Pontifical Chamber infinite Offices, but a very small sum of mony: he had at di∣vers Ordinations created three and thirty Cardinals; all which (except Cardinal De Medicis) were made to please others, rather than himself. He had been exalted to the Popedom with wonderful felicity, and with the general applauses, and grand expectations of the world; but in a short time he fell strangely in their opinion; for being of a temper na∣turally irresolute, and diffident, suffered himself to be divided by his two familiar friends, men differing in their humors, affections, and inte∣rests; which laid him low in the esteem of mankind, and hated and de∣tested by the Romans; and yet he was sober, abstemious, and a greater
conqueror of himself; but accounted covetous, of no fidelity, or faith∣fulness to his word, nor readily inclined to do any man a good office, unless forced thereunto by some constraining necessity; and yet he was grave, and well advised in his actions, if timorousness had not oftentimes corrupted his judgment. He proved such diversity of fortunes, that it is hard to determin, whether his bad, or his good fortune was greatest: for what evil can be compared to the sacking of Rome, which he beheld with his own eyes; his own, and the long imprisonment of the Cardi∣nals; the desolation of his own Country, of which he was an instru∣ment, for the promotion only of the Family of the Medices. He died in the 67th. year of his age, having held the Papal Chair ten years, ten months, and seven days: His Corps were first interred in the Church of S. Peter, but afterwards transported to the Minerva, by his own Relati∣ons, and laid by the Body of Pope Leo the tenth, over which they ere∣cted a stately Monument of Marble. PAƲL III. THE Funeral Rites of Clement VII. being performed with due solemnity, the Cardinals entered the Conclave the 12th. of October, 1534. and the same day towards night agreed una∣nimously in their Election, and published Alexander Farnese Dean of the College of Cardinals to be with general consent chosen Pope. The motives which the Cardinals might have to hasten with such facility, and unanimous assent this election might be various; for his family was great, and ancient; He had been forty years a Cardinal, and thereby acquired a competent knowledg of the Affairs of the world, and of the practices of the Court of Rome; and being 68 years of age, and of a weak and tender constitution of body, the more robust, and ambitious Cardinals expected, that his Reign could not be long before he made way for one of them. And in regard, that in all the actions, and negotiati∣ons of his life, he had ever shewed an indifferency, not inclining either to the Imperial, or French Faction; the parties of neither side did make it their business or concernment to oppose him; for tho the Family of Farnese were Guelfs, and Ʋrsins, rather than Gibellins, and of the party of Colonna; yet this Alexander did contain himself within that happy neutrality, that neither Faction had a prejudice to him, or did violently oppose him: so that all parties concurring with a common voice in his Election, did without farther demur, or delay, salute and pay their respects and ceremonies of Worship to him, as Universal Bishop: the which Election was so free and easie, neither constrained by an over∣awing force of armed Bands, nor by the power of a prevailing Party; that for many ages the like had not been known to the great joy of good men, who are always pleased with regular proceedings. Alexander being thus chosen, he took on himself the name of Paul the Third; in consideration as some conjecture, that he was born in the Reign of Paul the Second in Canino, a place in Toscany, which was the paternal seat of his Fathers.
Being now Pope, he declared much against Nepotismo, or advancing Favorites, or Nephews to eminency, or greatness; and therefore expresly forbad his natural Son Pier-luigi to come to Rome, or medling with the Affairs of the Church, or State, requiring him to promise unto himself no other benefit or advantage by his promotion to the Papal Sea, than only to live a quiet, and a commodious life. Howsoever he was not so firm, or constant to this resolution, but that he promoted the Son of this Pier-luigi, a youth of 14 years of age to the Dignity of Cardinal, by the name of Cardinal Farnese; and another also yet younger than the former, named Ascagno Sforza, his Sisters Son: the which unreasonable promotions at a time, and conjuncture of Affairs so unfit, afforded just matter of discourse, and obloquy to the Lutherans, and Reformers of Religion; who besides the impieties of former Popes, had yet some thing material to object against the levity, and weakness of the present Government: howsoever, as if he intended to make amends for this unripe fruit, he assumed others of more mature age and wisdom to this Dignity, whom he promoted either for their Virtues, or Learning, or Nobility of their Families; amongst which John Maria de Monte Arezzo, Arch-Bishop of Siponto was one, who was afterwards made Pope by the name of Julius the Third: He also created John Fisher Bishop of Ro∣chester, as also Renard de la Poole Cardinals, together with many others to the number of seventy one, during his Reign, or time that he was Pope. And as this Pope Paul the Third was very bountiful in these promoti∣ons, so he was no less magnificent, and stately in his Structures; ha∣ving in the first year laid the Foundations of that sumptuous Building at Rome, called by the name of The Palace of the Farnesi, which is one of the most noble and magnificent Edifices not only in Rome, but in all Eu∣rope: the which I the more willingly mention, because that being my self at Rome, I observed it to be most agreeable to the antique Buildings of old Rome: and that besides the outward Magnificence, it was rarely furnished within side, with many excellent Statues, as that of Hercules, of Flora, and a Gladiator, esteemed the best pieces in the world, which are in the Court, or Area below: Then above stairs you have the Sta∣tues of Julius Caesar, and Augustus, Homer, Herodotus, Pindarus, Cicero, Seneca, and others; but that of Caracalla is beyond them all: he looks fierce, and wants nothing but motion to make you believe it is alive: there are also some Idol gods, and a Statue of Socrates on a Pedestal of the same Marble: but the most famed piece of Art, is the Toro Farnese, which is a furious Bull held by the Sons of Dirce, who are tying their Mothers Hairs to the Horns of the Bull; it was brought from Rhodes, and esteemed at a very high value. This Palace was begun by Antonio Gallo, an excellent Architect, and finished by Michael Angelo Buona rota. Upon the Frontispiece of the Gate, these Verses are engraven. Tertius has Paulus struxit Farnesius aedes, Quarum forma oculos ponitur ante tuos, Aspicis immensos hospes qui frontis honores, His similes, dices, Roma nec orbis habet.
Thus much had the pacifick, and quiet spirit of Paul the Third effected; that amidst the troubles, and inquietudes of Government he was able to attend to such an expensive piece of Structure; the which shews his aversion to War: for stately Buildings, and ornaments of Cities are al∣ways the happy effects of Peace: and indeed the Maxim which this Pope observed of keeping himself in a discreet neutrality between the Emperor and the French King, did marvellously contribute to his ease, and prosperity; for by that means, he was courted by them both, and lived without the troubles and expence of War, until he was necessita∣ted thereunto by other emergencies. Moreover, the first year of this Popes Government was so very happy in the seasonableness of the Wea∣ther, and fruitfulness of the time, accompanied with so many other auspi∣cious circumstances, as made those, who had suffered in the late cloudy, and tempestuous times of Adrian, and Clement, bless the returns of Romes glory, and prosperity, as if the Golden Age had again entered, attri∣buting all to the conduct, and wisdom of Paul the Third; of whose great Parts and Abilities they had received apparent instances in the Reign of Clement VII. who so kindly accepted the solicitations and la∣bors which this Alexander when he was Cardinal had performed to re∣lieve him when he was besieged in the Castle of S. Angelo, by bringing Lautrec to his assistance, that he gained the primary station of authority and esteem with him; so that being sick, and oppressed with a pain in his stomach, he would often say, that if the succession to the Popedom were hereditary, or could be disposed of by Will and Testament, he should judg no other so worthy to be his Heir, as this Alexander; who now, as we have said, being elected Pope on the 12th. of October, was Crowned on the second of November following, with all the Ceremonies usual at that Solemnity. Being thus settled in his Pontificate, he resolved to adhere to his an∣cient Principle, and Maxim of Neutrality; and therefore could never be persuaded to revoke, or annul the League which was made between Clement the Seventh his Predecessor, and Charles the Emperor at Bologna: for tho that League was principally calculated, and designed to drive the French out of Italy, to which, tho perhaps the dominion of the Imperia∣lists might be equally grievous, and oppressive; yet considering, that such a breach of Articles, in favour of the French, could not be performed with∣out innovations, which must necessarily produce Wars, and disturbances in Italy, nor effected without impeachment of that Neutrality, which he had often avowed to be indispensably belonging to the Office of Popes, who were the common Parents of all Christian Kings; and therefore he would never give ear to those suggestions which the French Mi∣nisters, and Faction would frequently inculcate in favour to that King. And whereas the former Pope was always averse to the instances which the Emperor, and French King and other Princes made to him for a Ge∣neral Council to be held for reforming abuses crept into the Church, and suppressing the Opinions of Luther, which they called heretical, and which began to dilate, and spread themselves in all parts of Christendom: Now this Paul the Third was of such a different sense herein to his Pre∣decessor, that he freely declared for a Council, shewing himself willing to meet the desires of the Princes, and promised in a short space to ap∣point the time, and place, where such a Council should be held, and ce∣lebrated.
And farther to confirm and improve this good correspondence with the Christian Courts, he dispeeded his Emissaries, and Legates in∣to all parts, whose care it was as well to advance the private interests of his Family, as the common benefit of the Church; and particularly to solicit, and promote such a good correspondence, and peace between the Emperor, and the King of France, that uniting their Forces for the com∣mon safety of Christendom, might joyntly make War upon the Turk, and other enemies to the Christian Faith: but herein his desires found little success, for the French being beaten out of Italy, could not support the prosperity of the Emperor, against whom breathing nothing but re∣venge, could never be induced to unite their Arms in a common Cause; or joyn in a design then preparing by the Emperor against the Kingdom of Tunis, which one Barbarosso had usurped: who having by the help of Soldiers, and a strong Fleet furnished and equipped at the expence of So∣liman Emperor of the Turks, droven Mulcasses King of Tunis out of his own Country, did with the pyracies he committed, very much infest the Coasts of Spain and Sicily; and being arrived to a considerable power, threatned to invade the Kingdom of Naples. This growing greatness of Barbarosso, and the daily Pyracies he committed were sufficient provoca∣tion to Charles the Fifth to wage War against him; and being a Tyrant, and an Infidel, the Pope also became concerned in this Holy Cause to concur with the Emperor, for whose assistance, he furnished out nine Gal∣lies, which were fitted at Genoua, besides three others which were the usual Guard of the Coast; over this Fleet Virginio Orsinio, a person of great quality was constituted Admiral, to whom was joyned Paulo Giustiniano a Noble Venetian, and one of great experience in Sea Affairs. The preparations of the Emperor also were very great, his Fleet was commanded by Prince Doria, who was made Commander in Chief at Sea, to whom the Pope made a present of a short Sword, or Poniard with a Hilt set with Jewels, and the Scabbard rarely Engraved, and consecrated with the usual Ceremonies; likewise a Cap of Velvet Em∣broidered with Pearls, which were the accustomary Donatives which Popes made to Generals that were employed in a Holy War against In∣fidels. The Marquiss Del Vasso was created General of the Italian and German Infantry, and being on his Voyage towards Tunis, he touched in his way thither at Civita Vecchia; to which place the Pope went in per∣son to bless the Army, that he might evidence to the world the great zeal he had for the Christian cause: the which office of Benediction he performed on the top of a high Tower, from whence surveying the Fleet of Ships, and Gallies, he solemnly prayed with a Choire of Priests for the happy success of this enterprise, making thousands of Crosses on the empty Air; and then descending into the Church, he delivered the Banner and Scepter of the Christian Religion into the hands of Viginio Orsino his General. The success of this Expedition was, that the Emperor having landed a great Army on the Coast of Tunis, defeated Barbarosso, and put his Forces to flight, took the City of Tunis, and restored Mulcasses the van∣quished Prince to his Kingdom on conditions of Homage, and Tribute; for better security of which payment, and performance, he built two Castles at the Goleta, which being Garrisoned with Spaniards, ser∣ved for Block Houses to that Port; and having released twenty thousand
Christians from Captivity, which Barbarossa had by his depredations at Sea, and Land taken, and enslaved, he returned with his Fleet to Sicily, and then to Naples, where he solemnly entered in a triumphant manner, with such joy, and festivals as are due to such successes. Nor was this good news less welcome to Rome, where Processions of Thanksgivings were made, and Te Deum sang in the most solemn manner, and farther to estifie the great joy which the Pope conceived for this success, John Piccolomini, and Alexander Cesarini were sent from him to congratulate with the Emperor for this glorious and happy Victory. Whilst the Emperor was in his passage between Sicily and Naples, ad∣vices were brought him of the decease of Francis Sforza, who was the last Duke of Milan, by whose death that Dutchy devolved to the Em∣pire, being afterwards governed by Antonio de Levae, in form of a Province: howsoever the Title thereunto was not so clear on the Empe∣rors side, but that the King of France laid his claim unto it, not only by right of inheritance, as descended from his Great-Grand-Mother Valen∣tina, but by virtue also of a concession granted by publick Act from Maximilian the Emperor to King Lewis XII. of France, on a valuable consideration of mony paid for it, after Lodowick Sforza had been taken, and droven from thence. But this pretence seemed of little moment to the Emperor, who judging this Dukedom of great importance to his State, came from Naples to Rome with intent to persuade the Pope to joyn with him in a League against the French, that so Italy might be more in repose, and quiet by expulsion of the French, who were always esteemed great disturbers of the peace of it. On the 5th. of April 1536.Anno 1536. the Emperor came to Rome, where being received by the Cardinals, Bi∣shops, and all the Orders of the Clergy, with the Citizens, he was con∣ducted to the Church of S. Peter, where the Pope attended him on the steps of the Porch: and the usual Ceremonies being passed, he was lodged in that apartment of the Vatican Palace, which was built by Innocent VIII. During the residence which the Emperor made at Rome, he entertained frequent Conferences with the Pope concerning a League to be entered into, between them and the other Princes of Italy, for expelling the French out of that Country; who having been always known under the character and notion of the disturbers of their peace, they could ne∣yer hope, or expect quietness, whilst that restless people had any hold, or possession in their Quarters. And farther, the Emperor in a publick As∣sembly of the Pope and all the Cardinals, and Forein Ministers did most severely inveigh against Francis the French King, as the most ungratetul, and faithless of all the Princes of the Universe: but being sharply an∣swered, and replied upon by Monsieur Bellay the Embassador of France, the Emperor became more moderate in his terms, and discourses on that subject; during which time there was a most profound silence amongst all the Cardinals in that August Assembly. But then as to the proposi∣tion made of a League between the Italian Princes for expulsion of the French, the Pope did with singular respect to the Emperor, approve, and praise the pious affection he had for the care, and repose of Italy; but yet as to himself he could not recede from his Principle, and resolution of Neutrality, which he had grounded on the foundation of his Pastoral Office, and Charge, which enjoyned him to seek, and endeavour to the utmost of his power an Union, and Peace between Christian Princes;
and therefore he heartily urged him to a Peace with the King of France, offering himself to become the Mediator and Umpire in the accord be∣tween them: But so far was the Emperor Charles transported with anger, and disdain against Francis the French King, that he treated him with all the terms of obloquy, that his rage could suggest; concluding, that no∣thing could determin, or put a period to the differences between them, but only the death of one of them two; and therefore did publickly de∣fie and challenge Francis to a single Combat: but the Pope being desi∣rous to mitigate this heat with fair words, and gentle persuasions, em∣bracing him, desired him not to give way to his passion; and when the Embassadors of France would have answered something farther in favour of their King, he required them to be silent, resolving not to give ear to any of their Expostulations. Hence a cruel War arose between the Em∣pire and France; for the Emperor having remained 14 days at Rome, departed thence with design to Invade France; and so passing through Toscany, and the Jurisdiction of Genoua, at the persuasion of Antonio de Leva, he entered Provence, where for want of all Provisions, and by rea∣son of the Distempers and Sicknesses which at that time reigned in that Country, his Forces were reduced to great difficulties; which was the reason that this War did not continue a year, before a Truce was conclu∣ded of ten months between them: the opportunity of which quiet inter∣val the Pope improving for making a firm, and constant Peace, laboured to appease the incensed Spirits of those two Princes by an interview at Nice, which he proposed as a place for their Meeting, and where he him∣self offered to be personally present: for tho being 73 years old, his age might excuse him from the fatigue of such a Journey; yet for the sake of the peace of Christendom, and the piety of this work, he offered himself to be Arbitrator of their Controversies: the which being as∣sented unto by the two Princes, about the beginning of June, 1538. the Emperor, and the French King, and the Pope also personally appeared at the place appointed, where the Pope taking the Propositions, and the Demands on both sides into consideration, he found so many difficult and knotty points to be determined, that despairing of any conclusion in manner of a Peace, he proposed a Truce for ten years between them; during which time, all acts of Hostility were to cease, and free Com∣merce, and intercourse of Trade to be admitted between their Subjects: the which being accepted by both parties, the Emperor, and King re∣turned to their Dominions, and the Pope to Rome; where he was re∣ceived with the common joy, and acclamations of all the City. But to return from these secular Disturbances, and Treaties, to mat∣ters more nearly relating to Religion, and the Church. It was now about twenty years that Luther had preached his Doctrins in Germany, and other parts; and that the Christian Princes had long desired a General Council; against which this Paul the Third having never shewed him∣self averse, but rather testified a willingness, and inclinations thereunto, it was now thought fit to assign the time, and place for assembling this Council;1537. the which was published by a Bull, penned with great cauti∣on, and subtilty, by six Cardinals, and three Bishops, lest the words should prejudice, or in any wise infringe the Papal Authority; the which was dated in publick Consistory the 12th. of June, and signed by all the Cardinals: the Tenure of which was to this effect.
That since the time that this Pope entered into the Papal Dignity, he never had more passionately desired any thing, than to purge the Church of Christ, (the care of which was committed to his charge) of all Errors and Schisms, and to restore it to the ancient Discipline and severity of the Primitive times; to effect which,Hist. Trent. he judged no ex∣pedient so agreeable, and proper, as a General Council, the which he had often signified both to the Emperor, and other Kings; in hopes that after all Errors were corrected, and exploded, and abuses in man∣ners reformed; that such a Sacred Convention would procure, and be∣get a right understanding between all Christian Princes, that laying aside all Quarrels and Animosities amongst themselves, they would unite together in a War against Infidels, for recovery of the Countries they had usurped, and rescue of our Christian Brethren who suffer under their servitude, and slavery. To which end, by virtue of that absolute Power committed to him by God, and by and with the con∣sent of his Brothers the Cardinals, he did Indict, and publish a Ge∣neral Council to be held at Mantoua, at, or upon the 27th. of May, of the year following: Commanding and requiring all Bishops, and Pre∣lates of what degree or place soever, to be assistant, and present there∣unto, as they were obliged by Oath, and by Holy Canons, and De∣crees instituted on such occasions. Desiring and intreating the Emperor, and all Christian Princes, for the love of Jesus Christ, to be present and assistant there in person, if it were possible, and consistent with their Affairs; and if not, then to depute their Embassadors, and Ministers with plenary Power, and Authority; as they had already promised both to Clement and himself, &c. The Pope also published an other Bull at the same time, to purge, (as he called it) the City of Rome from Vices, and corruption of manners; that so, as his intentions were to reform all that was amiss in the Christian world, (of which in spiritual matters he was the Head, and Chief) so it was most pious to begin at home; that the streams from the original Source might descend more pure, and limpid into other parts. But the first Bull indicting a Council at Mantoua, had not been long published, before the Duke of that place, considering, that for the secu∣rity thereof, it would be necessary to maintain a stronger Garrison, than usual; the extraordinary charge, and expence of which he demanded of the Pope; with many other hard conditions derogatory to the Papal Power, and such as did infringe that liberty which was always accorded to places, where General Councils had been celebrated: it was therefore thought fit to assign an other place; the which being not as yet agreed, the time of Assembling was deferred from May, until the first of November following. The month of November approaching near, the Pope published an other Bull, appointing the Council to be held at Vicenza, a City under the Jurisdiction of the Venetians, upon the first of May next, in the year 1538. deputing for his Legates the Cardinals Campeggio, Simonetta, and Jeronimo Alexandro, alledging for cause of such prolongation the near∣ness of the Winter, which would be very incommodious to those, who were to travel thither from remote parts. Howsoever upon divers ob∣stacles, and inconveniences thereupon occurring, the place for meeting of this Council was altered, and the time deferred for some years after,
as will appear by the sequel hereof. In the mean time Henry the Eighth, King of England, who in the year 1535. was by Act of Parliament Au∣thorized Head of the Church of England, did now absolutely throw off all Obedience to the Papal Sea; at which time the whole Clergy of England was charged by the Kings Learned Council to be in a Praemu∣nire for supporting and maintaining the Legantine power of Cardinal Wolsey:Baker's Chron. and were thereupon called by Process into the Kings Bench: but before that day of appearance came, they in their Convocation con∣cluded an humble submission in writing, and offered the King a hundred thousand pounds to have their Pardon by Parliament, which offer after some pause, and deliberation, was accepted, and their pardon promised. Until this time the Popes, that is, Clement VII. and this present Paul the third had subtilly dissembled matters between them and Henry King of England, intending if necessity had required to have confirmed his Di∣vorce from Queen Catharine; to which end Cardinal Campeggio was sent into England, and joyned in Commission with the Cardinal of York, with Authority to give Sentence in favour of the King; and that the matter might receive a speedy dispatch, and not be spun out by length of time, required in the solemnity of Judgment, and passing Sentence; a Brief was ready framed, and drawn up, and the Bull, or Seal thereun∣to affixed, whereby the Marriage with Queen Catherine was made null, and void, in the most ample manner, and with Terms and Clauses so full, as nothing could be more expressive, nor more large than that In∣strument, with instructions notwithstanding not to present or publish the same, unless they received assurances, that Henry would continue firm and constant in his Obedience to the Authority of the Church; and in this manner things stood, and thus far had proceeded in the year 1528. Clement the Seventh being then Pope; and so remained in suspense until the time of this present Paul the Third, when Henry bidding de∣fiance to the Papal Authority, proceeded to actions never to be recon∣ciled with that Church; whereupon the Pope issued out his Bull, dated the 30th. of August, 1535. whereby he cited King Henry to appear per∣sonally before him, and the College of Cardinals at Rome, to give an∣swer to all those Cruelties, Sacrileges, Adulteries, and other Crimes whereof he stood accused: and in case of refusal, he pronounced him, and all his Subjects to remain under censure of Excommunication; decla∣ring him actually deprived of his Crown, and Kingdom; his Subjects absolved from all Obedience; all actions of Religion interdicted and forbidden to be performed, or celebrated in his Dominions: command∣ing all Ecclesiastical persons to depart from his Kingdoms, and the No∣bles to rise up in Rebellion against him. But all this lightning and thun∣der of Excommunication did little terrifie the resolved mind of King Henry, but rather incensed him to proceed in that course, which since that time, hath laid the happy beginning of that blessed Reformation, under which by Gods mercy we enjoy the true, and glorious light of the Gospel. On these terms England stood in reference to the Pope, when publi∣cation was made of a General Council to be held at Mantoua, and then altered to Vicenza; in which case King Henry, judging himself concerned in despight of his Excommunication, published a Manifesto in his own name, and in the name of all his Nobility, whereby he protested against
any such Convocation assembled by the Popes Authority, as being in it self of none effect; excepting also against the place, as unsecure, and the Country as infested with continual Wars. But whereas he was de∣sirous of a General Council, as being the only means whereby to reform the dissolute matters of the Clergy, and suppress the exorbitant Tyran∣nies, and Usurpations of the Clergy: he should willingly give his con∣sent thereunto, provided that such Convocation were assembled by the Authority of the Christian Kings and Princes, who had the sole power and disposal of such matters; for as to the Pope, he esteemed him only as a Bishop in his own Diocess, with no farther extent of Jurisdiction, than that which reacheth thereunto; the which also was most reason∣able at this time, when the abuses of the Court of Rome were the chief matters to be reformed, and to be presented to the cognisance and cen∣sure of such a Council. Besides this great defection of England from the Papal Obedience, which gave a fatal blow to the Church of Rome, the Doctrin of Luther daily grew, and dilated it self in all parts of Ger∣many and France, with much disturbance; for allaying of which, and establishment of the truth of the Gospel there was no other remedy men∣tioned, and cried up by all parties, but a General Council; but this ad∣mitted of so many scruples, disputes, and nicities, as to the time and place, that nothing could as yet be resolved. In the mean time the Turks taking advantage upon the discord amongst Christians, entered Dalmatia with Fire and Sword, and took the strong Town of Clissa, which the pope had fortified with all sorts of Provisions, and Ammuniti∣on; which misfortune the Pope greatly resenting, ordered solemn Pro∣cessions to be made in Rome, at which he was present in person, and walked on foot; and sent his Legates to most Christian Princes, exhort∣ing them to lay aside the Quarrels, and Wars amongst themselves, and unite together against the Common Enemy: in order whereunto a League was made between the Pope, the Emperor, and the Venetians; the conditions whereof were, that the Emperor should set 82 Gallies to Sea, and the Venetians the like number, and the Pope 38; with which force of 200 Sail, they agreed to invest the Turks Dominions in some parts of Greece. Andrea D'Oria was constituted Admiral of the Empe∣rors Fleet, Vicenzo Capello of the Venetians, and Marco Grimano Patri∣arch of Aquileia, of the Popes; and in case any descent were made, or Forces landed, then Fernando Gonzaga, Vice-King of Sicily was to be Generalissimo, or Commander in Chief: but the success did not answer so great preparations, which proved rather dishonorable, than advanta∣gious: for this formidable Fleet being at Sea, near the Promontory of Antium, had sight of the Fleet of Barbarosso; and might with much ease have charged and vanquished them; but Andrea D'Oria the Emperors Admiral refused to engage; so that leaving the Enemy, they all divided themselves into three Squadrons under their respective Commanders, sail∣ing away in manner of a flight, to the great ignominy, and shame of the Christian Arms; which inglorious action did greatly displease the Pope, and more especially the Venetians, who instead of some great benefit which they expected in return for all their expence, and hazard, lost Castlenuovo, which was soon afterwards taken by the Enemy. Howsoever this publick Disgrace was in some manner repaired by the favour, and good will of the Emperor towards the Pope, whh bestowed
on his Son Pier-luigi the City of Novara, and gave Margaret of Austria, the Widow of Alexander de Medicis in marriage to his Nephew Ottavio, with a Portion of 250 thousand Ducats. It happened about this time, that Francis Naria da Meltro, Duke of Camerin, died, the Pope immediately resolved to make seizure of Ca∣merino, pretending that that place was devolved to the Church, ever since the death of John Maria Varano, whom Leo X. had made Duke of that place; for that he leaving no Heirs Male, Feltro had by Usurpation taken possession of that place, in right only of Julia the Daughter of John Maria Varano, whom his Son Guido Ʋbaldo had taken to Wife, and held the same in despight of Clement the late Pope. And now whereas the present Duke was a youth of tender age, and no experience, the Pope made use of this opportunity to lay his claim, (which he had concealed during the life of the old Duke) and to make it good raised an Army, and marched against Camerino, with which this young Duke being terri∣fied, surrendred the place without other difficulty to the Pope, who ha∣ving satisfied all pretenders to any Arrears by disbursement of great sums of mony, he invested his Nephew Ottavio Farnese in the place, creating him Duke of Camerino, chief Prefect of Rome, and Censuary of the Church. By this and other expences the Chamber was greatly exhausted of its Treasure; to recruit which the Pope laid new Gabels and Impositions on all Commodities in his Dominions, and especially upon Salt; the which so discontented the People of Perugia, that from a mutiny they took Arms, and appeared in open Rebellion; but being soon queled by the Popes Forces, all their Immunities, and Privileges were seized, whereby they were forced to send their Messengers to Rome, with all humility, and submission to beg Pardon from the Pope, promising all Loyalty, and Obedience for the future. 1539.Ascanius Colonna making also some disturbance on the like occasion, was for his contumacy deprived of his Estate in Campagna, Paliano was dismantled, and his Fortress of Rocca entirely demolished. Things being thus reduced, and settled in the Temporal State, he converted his thoughts to the quiet and security of the Church; and con∣sidering that disturbances in the world proceeded commonly from want of good Instruction, and corruption of manners, he commanded the Bi∣shops to their respective Diocesses, enjoyning them to reside there, and teach their Flocks with good Lectures, by their own exemplary lives. In the year 1540.1540. he augmented and enlarged the Immunities, and Privileges of the Chamber, and the Authority of the Referendaries: He gave liberty to Clergy men to dispose of their Estates by Testament with∣out leave, or interruption of the Apostolical Chamber: He gave liberty also to Jews which were converted to Christianity to dispose of their Estates according to their own will and pleasure, and reformed many abuses in the administration of Civil, and Criminal Causes; and to∣wards the end of this year constituted Cardinal Farnese his Nephew Legate at Avignon in the place of the Cardinal D'Auch deceased. The Pope (as we have declared before) shewing himself unresolved in the matter of a Council, being very wavering as to the time, and place, tho he seemed always ready to agree thereunto; and from the first time, that he was created Pope, evidenced an earnest desire above all things to
comply with the Christian Princes in that particular; at length the Empe∣ror and Princes of Germany finding their Country tossed, and embroiled with various disputes of Religion, resolved to call a Diet at Regensburg, supposing that a National Assembly might settle, and determin Contro∣versies in want, and for defect of a General Council; and in pursuance thereof a Diet was opened at Regensburg about the beginning of March,Hist. Trent. 1541. At this Diet the Emperor himself was present with great hopes,1541. that all Controversies about Religion would be here determined, and Germany united in the same opinion. Hereunto the Pope sent Cardinal Gaspar Contarini to be his Legat; a person of excellent prudence, and learning, accompanied with several others well instructed in the Interest of the Court of Rome, and with publick Notaries skilful in drawing up Au∣thentick Acts, and Forms of Law, to whom above all things it was com∣mitted in charge, not to receive any Papers, or Memorials which might tend to the least abatement, or diminution of the Papal Authority; but in such case to break up abruptly, referring those matters to the deter∣mination of a General Council. In short, after long Conferences, and Debates, the Diet broke up on the 28th. of July, the Emperor referring all that had been done, or transacted there to a General Council, or to a National Synod of Germany, or to a Diet of the Empire; promising to go himself into Italy, to treat with the Pope on that matter, and in case the Pope should appear refractory thereunto, that then notwithstanding he would within the space of eighteen months, by virtue of his own Au∣thority issue forth his Writs for calling a Diet of the Empire, for setling the Affairs of Religion, and prevail with the Pope to send his Legat to it: And in the mean time he commanded the Protestants not to receive any other new Doctrins, than such as had already been debated; and enjoyned the Bishops to reform the abuses of their Churches. He forbad also the dissolution of Monasteries, or any seizure to be made on the Estate of the Church, and any person or persons whatso∣ever to change, or alter his or their Religion. And for the better satis∣faction and contentment of the Protestants, that in those points which were still under Controversie, he left every man free, and at liberty in his own judgment; and farther, that such Monasteries as were not yet demolished, should still remain, but howsoever should be reduced to a Godly and Christian way of practice. That the Goods of the Church should not be seized, but left for maintainance of the Ministers without any distinction or difference relating to their Sect in Religion. He also prorogued the Assembly at Ausburg, until such time as the points there in Controversie could come to the decision of a General Council, or a Diet of the Empire. After this the Emperor passed into Italy, and at Luca met the Pope, where in a long discourse he treated at large concerning a Council, and the management of a War against the Turks; the result of which was this, That the Pope should send a Nuntio into Germany, to advise the Diet which was to be held at Spira on the beginning of the next year following, and assure them of his resolution to assemble a General Council at Vicenza at the time formerly prefixed. But in regard this Ci∣ty was under the Dominion of the Venetians, the Pope thought fit to intimate first this intention to the Senate, before he signified this resolu∣tion
at Spira: the which was advisedly considered, for the Venetians re∣jected the proposal, being jealous of the ill consequences, which the concourse of such multitudes might produce to their State; and in re∣gard they had lately made a Peace with the Sultan, they apprehended, that a Treaty and Consultation held in one of their Towns, for uniting in a Confederacy against him, and carrying on a War, might be the occa∣sion of a Rupture, and breach of the Peace, which lately they had with great charge, and much labour concluded: upon which answer from the Venetians the Pope was forced to take other measures. In the mean time the Cardinal Coutarini lay under the severe censure of the Pope, having been accused, for behaving himself with too much easiness at Regensburg in matters which concerned the interest of the Church, for that he seemed as if he had been a little shaken, and staggered with the subtil Arguments against the Doctrin of Transubstantiation, and heard with too much indifferency, the discourses which tended to the diminution of the Papal Authority. But the Cardinal Fregosa being his friend, de∣fended him in despight of all his enemies, until such time as returning to the Pope at Luca, he rendered such an account of all matters transacted in his Embassy, as gave the Pope entire satisfaction. This was the state of Affairs towards the end of the year 1541. when at the beginning of 1542. the Pope dispatched John Mora the Bi∣shop of Modena to the Diet held at Spira, under Ferdinand the Empe∣rors brother, giving them to understand that the Pope continued his reso∣lution of holding a General Council, which he had for some time defer∣red in expectation of that good issue which it was hoped the Diets, and National Conventions would have produced in the settlement of Reli∣gion: but seeing that those means had failed, he now again re-assumed his former deliberation about a Council, which he should gladly cause to be assembled in Germany, were not the fatigues of so long a Journey, and the alteration of Air dangerous to a person of his age: and therefore af∣ter he had thought of Mantoua, Vicenza, Ferrara, Bologna, and Piacenza for places proper and convenient for such a Convention; He did at length pitch upon Trent as a City without exception, being situated on the Frontiers of Germany, and therefore did now unalterably appoint a Coun∣cil there to be opened on the 13th. of August next ensuing, desiring all those there present at this Diet that they would lay aside all Animosities and Factions, and appear at this Council with clear and sincere souls to favour the cause of God, and the truth of the Gospel. Upon this pro∣posal Ferdinand, and the other Princes which favoured the Cause of the Roman Church, returned their thanks to the Pope, saying, that since there was no City in Germany judged convenient for this Council, that they were contented with this assignment of Trent, where they promi∣sed to come, and there to be assistant. But the Protestants refused to accept of this intimation, alledging that the Pope had neither Authority to indict a Council, nor that Trent was a place convenient for it; which was the cause that no farther resolution was taken hereupon at this Diet. Howsoever the Pope proceeded forward in his intention, and publi∣shed his Bull dated the two and twentieth of May, for assembling a Council at Trent to meet on the first of November following; the which was dispatched from Rome to all the Princes of Christendom, but with∣out any great success. For in the month of July, Francis the French King
had denounced War against the Emperor, having in a Manifesto publi∣shed his reasons for it in such severe terms, as greatly reflected on the ho∣nor of the Emperor, and which so much provoked him to anger in that ill humor wherein he was newly returned from his unhappy adventure be∣fore Algier into Spain, that when the Bull was delivered ro him, he gave this answer; that he was in no manner satisfied therewith; in regard that it made no distinction in the terms, and stile thereof between him and the King of France: for tho he had refused no pains, nor spared ex∣pence to compass the assembling of a Council; and that the French King on the contrary had endeavoured by his Embassadors at Spira to nourish discords, and so to embroil the affairs of Religion, as to put them in∣to a condition beyond all hopes, or possibility of accommodation; yet this Bull treated the disservices of the French with the same equality of me∣rit, as it did the unwearied zeal of Him the Emperor, whose great incum∣bence it had always been to render faithful, and effectual Offices of Du∣ty to the Church: And then rehearsing the many provocations the French King had given him, he desired the Pope to consider, if the Behaviour of that King towards him did correspond with a design, or intention of ad∣vancing the interest of Christendom, or did appear with such a face, or guise of Peace, and Reconciliation, as was necessary at such a time when a General Council was to be convened; of which we may then con∣ceive the most promising assurances of success, when it commences with Candor, Friendship, and Charity, which are the best, and most excel∣lent dispositions towards the establishment of truth, and peace. But see∣ing that the French King hath ever countermined, and disturbed this course, some other way, was to be found for the settlement of Religi∣on besides a Council; and in the mean time he desired that the Pope would attribute the disappointment thereof to the French King only, to whom it was necessary, that he should declare himself a publick enemy, in case he ever hoped to expect good from a Council, in the settlement of Peace, and Religion in the world. The French King being well as∣sured that the War which he had commenced at this unseasonable time, would certainly be interpreted, as prejudicial to Religion, and as if he favoured the Protestant cause; did therefore, to forestal such suggestions, publish most severe Edicts against the Protestants; forbidding them to assemble at any Meetings, causing all their Books, written in defence of their Doctrin to be burnt, and enjoyning the Sorbonists to make severe inquisitions concerning such, who observed not Fish days, or days of Abstinence, or said not their Prayers in Latin, or in any manner contra∣dicted, or withstood the Principles, or Doctrins of the Catholick Church. Moreover, he wrote an Apology for himself to the Pope in answer to what the Emperor had accused him of; recalling to memory the hard and sacrilegious usage which he had practised against Clement VII. how he had sacked Rome, and imprisoned the Pope, and at the same time in a most hypocritical manner, illuding God Almighty, had made Processions at Madrid for the Pope's deliverance, when he himself was the sole Au∣thor of his confinement: farther purging himself of being any impedi∣ment, or hinderance to the proceedings of a Council, or giving an inter∣ruption to the quiet, and settlement of Religion. Hereupon the Pope, that he might shew himself the common Father of Christian Princes (on which title he laid the great stress of his Autho∣rity)
desired to interpose himself, as Mediator of their differences; and to that end, dispatched Cardinal Contarini to the Emperor, and Cardinal Sadoler to the French King; but Contarini dying in his journey, Cardinal Viseo was constituted in his place, who being a person not very accepta∣ble to the Emperor, was not a proper instrument to effect the Pacification intended. Howsoever, tho the War proceeded, and that acts of Hosti∣lity were committed in divers places, yet the Pope prosecuted the design of a Council, judging it his honor to be now positive, as to the time and place, and accordingly towards the beginning of November, he sent three Cardinals, viz. Peter Paul Parisio, John Morone, and Reginal le Poole an Englishman to be his Legates, for preparing matters in order to the Council, which was appointed to be holden at Trent: besides whom, many other Bishops were sent, who were all men of excellent Learning, and subtil Disputants; but the Protestants refusing to meet at that place, by virtue of the Pope's Authority; these learned Doctors became all of one side, and finding none to make opposition against them, they might with much facility have confirmed, and established what Fundamentals and conclusions they had pleased. But as yet things were not prepared for any publick Act, nor had the Legates Instructions as yet to conclude any thing, but only entertain the Prelates, and Embassadors which were sent thither. The appearance at first was very thin, and few Prin∣ces had sent their Ministers to Trent; howsoever the Emperor tho he entertained little hopes of a good issue of these proceedings, yet he re∣solved for prevention of Plots, or Designs against him to send Don Diego de Mendoza, and Cardinal Granvel to be his Embassadors at that place; who being arrived, pressed the Pope's Legates to proceed to the busi∣ness, that their time might not be there consumed to no purpose; which the Legates endeavouring to evade, and still to put delays, and impedi∣ments in the way, it was so displeasing to the Emperor's Ministers, that they protested against those delatory excuses; to which the Legates gi∣ving no answer, Granvel was recalled, and sent to reside at the Diet at Noremberg, which was opened about the beginning of the year 1543. so that nothing moved forward in this Council by reason of the many ob∣structions, and especially of the fierce War, which now grew very hot between the Emperor, and the French King, and of the Plague which was begun at—so that after some few Sessions to little purpose, the Council was by order of the Pope adjourned to Bologna. 1543.The Pope having advice that the Emperor, who had now entered in∣to a League with Henry VIII. King of England, against France, intended to pass into Flanders by way of Italy; he resolved to meet, and speak with him, pretending that his Errand was no other, than like a Father, and Spiritual Pastor, to persuade, and exhort him to Peace, and Unity, and to impart some things to him relating to the Council of Trent; tho in reallity he had a more secret, and peculiar design under the covert of these publick interests: which was, to procure the Dukedom of Milan, for one of his Nephews; and for an inducement thereunto intended to make offer of a good sum of mony, which he supposed might be very prevalent with the Emperor at a time when his Wars in Flanders were pressing, and expensive. And therefore departing from Rome on the 26th. of February, and not regarding the coldness of the season, which was inconvenient to one of his age, he travelled through the Dominions
of the Church, and taking Modena, Reggio, Parma, Ferrara, Ancona, Pe∣rugia, and Viterbo in his way, he at length came to Bologna, where he remained until the middle of Summer, when Charles V. arrived at Ge∣noua, where he was received into the Palace of Prince D'Oria, prepared for him in all Royal and sumptuous manner; he was there complemen∣ted by several Princes of Italy, and particularly by Pier luigi Farnese, whom the Pope had expresly sent to the Emperor, intreating him to as∣sign a time, and place where the Pope might have discourse with him in order to some matters of great concernment. The Emperor who was pressed to make all the speed possible into Flanders, and had resentment of things which he took unkindly from the Pope, made several excuses▪ pretending that his Affairs would not permit him the leisure for such a meeting; and that in case the Pope's business were exhortations to Peace and Reconciliation with France, the matter was too far gone for him to afford any ear thereunto, until he had first received some revenge, and compensation for the injuries which had been offered him. Pierluigi not succeeding in this request, the Cardinal Farnese was immediately dis∣patched in post to Genoua to urge the Emperor with more pressing instan∣ces; and being a person very eloquent and importunate, he prevailed with the Emperor to meet, and discourse with the Pope at Busetto, a place between Vicenza, and Cremona; provided that this interview should not retard him in his journey, for above the space of three days. Ac∣cordingly the Pope came to Busetto on the 20th of June, and the next day also the Emperor arrived, when falling immediately upon business, the Emperor would by no means hearken to the proposition which was made him for investing his Nephew Ottavio in the State of Milan; and tho a sum of mony was offered for it, which the present necessities did greatly require; yet being supplied with two hundred thousand Crowns by agreement with Cormo de Medicis, whereby he released to him all the Fortresses of the State of Florence, he would upon no terms give ear to the proposition concerning Milan; which when the Pope perceived, and that his arguments, and importunities for it, were all insignificant; he turned his discourse to matters of more publick concernment, desi∣ring him to consider the present state of the Church, which was torn in pieces by diversity of Sects in Religion, which took their advantage of those confusions, which the Wars between him, and France had caused; and farther he represented to him the great danger in which his Brother Ferdinand was engaged by the formidable forces of the Turk, which threatned Hungary; in consideration of all which, he begged of him to put an end to his Wars against Christians, that he might repress and give a stop to the violent incursions of the common enemy: all which discourse had no other effect, than only, that hereupon Julio Or∣no was dispeeded with thirty Companies of Foot to Guard and defend the Confines of Hungary: and thus the Pope having spent five days at Busetto, with no other advantage to his Affairs, he returned again to Bologna, where he celebrated the Feast of S. Peter the Apostle. About this time Barbarosso, who had been instigated by the French, to do all the damage they were able to the Emperor, had coasted along the shore by Naples; and having slaid some time before the Isle of , they at length appeared near Civita Vecchia, at the mouth of the  which gave such an alarm to Rome, that the Inhabitants had certainly
abandoned the City, and fled to the Mountains, had not Poline the French Envoy aboard the Fleet of Barbarosso, written a Letter to Car∣dinal Rodolfo, giving him assurance, that there was no design upon Rome; with which the tumult was quieted, and their fears dissipated. Now began the year 1544. which was very remarkable for the unex∣pected Peace concluded between the Emperor and the French King, on the 18th. of September at Crespy, a Castle in Valois, after the bloody Battel of Cerisoles: the which was received with extreme joy by all the Christian Princes, and especially by Pope Paul, who being returned from Bologna to Rome, had lately made solemn Processions for the Peace and quiet of Christendom; the which unexpected news surprising the Pope, was interpreted by him, as a return of those Prayers and Suppli∣cations, he had made for Peace, tho inwardly he conceived some secret resentments, that he had not been concerned as Mediator in it. Up∣on this news of Peace, the Pope thought it seasonable to publish an other Sessions of the Council to Commence in March following, which had on occasion of the late Wars been prorogued: but this hasty indiction of a Council was not pleasing to the Emperor, who expected to have been first consulted; esteeming that it had been more agreeable to his Autho∣rity, and more acceptable to the humor of Germany, had he been made the principal Author of this Council: Howsoever that he might seem to be the first mover of the work, and the Pope only to act in the second place, he issued out many Commissions to the Prelates of Spain, and of the Low-Countries, and to many Divines at Lovain, to meet together, and consider of several Theses, and Propositions which were to be deba∣ted in the Council, which being reduced to six and thirty Heads, he re∣quired their solution of them positively, without any proofs, or referen∣ces to Holy Scripture. All which solutions being made, were confirmed by the Emperor's Magisterial Authority, and Edicts, requiring all peo∣ple to yield entire faith,Hist. Trent. and belief thereunto. And farther, the Empe∣ror not being able to conceal the displeasure he had conceived against the Pope, vented his choler frequently to the Nuntio in very severe and sharp terms: and whereas the Pope in the month of December had crea∣ted thirteen Cardinals, those three which were Spaniards amongst them were forbidden by the Emperor to accept the Dignity, or to take the Ti∣tle, or wear the Habit. 1545.Tho the Emperor had testified this open displeasure against the Pope, yet he so far complied with him, as to send Don Diego de Mendoza, who had lately been his Embassador at Venice, with ample Commission to the Council of Trent, as did also the other Princes who were in amity with the Pope: but the Protestants who had sent their Commissioners to the Diet at Worms, over which Ferdinand presided in the place of the Emperor, refused to send their Embassadors to Trent, alledging, that the Assembly held at that place, was not legitimate, nor could be ter∣med with the quality, and character of a General Council. The Pope being highly incensed at this refusal, and separation of the Protestants, which he esteemed an affront to the Papal Authority, dispatched his Ne∣phew the Cardinal Farnese, in quality of Legate, with ample instructi∣ons to the Emperor; wherein besides some other particular interests, he encharged him most especially to incite the Emperor to make a War of Religion against the Protestant Princes▪ of which he conceived the
greater hopes, in regard that by frequent advices from his Nuntio, he was assured of the displeasure, and disdain the Emperor had of the Pro∣testant Cause, and that he willingly gave ear to those suggestions which advised him to compel their Assents, and Compliance by force of Arms. To this Proposition, the Emperor made answer, that he acknowledged this Counsel which the Pope gave him to be good, and almost necessary, and which he resolved to follow; but howsoever, that it was to be exe∣cuted with its due caution; and that a Truce was first to be concluded with the Turk, which was secretly treating: and then that some discords, and dissentions were to be sowed amongst the Protestant Princes; for that being united together, their numbers were so formidable, and great, that instead of maintaining the Catholick Religion, he should put it into apparent danger, and hazard, which a doubtful state of War may produce. This Treaty, tho secretly carried, was yet suspected by the Prote∣stant Princes, who took a most sensible alarm from the Sermon of a Cordelier Frier that preached one day before the Emperor, King Ferdi∣nand, and the Legate, and used many invective Speeches against the Lu∣therans: he told the Emperor plainly, that it was his duty to defend the Church by force of Arms; and that God had put the Sword into his hands for extirpation of this Heresie, and destruction of this pest of mankind, which he ought not to suffer to live in this world. This Ser∣mon and discourse made great noise, being interpreted for the sense of the Legate, and to be an effect of the Treaty which he secretly held with the Pope, and that the Frier Preached in that manner by his order; wherefore to abate, and surcease those reports, the Cardinal departed secretly by night, and with all expedition returned into Italy. In the mean time the Debates at the Diet at Worms proceeded, where the Emperor in person endeavoured to persuade the Princes to contribute towards a War against the Turk; which they absolutely refused to do, until assurance were given them, that the Peace between them and the Emperor should be continued, and maintained without any respect to the determinations, and conclusions at Trent, which they could not esteem a General Council, or to have any Power and Authority to oblige them to an observation of those Decrees, and Canons which were formed there∣in: to which the Emperor replied, that he could not assure them of Peace, or observation of any Articles, which should exempt them from the determination of that Council, to which all Christians were obliged to submit; and that he should not know how to to excuse himself to other Kings and Princes, in case he should endeavour to procure that exempti∣on for Germany only, from obedience to the Council, which was chief∣ly convened, in respect, and in order to the settlement of their Affairs. With which this Diet was dissolved on the 4th. of August, and an other published to be held in the month of January following at Regensburg.1546. In this manner time passed without any issue or determination of Dis∣putes: the Protestants refused to own or acknowledg the Council of Trent to be lawfully Convened; and the Pope could not suffer the Points of Religion to be debated in the Diets of Germany, which were assem∣bled by the Secular Authority. So that the Pope published a Jubily to be held at Rome on the 15th. of July, 1546. in the Bull for which, after he had amply set forth the great care and pains he had used for the sup∣pression of Heresie, which could not be compassed by any other human
means, than by a General Council: yet such was the obstinacy of He∣reticks, that they contemned, and slighted its Sentence, and denied Obe∣dience to its Authority: And therefore as the last remedy, and ulti∣mate prevention of these growing evils, he declared, that he was forced to make a League with the Emperor, that he might by force of Arms, reduce those to the Church, who were by no other more gentle means capable to be reclaimed from their Heresies and Rebellion: for the suc∣cess of which, he exhorted all good Catholicks to have recourse unto God by Prayers, Fastings, Confessions, and Communion. The Emperor on the other side, on the 20th. of the same month, pub∣lished a Remonstrance against the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hess; in which, omitting to mention any particulars about Religion, he charged them with disobedience to his commands, and opposition to his designs; that they had made Alliances, and entered into Confe∣deration with other Princes of the Empire against him; that they had seized Bishopricks, and Ecclesiastical Benefices into their own hands, un∣der the specious pretences of Religion, Peace, and Liberty. And there∣fore that as seditious Rebels, Traitors, and Disturbers of the publick Peace he resolved to proceed against them; absolving the Nobility from their Oath of Allegiance to them, and requiring the people to withdraw themselves from their Obedience, not to joyn with them, nor afford them any aid, succor, or assistance. Tho the Pope and the Emperor were joyned in the same League, and intended the same thing; yet the motives for this War mentioned in their Remonstrances were displeasing to each other, as not correspond∣ing to their mutual interests: for the Emperor was unwilling to have this War stiled a War of Religion, lest that denomination should engage a stronger, and a more numerous party than he was able to Master: the Pope howsoever was desirous to have it so named, and believed, that the Emperor having to contend with a numerous, and formidable Enemy, his Power might be attempered, and his Greatness reduced to some to∣lerable equality in the Ballance of Christendom. 1547.Notwithstanding these different considerations, the Pope united his Army with that of the Emperors; who now casting off all thoughts concerning the transaction of Affairs at Trent, attended wholly to the War: in prosecution of which, on the 24th. of April 1547. both Ar∣mies were drawn up, and stood ranged one against the other near the River Albi:Ouf. the Protestant Army consisted of eighty thousand Foot, and fifteen thousand Horse: that of the Emperors was much inferior in number, not amounting with the three Italian Regiments, and six hun∣dred Horse sent by the Pope, to more than three and forty thousand men. Howsoever the Emperor gained the Victory, the Elector of Saxony being wounded, and taken Prisoner, and his whole Army defea∣ted: and in a few days after the Landgrave of Hesse by mediation of Maurice his Son-in▪law, and the Duke of Brandenbourg, with all sub∣mission came in, and presented himself before the Emperor. The Duke of Saxony was in the first place tryed and condemned to dye; but af∣terwards procuring a remission of the Sentence, he yielded to some other very severe terms, and conditions, with exemption notwithstanding from being obliged to the Acts, and determinations of the Council of Trent in points of Religion, with which the Emperor was willing to dis∣pense,
provided he would subscribe, and oblige himself to other Articles. The Landgrave tho he was hardly pressed to that point also▪ yet would not subscribe; but only in general terms, that he would refer himself to the Decrees, and Determinations of a Council, that was free, and holy, and purged from the leven of a corrupt Head, and Members, as did al∣so Duke Maurice of Saxony, and the Elector of Brandenbourg. How∣soever the Duke of Saxony was condemned to perpetual imprisonment, and the Landgrave during the pleasure of the Emperor. By which great Victory the Emperor becoming absolute Master of all Germany, and ha∣ving gained much Cannon and Artillery, and exhausted great sums of mony from the Towns and Countries which were in subjection to those Princes, whom ho had conquered, he was arrived to that pitch of heighth, and greatness which the Pope could not gladly allow; and in this condition, for security of the peace, and quiet, and for the better regulation of the Affairs of Germany, the Emperor assigned a Diet to be held at Ausbourg. Upon the first news of this Victory, the Pope to outward appear∣ance seemed to be transported to an extremity of joy; and thereupon immediately dispatched away the Cardinal Francis Sfondrato with Con∣gratulatory Letters for the success of this Victory, stiling the Emperor Invictissimus, & Maximus Imperator. Howsoever his secret thoughts did not correspond with these external Demonstrations; for ever since the denial which the Emperor had made of investing his Nephew in the Dutchy of Milan, he had conceived a grudg against him, which he dis∣sembled, until this time, when his displeasure being exalted with a jea∣lousie that the Emperor by this success would aspire to the absolute Do∣minion of Italy; and observing with what little regard the Prelates of the Empire had comported themselves, during the Council of Trent towards the Papal Authority: and reflecting farther, that he could ne∣ver obtain from the Emperor the confirmation of his Son Pier-luigi, in the States of Parma, and Piacenza, which he had conferred upon him; he could not longer suppress these resentments, but vented with all the spight imaginable many reproaches against Charles, saying, that out of malice to him, he had joyned himself to Henry VIII. King of England, who was condemned of Heresie, and Excommunicated from the Church. In which passion he prorogued the Council, which in compliance with the Emperor he had called at Trent, to be now transferred, and held at Bo∣logna; for which he seemed to have received some just motives from the Behaviour of certain Prelates, who having banded themselves into Fa∣ctions, seemed to intend something in diminution of the Popes Dignity, and Prerogative: to prevent which, all those Prelates which sided with the Pope, pretending that the Air of Trent was too sharp for them, re∣moved to Bologna; from which place the Emperor was not able to dis∣suade the Pope, with all the excuses and intreaties he could use. This and other matters raising and exalting these feuds, the Pope applied himself to the French King, intending to joyn in League with him, and other Princes of that party; and the Emperor finding no effects, or is∣sue of Affairs at Trent, repaired to the Diet at Ausburg. The Diet there began on the first of September, where the Emperor presiding in person, laboured with all the earnestness,154. and with all the art, and endeavours he was able to compose the differences, and settle a
Peace in Germany; but in regard the point of Religion was the cause of all their Troubles, whensoever that came into question it occasioned great Commotions. For the Ecclesiastical Electors, or such as belonged to the Church did desire, and urge that an entire, and absolute refe∣rence of all things should be given to the Council at Trent, without any reserve, or condition. The Secular Electors who adhered to the Doctrin of Luther were contented also to refer the matters in dispute to the Council, provided that neither the Pope, nor any other deputed from him, should preside thereat; and that the Council should be free, and holy, and that what Bishop soever was thereunto admitted, should be absolved from any Oath he had taken, which might render him par∣tial to the Papal Sea. During the time of this Diet at Ausbourg, the Pope remained in a con∣tinual trouble of spirit, not knowing what those Sessions might produce. During which on the 10th. of September, advice was brought him, that his Son Pier-luigi Duke of Piacenza was murdered in his own Palace by certain Gentlemen who had conspired against him, and who in an ignomi∣nious manner had thrown his Body into the Streets to be a spectacle to the people: and in a few hours after several Troops arrived from Milan by order of Ferrand Gonzaga, Governor, to take possession of the City. The which unhappy fate, and violent death of a Son, as it sensibly touched the Pope with natural grief; so the loss of so fair a City did serve to augment the sence of this mischief, which by all the circum∣stances of it, did appear to have been perpetrated by the knowledg, and contrivance of the Emperor. This unexpected outrage caused great consternation at Bologna, and gave interruption to the proceedings of the Council at that place; for the Pope in his great affliction could not bend his thoughts to any trans∣actions there; only he forced his mind to read the particulars of what was debated, and concluded at Ausbourg, which were twice a week dis∣patched thence by an express: the which Diet being held until the year 1548.1548. with various discourses, and arguments, and nothing as yet concluded: But being the general sense of all that it was necessary for the common quiet of Germany to center at length in some resolutions, and that such resolutions tending to a composure could not be expected from the Council which was now transferred from Trent to Bologna, at least during the Reign of this Pope; wherefore it was proposed to make choice of some few persons to whom the care of this work should be committed; but not being able to agree in the persons to be elected, the choice was remitted solely to the Emperor, who at length pitched up∣on three persons, namely Julius flug, Michael S. don, and John Islebe to be the Compilers of a Formulary of Religion; the which after several consultations being reduced to a method, it was reviewed, and examin∣ed so often, by such different Heads, and Judgments, with additions, and retrenchments, puttings out, and in; that at length being finished, it looked like a patched piece, compounded by men of dissenting Judg∣ments, and differing designs. Howsoever being compleated, it contain∣ed five and thirty Chapters, or Heads; a Copy of which was delivered to the Legat by order of the Emperor to be sent to Rome to receive the Pope's Opinion, and Approbation thereunto. But lest this Formulary of Religion should give scandal to the Pope, and Cardinals, as if the
Emperor in a Diet had given new forms of Faith, and Religion, the Title Page of this Book was qualified by an Interim, that is, that the same Heads, and Points contained in that Book should be no longer Au∣thentick, or esteemed Catholick, or obliging Doctrins, than until such time as the same should be altered, and changed by the more unerring determinations of a General Council, to whose judgment they were sub∣mitted. When this Book came to Rome, where the Pope was now re∣tired, it caused great consternation and noise. The Clergy exclaimed highly, That a Temporal Prince in an Assembly composed only of Se∣culars, should adventure to handle all matters and Points of Religion: upon which the Learned Men, and such as were read in Histories, called to mind the Henoticon in the time of Zenon, the Ecthesis in the time of Heraclius, and the Typus of Constance, who were Emperors; and the Schisms, and Divisions in the Church caused by the Imperial Constitu∣tions relating to Religion, with which they compared, and adjoyned this Interim of Charles V. And farther, that which gave the greatest cause of fear, was, lest this Interim should be an Introduction to a greater Change; and that the Emperor intended this compliance with the Protestant Doctrins, to be a prelude, or a preparative to a total de∣fection from the Church of Rome, after the manner, and example of Henry VIII. King of England, The Pope, who was wise, and accustomed to dissemble matters, un∣til such time as he was able to remedy, or revenge them, reflecting with mature consideration on this present emergency, did make an other judg∣ment thereof than appeared to ordinary understandings; for he conclu∣ded that this new Formulary did tend more to the prejudice of the Em∣peror than to the Ecclesiastical State: wondering greatly that a Prince of so much Prudence, should so far be elated with his late Successes, as to believe himself able to be the Arbitrator, and Moderator of all mankind; or to be in a capacity by his single Interest to oppose both the great, and prevailing parties in the world. It was possible for a Prince adhering to one of them to suppress the other; but to oppose both at the same time, would be a match unequal. For the Pope wisely foresaw that these Do∣ctrins for the most part would be as displeasing to all Catholicks in gene∣ral, as to the Court of Rome, and would be no less contradicted by the Protestants; so that being oppugned on all sides, it would consequently fall by the contrariety of Factions. To which end, the Pope seeming in himself little concerned, did yet under-hand suggest jealousies in the minds of the German Prelates; the which being dexterously insinuated by the Cardinal Sfodrato the Popes Legate, who according to his Instru∣ctions gave in a memorial to the Emperor, representing the ill foundati∣on, and consequences of this new Formulary of Doctrins, and then took his leave, and departed, that he might not be present, when the same was published. In short, this matter succeeded according to the judg∣ment of the Pope: for tho the Emperor did most strictly forbid, and inhi∣bit any person to oppugn the Doctrins contained in this Book of Interim, either by Practice, Writings, or Preaching: yet notwithstanding the Pro∣testants on one side did not forbear to refute this Confession of Aus∣bourg by their publick Writings, and Disputations: and on the other Francis Romeo General of the Dominican Friers did by command from the Pope appoint several Learned men of that Order to refute that
Formulary of the Interim: In France also many wrote against it, and in a short time great numbers both of Catholicks and Protestants oppugned it with heat of argument, it having hapned in this matter as in others of the like nature, that where middle terms, or moderate expedients have been proposed between the extremes of opposite Factions for ac∣commodating or reconciling their differences; there the event hath been no other, than that the contrary parties have impugned the expedients, and both have been hardned, and confirmed in their own Tenents, and Opinions. 1549.These debates and troubles gave a stop to the proceedings of the Coun∣cil at Bologna, for the space of two years; and until almost the end of the year 1549. when at the beginning of November news came to the Pope then at Rome, that the Duke Ottavio Farnese his Nephew, (who having against his own inclinations been detained by the Pope at Rome, out of tenderness to his life, lest he should incur the same fate, as Pier∣luigi had done) was privately escaped out of the City, and was then actually dealing with Ferdinand Gonzaga the Governor of Milan to in∣state him in Parma, in despight of Camillo Orsino, who was to keep and defend the Town in right of the Ecclesiastical State. The which news so surprised the mind of the Pope with sensible grief, and commotion of spirit, who was not as yet recovered of the sorrow he had conceived for the fate of his Son Pierluigi that he presently fell into a swound, or Leipothymie, from which being revived, was seized by so violent a Fe∣ver, that in three days he died thereof, being the 10th. of November, at his Palace of Monte Cavallo, where he usually resided, because it was esteemed a place of the best Air in Rome. He had held the Papal Sea 15 years, and 28 days, and was arrived to the age of 81 years, eight months, and 10 days: He was buried in S. Peter's Church without any great pomp, or State; and afterwards the Sea was vacant two months, and 29 days. JƲLIƲS III. THE Cardinals having (as accustomary) celebrated the Fune∣ral Obsequies of the Pope deceased, for the space of nine days, did on the tenth enter into the Conclave; but then considering the small appearance of Cardinals, few being then present, the formal recess and retirement into the Conclave was de∣ferred for some time. And here it is to be observed, that the Cardinals were divided into three Factions; the first favoured the Emperor; the second was inclined to the French King; and a third consisted of such Cardinals as had been the creatures of the late Pope deceased, and by him promoted to several Benefices, and Dignities; the Cape, or chief of which, was Cardinal Farnese, Nephew to Paul the Third, who tho young, was yet active, subtil, and of a judgment solid, and of as good experience in the Court, as could be expected in a person of his years. This last party as it was numerous, so it was composed of ancient Car∣dinals, men of great authority and knowledg in the world, and such as
were able to bear down the ballance in favour of any person, to which they inclined; for which reason great courtship was made to Cardinal Farnese both by the Imperial, and French Ministers; whose arguments on both sides were so forcible to draw him to their party, that being doubtful unto which he should incline, resolved on a neutrality, as the safest course whereby to steer, tho in reality, he seemed on occasions to lean most to the French party. This was the state of affairs at Rome, when about the beginning of the month of December 1549. the Cardinals entered into the Con∣clave: Farnese in the first place proposed to his own Party, the choice of Cardinal Poole, an English man, a person, against whom for the no∣bility of his extraction, his godliness, and exemplary life nothing could be objected: and being also acceptable to the Imperialists, and displea∣sing to no party, he found many friends ready to give their Votes for him, amongst which the most considerable were the Cardinals of Trent, Sforza, and Crescentio, who had drawn also Morone, and Maffei to their Party; who being all men of considerable interest did agree immedi∣ately to present him in the Conclave, and assume him to the Papal Dig∣nity. But some of the old Cardinals, who seemingly assented thereun∣to, yet being inwardly envious to see a younger man preferred over their heads, did advise to delay the time for a while, lest the Election which ought to be mature and grave, should seem to have been over∣hasty, and precipitate, tho in reality this delay was caused by that hopes which every one entertained of being himself the person that should be elected: by which means the choice of Poole being until the next day suspended, the contrary party, such as Monti, Cesis, and Gaddi, who were all Pretenders, and Candidates, had time to make their Parties; Cardinal Salviati labouring all the night for the exclusi∣on of Poole. The next day the Cardinals being assembled in the Chap∣pel to the number of 49. Cardinal Fortone one of the French Faction publickly accused Poole of Heresie, and for that reason protested against his choice. Howsoever his Friends esteeming his report false, and scandalous, pressed forward the scrutiny; in pursuance of which, the Votes being put into a Chalice, 26 were found in favour of Poole; but in regard that 33 at least out of 49 were required to make the Election legitimate, Poole was excluded, to the great disappointment of himself, and the Imperial Party, who esteemed the choice to have been secure and certain. In relation hereof I have been the more large, because it concerned one of our Country-men, and may have reference to some particulars which are to follow. After which, several other Cardinals experienced their fortunes; but to no effect, the Factions being every day more heated, and embroiled, so that they could not come to any agreement: at length they resolved to nominate nine persons, out of which the Imperialists might choose one that was most acceptable to them. The persons proposed were three French men, viz. Lorene, Tornon, and Bellai: three Italians, Salviati, Ridolfi, and Trani: and three Imperialists, Theatino, Monti, and San Marcello, against whom nothing was objected; excepting Monti, whom Cardinal Ghisa accused of a wicked life, publishing many Vices of which he was guilty, and rendering him unworthy of the Priesthood and Holy Orders, into which he was entered. Howsoever at length the Cardinals
growing weary with so long a continuation of the Conclave, resolved generally to adhere unto Monti; to which also Cardinal Farnese assent∣ing, laboured with all his power to reconcile Ghisa, and Monti, which after some words, and secret conferences together being happily con∣cluded; all parties concurred in the Election, and on the ninth of Fe∣bruary 1550. Monti being accompanied by 42 Cardinals descended into the Church of S. Peter, where being seated in the Chappel of S. Andrew, all the Cardinals paid their respects and obedience to him, which they te∣stified, as was usual, by kissing his feet; which being finished, he cal∣led himself by the name of Julius III. in memory of Julius II. from whom he derived the beginning of his greatness. He was afterwards crowned by Cardinal Cibo, on the 21. of the same month of February. His Reign began with the year of Jubilee 1550. the which in its re∣gular course ought to have commenced the Christmas before: but in re∣gard the Chair was then vacant, that solemnity was deferred until the 24th. of February, being the Festival of S. Matthias, when the four Gates were opened, according to the accustomed manner, and great numbers of people flocked from all parts of Italy, who having visited the four princi∣pal Churches, namely S. John of Lateran, S. Peter's, S. Pauls, and S. Ma∣ries the Great, received the Indulgences, Privileges, and Absolutions, which are the fruits and rewards of that Devotion; with which this Holy Year ended on the day of the Epiphany of the year following. Amongst the other Pilgrims, which were but few in number from the Western parts, by reason of the Wars, and confusions about Religion; Stephen the Patriarch of the greater Armenia in company with an Arch-Bishop and two other Bishops came to Rome to gain the Jubilee. This people who had been always of the Eastern Church, and submitted to their own Supreme Patriarch called, were persuaded by the Missionaries from Rome in the time of Paul III. to submit to the Roman Church up∣on promises of Preferments and increase of their Revenue; in which Faith they have ever since continued, adhering to all Points of that Church; tho perhaps little regard hath been had to an augmentation of their Benefices; for I have been acquainted with one of their Patriarchs accompanied with two Dominican Friars, who were so poor, that in their Travels to Rome, they have begged Alms to defray their charges. During this year of Jubilee, and the first of his Reign, the Pope In∣dicted the Council which Paul III. had transferred to Bologna to be held at Trent, and to begin in May following. Charles V. was then at the Diet of Augsburg, when this Bull of the Pope was delivered to his hands, which he caused to be promulged in the hearing of all the Princes, who were present at the Diet. In obedience to these summons, some of the Bishops of Germany, Spain, and Italy attended and made their per∣sonal appearance; to which place also the Pope sent Cardinal Crescentio to reside as his Legate, assisted by the Arch-Bishop of Sipontino, and the Bishop of Verona: and being desirous to perform acts of Favour and Grace soon after his Inauguration, he bestowed twenty Cardinals Hats, amongst which he gave one to a Youth of thirteen years of age, called Innocent de Monte, born at Piacenza, one of poor and mean Parentage, whom he received and adopted by that name into his Family, none knowing the ground or reason for it, which gave a large and copious Theme to the Pasquils at Rome.
About that time George Martinuno, who governed the Affairs of Transilvania during the minority of that King, was at the instance and request of Ferdinand created Cardinal by this Pope Julius; but he af∣terwards secretly plotting and conspiring with the Turks against the Prince, who was under his charge and tuition, upon discovery and proof made of his treacherous designs was justly put to death. This Pope who was of a pacifick temper, and naturally inclined to peace, had al∣so farther inducements thereunto by the long experience he had in the affairs of the Church, which he had observed to thrive, and prosper most with the lenitives of peace, rather than by Arms, and Slaughter, which were incongruous and dissentaneous to those principles on which the Church was originally founded: howsoever the Pope contrary to these principles was unhappily forced, and engaged in a War on this occasion, which we shall here relate, with as much brevity as we are able. Paul the Third, after Piacenza was lost, and his Son Pier-luigi slain, com∣mitted the charge and defence of Parma to Camillo Orsino (who was re∣puted a great Soldier in his time) to keep and defend that City in the name and behalf of the Church, strictly commanding him not to resign or entrust that care into any other hands, without express and positive Commission. Paul being dead, and Julius III. being in treaty for the Succession, promised Cardinal Farnese, who (as we have said) was Chief of a powerful Party, to deliver Parma into the hands of his Brother Ottavio, in case he would favour him with his Vote, and Interest; which he assenting unto, and Julius being made Pope, the conditions were complied with; the Commission of Camillo being vacated, and the Go∣vernment of the City surrendred to Ottavio: provided notwithstanding that it should not be in the power of Ottavio to consign the City into the hands of any Prince whatsoever, without the knowledg, license, and consent of the Pope: and that Ottavio might be the better enabled to maintain the Garrison against the force, and temptation of the Im∣perialists, a stipend was allowed him of 2000 Crowns a month. In a short time Ottavio finding that the Imperialists were pressing upon him, and that he was not able to defend the City against Charles V. with∣out greater supplies both of men, and mony, desired the Pope, that he would either augment his Allowance, or else give him the liberty to joyn, and enter into Alliance with some other Prince, that was able to se∣cure and defend him against the artifices, and violences of the Emperor. The Pope not penetrating the depth of the matter, without due, and ma∣ture consideration answered, that confiding in his prudence, he gave him license to provide for his safety in such manner, as he thought most ex∣pedient. Ottavio taking these words in the largest sense, and supposing he had obtained license to do, and act as he pleased, agreed privately with Henry II. King of France to receive a French Garrison into Parma; which being done, and the Pope too late complaining thereof, as a mat∣ter concluded without his knowledg or permission; and also apprehend∣ing that the Emperor would certainly believe that this was acted by his assent, and concurrence, that he might disabuse the world, and persuade the Emperor to the contrary, he banished Cardinal Alexander Farnese to Florence, and calling the Emperors Forces to his assistance, made War upon Duke Ottavio; so that all Italy on a sudden began to be embroiled and enflamed with War. For Parma was presently besieged by Fer∣nando
Gonzaga, who was Governour of Milan under the Emperor; and by Angelo de Medici Legat for the Pope: and in the mean time Monsieur de Thermes General of the French Forces was raising Men in Mirandola, and making preparations of Ammunition, and provisions for a War, and Peter Sirozzi, and Oratio Farnese Captains of Henry the French King made incursions as far as Bologna, spoiling, and laying waste the Coun∣try round about; wherefore the Imperialists having joined the Popes Army laid siege to Mirandola, so that Parma and Mirandola were both besieged at the same time: in this manner the War continued for the space of a whole year without any memorable action on either side, onely fire, and sword, and miserable devastations raged in all parts of Italy; of which the Pope being touched with an inward compassion, and being naturally inclined to Peace, having began this War more in compliance with the Emperour, than his own humour or affections, or with intention to possess himself of Parma, did at the instance of cer∣tain French Cardinals make a Peace, with which the Siege was raised both from before Parma, and Mirandola: howsoever with this accom∣modation on the Popes side, the Wars did not end between Henry of France, and Charles the Emperour, but being continued from one year to another produced nothing but slaughter, ruin and miseries to their People. In the mean time the Pope having proclaimed, that the Council held at Bologna should be transferred to Trent, commanding by his Indictions, and Bulls, all Patriarchs, Arch-Bishops, and Bishops to repair thither, and having sent thither Cardinal Crescentio to preside as his Legat, together with his two Assistants before named, the eleventh Ses∣sions was commenced on the first of May, 1551. 1551.Howsoever, before it could be agreed to transfer the Council again to Trent, many, and serious Debates were held thereupon, and the rea∣sons of Paul the third for adjourning it to Bologna being very forcible, it had still been continued there had not the considerations of pleasing the Emperour prevailed, which in that conjuncture was esteemed neces∣sary: and also it was resolved, that all the Acts, and determinations which had been concluded, and agreed in the former Sessions should be esteemed authentick, and ratified, and not farther to be called into question, or debate either in any Diet, or in this Council: for which reasons the Protestants refused to appear at Trent, alledging that the place was neither secure for them, nor the Council free in such manner, as that every one might deliver his Sence, and debate his Opinions; and that unless the conclusions made in the Council might be again exa∣mined, and that the Divines, who composed the Confession of Augsburg, might have a Decisive, as well as a deliberative Voice, and that unless the Pope not being permitted to preside in the Council, the Bishops might be absolved from their Oath, which obliges to the Papal Sea, and suffered freely to give their own true, and real Sentiments, it could not be expected, that any happy result should issue from this Council, and therefore they were resolved to absent themselves, and not give their attendance according to the citations and summons from the Pope. Wherefore the Emperour entering into a closer Treaty with the Ecclesiastical Electors, and others inclining to the Church of Rome, advised them to attend personally the General Council to which all due, and humble obedience was to be given, promising them all security,
and safety both in going and returning; For as he was in the quality of Emperour, so he was Advocate of the Church, and the Defender of Councils, the which Office that he might be in a better capacity to per∣form, he would take up his residence at some place on the Fron∣tiers; where he would be assistant to their Liberty, that every one might have a freedom to propose, and speak what he in Conscience judged most agreeable to the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers. This Declaration of the Emperour seemed to be made, and erected as a Battery, or Counter-work to the Popes Bull. For whereas the Pope pretended to govern, and direct Councils, the Emperour resolved to take the care, and charge to see them orderly, and regularly directed. The Pope pretended to preside, and to be himself the Rule, and have the casting Voice; and the Emperour commands that all Decisions be made according to Scriptures, and the Holy Fathers. The Pope directs that the conclusions made at former Sessions stand in force, the Emperour leaves them free to be disputed, and debated as every Mans conscience directed: In short, the Court of Rome not being able to digest these con∣tradictions, complained much of the encroachments which the Emperour made on the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and that his Declaration was an other Convocation of a Council. The Emperour having declared his resolution to grant his Passes, and safe conduct to all such, as should go to this Council. The Protestant Princes began to discourse in all parts of Germany of sending the most a∣cute, and learned Men amongst them to Trent: and accordingly Maurice Duke of Saxony commanded Melancthon, and other Divines of singular note, and reputation to repair thither. In like manner the Duke of Wirtemberg provided others of equal Learning; but considering that a safe Conduct, or Passeport from the Emperour was not sufficient, as had been formerly experienced at the Councils of Constance, and Basil; the Emperour was desired by those Princes to obtain by the means of his Ambassadours safe conducts, under the publick Seal of the Council: which the Emperour promised to do, and accordingly gave order to Count Monfort one of his three Ambassadours residing at Trent to procure the same, the which afterwards gave occasion of much Debate, and Dispute in what manner, and with what Expressions it was to be formed. The Pope though to outward appearance seemed very desirous to have the Council commence and be continued at Trent according to the time appointed: yet did not seem much concerned, or greatly pressing to have the Catholick Prelats assemble: onely the Emperour seemed most urgent, conceiving the determinations of a Council to be the onely means to quiet, and appease the disturbances in Germany; and therefore instantly pressed the Electors of Cologne, Triers, and Metz together with several Bishops of Spain, and such as were in his Dominions of Italy to hasten their Journey unto Trent: so that during the space of eight months, that the Council continued, the whole Assembly of Persons actually present comprehending also the Presidents, and Princes did not exceed the number of sixty four. Time being protracted unprofitably from the first of May to the first of September: a Sessions was then held: at which it was declared,1651. that
considering the small appearance of Bishops by reason of the absence of the German Nation; the Sessions of the Council had been until that time deferred. But now in regard that two of the Electors were already come, which gave hopes, that many others of the same Country would follow their example, and speedily attend the Summons of the Holy Council; it was resolved in expectation thereof to adjourn for the space of forty days, that is from the first of September to the eleventh of October. At which time these particular Articles would be then treated, and discussed. First of the Sacraments in general: and next of Baptism, the Eucharist, and confirmation in particular: After which the Count de Monfort made a Speech in behalf of his Master the Emperour; and several Commissions and Letters of Credence from di∣vers Princes were publickly read by the Secretary of the Council. After which Amiot Abbot of Bellosane presented a Letter from Henry the French King, directed to the Council, and delivered to be read by the Secretary; the Superscription whereof was this, Sanctissimis in Chri∣sto Patribus Conventus Tridentini. Against which the Spanish Prelats took great exception, cryed out with a loud Voice, That that Letter was not directed to them, who were a General Council, and not an As∣sembly, as that Superscription would insinuate, and therefore desired that the Letter might not be read, but that in case the Bearer had any thing to propose from his Master, he might be heard by a Committee, or at some private House: the word Conventus, gave great Scandal, and an occasion of much noise and disturbance; until such time as the Arch-Bishop of Metz rising from his Seat, asked them, how they would be able to admit audience to the Protestants, who stiled them Conven∣tum Malignantium, when they so ill relished the title of Sanctissimum Con∣ventum: howsoever the Spaniards continued their Exclamations until the Legat and his Assistants together with the Emperours Ambassadors reti∣ring a while into secret Conference, returned again, and gave their assent to have the Letter read, being willing to have the word Conventus taken in the largest and most favourable sense. The Contents and substance of which Letter dated the 13th. of August was to this effect. That the King out of due respect to that Council, and according to the custom of his Ancestors had thought fit to signifie to them the reasons why he had not sent any of his Bishops to that Assembly convened by Pope Julius the 3d. under the title of a General Council; the which was caused by the Obligation he had upon him both in justice, and honour to assist the Duke of Parma; for which cause there being a necessity laid upon him of making War against the Pope, and the Ecclesiastical State, there could be no security or safety either to his Ambassadours, or Bishops in any Dominions of the Church, whilest this misunderstanding between him, and the Pope remained: and therefore he hoped they would ac∣cept this, as a just reason and excuse, to whom he appealed as favou∣rable, and impartial Judges in the case, &c. After the Letter a Protest was read, containing all the Particulars, of which Mounsieur de Termes Ambassadour for France complained at Rome to the Pope, in name of the King, the substance whereof was this: That having taken upon him the protection of Parma, he had endeavoured to represent his Rea∣sons for it to the Pope, and Cardinals; giving them to understand, that his principal Motives thereunto were reasonable, pious, and Royal, and
such as had no mixture of interest, but purely respected the welfare, and benefit of the Church; as might appear by the Articles of agreement with Parma, which onely respected the Church, and the peace and liber∣ty of Italy: of which having informed the Pope, his Holiness seemed not willing to understand the same, seeming more inclinable to gratifie his own humour, than prevent those mischiefs which would embroil all Europe, and interrupt the proceedings of the present Council, which he could not esteem, or stile with the Character of General, but of a par∣ticular Convention, assembled onely to serve a turn, and promote private interests; so long as he who was the most Christian King, and the eldest Son of the Church was excluded thence; not being able to send his Am∣bassadours or Bishops thither with that security to their Persons, and freedom in their Votes, as was required in a General Council, &c. This Protest being read, the Answer thereunto was deferred until the eleventh of October. In the mean time this Protest afforded matter of Discourse to all Chri∣stendom: some were of Opinion that the Pope hereupon would be in∣duced to dissolve the Council, which could have no Authority, or be termed General, so long as the French Nation, which was a principal Member was excluded from it: But the Pope was of another Opinion, pretending that his sincere endeavours of persuading that Nation to join themselves to it, was sufficient: and the Imperialists, who cared not much for their Company, judged that scruple immaterial; since that being cited, and required to appear thereat, as members of the Catho∣lick Church; their causeless, and obstinate absence ought not to preju∣dice the proceedings of the Council; for in regard the greater part in∣clude the Minor; the whole body of France was obliged to own those Acts of the Council to be Canonical, and Obligatory, having by their absence, when they might have been present, or by their silence assented thereunto. Howsoever the Parliament of Paris was of an other Judgment: for tho it be true that the greater number carries the point, in those Assemblies, where is a common concurrence in Votes: But where one part absents it self, and refuses to joyn, the Acts of the other cannot oblige the dissent∣ing Party, and in that case that Rule takes place, Prohibentis potior est conditio; of which nature are all such Ecclesiastical Assemblies which how numerous soever they may be, their Acts have onely an Authority to oblige their own Countries, but not such as have dissented, or are not concurring with them: which was the sense and Opinion of ancient times, as we may read in the Treatises wrote by S. Hilarius, Athanasius, Theodoret, and Victorinus expresly upon this Point: for which reasons certains Canons have been received in some Churches which have been rejected in others: and as St. Gregory testifies, that upon the same account, the Canons of the second Council of Constantinople, and of the first of Ephesus were not received by the Church of Rome. But lest the French King should by this manner of Nonconformity seem Schismati∣cal, or be suspected of an intention to alienate the minds of his People from the Catholick Religion; he published divers severe Edicts against the Protestants; promising rewards to such, who should detect, and ac∣cuse them.
Now according to the Promise made to the Abbot of Bellozare, that an Answer should be given to the Letters and Protest of the French King his Master on the eleventh of October following; the Cryer of the Council at the Church-gate, made Proclamation, that in case any were there pre∣sent for the most Christian King, he should then appear. But the Abbot knowing well, that no Answer would be given him, but such as was forged at Rome by the Spanish Party, had by Order from his Master the King withdrawn himself; wherefore none appearing to receive and hear the Answer, Order was given to have the Answer which was prepared for that time to be publickly read in the Council, the substance where∣of was this; That the Council was not conscious of having given any such offence to his Majesty, that he should have cause to pass such hard Censures upon it: that it had been at first convened by the Authority of Paul the 3d. and now continued under this Pope Julius, and therefore could not be suspected of having had it's original from any private De∣signs of advancing particular interests, as his Majesty would insinuate, and therefore they desired his Majesty would be pleased to send his Bi∣shops to the Council, that they might concur in this holy Work, which was carried on with no other aim, than a just and a sincere intention to settle Religion on its true basis, and to produce peace and quietness in the World: Adding farther, That in case his Majesty should upon any pri∣vate considerations, or animosities decline this happy Union denying the pretence and attendance of his Ministers at this Sacred Assembly; that yet notwithstanding they were well assured that all those Acts perform∣ed there, would have the same force, and Authority obligatory upon Men's Consciences, as if his Majesty had by the presence of his Ambas∣sadours and Bishops concurred therein. Nor did the French King onely deny to send his own Subjects to the Council, but also prevailed with the Suisses, and Grisons by his Ambas∣sadours to do the like, who being well acquainted with the secret Designs and Intrigues of the Court of Rome instilled that prejudice in their minds to this Council; that as well Catholicks, as Protestants then assembled in a Diet at Basil, denied and disclaimed all concurrence with that Council, and as an evidence thereof recalled Thomas Plant Bishop of Coire from thence. Notwithstanding all these difficulties, and oppositions the Council proceeded in their Decrees, and determined eleven Points with Ana∣thema against all such, who should not close in faith and in belief there∣of. First, against those, who should deny the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ together with his Soul, and Deity to be really and sub∣stantially contained in the Eucharist; but confess it to be only in sign, or figure, or mystically: the which conversion of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Body and Blood of Christ, they called Transubstan∣tiation. Secondly, against those, who should hold that the whole Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist is not contained in one of these two Species; Thirdly, against those who hold, that the Body and Blood of Christ is then onely contained in the Species when the same is received, and not before, or after. Fourthly, against those, who hold, that the chief fruit, and benefit of this Sacrament is the remission of sins. Fifthly, against those, who hold, that Christ in the Eucharist is not to be adored with the Service of Latria, or carried in Procession, or publickly exposed to Worship and Adoration. Sixthly, against those, who being come to the
age of discretion shall not communicate once a year, and that at Easter; with five other Points relating to the Sacrament, all which were con∣firmed as irrevocable, and immovable fundamentals, of which it was not lawful to doubt, much less to dispute. These and other Points being already passed in the Council, were taken as granted, and concluded, and therefore were not to be again re assumed to Debate: But now in regard the matter of the Passports to be given to the Protestants, was again to be considered, it was judged fit, that the Tenure thereof should be restrained with prudent cautions, that when the Dissenting Party should intermix with their Assembly, it should not be in their Power to unravel those Doctrines which had been already setled, and determined; but giving them for granted, should proceed to examine other Points of lesser moment, which they limited to four Articles. First, Whether it were necessary to Salvation that Christ's faithful People should receive the Sa∣crament of the Eucharist in both kinds. Secondly, Whether he that re∣ceives in one kind alone, receives less than he that communicates in both. Thirdly, Whether the Church be guilty of an Error in having ordained, that the Laity should communicate in one kind only. And then Fourth∣ly, Whether the Sacrament of the Eucharist may be given to Children. These Points of limitation being thus laid down, the Preamble to the Passports ran in this manner; That whereas the Protestants did desire to be heard upon these Points before they were finally determined, and for the end they might have free and safe admission to this Council, without any let, hinderance, or interruption whatsoever: It was there∣fore by the Authority of this Council ordered, and enacted, That out of a desire, and zeal they had to reduce the erring Christians into the true way of the Gospel, they did with humble charity condescend unto their Demands, giving, and granting unto them the publick faith, and assurance to come, and repair freely to this Council, and there to de∣bate of the preceding Particulars, Provided that they came, and gave their personal attendance there in Council, at, or before the 25th. of January next following, and in the mean time that the Points being fre∣quently debated and discussed, might be prepared and made ready for determination against the end of that Month. The Tenour of this Passport being read, and considered by the Pro∣testants, appeared strangely captious, and such as gave them just occa∣sion of astonishment and admiration; for considering that the Prote∣stants had not onely in all their Diets, but in all their publick Remon∣strances and Writings avowed their resolutions to hear all matters in Dispute to be examined in their presence, and that without such personal intercourse and consent, they would never receive or obey any Precepts or Articles which should be enjoyned, or imposed upon them from Trent: it seemed strangely magisterial and surprizing, that the Council should assume a liberty to say, that the Protestants desired to be heard onely upon those four Points; it being most evident that the Design of the Pass∣port was no other than to delude unthinking Men by a fair appearance of invitation, and safe Conduct, and yet keep the Authority of the Pope, and of the Roman Church upon its guard and reserve; wherefore the Protestants rejecting the allurements of such feigned Disguises, by gene∣ral agreement resolved not to repair unto the Council, unless it were under the protection of such a safe Conduct as was given be the Council
of Basil to the Bohemians: one Clause of which was, That the Holy Scriptures should be the Judg of all Controversies; which in case they could not obtain, they might have wherewith to excuse themselves be∣fore the Emperour. The Pope having understood these resolutions of the dissenting Ger∣mans, more earnestly urged the coming of the Catholick Suisses to the Council, with whom also the Emperour joyned in the Invitation; but the French King had so charmed them by his Ambassadours, who being a Person well versed in all the Intrigues and contrivances of the Court of Rome, had wrote a Treatise on that Subject, sufficient to create in them a Diffidence and jealousie of the Roman Counsels, and so exposed the Designs intended against them, that not onely the Protestant, but also the Catholick Swissers did at a Diet held at Bade unanimously concur not to send their Deputies to Trent, by which the Grisons also taking an Alarm, conceived a jealousie, that some thing was contri∣ving at Rome to their prejudice, and for that reason recalled Thomas Plant the Bishop of Coire from his residence with the Council. Whilest these matters were in Treaty two Ambassadours from the Duke of Wirtemberg arrived at Trent, whose Commission was publickly to represent the Confession of their Doctrine before the Council, giving them to understand, that in case they would admit their Divines to a Debate, and grant them a free Passport as large and ample in the Te∣nure of it, as was that of Basil, that then they should appear in the Council, and expound and explicate their Doctrine, and Tenents ac∣cording to the true sense and meaning of them: but before these Divines were admitted, it was ordered by the Legat, that they should first pre∣sent and make known to the President the Summary of their Commis∣sion, that so it might be considered whether the particulars therein con∣tained were such as were lawful, and which might be regularly admit∣ted into the Council, which was the method of their proceedings. But the Ambassadours whose Instructions were, not to own, or acknowledg the Authority of the Pope, or power of convoking, or presiding in Council either in Person, or by his Deputies, could not be persuaded to make applications to the President, being a matter contrary to the prin∣cipal Article resolved in Germany. 1551.About the same time also being the beginning of November the Em∣perour arrived at Inspruck; which being a City not above three days journey from Trent, was for that present made the place of his residence, that so he might with more ease receive daily Advices of the proceed∣ings of the Council, and be more near at hand to administer assistance to his Wars at Parma. The news of the Emperours near approach did not much disturb the thoughts of the Pope, who depended on the rei∣terated Promises which the Emperour had made him of being firm, and steady to the interest of the Church, and the Court of Rome. But to the Ambassadours of Wirtemberg he studied not much to give a Reply, or new Instructions to his Legat; but onely recommended to him a firm constancy in defence of the Papal Authority, which having in the time of Paul the third convened that Council, and which had by the same Power been ever since continued; he ought not in the least Point give way to schismatical, and seditious motions: but with courage and zeal, defend the Right and Title which the Pope singly had both to As∣semble,
and to preside as Head in all Ecclesiastical Councils. The Am∣bassadours having continued at Trent without being heard, pressed very earnestly for a Dispatch, and that their Doctrines might be read in the Council, and a safe Conduct granted to their Protestant Brethren accord∣ing to the form of that given at Basil, that so they might have liberty to deliver their Doctrines, and Argue, and Dispute in maintenance thereof without interruption, or danger to their Persons. But the Legat would not yield to either of the Propositions; saying, That as to their Do∣ctrines, they were already notified in their own Books, and lay before the Council to consider, and either to approve, or condemn them; and that the Censure given ought to be conclusive, and received with humi∣lity and submission, as a final Determination. And whereas they de∣sired that their Doctrines should be read in the Council, it seemed as if the Dissenters intended to give Laws, and Precepts, and teach the Church what was Orthodox, and what Erronious: And as to the form of the Passport in any other latitude than what had lately been pre∣scribed, it seemed so insufferable an indignity to the Council, and to the Church of God to have their former resolutions questioned, and a∣gain unravelled, that all good Christians were obliged to engage their Lives for the prevention thereof. At the same time the City of Strasbourg, and five other Towns sent their Ambassadours to Trent with the like Orders to represent their Do∣ctrines before the Council; who finding the same repulse, did jointly address themselves to the Emperour, complaining, that contrary to the Promises of his Imperial Majesty their Doctrines could not be read in the Council, or received into consideration: but the Emperour being wil∣ling to content them, acquainted them that the Ambassadours of Saxony were shortly expected, and that when they came, they should have a fair hearing, and be admitted to a charitable, and friendly Conference. On the seventh of January 1552.1552. the Ambassadours from Maurice Elector of Saxony arrived at Trent to the great joy of the other Electours, and Prelats of Germany, who uniting together in the same Interest made their first Addresses and applications to the Emperor's Embassadours: ac∣quainting them that their Princes, being desirous to cultivate Union, and Charity amongst Christians, had sent their Divines to the Council, who were moderate Men, learned in the Law and Gospel, and such as were lovers of Peace, and Christian Charity, and that all the other Protestant Princes would in like manner send their Ministers to the Council under the protection of such a Passport, or safe Conduct, as had been granted at Basil, Provided, that all matters, and Points already Determined might be again examined, and called into question: and the Pope not admitted to preside as Chief of the Council, but be equally liable to the Sentences, and Censures of the same with other Bishops. And in the mean time their desire was to be admitted directly to the Council with∣out any intermediate Addresses to Crescentio the Pope's Legat; and that in publick Assembly their Commissions might be read, and their Doctrines exposed to publick consideration: But these Proposals, though gently received and hearkned unto by the Emperour's Ambassadours, who were unwilling to disoblige the Electours of Saxony, and Brandenbourg, were violently opposed by the Pope's Legat, and Nuncios; who alledg∣ed, that it was a matter of high indignity to the Council, which repre∣sented
the Church Catholick, to have their Decrees, and Determinati∣ons canvassed, and reversed by an inconsiderable number of Sectaries, who seemed to come prepared and armed rather to confound, than esta∣blish the Council: for seeing that their Principles were, to disown the Pope's Authority, on which that Council was founded; and then to be admitted to a freedom of Speech, in which they might vent their bla∣sphemous Doctrines, and reproaches to the dishonour of the Apostolical See, was such an Indulgence to Impiety, and a betraying the Power of the Church, as rather than admit, were ready to sacrifice their lives, or at least withdraw from any Meetings, where such matters were De∣bated, or Acts Decreed. But notwithstanding these positive refusals, the Emperor's Ambassadours endeavoured to induce the Pope's Party to ad∣mit the Dissenters to audience in the Council; for that their very en∣trance to it did imply a tacite owning of the Pope's Authority, though the usual Ceremonies, and Compliments which were but super∣ficial Points, were pretermitted by them, the which would be an act most religious, and Christian, for perhaps such charitable condescension would be a means to prevent a War, which might endanger the safety of the whole Church: to which the Cardinal of Toledo one of the Em∣peror's Party, farther added: That he had often heard in Sermons, how that the salvation of one Soul was so dear, and precious to Jesus Christ, that for the saving thereof he would descend on Earth, and be again crucified; and then, said he, let us consider, if we imitate this example, in case for the saving of all Germany, we should deny to recede from the least punctilio of our honour, and prerogative. At length, to be short, after many Debates, and consultations in despight of the Legat and his Adherents, the Authority of the three Electours, and the Cardinal Ma∣drutio promoted by the mediation of the Imperial Ambassadors prevailed. But then another difficulty arose concerning the treatment of these Ambassadours when introduced to the Council, with what place, and precedency was to be granted to them; and how, and where the Di∣vines were to be seated, who expected a rank, and freedom of Voice, and suffrage equal with others; which seemed very dangerous to be yielded to known Hereticks, who by Antient Canons, and Papal Decretals were never admitted to a Communion or Society with other Christians, unless having first renounced their Errors, they desired with humility to be taught, and directed: this Point though at first disputed with the same difficulties as the former; yet at length it was concluded: That the necessity ought to excuse the transgression of such Canons, which af∣ter mature deliberation had been dispensed within all the Diets of Ger∣many; and that the like might be safely practised at this Council; in case that in the Preamble to this Admission, it were declared, that such Indulgence was yielded out of charity, and compassion, to the end that Men who were gone astray, and fallen into error might be reclaimed, and reduced to the true Faith, and Orthodox Doctrine of the Church. And though the Legat would not yield to any of these means of Ac∣commodation, yet it was concluded against him; that on the 24th. of this month of January a General Convocation should be held, at which the Ambassadours of Saxony should be received, and heard; and that in the mean time the Divines who remained at some distance from Trent might repair thither, and that the 25th. should be the day of Session;
which being agreed, a Committee was chosen to draw up this Decree, together with the Preamble to the Admission, and the safe Conduct. The Imperial Ministers having made this report to the Protestants, and signified in an eloquent Speech the tenderness the Council had for them, and willingness to condescend to their weak Consciences: the Protestants retired a while, and having considered the minutes of the safe Conduct; made their exceptions to it, being in four particulars dif∣ferent to that of Basil, formerly granted to the Bohemians, and on which they were obliged by their Instructions to insist. As first, That in Council they might have a Vote, and free suffrage. Secondly, That the holy Scripture, and practice of the Primitive Church, Antient Councils, and Fathers who were Expositors of the Scriptures might be the Judges of all Controversies. Thirdly, That all Ambassadours du∣ring the continuance of the Council, might have the free Exercise of their Religion in their own Lodgings. Fourthly, That nothing should be said, or acted which might tend to the defamation of their Religion, or render it ridiculous. These particulars being offered to the Council, were generally concluded to be unreasonable, and such as might ensnare their wisdom in inextricable difficulties; and therefore it was resolved not to change, or alter any thing in the Minutes of the Safe Conduct, in expectation that the Protestants observing their resolution and constancy might with time be induced to condescend to their terms. Matters being thus protracted till the 24th. of January the General Convocation was held at the House of the Legat, where the Electors, all the Fathers, and the Emperor's Ambassadours were present; who having taken their Places, the Ambassadours of Saxony were called in, who having made their Reverence, and Salutes to the Assembly, one of them began his Speech, with this Compellation, Reverendissimi, & Amplissimi Patres, & Domini; My Lord and Master Maurice Elector of Saxony after his hearty Wishes, and Prayers, that God would inspire all your Counsels with his Holy Spirit, hath commanded me to let you know, that he hath a long time desired to see a General, Christian and free Council held, and celebrated, wherein all Errors might be refuted, and abuses in the Church corrected, and reformed; and that the Holy Scriptures might be made the Rule of our faith and practice: in which good work that he might be assistant, he hath sent his Divines to repre∣sent their Confession to this Council, being commanded to abide at some Leagues distant until a safe Conduct could be procured for them; for having understood, that according to a constitution of the Council of Constance, it was not necessary to keep faith with Hereticks, or those who were so reputed; and that the Bohemians being sensible of such Te∣nants, had with due caution armed themselves with assurance of safe Conduct under the Seal of the Council of Basil; so in like manner his Master the Elector did desire and expect the security of safe Conduct for his Divines, Counsellors and their domestick Servants in a more ample, and large form than what appeared in that Draught, and Copy which had lately been presented to him. Which request being granted, and admission given to the Divines to take their place in Council, his next Proposition was to have them heard upon those Points, and Articles, which were in Controversie between the Protestants, and the Catho∣licks; and though the same had already been determined by the Coun∣cil,
yet that they might again be revised, and examined, and determined by the Word of God, and according to the common belief of all Chri∣stian Nations. After these Ambassadours had finished their Oration, those of Wir∣temberg were introduced, who having delivered their Message almost to the same intent, and purpose with the former they were caused to retire; and after a Debate whether any addition, or alteration should be made in the form of Safe Conduct, it was generally concluded in the Negative, lest by giving the liberty proposed, the Council should be intri∣gued in most inextricable Disputes, of which Volumes had been wrote alrea∣dy without hopes of arriving at any definitive Sentence or Determination. The next day being the 25th. of January which was the day of the Session, all things were managed with great Order, and Solemnity; and after Mass was ended, the Council sat, and in the first place determi∣ned all points relating to the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Sacrament of Ordination, that those material Points might be passed before the ar∣rival of the Protestants, in expectation of whom (as was then declared) and in hopes that they came provided with real, and peaceable inten∣tions to acquiesce in the truth, and confirm the Decrees of their Mother the Church, and not to ruine, and destroy its fundamental Principles, they had prorogued their next Session until the 19th. of March follow∣ing; and as to the form of the Safe Conduct it appeared to them so large, and ample that nothing could be devised, or imagined to render it more extensive, or of greater validity. With this, and the like tenderness of brotherly compassion the Council seemed to outward appearance to treat the Protestants, though the chief motive thereunto, was to please the Emperor, who apprehending great confusions, and Wars in Germany, on the score of Religion was earnest by all the Sollicitations his Ministers could make to bring matters to some tolerable accommodation. The Emperor also being desirous to abate something of the Authority and arrogance of the Church, imagined that the Protestants might be made use of, as the happy Instruments to effect the same, and that the depression of the Papal Power might en∣crease the grandeur of the Imperial. The Pope, and his Party discover∣ing these secret agitations did after this last Session think little of the farther proceedings of the Council, and therefore on force of this jea∣lousie entertained private Treaties with France managed by the Cardi∣nal Tournon in behalf of that King, in pursuance and execution of which it was believed, that an entire, and absolute dissolution of the Council would necessarily follow of it self, without any Act of the Pope therein. Howsoever these matters not as yet discovered; the Protestants te∣stified their dislike of the Narrowness of the Passport, as not compre∣hending that amplitude, which their Princes required. And also obser∣ving that the general Congregation proceeded to prepare all matters in Controversie concerning Marriage, adoration of Images, worship of Saints, Purgatory and the like, which they called Minute Points, to be offered against the next Session, all which were to be passed without the intervention of the Protestants, they took just offence against the proceedings, and complained thereof to the Emperor's Ministers: of which also the Emperor himself taking notice, dispatched an Express both to Trent, and Rome, giving them notice, that this hasty precipita∣tion
of Affairs gave just cause to suspect, that nothing was intended fairly towards the Protestants, who on these due and reasonable Re∣sentments would become more obdurate in their Opinions; to prevent which, he laid his Commands on the Prelats not to act, or join in any farther proceedings; which resolution being signified at a General Con∣gregation, all Synodical actions and Decrees were ordered to surcease, until the pleasure of the Council should be known to the contrary. The Pope being greatly incensed at this, and other actions of the Em∣peror, gave license to this Prorogation for a few days onely, and that af∣terwards they should again assemble, and reassume their Debates with such Christian fortitude as became their Ecclesiastical functions, without respect to any worldly consideration. During this vacation a Frier preaching on the Parable of the Tares sowed amongst the Wheat, applyed that Doctrine to the present dissent∣ing Opinions, which he called Heresies, and which ought, (as he said) to be extirpated with fire, and the gallows; at which and other affronts the Protestants taking particular exceptions greatly complained of their ill usage, which tended to make the breach wider; and the Elector of Triers took this pretence to depart, feigning also an excuse of his health; though in reality a secret intelligence which he held with the French King was the cause thereof. About the beginning of March the Ambassadours of Saxony received Letters from their Prince to prosecute their Demands with new instan∣ces to the Council, giving them to understand, that for the more effe∣ctual dispatch thereof, he intended personally to wait on the Emperor; which was cause of great amusement to the Papal Party: but in a few days, it was generally bruited, that a League was made between the French King and the Protestant Princes to make War upon the Empe∣ror; which news giving an Alarm to the Electors of Mtz and Cologne they departed, taking Auspruck in their way homewards, entered into serious, and private consultations with the Emperor. The Ambassa∣dours likewise of Maurice Duke of Saxony fearing least in those rumours, their Pesons were not safe, privately withdrew from Trent, and by dif∣ferent ways returned to their own Country. Notwithstanding which the Ambassadours and Divines of Wirtemberg and two of Strasbourg re∣mained still in Trent; where not having been able to procure License for their Confession to be received and read in Council, they printed several Copies of them, and caused them to be dispersed in all places, which gave publick offence to the whole Council; nor could the Interest of the Imperial Ambassadours prevail farther, for the Papal Party suspe∣cting that all those instances made by the Emperour in behalf of the Pro∣testants, tended to no other end than to depress the Court of Rome, embraced all occasions of excuses, and delays: for now the Emperor's interest was grown weak at Trent by the retirement of the German Bi∣shops, who upon the Alarm of Wars in their Country were retired to their own homes: indeed the report of Wars raised by the French King in confederacy with the Princes of Germany against the Emperor was confirmed, and Manifests, and Protests in defence of Religion and the liberty of Germany were printed and published; and in pursuance there∣of on the first of April the Elector of Saxony laid siege to Augsbourg;1552. the which combustions had so great influence on the Affairs of Trent,
that the Italian Bishops departed, as did also the Protestants; and a small number of Prelats remaining, and the Legat greatly indisposed in his health, the Council broke up, being prorogued for the space of two years, during which time it was hoped, and expected that the present storms would be blown over, and Men return to a more mild, and calm tem∣per of spirit. In this manner the Gown gave way to the Sword, which commonly decides the most knotty difficulties, and puts an end to long Disputes of Councils, and the Schools. For now Henry II. King of France ha∣ving joyned his Arms with Maurice Duke of Saxony, and other discon∣tented Princes of Germany made War on the Emperor; the King was in∣veterately angry for the injury he had received in the matter of Parma; the Duke incensed by reason of the ill treatment of his Father-in-law Philip the Lantgrave of Hesse, whom the Emperor suffered to languish in a tedious imprisonment; and all in general being jealous, and fear∣ful of the Emperor's growing greatness, (whatsoever there might be of Religion pretended in the case) united their Arms upon different con∣siderations. The Duke with a strong Army marched to Oenipont in Rhetia; and with such expedition that the Emperor was forced to rise, and retire from thence at midnight to Villaco in the Dukedom of Au∣stria, on the confines of Italy; by which means the Duke became Master of Oenepont, a place distant about three days Journey from Trent. But in regard the successes of this War were various, and not pertinent to our present Treatise, we shall proceed to matters more nearly relating to the Life, and reign of this Pope Julius III. The Council of Trent being dissolved, and the Pope quiet in Rome, he made choice of a certain number of Cardinals in resemblance of a Council to inspect the present Errors, and abuses which were crept into the Church, and the dissolute, and corrupt manners of the Clergy; and to consider of means to correct, and reform them: but whilest they attended to these matters, they found themselves so engulfed, and immers'd in dif¦ficulties, which were past their wisedom to redress, that after several meetings being unable to conclude any thing, the business grew cold, and frequent delays, and adjournments from one week to another put an end thereunto without any effect: onely it was agreed that the pro∣rogation of the Council which at first was limited unto two years only, should now be farther enlarged to the term of Ten. The Pope who had been in repose until now, was also disturbed by the commotion of his Neighbours: for Ʋrtado de Mendoza who (after having been Ambassadour from the Emperor to the Pope) was now constituted Governour of Siena; to secure which from the civil Dis∣cords, which then arose, and to keep the City in obedience to his Master, he began to lay the foundations of a Cittadel; of which the Inhabi∣tants being apprehensive, lest it should subject them to a perpetual sla∣very, resolved secretly to resign themselves into the protection of France: and having secretly for that purpose dispatched their Ambassadours to Henry the Second, they received such favourable assurance of aid and defence from him, that the People, in a tumultuous manner arose in Arms, and being encouraged by the Count Petigliano and Farnese, (who maintained the French interest in that part of Tuscany), they raised their Forces with such expedition, that falling on the Spaniards in a kind
of surprize, they cut them to pieces; and having demolished and sub∣verted the very foundation of the Cittadel, they returned to their an∣tient form of Government, seeming to outward appearance to have re∣covered their pristine Liberty. The news of this revolt of Siena was brought to the Emperor, whilest he was at the siege of Metz the princi∣pal City of Lorain; upon receipt of which he instantly dispatched his Orders to Don Pedro de Toledo Vice-King of Naples, that he should in Person attend this War and endeavour the recovery of Siena. Don Pe∣dro having received these Orders in the depth of the Winter, which was the beginning of the year 1553.1553. began his march with a formidable Army of twenty thousand Men composed of Italians, Spaniards, and Germans. The Pope remembring the times of Clement VII. when a Napolitan Army sacked Rome; and fearing to be surprized with the like calami∣ty, levied speedily eight thousand Men; the conduct of which he com∣mitted to Camillo Orsino. So that now all Christendom being in Arms, the Pope sent his Legats to the Emperor, and the French King to pacify, and mediate their differences in order to a general Peace; but so far were the spirits of these Princes exasperated against each other, that no gentle remedies were available, or any other tryal, but such as should be determined by the judgment of the Sword: and now no prepara∣tions being made but for War, the Pope constituted Guido Ʋbaldo Duke of Ʋrbin General of all the Forces of the Church; whilest Cardinal da Este, and Monsieur de Termes an excellent Soldier defended Siena with a strong Garison in the name of the French King, The Imperial Army be∣ing on their march took Montechio, add besieged Montalcino, a Fortress belonging to Siena, where happened many Skirmishes, and Rencounters, with great slaughter on both sides: and Wars being begun in Siena, Montalcino, Orbitello Grossetto, Chiusi and many other places, all Tus∣cany was in Arms, Fire, Sword, Rapine, and Violence raging in every part thereof: but amidst of these Combustions Don Pedro dying after a tedious sickness at Florence, the French gained the advantage; and the Imperialists having placed strong Garisons in the Fortresses which they had taken returned again with their Troops to Naples. And this was the issue of the first years War. But then the second was more fatal to Siena, proving the final overthrow of the Liberty, and Government of that Republick. For Henry King of France on whose protection Siena depended, being incensed against Cosmo de Medicis Duke of Florence for favouring the Emperor's Party a∣gainst the People of Siena, did about the beginning of the year 1554.An. 1554. send Peter Strozzi, one banished from Florence, and the mortal Enemy of Duke Cosmo with a formidable Army into Tuscany; but the Arms of the Duke prevailed, and obtained such success against those of Strozzi; that the Marquess Marignano, who was the Duke's General, adventured to attempt Siena, in which he was so successful that he surprized the Ba∣stion next adjoyning to the Post Camollia, putting all the Country round, which was the most fruitful and flourishing Soil of Italy to fire, and sword: to the relief whereof Strozzi coming with all his force was over∣thrown by Marignano; which unhappiness reduced Siena to its ultimate extremity; and being at last constrained to surrender by reason of Fa∣mine, many were made Prisoners, the City sacked, and plundered, and the Spoils and Booty brought to Florence, many of the People, especially
those of the Nobility disdaining to become Subjects to the Duke of Flo∣rence, retired to Montalcino, a place strong, and impregnable by nature, setting themselves in the form of a Republick under the protection of France. The People of Siena lamenting their unhappy fate, accused Pope Julius in a great measure to be the Author of it; for that he had by his Money bought up great stores of Provision, Victuals, and Ammunition in Marca, Ʋmbria, and Tuscany, and therewith relieved, and supported the Army of Florence: and that not considering the publick interest of Italy, nor the common justice of mankind, he, for gaining a poor, and inconsiderable Title of Marquis of Mount Sabino, with a little Land to his Brother Baldwin, and on the promise of obtaining the Daughter of Duke Cosmo for Wife to his Brother's Son, had basely, and ungratefully betrayed the City where he was born, and exposed it to utter ruin and desolation▪ But all this obloquy, and defamation little, moved the mind of the Pope, who perceiving that all his sollicitude, and care for the general Peace and quiet of Christendom availed little, resolved to enjoy, and give himself up to Buildings, and other divertisements: so that placing all his thoughts on a Country-house, Gardens, and Vine∣yards which he had erected, and made without the Porta del popolo at Rome, he was so enamoured of his new Paradise, where he conti∣nually made Feasts and Banquets, that he seemed wholly to have cast off all care of the Church, and sense of the miseries of Christendom; and what was most undecent, and misbecoming a Person of above se∣venty years of age and of his gravity, and function, he immersed him∣self in pleasures as if there had been no other Life, to the great scandal of the World, and damage and greater danger of Rome. In this year 1554. Edward the Sixth King of England died, and the Queen Mary succeeding, immediately sent her Ambassadours to Rome to signifie to the Pope the conversion of her whole Kingdom from He∣resie to the Catholick Church, and to acknowledg, and Vow all Obe∣dience to the Papal Sea, desiring to have the Excommunication taken off, and a general Pardon, and Absolution given to her Catholick Sub∣jects: on which grateful Message the Ambassadours coming, were re∣cieved with great kindness, and solemn Processions of Thanksgiving ce∣lebrated, at which the Pope assisted in Person. The same year Philip Son of the Emperor Charles the Fifth was married to Queen Mary, the Kingdoms of Sicily and Naples being setled upon him, together with Milan, Flanders and some other of the United Provinces: with which news Philip dispatched his Ambassadour the Marquis de Pescara to the Pope, to acquaint him therewith, and according to the custom of for∣mer Kings to do homage for the Kingdom of Naples, which he held in Fee from the Pope. And now Pope Julius the Third being by reason of his great age, and the torment of the Gout, which miserably afflicted him, become very in∣firm, was persuaded by the Physitians to change his Diet, and his usual regimen of living; the which ill agreeing with his habit of Body, brought him to a Fever, with which taking his Bed in the month of February 1555.1555. he lingred therewith until the 23d. of March, and then died at his Palace, being aged seventy seven years, six months, and fourteen days: he was afterwards carried without any great Pomp or State to
the Church of S. Peter, where his Corps having been publickly exposed for three days to the view of the People, he was afterwards buried in an ordinary Sepulcre of Bricks near the Altar of S. Andrew. After which the Sea was vacant seventeen days. This Julius was tall of Stature, of a plain Country Visage, his Nose great; his Eyes shewed him to be Cholerick, and hasty, but soon pleased; his Diet was gross, and plain, being much pleased with a sort of large Onions, which were sent him from Gaeta, the alteration of which Diet hastned his Death: When he was first Pope he so strangely favoured a young Boy, whom he called Innocentius, that without any apparent motive for it, he bestowed upon him a Cardinals Hat; which when the reason was asked; He replied, What reason had you to choose me Pope? Fortune favours whom she pleases. He was very facetious in his Discourse, but more familiar, in his Conversation than was decent; for without respect to the Majesty of his Office, and gravity of his Function; He would often shoot such Bolts, and use such Expressions, as were unseemly, and which those that heard, pitied, and blushed for him. MARCELLƲS II. JULIƲS the Third dying on the 23d. of March, and his Funeral Obsequies being performed after the accustomed man∣ner; the Cardinals to the number of thirty seven entred the Conclave, and without much faction, or dispute chose Mar∣cellus Cervinus Cardinal of St. Cross at Jerusalem to be Pope, of which publication was made with the usual Ceremonies on the 9th. of April 1555. the Sea having been vacant for the space onely of eighteen days. His Father was Robert, or as some call him Richard, Treasurer of the Marquisat of Ancona, and the place of his birth was Montfano: his Fa∣ther pretended to great Skill, or knowledg in Astrology, by which Art calculating the Nativity of his Son at the time of his birth, it appeared that the Stars under which he was born, would be very propitious to him in his promotion to Ecclesiastical preferments; for which reason Marcellus being first sent to have his Education in the University of Siena; he came from thence to Rome, where he dwelt with Felix the Datary of Clement the 7th. afterwards he obtained the Office of Secre∣tary to Paul the Third, and by him created Cardinal of St. Cross of Jerusalem; and lastly, as we have said, elected Pope on the 9th. of April. The day following he was consecrated Bishop by the Cardinal of Naples; and the very same day without much Pomp or Solemnity was Crowned with the Pontifical Miter by the Cardinal of Pisa who was Arch-Deacon. And as he refused to change his Name, calling himself no other than Marcellus the Second, in imitation of Adrian the Sixth, so he survived a much less time than he, having possessed the Papal Chair not above twenty one days after his Election; so that there re¦mains little more observable of him, than that after his Choice, he would give no invitation, or encouragement to his Kindred, or Relations of
coming to Rome, in hopes of benefit and preferment by his greatness: howsoever his intentions were good and his Designs great, having drawn a Scheme, and method whereby to restore Peace, and Unity in the Church, and the Papal Power to its antient lustre. This Design of his, he communicated to the Cardinal of Mantoua, maintaining that there was no other way to reconcile differences in Re∣ligion, but onely by a General Council; and that the reason, why hi∣therto, that means had been ineffectual, was no other, than because, they began at the wrong end, and proceeded not with the due method: for that first they should begin with an entire reformation of Manners, which would supersede, and quiet all superficial Debates, and disputa∣tions about words, and reduce Controversies to such a substantial issue as would be easily determinable by a Council. That for want hereof his five immediate Predecessors had much erred, for that they abhor∣red the name of Reformation, not out of a dislike to that desirable State, but from a belief, that it would be a means to abate and di∣minish the Papal Authority, whereas on the contrary he was really per∣suaded, that a Reformation was the onely means to render it more Glo∣rious, and powerful, as most plainly appeared, and was proved by the Histories of past-times, in which those Popes onely were famous, and renowned, who had supported their Papal Chair by an exactness in Manners, and purity of Life: that Reformation respected the entrinse∣cal, and circumstantial appendages of Religion, and served onely to re∣trench the luxury, and superfluous pomp of the Clergy, which made the Prelats envied, and contemptible; when as a modest train, and de∣cent comportment adjoyned to a severity, and mortified way of li∣ving, rendered the Prelats awful, and revered; and such Men encom∣passing the Papal Chair made it appear more holy, and Apostolical; and above all so fortified it with the Divine Protection, that nothing would be able to remove, or shake the firmness of that Throne, which was esta∣blished on so sure a foundation. These Designs being published, and discoursed of in the Court of Rome, were received with different Sentiments: such as were of the Pope's Party applauded the intention, as pious, glorious, and such as favour∣ed of Peace, Charity, and zeal to Religion: but those who were of a contrary Faction made an other interpretation, construing all the actions of this Pope to be regulated by Astrological Schemes, to which he gave much credence, in regard that both his Father, and himself had been much advanced by that Art. Moreover, amongst other things projected by this Pope; he intended to have erected a new Order of Chivalry, con∣sisting of a hundred Knights, of which the Pope was to be the Chief Com∣mander; all which were to enter into an Oath of Allegiance, and fidelity to the Pope, never to desert his Cause, or Person, but always to advance his Power, and Interest: and for maintenance of this Degree five hundred Crowns of yearly Pension were to be issued out of the Apostolical Cham∣ber to every Person of them: the which allowance was never to be aug∣mented, or enlarged, nor could other Revenues be bequeathed or purcha∣sed for an additional maintenance; only they were capable by their Vir∣tues, and merits of being created Cardinals without any impeachment of their Vow, or rules of their Order. Out of these he intended to chuse his Nuntios, and Ministers for all Treaties, and Negotiations, his Gover∣nours
of Towns, and Legats, and in short to extract all his Officers out of this Society: and so far was this Project resolved that several wise Men, and Persons of merit, living at Rome were already nomina∣ted, who were to be listed and admitted into this Order. Thus did the Pope with subtle reasonings and refined Discourses draw his Methods, and Schemes of Politicks, which would have proved more rude, and prickly in the handling. But whilest the Court of Rome was fil∣led with talk, and Novelty, unexpectedly and on a sudden, the thred of all these Designs were cut off by the death of the Pope, who having, as is said, wearied, and tired himself with the many superfluous and pain∣ful Ceremonies, which he sustained in the Holy Week before Easter, and at his Inaugurations, fell into a fit of an Apoplexy, and died the last day of that month of April in which he was created, having been Pope no longer than twenty one days; which was a far shorter time than what the predictions he had made by his Art in Astrology had flattered his belief. PAƲL IV. THE Funeral Rites and Ceremonies of Marcellus being ended; the Cardinals to the number of sixty four returned again to the Conclave, where as preliminaries to the future Election, the Cardinals of Augsbourg, seconded by Cardinal Moron in∣stantly pressed, that to the other Articles which were accustomary and which Popes swear to maintain after their Election, these two should be farther added; namely, That within the term of two years next fol∣lowing, the Pope should oblige himself by Oath to convene a Council to finish the matters of Reformation already begun, and to determine the Disputes, and Controversies in Religion, and endeavour by all means to induce Germany to accept the Doctrines of the Council of Trent; Se∣condly, That in regard the Colledg of Cardinals by the licentious mu∣nificence of former Popes was become very numerous, That the suc∣ceeding Pope, should not have Power to create above four in the space of two years next following. The which being premised after some sharp, though not long Contests, John Caraffa commonly called Cardi∣nal Chieti, was by general consent elected Pope, being then sixty nine years of age: though there was a strong Party made against him, yet by the powerful interests of the Cardinals Farnese, and Ferrara prevail∣ed, who having formed a Party of forty four, the dissenting number was obliged to condescend to a concurrence with the plurality of Votes. This Pope who took on himself the name of Paul the 4th. was the Son of Anthony Caraffa Count of Montorio; he was first created Bishop of Chieti by Julius II. He afterwards received a Commission from Leo X. to gather the Peter-pence in England, where he resided for the space of three years. He was afterwards made of the Privy Council to Ferdinand King of Spain, and therein confirmed by his Heir and Successour Charles V. By Hadrian VI. He was recalled to Rome to join with other Fathers, whose incumbence it was to consi∣der
in what manner the lives and practices of the Clergy might be re∣formed, and amended; under Clement the 7th. he not onely refused the Arch-bishoprick of Brundufium, but quitted also his Bishoprick of Chieti; and retiring to Mount Pincio from the noise, and bustle of the World, and almost from humane Society, he there instituted a new Order of Regulars: afterwards going to Venice, he affected a Society and Com∣munication with learned, and religious Men, renowned for Wisdom and Sanctity of life; with whom he first instituted the Order of Theatini: from the name of his Bishoprick called both Chieti, and Theatina. At length Paul III. in the year 1536. calling him to Rome, made him reassume his Bishoprick, creating him Cardinal of Santa Maria trans Ti∣berim, and Arch-bishop of Naples: and then under Julius III. He was made Bishop of Tusculum, Ostia, and Velitres: and lastly, being elected Pope in remembrance of his late Friend, and chief Benefactor, who had called him to all his promotions, he caused himself to be named Paul IV. In all the course of his former Life, being of a morose, and Saturnine temper, he shewed great severity, and exactness of Life; so that his E∣lection strook a great fear, and terrour to all such who were ill inclined to a Reformation, imagining that his humour would transport him to such severe proceedings, as would be terrible and inconsistent with those methods, which gently lead Men to conversion and reformation of Man∣ners: a testimony of which he had given by being the first Author and Contriver of the Inquisition, having advised, and persuaded Paul III. to appoint, and authorize a certain number of Cardinals to be In∣quisitors of such, who had embraced the new Doctrines of Luther, and to proceed to Capital Punishments in such manner as is provided in the Canon de aeretico comburendo, the which severity of Councils being by some interpreted for zeal towards God, and by most to be a ferocity in his Nature, his Election was entertained with fear and dread, by all those who were dependants on the Court of Rome. However he so palliated, and disguised his humour at the beginning, that he comported himself with an humble, and affable behaviour towards all, but especially to∣wards Strangers, whom he treated, and caressed in that friendly man∣ner, that his Servants, and Dependants were glad to be so happily mi∣staken: but this good Nature being forced, and constrained did soon vanish, and then his fierce, and supercilious temper returning to its na∣tural course, all his actions were influenced with a spirit of Pride and haughty severity. An instance of which, he gave to the Steward of his House, when he demanded of him, in what manner he was pleased to be served; his Answer was short, saying (as became a Prince.) His Co∣ronation he ordered with more Pomp and Ceremony, than was ever be∣fore practised; and in all things he affected Magnificence, and State, and was no less indulgent to his Nephews, than the most tender, and fondest of the Popes. Soon after his Coronation, he ordered the first Consistory to be pub∣lick, that he might with the greater State, and Pomp give Audience to the Ambassadours of England, who in the time of Pope Julius had been dispatched thence from Queen Mary, and Philip her Husband. The Ambassadours being introduced to his presence, and prostrating them∣selves at his feet, did one after the other (for so the Pope would have it)
confess and acknowledg the faults, and errors of the Kingdom of England, in having strayed, and deviated from the flock of Christ, and the Sheep∣fold of the Church; but now repenting, and returning again, did hum∣bly beg Absolution and to be received into the bosom of the Church, though by the obstinacy and perseverance in their Errors, they had render∣ed themselves unworthy of such mercy, and indulgence. The Pope ha∣ving for some time beheld these Ambassadours at his feet, and contem∣plated their humble posture with some satisfaction of spirit, raised them at length from the floor and embraced them with the tenderness of a Father, testifying great satisfaction in the happy conversion of this King∣dom: and because the Queen and King were the happy Instruments of this blessed, and religious work; in reward of so much Piety, he con∣firmed their right and title to Ireland; and by virtue of that Power, which he had received from God to dispose of all Earthly Crowns, he conferred on them that Kingdom, dignifying them amongst their other Titles with that of King and Queen of Ireland. Which piece of vanity though ridiculous to others, was extreamly pleasing to the Pope, who fancied himself in that Throne of Fools Paradise, to which the Devil had in his Pride exalted himself, when he tempted our Saviour with all the Kingdoms of the Earth. But then afterwards in private Conference with the Ambassadours, he blamed England for having but in part shewed their penitence, for that whilst they retained any thing of the goods of the Church and did not make restitution to the utmost farthing, a Curse would remain on the Kingdom, and the people remain in a perpetual snare, and danger of Damnation. He farther told them, That the sooner, and the more readily they paid the Peter-pence (for collection of which he had sent an Officer into England) the more easily would the Gates of Heaven be opened to them; for how could they expect that St. Peter should turn his Keys whilest they denied him those Fees which were the dues of his Office. In fine, the Ambassadours having behaved them∣selves with humility, (which was the onely means to procure the favour of this Pope) they departed from Rome, laden with Praises, Honours, and Graces from his Holiness: and then attending to a full Reformation in England; he purged the Universities of Oxford, and Cambridg of those Tenents, and Lectures which had been there taught by Peter Martir, and Bucer, and deprived Cranmer of his Arch-bishoprick of Canterbury. Having thus obtained his pleasure, and Designs over England, he next endeavoured to gain an Ascendant over the Emperor and King of France, both of which courted him to that Degree, that he expected to have them both at his Service, and Devotion: but in regard it was impossible to entertain them both in the same equality of respect, and dearness; both Parties strained to outvy each other in Proposals of advantage, which might give them admission to his favour: in pursuance of which, the Cardinal of Lorain, (who was well acquainted with the humour of the Pope) publickly declared in a full Consistory, that besides the many steps which the King of France had made in Obedience to the Papal Chair, he did acknowledg that the Gallican Church had need of Refor∣mation; towards which he was ready to afford all the aid and assistance to the Pope that he was able, and to act therein by such ways, and me∣thods as his Holiness should direct, whether it were by sending his Pre∣lats to the Council or by any other means, that should be esteemed more
proper and expedient. The which so took with the Pope, that France for that time gained a preeminence in his favour. And yet notwithstanding this Pride, and rudeness in his nature, he did several things at the beginning to gratify and please the People of Rome, which he performed by abating the Taxes and Imposts laid on Provisions, and in other things acted with such obliging circumstances, that the People in acknowledgment for such abundant favours, erected a Statue of Marble for him in the Capitol. He regulated the Manners of the Jews, and retrenched that liberty, and freedom they used; and for the better distinction of them, ordered them to wear yellow Hats. He published several severe Decrees against such as denied the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and that he died for the redemption of Mankind. In short, besides many good Laws and Acts which he ordained against cor∣rupt and dissolute Manners, which were grievous to the Clergy, who were unaccustomed to a Severity, He selected a hundred Citizens of the Gentry of Rome, which he created Knights of the Faith to be a standing Life-Guard to the Popes. He repealed several Decrees of Julius III. and imprisoned many of those who had been his Creatures, and familiar Friends. Amongst the Counsellours, and Familiar Confidents which he enter∣tained, there was none who had at first had a greater share in his favour, than Osio, whom he declared Datary, and chief Notary, or Register of Petitions, and created Bishop of Riete: but he being of a rude, and mo∣rose temper did always clash against the humour of the Pope, which was hard, and inflexible like his; which therefore ill according together, Osio was by the instigation also of the Pope's Relations, who were always busie at his ear, deprived of his favour, and sent Prisoner to the Castle, where he remained for the space of four years. In the next place, by a new Decree, he retrieved all those goods, and Ecclesiastical Revenues which had been alienated from the Church since the time of Julius II. to his days. He reformed also the a∣buses which were crept into the Office of the Penitentiaries, and regu∣lated the Habit, and Tables of the Clergy, and refused to admit any into Benefices, but such as had been approved for holiness of Life, and se∣verity of Manners. Towards the three Conservators of Rome, he be∣haved himself with great respect, enlarging their Power, and Authority, adjoyning thereunto the jurisdiction of Tivoli, which belonged to the Cardinal of Ferrara; and to the People he enlarged their Priviledges, and confirmed all their former Immunities by a new Charter. But all this indulgence, and kindness towards the Citizens was but in order to some Design of a higher nature, which soon after discovered it self: for whilest he was thus busied in matters of Government, and things laudable enough in themselves, he suffered some reports of a Plot against his Life to take impression in his mind; which being sug∣gested by many probable circumstances, he immediately seized on the Persons of as many as were suspected to be guilty thereof, and commit∣ted them to Prison; and then joyning with the French, and Switzers, he commenced a War against Philip King of Spain, by which those antient Feuds and Animosities between those Kings, which had for some time been extinguished, or as it were raked up in the Embers began again to re∣vive, and be enflamed. The original, and cause whereof was this.
Ever since the time that Rome had been sacked by the Spaniards, who had plundered, and sequestred the Estate, and Rents of the Family of Caraffa; this Pope Paul the 4th. conceived an implacable anger, and an inveterate hatred against that whole Nation: the which also was en∣creased by that ill treatment, and injustice, which the Vice-King of Naples once used towards his own Person; for he being created by Paul III. Arch bishop of Naples, was debarred from the possession, and benefits thereof by the Vice-King, on no other pretence, than that he was suspected to favour the French Party; the which so enraged his im∣petuous spirit, that with all the arguments, which subtilty, and malice could draw from the Topicks of Religion, and publick good to the Church, he endeavoured to persuade Paul III, to a War against Naples, promising him to assist him with the whole Estate of his Family, and with all the interest he had (which he pretended to be very great) in that Kingdom: but Paul III. being too prudent to give ear to his per∣suasions, and Discourses, commended his Piety, and zeal towards the Church, but refused to engage himself in that hazardous War. So that the anger and fury of this Paul IV. being suppressed until he be∣came Pope, did then burst forth, and vent it self: so that then with thoughts full of disdain against the Spaniards, and with imagination that the Napolitans would gladly shake off their yoke, and be eased of the Spanish Servitude, and that France would enter into the Alliance with him, he positively resolved on a War, swallowing already into his thoughts the enjoyment and addition of that Rich Kingdom to the Do∣minions of the Church. This Design was promoted by a stricter Union with France, occasioned in this manner: Henry King of France had ta∣ken from Charles Sforza Prior of Lombardy two Gallies, the which coming afterwards into the Port of Civita Vecchia, Alexander the Bro∣ther of Charles, and Chief Clark of the Camera, or Chamberlain, made seizure of them, and without any respect to that Protection under which they were within the Pope's Harbour, he carried them away by force to Gaeta: of which the French Ministers at Rome, complaining to the Pope, he conceived not onely anger and indignation against Alexander, but suspecting that such an action could not be contrived without the privity of his Brother the Cardinal, he loudly exclaimed against him, and clapt his Secretary Lotini into Prison, who was lately returned with some se∣cret Negotiations from the Emperour Charles V. the which serving to encrease and heighten the differences between them, many Cabals, and Consults were formed amongst the Cardinals of the Imperial Faction; at which the Pope being alarm'd he reinforced his Guards, and levied Soldiers, and to break the seditious Meetings clapt the Cardinal, and Camilla Colonna, and the Abbot of Brisegna, who was a Spaniard, into Prison: Mark Anthony Colonna, who upon these stories, was fled from Rome, was cited to appear there, and give answer to the Accusations charged against him: but afterwards the Gallies being again restored to the French King, Cardinal Sforza, and Camillo Colonna, upon Bail given were freed from Imprisonment; but Alexander Sforza who was Cham∣berlain not appearing upon the Summons, was deprived of his Office; and because Mark Anthony Colonna did not appear at the time prefixed by the Summons, all his Estate within the Territories of the Church was sequestred, and seized to the use of the Pope: with which Joan of
Aragon the Mother of Colonna being greatly affrighted, escaped secretly from Rome about the beginning of the year 1556. contrary to the Com∣mand, and Injunction of the Pope; with which he was so incensed, that he then resolved to act, and put all those mischiefs into practice against the House of Colonna, which he had before onely meditated, and con∣trived in his thoughts: and in pursuance thereof, he in the first place excommunicated Mark Anthony, and his Father Ascanio Colonna, and ha∣ving confiscated all their Estate within the Dominions of the Church, he bestowed it on his Nephew John Count of Montorio, whom he created Duke of Paliano; and not long after he declared Anthony Carafa an other Nephew to be Marquis of Montebello, having lately dispossessed Count Bagno of that Marquisate for having converted those Moneys which the King of France sent to the Pope for carrying on the War in Italy to his own use. All which served to incense the spirits of a great, and power∣ful Faction, and raise those Wars, which ended in miserable desolation of Italy. But the Pope, who was of Opinion, and often said, that a hap∣py Peace was onely to be procured by a calamitous War, did in Order thereunto fortifie Paliano with all provisions requisite thereunto; for that being a place situate on the frontiers of Naples, was of great im∣portance in that conjuncture: And lest the Truce which was made for five years between the Emperor and France should be an obstruction to this War, he dispatched Charles Caraffa his Legat to Henry II. pre∣tending, that his Message was in order to a farther accommodation, and to convert the Truce into an everlasting Peace: but the Negotiations of Caraffa being of an other nature, he possessed Henry with great hopes and expectation of success by a War with Naples; wherefore though at first he sent but two thousand Men for assistance of the Pope, (seeming to reserve some little respect to the Truce so lately concluded) yet af∣terwards the Popes forces not being able to withstand the Power of the Imperialists; a greater Army of twelve thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse were sent to Naples under the conduct of Francis Duke of Guise. With these Auxiliary aids the spirit of the Pope being highly swelled, and become implacable, he imprisoned Juliano Sesarini Camillo Colonna, with his Bother the Arch-Bishop of Taranto, and divers others, whom he suspected to be in any manner affected, and inclinable to the Imperial Faction. Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alva then Vice-King of Naples, being alarmed by these proceedings resolved not to attend the assaults of the Enemy; but rather, that he might be, beforehand with them, made Incursions into the State of the Church, and without much resi∣stance took Pontecorvo Frosolone, Anagna, Marino, Valmontone, Palestri∣na, Tivoli, Ostia, Gave, Genazzano, Nettuno, Albano, Vicovaro, Monte For∣tino; and in short, made himself Master of all the Campania of Rome: the Pope on the other side with the aid, and assistance of the French, and Switzers, recovered several of those places again; but the War being con∣tinued for the space of a whole year with great fury, and resolution on both sides, that Country became most miserably harassed, and laid de∣solate by fire, and sword. By the vast expences of this War the Pope's Treasury being much exhausted, many exorbitant ways were contrived to replenish it again; as namely, the Tithes upon all Benefices were doubled, the Gabelles, and Customs were raised to an intolerable de∣gree; half a years Revenue was exacted from all Offices: and the Debts
which particular Persons owed to their Creditors, were required to be paid into the Treasury; upon which the Debtors being discharged, De∣bentures were given from the Pope to the Creditors, and the same charged as a Debt upon the Church. He farther seized on all the Horses in Rome to serve in the War, and compelled all the Friers of what order so∣ever to labour on the Works, and carry Earth to the Fortifications: ma∣ny of the Churches he converted into Granaries and Store-houses, where∣in to lay Provisions; besides many other Exactions, and agrievances, which he imposed on the People, who were by this time possessed with a detestable hatred against his Person, and his Actions. Howsoever, nei∣ther the Cries, nor Exclamations of his Subjects, nor the miseries of his Country were able to incline the fierce and resolute Spirit of the Pope to any terms of Peace, whilst he found himself seconded by the French, and Switzers: Howsoever in the Month of August following, the French having received a Defeat at the Battel of St. Quintin, in which a great part of the Nobility of France were taken Prisoners; and thereby also the expectation of the Pope being in some measure defeated; his haughty Spirit began to abate and hearken to some terms, and proposals of Ac∣commodation: for then the sad Spectacle of Italy, laid wast with fire and sword appeared before him, and the dreadful apprehension of Trea∣son against his Person, which was plotted to betray Rome into the hands of Mark Anthony Colonna, and Ascanio della Corona, who at the begin∣ning of the War revolted to the Spanish Party, did much affright him: so that as I say, the Pope's mind being become more flexible, a Peace was concluded on the thirteenth of September 1557.1557. by the mediation of the Venetians, the Duke of Florence, and Cardinal Sforza, and sign∣ed by the Cardinal Caraffa in behalf of the Pope, and by the Duke of Alva in the name of Philip King of Spain. Which being concluded the Duke of Alva coming to Rome, with Christian humility kissed the feet of the Pope, and received absolution; and being treated with high ho∣nour obtained the freedom of all those who had been imprisoned on ac∣count of the late War. Matters being by these means reduced to some tolerable quiet, the Pope dispatched his Legats both to Spain, and France to labour a cement∣ing of that Peace, which he himself of late had been an Instrument to break; recommending more particularly in their Instructions the con∣firmation of the Dukedom of Paliano on his Nephew. So that now be∣ing wearied with War, the fatigues, and expence, and unquietudes of which he had never before been acquainted with, the Pope betook him∣self to his more agreeable trade of regulating the Manners of Men, and the corruptions and abuses crept into the Church: but in regard the particulars hereof were various, and burthensom, he committed the greatest part of that trouble to the Conduct of Cardinal Caraffa: At∣tending himself with sedulity and attention to the Court of Inquisition, as the sole Tribunal then capable to suppress Heresies, and the present distempers of the Age; and therefore to the cognisance of that Court he reduced several Crimes triable at other Bars of Judicature; so that the Prisons of the Inquisition were filled with Malefactors: and in this way of Judicial proceedings he was the more passionate, because he had been the first that persuaded Paul III. to erect that Court, and had contrived the Methods, and Rules for the proceedings thereof: and
therefore coming now himself to the Popedom, he put all those Orders into practice, which he had formerly meditated, constituting Cardinal A∣lessandrino Inquisitor General, together with sixteen Cardinals, who were made Judges of the Court; whose first work was to publish an Index Expurgatorius of all Books in the least manner suspected, or attainted of Heresie, forbidding all Persons under pain of Excommunication to read them, or have them in their possession. He recalled Cardinal Poole from his Office of Legat in England, on account (as some believe) of an old Pique that had been between them, and having accused Cardinal Morone of Heresie, by reason as some believe of his friendship to Poole, he imprisoned him in the Castle together with the Bishop of Cava, and had (as was certainly believed) deprived them of all their Revenue, and Dig∣nities, had not his malice against them been interrupted by his Death, acting in every thing with a bitterness agreeable to the virulency of his nature. About this time the Emperor Charles V. being wearied with the tur∣moils, and troubles of this World renounced his Imperial Crown to his Brother Ferdinand of Austria, who was already elected King of the Ro∣mans, and his Kingdom of Spain and other Dominions to his Son Phi∣lip II. But this Abdication the Pope would not understand, not ad∣mitting on the score of old grudges which he owed to Charles, that ac∣cording to antient Canons an Emperor could make such a renunciation without consulting first, and taking the advice, and consent of the Pope; and for that reason, he would never acknowledg Ferdinand for Empe∣rour, nor under that Notion, and Character receive Ambassadours from him. In this manner with a froward severity acting all his Affairs, he would admit of no excuses that any Man made for a failure in his Duty; and particularly having commanded all Monks, Friers, Abbots, and Priors to return to their Monasteries, he would not admit an Excuse from any Non-Residentiary, unless he had obtained a License on occasion of some publick Service for the Church: and for discovery of such Trespassers he employed Officers, or Visitors as severe, as himself, who upon strict en∣quiry having found any Non-Residentaries, they immediately proceed∣ed against them as Disobedient, and Delinquents, committing some of them to Chains, and others to the Gallies. This Severity howsoever was much applauded, when after an un∣known and unpractised manner of Justice, he spared not the Crimes of his Nephews, into whose hands he had committed the most important Government of the Ecclesiastical State: for they having misbehaved themselves; the Pope in a publick Consistory discharged Cardinal Ca∣raffa of his Government, and Legantine Power in Bologna: the Duke of Palvano he dismissed from being General of the Ecclesiastical Army and Admiral of the Gallies belonging to the Church, and the Marquis of Montebello from being Captain of his Guards: which Sentence against them the Pope thundring with impetuous Rage, certain Cardinals would have offered something to mitigate his fury, and extenuate the faults of his Nephews; but those Lenitives adding more flame to his Fury, he instantly charged the Cardinal Caraffa without farther delay to depart from Rome, and remain confined to the City Indivina, and the other two unto their respective Castles: in places of these, he con∣stituted
other grave Prelats, whom he esteemed able, and worthy to bear that share of Government, which by reason of the infirmity of his old age he was uncapable to support. And having thus disposed the Affairs of his Temporal Government, he returned his thoughts to perfect that Reformation, which he had then projected when he first came to the Papal Chair, believing that the ac∣complishment thereof would be the greatest Ornament of the Apostoli∣cal Sea, and give it a reputation over all the World. In pursuance whereof, he erected a Congregation composed of twenty four Cardinals and forty five Prelats, and other Persons of the most wise, and learned of all the Court, to the number of one hundred and fifty. These he di∣vided into three Classes or Chambers; to each of which he allotted eight Cardinals, and fifteen Bishops, and as many others, as made up the number of fifty; the chief incumbence and business of whom was to examine, and enquire into the several degrees, and natures of Simo∣ny; the which being stated, and concluded by this Congregation, Cop∣pies thereof were taken, and published and sent to all Universities, and Schools of learned Men, requiring them to take notice of the particular Cases stated, and concluded by the Holy Sea, which was the Chief Do∣ctor, and Cathedratical Casuist in all Points of Religion, and Consci∣ence. And though he himself, as he affirmed, had no need of such Re∣gulations being well acquainted with the mind of Christ, and versed in the Duty of that Office to which he was called; yet that he might in all his endeavours for Reformation, forestall the Objection which might be made him of, Physitian, cure thy self; he resolved to begin at home, and reform the Crimes of Simony, which were objected as the crying sins of the Court of Rome, and that when he had gone so far, he would then remonstrate unto other Princes the Simony of their own Courts, which was more rife, and more intolerable in them than was ever al∣lowed, or practised at Rome. But when the particular Cases of Simony came distinctly to be hand∣led; instancing in what manner Money might be taken and in what not; there arose such diversities of Opinions; that at length the conclusions came to be laid before the Pope, as the ultimate Moderator of all Dif∣ferences: the which he having with some perplexity considered, he finally resolved, That it was not lawful to receive any Price, Money, Alms, or any reward whatsoever for conferring any spiritual Graces, or Benefices Ecclesiastical: and that as to the Dispensations in cases of Ma∣trimony, though it had been the custom to receive Money for them, he resolved, that the same should never be again brought into practice by himself. Howsoever, so many scruples and Objections arose in many particular matters, that nothing could ever be drawn to general Heads; and so being environed by difficulties which procured delays, nothing came to a full resolution: the which a certain Cardinal having observed, proposed to have these Questions reserved for a General Council: at which the Pope being moved with extreme Choler, replied, That he had no need of any Council being the supreme Head and above it; but the Cardinal being desirous to mollifie, and appease his anger with some qualifications of his Speech, said, that though it was true that a Council was not necessary for giving force, and Authority to the Pope's Determinations; yet it might be convenient to have a Council, for settle∣ment
of that Uniformity of Worship which was necessary in all Christian Churches: to which the Pope assenting, farther added, That in case he should at any time call a Council, that the same should be held at Rome and not at Trent, which was in the midst, and almost the Nest of the Lutherans. Moreover, in case he should at any time call a Council, it should be composed of none, but Catholicks; for that they might with as much reason admit a Turk to those Debates, and Consults of Religion, as a Lutheran or any other Heretick: and that it was unreasonable, and preposterous to send sixty able and learned Bishops and forty Doctors to a Town within the Mountains, (as had been done twice already) on supposition that they were better able to govern the World than the Vicar of Jesus Christ, joined to the wisdom of his College of Cardinals, who were selected out of the most wise, religious, and excellent perso∣nages of the Chistian Church. During his time this Pope at four several Ordinations created nine∣teen Cardinals; and changed the Festival of St. Peter which by antient Canons was celebrated on the 18th. of January to the end of June, sup∣posing that season of the year most convenient for that Solemnity. It is certain that this Pope intended well, and designed with the strictest severity the reformation of Manners; but his way of acting therein was so fierce, and with those disobliging circumstances, having a motion with his Head which spoke anger, and spight; that he could perform nothing though never so holy, and laudable, but what was ill censured by evil Tongues, and indeed he was generally hated, and that even by good Men. And though all the good actions which this Pope performed, were done with so ill a meen, as made them appear bad; yet he had the good Conduct, and fortune to prove a successful Instrument in making that memorable Peace between Philip King of Spain, and Henry King of France; for which happiness, and Rejoycing, Tilts and Tor∣naments being appointed at the French Court, King Henry himself act∣ing a part in it, was unfortunately slain, and his Son Francis II. being then a Youth, succeeded in his Throne. About which time the Pope being fallen into a Dropsie with which finding himself to decay, and his end approach; he summoned all the Cardinals to his Chamber, desiring them to cast their thoughts upon some Person, excellently qualified both for holiness of Life, and Wisdom, whom they might judg worthy to succeed him in the Apostolical Chair, but in an especial manner he recommended to them the continuance of the Inquisition, to which he gave the Epithet of most Holy, declaring to have by good experience proved, that the same had been the sup∣port of his Authority, and would be the chief Basis, and Pillar of the Papal Dignity. But so soon as it was noised abroad, that the Pope drew towards his end: the People arose in a tumult, and without Counsel or Rule run∣ning through the City cursed the name and actions of Paul IV. damn∣ing all the Family and Party of Caraffa; and having opened all the doors of the common Prisons, they ran to the House of the Inquisition, of which having opened the Gates, and released the Prisoners, they set fire to the Building, which consumed the Prison, and the place of Judicature toge∣ther with all the Processes, Papers, and Records of that Court; and had proceeded to have offered the like to the Minerva, where several of
the Judges of the Inquisition were lodged, but that the Rhetorick, and persuasions of some who had power with the Rabble diverted their fury. In fine, this Pope died the 18th. of August 1559.1559. being aged eighty three years, one month, and twenty two days, and having governed four years, two months, and twenty seven days, and his Body was car∣ried with little Pomp, and buried in a Sepulcre of Brick, in the Church of St. Peter, after which the Sea was vacant four months, and seven days, but no sooner was the breath out of his Body, than the furious, and mad Rabble ran to the Capitol, where he had a Statue of Marble ere∣cted by an excellent Artist, and placed amongst the Conservators of Rome, the Head and right Hand of which they having taken off, drew them for three days together through all the filth, and ordure of the City, and after∣wards wearied with the sport, they threw them into the Tyber: and, finally by publick Decree of the People of Rome, it was commanded, that in what place soever of the City the Arms of Caraffa were found either painted, or engraven, they should be defaced, or broken; the which was executed with so much readiness, that in one days time, there were no signals, or memorials of the Caraffian Family remaining in the whole City. By all which it appears, that this Paul IV. had been happier, and more reve∣renced had he died with the Title onely of Cardinal Caraffa, and with the Opinion of being worthy to govern, though he had never reigned. Dignus fuisset Imperii si non regnasset. PIƲS IV. PAƲL the Fourth being dead, and his Funerals performed, the Cardinals after the Accustomed manner entered the Conclave to the number of forty four for Election of a new Pope; the Con∣tests on which were so many, and so obstinately maintained by the in∣terest of powerful Cardinals, whose equal Authority, and grandeur of Families were in such an even ballance, that after a thousand shufflings, and alterations of Suffrages which happened in the space of four months and seven days; all the Votes came at length on the 24th. of Decem∣ber 1559. being the Eve of the Feast of Christmas to terminate in the choice of John Angelo de Medicis Cardinal of Santa Prisca: On the Feast of Epiphany, or Twelfth-day 1560, he was Crowned to the common joy, and satisfaction of the whole City of Rome, which conceived great ex∣pectations of good Government, from the testimonies of Piety, and Vir∣tue which he had given by many instances of his past Life, in confor∣mity whereunto he took on himself the name of Pius IV. This Pope was of the Illustrious Family of the Medicis, born at Mi∣lan, to which place his Father amidst the turbulencies, and intestine Dis∣cords of Florence was constrained to sly for refuge: he was in his youth educated and trained up in all the Methods of good Literature, in which having run through all the Studies and Exercises of Philosophy and Physick, and then studying the Civil Law he took his degree of Doctor, applying himself afterward to the practice of the Law. In the
time of Clement VII. he was made one of the Protonotaries which they call Partecipanti: under Paul III. He exercised many considerable Charges, and Offices, amongst which he was made Commissary of the Army of the Church, then Arch-Bishop of Ragusa, and lastly, before his prefer∣ment to the Popedom, he was by Paul IV. made Priest and Cardinal of Santa Prisca. Du Chesne, and others who write of the election of this Pope, report, that the Debates thereupon having been long, and intricate, the Choice came at length to be decided by the Holy Ghost, which in the form of a Dove, entering the Chappel of Sixtus, after many flights round, came at length to pierch on the Cell, or Seat of Cardinal Santa Prisca, which being observed was agreed to be the Holy Omen, by which the Holy Ghost pointed out the Person to be Elected, concluding all Con∣troversies by a Miracle: but other more judicious Authors are silent in such a foppery, and particularly Onufrius Panvinius, who writing the life of this Pope, mentions nothing of this nature, though he prosesses to have known him, and to have frequented his Table when he was Cardinal, which was always incompassed with Men of Learning, and parts, who conversing one with another with much ingenuity and Candour, seemed to form a College of wise, and virtuous Persons: and he farther de∣clares, that having been present at the solemnities of his Election, and Inauguration, he had seen, and observed all the passages of it. He more∣over pretends to have had a personal acquaintance with him, and that he was in his own nature generous and compassionate, having by many, and great Charities he had performed, obtained the Title of Father of the Poor; and thus having acquired a general esteem amongst the Car∣dinals of a meek, gentle, and pious temper, he found a more easie ac∣cess to the Papal Chair, which had lately been possessed by gall, and bitterness, and from whence nothing but Thunder, and Lightning and terrours had proceeded. But this Pope being desirous to rectifie this harsh humour of the Chair, gave himself the name of Pius IV. And for instances thereof; his first care, and incumbence was to pass an Act or Decree of General Pardon to all such who during the vacancy of the Sea had committed any enormous Crimes, and in common to all the people who had with in∣solent despight broken the Statue, and defaced the Arms of Paul IV. Then his next business was to enquire into, and redress the Oppressions, and agrievances imposed by his Predecessour, referring the examination of those matters to a Committee of wise and sober Men, who rectifying that which was amiss, all things might at length return to their due and accustomed Channel: upon revision of which cases, many Decrees pas∣sed by Paul IV. in point of Simony were repealed, or at least modera∣ted: many Friers who had with too much severity been expelled their Monasteries, were restored: the punishments, and cruelties of the In∣quisition were regulated with more moderation; and in fine, many of those who under colour of Heresie, though in reality out of malice, or other design had been committed to that Prison; were by Order of the new Inquisitors released and set at liberty; amongst which Cardinal Morone, was one. Now as Mercy is always to be accompanied with Justice: it was re∣solved, that those intolerable miseries, and devastations which all Italy
almost had sustained in time of Paul IV. should be considered, and the Family of Caraffa who had been the Instruments, and wicked Incendia∣ries in all those Calamities should be questioned, and tried for the same: in order whereunto on the 7th. of January, being the day after the In∣coronation, the Cardinals Charles, and Alfonso coming from the Consi∣story were seized, as was also the Count of Montorio, then called Duke of Paliano, who was the Brother of Charles the Cardinal, together with Count Alife his Wife's Brother, and Leonard de Cardini one of the Kin∣dred; for these having been evil Counsellours, and worse Instruments of the fury and cruelty of the late Pope, were all committed Prisoners to the Castle, as were also several other Servants, and Ministers of the late mischief. The Process against them for these Crimes was encharged to certain Cardinals in Commission with the Bishop of Savona, and Gover∣nour of Rome, the Indictments being preferred against these Persons, and the Depositions severally made and taken, which work took up the space of nine months, in which time the proofs, and testimonies being given, and every thing prepared for a Trial, the whole Process was read before the Pope and Cardinals in publick Consistory; where the Accu∣sations being proved, and made clear by several credible Witnesses, Car∣dinal Charles Carafa was by the Pope himself convicted of Felony, and the Count of Montorio, with Count Alife, and Leonard de Cardine found guilty by the Governour of Rome of Murther, and other enormous Crimes, and all delivered into the hands of the Civil Judges, that Sen∣tence of death might be passed upon them; in execution of which the Cardinal, and the two Counts were strangled, and de Cardine beheaded. Onufrius Panvinius tells us, that he having had a familiar conversation with this Pope had often heard him lament the sadness of this Tragedy, which he was constrained to execute in respect to the Duty he owed to Justice; and for example, and caution to the Nephews, and Relations of succeeding Popes, who when they soar aloft on the wings of good Fortune may by the fate of others be fore-warned, how they commit the like excesses, for which they may be questioned, when times should alter. Howsoever this Pope himself, according to the custom of his Predeces∣sors admitted his Sisters Sons to Rome, raising them to all those Benefits, and Dignities he was able to bestow upon them; amongst which he had the fortune to have Charles Borromeo to be his Relation, a Person of that modest, wise, and industrious temper, as might deserve that honour, and preferments which he designed for him; for being skilful and well ex∣perienced in the Civil Law, and in the management of worldly Affairs, he committed the most important charge of all matters relating to Go∣vernment to his fidelity, and conduct; of which Borromeo so well ac∣quitted himself, that being created Cardinal, he gained the reputation of a wise Minister during the time of this Pius, and afterwards by the holiness of his life in succeeding times was canonized for a Saint. To this Borromeo, and to Cardinal Morone he communicated all his thoughts and Counsels, taking their Opinion in the highest emergencies and exigencies of State; amongst which nothing appeared more difficult, and worthy of disquisition, than two things, namely the recognizing, or acknowledging Ferdinand for Emperor; and reviving again the Council of Trent. The first as we have said, was denied by Paul IV. on alle∣gation,
that the Constitution of an Emperor did essentially require the Pope's authoritative approbation; but in truth the obstruction was in the Electors, who challenged a right of electing the Emperor. But now it was resolved to wave all that, and to grant the Emperor's desires, be∣fore they were demanded, that so the frankness of this Pope's nature might be distinguished from the severity of his Predecessours. In pur∣suance whereunto Letters were wrote to the Emperor adorned with all his Imperial Titles, wherein the Pope approved the Surrender which Charles had made of the Empire, and the succession of Ferdinand there∣unto; the news hereof was received with that satisfaction by the Em∣perour, then at Vienna, that he immediately dispatched his Ambassadour, the Count d' Arco, with Letters to the Pope, congratulating his exalta∣tion to that supreme Dignity, and rendering him thanks for having out of his wisdom, and paternal Justice freely determined that point in his favour, which Paul IV. against all sense, and reason had denied him. But yet things did not so smoothly pass, but that the Ambassadour being arri∣ved at Rome, encountred some difficulty before admission to his Audi∣ence; for he having in his Instructions, Orders onely to acknowledg Reverence to the Pope in behalf of his Master, the expression seemed to sound low, and to intimate, as if the Emperor intended to infer an E∣quality with the Pope; and therefore to clear that Scruple, it was re∣quired, that the word Reverence, should be changed into Obedience. The Ambassadour having no such warrant in his Instructions absolutely refused to accept his Audience upon those terms, alledging that Imperial Ministers had never used that Stile towards any of his Predecessours; in which resolution also he was farther confirmed by the advice of the Spanish Ambassadour: Howsoever the Cardinals Morone, and Madrucio persuading him to the contrary, their Opinions prevailed, because the Emperor had in all points of difficulty, directed him to be governed by their Sentiments. This difficulty being overcome; It was resolved, That the Pope should with the same free spirit declare his intentions speedily to assemble a General Council at Trent, or rather a continuation of the same after di∣vers Prorogations; that so he might forestall the desires of the Christian Princes, whom he understood were ready with their Addresses to that purpose. But in regard the turbulent commotions about Religion were heightened with that fermentation in all parts of Christendom as would not admit of those slow Methods of cure which were to proceed from the Debates and Resolves of a General Council: it was in the first place desired by the Duke of Savoy, that Authority might be given him by the Pope for a Conference touching certain points of Religion to be held within his Dominions, for better instruction of the People, who were ready to fall off, and revolt from the Church of Rome: and indeed this expedient seemed most urgent at this time, in which many, who ha∣ving made a total defection from the Church, and finding themselves persecuted in Poland, Germany, Provence, Puglia and other parts, were fled into the Vallies of Mont-cenis, Luserne, St. Martin, and the places adjoyning, where they maintained themselves in separate Congregations under certain Ministers, until such time as the Doctrine of Zuinglius, should be planted, and setled in the City of Geneva. And whereas the Duke being resolved to reduce his Country to the profession of the Ca∣tholick
Religion, had by the Authority of the Inquisition established, condemned some to the Gallies, and others to the Fire: yet finding that these severities operated little upon minds already prepossessed with an Opinion of Religion, and Conscience, he was desirous to make trial of the more gentle, and soft means of Instructions, lest his People becom∣ing desperate under their hardship and torments should be persuaded to believe it lawful to take up Arms in defence of their Persons, and their Religion. The Pope ill relished this Proposal, declaring that he would never consent to have his Authority put to compromise, or his Power com∣pounded for: that he was well acquainted with what obstinacy the He∣reticks maintained their Doctrines, which were never to be confuted but by the Sword; the which he esteemed to be the most effectual way of Instruction; and having persuaded the Duke to that remedy; a War was begun in the Valleys which continued for a long time. Nor were the disturbances in France less grievous than in Savoy: where many were put to death for no other cause than for their zeal to the true reformed Religion, and the salvation of their own Souls: though it is true, that many, who were ambitious, and desirous of Novelty did under this guise, and cloak of Religion, and with pretence of rescuing the King, and the Dignity of the Sovereign Magistrate from the usurpa∣tions, and tyranny of the Duke of Guise, and his Party, take up Arms, and enter into Rebellion against their King; but being afterwards beaten and many killed, others were afterwards tried, and for their Offences justly condemned to die: and to all others, who being misguided by Religion should lay down their Arms in the space of twenty four hours, Proclamation was made, that they should be received to mercy by a full and plenary Pardon from his Majesty. But now the humours of the People being moved, and hopes concei∣ved of obtaining liberty of Conscience: great tumults were raised in Provence, Languedoc, Poitou, and other places; so that how to suppress these tumults and quiet the minds of the people, which were feavered with the heats of Religion, was the great matter debated in the Coun∣cils of France: and whereas it was objected by the Cardinal Armagnac, that no Ecclesiastical remedy could be applyed without the assent, and con∣currence of the Pope; this scruple was soon exploded by the contrary Opinion of the most of the Council: who alledged, that God had given to every Nation a full Power, and Authority within it self to provide remedies necessary, and agreeable to the present government of their State, without having recourse to forein and far distant Powers: for as it were unreasonable in case of fire, and terrible incendiations within the City of Paris, to expect till waters were brought from the Tybur to ex∣tinguish the flames: and in the mean time neglect the use of the more near and convenient streams of the Seine, and Mearne: so also would it be in this great conflagration of civil-War to neglect remedies at home, until we can fetch them from remote, and distant Countries. In short therefore it was agreed that a National Council should be assembled, com∣posed of all the Prelats of the Kingdom, whose business it should be to consult, and find out means to give a stop to the growing evils, and to the course of those infections which were ready to poison, and overwhelm the whole Kingdom.
Howsoever, lest this Edict for summoning a National Council should be ill taken by the Pope, and interpreted for a point of disrespect to the Apostolical Sea, without his consent thereunto, or at least an intima∣tion given thereof: it was ordered that the Ambassadour residing at Rome, should by word of mouth represent the many dangers, and grow∣ing evils within the Kingdom of France, which could be cured by no o∣ther remedy than a National Assembly, and that the dangers thereof were so pressing, as not to admit the slow Methods of forein As∣sistance. These matters being exactly in this manner represented to the Pope, were very ill resented by him, judging that such an Assembly of Prelats could not be convened without a breach of the Ecclesiastical Canons, nor without prejudice to the Papal Authority: which to make more clearly appear he resolved to dispatch the Bishop of Viterbo into France, to make known unto his Majesty; That such an Assembly was never admitted by former Popes in any Country or Kingdom whatsoever; they being well assured, that such a meeting would serve to no other end, than to administer unto greater division, and confusion, and produce a Schism in the Church Catholick: and, That it would serve farther to exalt the pride of the Prelats, inspiring them with an Opinion of some superiour Authority inherent in them, above that of the Pope, or of the King; but if he would apply a true, and an effectual remedy, none could be so successful as a General Council, which he had resolved shortly to as∣semble; and that in the mean time nothing could be so available, as that the Bishops be commanded to repair to their respective Dioceses, and the Curats to their Parishes, and there to watch over their Flocks, and hinder Thieves, and Wolves from breaking within the Fold: and final∣ly, desired that their Spiritual Authority might be reinforced by the Power of the Civil Magistrate, and the Arms of Regal force. The Bishop of Viterbo being with these Instructions dispeeded into France; he was farther commanded in his Journey thither to negotiate matters in the same form at the Court of Savoy; and to incite the Duke to make War upon Geneva, which they called the Nest of Heresie, and the root from whence sprang all the false Doctrines of the new Religion: the Bishop accordingly did not fail on his part to represent all matters to the Duke agreeable to his Instructions, and found in him a ready disposition to embrace all the Proposals made him by the Pope, especial∣ly the Enterprise against Geneva, provided, that with the consent both of Spain, and France he might possess, and enjoy that City: This De∣mand was easily admitted on the side of Spain; but they well knew, that it would never be granted by France, which had long aspired to that Dominion; to which the Spaniards would accord, being more wil∣ling to see that place the Capital Throne of the new Religion, than a Seat of the French Power; for that being near to the Dukedom of Bur∣gundy might prove an ill Neighbour to that part of the Spanish Domini∣ons. Howsoever, that the King of Spain might follow the Pope's incli∣nations in concurrence with the French as far as prudence, and caution directed, he dispatched Don Antonio de Toledo his Ambassadour into France to offer unto that King his utmost assistance, and to joyn his Arms unto his for the total ruin, and extirpation of Heresie.
But the Court of France would yield no ear to either of these Propo∣sitions; they would gladly indeed have had the possession of Geneva, but the Enterprise seemed difficult whilest the Civil Wars continued, and whilest Geneva remained in League with the Swisses, who had pro∣mised to afford their utmost succour, and aid unto that place: and as to the National Synod they persisted in their resolution, promising the Pope that nothing should be attempted therein derogatory to his Power, and the Authority of the Church. But this assurance did little satisfy the jealousie of the Pope, who suspected the very Prelats to be tainted with Heresie, and to have an inclination to set up a Gallican Church, as they called it, separate, and independant of the Roman Sea. The fear and jealousie hereof constrained the Pope positively to re∣solve on a General Council, and to hasten the convocation thereof with all speed possible, supposing that the convention of a General Council would break the former Measures, and invalidate the Authority of all National Synods: This being agreed, the next thing proposed, was the place; which the Pope would have had to be his own Town of Bolog∣na, but that he knew, it would be generally disliked by the Prelats; nor would the Spaniards consent to have it held at Milan, for though they were zealous Catholicks, yet in matters of worldly interest they di∣strusted the Pope, as much as other Princes: In fine, Trent was agreed to be the most commodious, and least subject to exceptions of any: howsoever the French were of another Opinion, as was also the Empe∣rour who proposed Wormes, Triers, Constance, or Hagunaw, as more con∣venient; for that the Protestants did so abhor the name of Trent, that they would take a prejudice to any thing formed there; nor would they endure to have the Council stiled a Continuation of a former, but one new, and established on its own foundation: nor was this the only scruple of the Emperor; for he declared, that he could not answer for the Em∣pire, unless it were first prepared, and disposed by a General Diet, nor would the Clergy of his hereditary Countries be induced to be present at the Council, unless the Cup in the Sacrament were first granted to the Laiety, and License for the Priests to marry; but all these matters being diametrically opposite to the Papal interest, the Pope declared his resolution was, rather to give his life, than his assent thereunto. In the mean time the numbers of those of the Reformed Religion en∣creased greatly in France; so that it was resolved, in case a General Council were not speedily assembled, that a National Synod should meet at Meaux on the 13th. of January 1561. for the tumults, and combusti∣ons about Religion were so pressing that they required a speedy, and an effectual cure: the fear of which so touched the Pope, as did also the Declaration of the Emperor; that taking no notice of the exceptions of either, he resolved to surmount the difficulties, and therewith signed the Bull for calling a Council, to commence on Easter day 1561. giving this Title thereunto, Indictio Concilii Tridentini, as if it had been to be a New, and not the continuation of a former Council: howsoever in the body of the Bull the word Continuation being mentioned, it gave great scandal and offence to all, though the Pope's Legats endeavoured to smooth it over, by saying, that the Continuation could be no impedi∣ment to any revision of what had formerly passed, nor hinder the Council from repealing any Act which had been Decreed, and ordained in the times of Paul, and Julius III.
And now Francis II. King of France being dead, and his Brother Charles IX. a Youth of ten years of age succeeding, gave great expecta∣tions, of a happy change to the Protestants, for that the King of Navarre having declared himself of the Reformed Religion, to whom of right as first Prince of the Blood, the Government belonged, during the minority of the King, and that he was ruled much by the Counsels of the Admi∣ral de Coligny, who was the grand Protector of the Reformed, gave them hopes, that the severity of proceedings against them would be aba∣ted, and liberty of Conscience granted to the whole Kingdom: the which though it did not take effect fully to their desires, yet at an Assembly of the Estates at Orleance, it was ordained, That an Arrest of judg∣ment should be given, and all penal Processes stopped which were made against any for account of Religion: and at the same time Orders were given to the Prelats to prepare themselves for their Journey to Trent. At this time the Protestant Princes were assembled at Naumbourg, with intention to guard themselves from the Plots which would be contrived against them in the Council of Trent; and to take off the reproach of Divisions, and disagreement in the points of Faith amongst themselves. But such was the variety then of Opinions that it was difficult to concur in one Symbol of Faith; for the Confession of Augsburg had lately been printed in several Editions, and every one with some difference from an other. And as to a General Council they petitioned the Empe∣rour, that such an one might be convened as was free, and where the Pope might not preside, and overawe the Votes of the Protestants; the which request they made rather in excuse for their not going to Trent, than out of any prospect of a concession to their grant. In the mean time the Pope having sent two Nuntios to the Emperor, he advised them to go to Naumbourg, accompanied with two of his Am∣bassadours, and receive the sense of the Assembly which was there con∣vened: The Protestants received the Ambassadours with great respect, and heard the Nuntios with equal civilities; but still continuing firm to their Principles, declared that they could not acknowledg the Pope's ju∣risdiction, and therefore could not esteem themselves obliged to make known unto the Pope the Opinion they had of a Council, having already signified their thoughts thereof unto the Emperor: with the like cold∣ness they were received at Norimberg, Frankfort, Ausbourg, and other Protestant Towns. Elizabeth Queen of England at the same time refu∣sed to admit the Abbot Martininguez sent by the Pope, within her Do∣minions: And the King of Denmark in like manner denied entrance to the Nuncios within his State, saying, That neither his Father nor he having ever had to do with the Pope, he knew no business his Nuntios could have with him. Thus did these Nuntios meet Oppositions in all parts, nor did they find any encouraging compliance in the Emperor himself, who insisted on the Indiction of a new Council, which was not founded on the Continuation, or basis of a former. France likewise made many exceptions to the Bull of Indiction, being for a New and not for a Continuation of the Old Council; Nor was this all; many other things concurring in that Kingdom to the diminution of the Pope's Au∣thority:1561. for not onely were the penal Laws against the Protestants ta∣ken away, but also at a Convention of the Estates at Orleance, the Pope's Annates or yearly Revenue was taken off and all Moneys for∣bidden
to be carried to Rome; the agreement between Leo X. and Fran∣cis the First was made void; and all Friars, and other Religious were made subject to the Bishop of their Diocese. So that France seemed in a manner to be lost: onely Spain being a people not given much to in∣novation, adhered to the Pope's Authority, and to a Continuation of the Old Council. The Feast of Easter approaching which was the time appointed for the opening the Council; the Pope deputed the Cardinals of Mantoua, Warmia, Seripanda, and Simonette to be his Legats, and Presidents of the Council, and hastned all the Bishops of Italy to repair unto Trent, that so they might counterballance the number of the French, and Spa∣nish Bishops, who came, as was believed, with no other intention, than to gain one Point, which was, that a General Council in its Determi∣nations, was superiour and above the Authority of the Pope; a Position which the Bishops of Italy, who had the honour of being the Head of all the Clergy, ought on no terms whatsoever to admit. But as yet there was a very thin appearance of Bishops at Trent; for the eyes of all were fixed on the issue, which the Convention of the E∣states at Orleans, and the Conference at Poissy would produce, which in every Act struck at the Pope's Authority, and exposed unto the people the corruptions and abuses of the Roman Sea. In fine, after all, the Queen Regent wrote a Letter to the Pope, wherein she represented to him the great numbers of Protestants in France, and the daily encrease of them; to suppress which a Reformation in many things was necessa∣ry; as namely, to take away Images out of the Churches; the Spittle, and Exorcisms in Baptism, to grant the Eucharistical Chalice to the Laiety, to admit the Divine Service in the vulgar Tongue, and expunge the late Festival of Corpus Christi out of the Kalendar; All and every Point of which were such mortal blows to the Church, that the Pope could not think thereof with any patience, nor give other answer there∣unto, than that those, and other matters should be deferred to the de∣cision of the Council. With these expectations, and Discourses the time was protracted un∣til the month of December,1561. by which time there was a considerable ap∣pearance of Bishops at Trent, so that the Pope commanded without far∣ther delay, that the Council should be commenced; but by reason of some other Obstructions, and at the desire of the Emperor's Ambassa∣dours it was again deferred until the middle of January following. The first Session was held the 18th. of January;1562. at which the first preliminary afforded great matter of Dispute; for it was there to be made a standing Rule, That nothing should be propounded, but what was first moved by the Legats, Proponentibus Legatis: which being op∣posed by four Spanish Prelats, was notwithstanding over-ruled by the greater number, and the next Sessions appointed for the 26th. of Fe∣bruary following. In the mean time on the 17th. of January the Edict was made at St. Germaines, whereby the Protestants had liberty given them to have their Churches, or Temples without the Cities, to live under the pro∣tection of the King in observance of their own Discipline, Provided, that they taught nothing contrary to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, and to the Council of Nice.
At Trent after several Congregations held there, another Sessions commenced the 26th. of February, at which some matters were deter∣mined in relation to Precedency, and the Index Expurgatorius; and then the Council adjourned, until the 14th. of March, which time be∣ing come, nothing passed at that Session worthy of observation, onely they adjourned until the 14th. of May; and then again to the 4th. of June. At the beginning of this Session the Marquis of Pescara, who was Ambassadour for Spain, instantly urged that this Council might be decla∣red a Continuation of the former under Paul, and Julius; but the Em∣peror's Ambassadours made such fierce opposition that nothing for that time was concluded therein: after which the Marquis de Pescara de∣parted from Trent upon pretence that the affairs of his Government re∣quired his presence at Milan; though in reality it was to avoid a con∣currence with the French Ambassadours, who were then upon their Jour∣ney to Trent, namely, the Lord of Lansac, Ferrier who was a President of Parliament, and Fabre Lord of Pibrac, one also of the Long-Robe, who arrived two or three days after the departure of the Spanish Am∣bassadour. And now misunderstandings encreased between the Court of Rome, and the Council of Trent, the Cardinal of Mantoua himself who was one of the Pope's Legats, being suspected of not having had sufficient zeal for the Authority of the Court of Rome, because he had not se∣conded the Votes of the Spanish Party, who would have declared this present Council a Continuation of the former: so that it came to be debated at Rome, whether it were not necessary to recall the Cardinal of Mantoua from his Presidency, or to place some other Collegue in Com∣mission above him. On the other side the Council was as much dissatis∣fied with the Court of Rome, as the Court of Rome was with Trent; be∣cause that many things were designed there to moderate the Papal Au∣thority, and give a greater latitude of Power to Princes, and Arch-Bi∣shops in the exercise both of the spiritual and temporal jurisdiction: nor were the Prelats free from all variance amongst themselves, whose inte∣rests several times interfering one with other, administred subject of Dispute, which ended in Reproaches, and Obloquies of one against the other. The French Ambassadours being admitted to Audience in a Congre∣gation assembled the 26th of May; Fibrac made a very eloquent and pathetical Oration, wherein he reproved the indiscreet and ill-guided zeal of those, who would not part with one insignificant ceremony, to gain the common quiet, and peace of the Church, and the salvation of many souls. He also openly declaimed against the violence imposed in the Council, which ought to have been free; And considering that pre∣ceding Councils had for some Ages past suffered their Opinions and Sentiments to be overswayed by a superiour Power, and serve an inte∣rest for whose sake they were not assembled, he did therefore now ex∣hort the Fathers then present, that they would take such measures as might without mixture of other considerations cure, and heal the Dis∣eases of the Church, produce Peace, and propagate Charity in the World; and secure the Flock of Christ from usurpation, and Oppression. This Speech so startled the Council, that the Prolocutor having nothing to re∣ply, gave an end to the Congregation of that Day.
On the 4th. of June a Session was held, in which the Commissions of Ambassadours were read and an Answer given by the Prolocutor to the Speech of Pibrac, which was ill resented by the French, and then the Session ended, and another appointed on the 16th. of July. In the mean time several Congregations were held, whereat the chief matter debated was the administration of the Sacrament of the Holy Communion to the Laiety in both kinds: the Imperial and French Ambas∣sadours contended for it, as did also the Minister of the Duke of Bavaria; and on that subject joyned together in a Memorial: in which they re∣presented, and produced the Writings of the Popes Paul, and Julius, wherein they had acknowledged the necessity of yielding the Cup to such of the Laiety, as should demand it, it being the only means where∣by to conserve the Kingdom of Bohemia in obedience to the Sea of Rome. That already in the Kingdom of Hungary the People did force the Priests to administer the Sacrament to them in both kinds, threat∣ning for want thereof to seize their Estates, and take away their lives. After many Debates on divers Subjects at several Congregations, at length the day of Session came being the 16th of July; at which the Decrees were read, and four Canons confirmed with Anathemas there∣unto annexed. First, That the faithful Laiety are not obliged by any Command to communicate in both kinds. Secondly, That the Church upon very good grounds, and reasons had taken away the Cup from the Laiety. Thirdly, That whosoever receives the Bread onely, receives Jesus Christ, as fully, and intirely to all ends, and purposes of spiritual Grace, and Salvation. Fourthly, That the Communion is not necessa∣ry for Infants. All which was impertinent to the question demanded, namely, whether such as were not satisfied herewith might not receive the Sacrament in both kinds, if desired by them: wherefore to please the Germans, who made great noise about this Point, the determination thereof was referred to the following Session: likewise many other mat∣ters were enacted, and decreed for Reformation of abuses committed by the Questors, who were a sort of Rascals, and Caterpillers, who under the pretence of recommendatory Letters to all Good People, exhorting them to contribute their Alms to pious Works, such as the building of Hospitals for the sick, and for maintenance of Orphans, framed a thou∣sand damnable Artifices to extort Money from the People; in which for the more formality they disguised themselves in strange Habits, and by sound of Bell carried before them, assembled the People, and offered their Indulgences to sale, terrifying those who refused to buy them with a thousand Curses, and Maledictions; the which Money by agreement with Officers at Rome was appropriated to their own use and a part to the benefit of those, who had procured the Authority for raising these Collections. So that this abuse was condemned, and wholly abolished. Likewise other Decrees passed for regulation of Dioceses, Parishes, and Non-Residencies: And in the mean time Posts ran continually from Trent to Rome, and back again with Treaties, and Negotiations between the Ambassadours of several Princes, and the Legats, besides a thousand other Intrigues formed by the Prelats, who were encreased to a number four times greater, than in the time of the two preceding Councils under Julius and Paul III. All which in the conclusion produced so little, that we may well apply that saying.
Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus. The French Ambassadours attended all this time in the Council with∣out any reasonable satisfaction; for they observed that the most material Points of Religion were debated, and determined in the absence of their Bishops, all being carried by the Vogue, and suffrages of Spaniards, Por∣tugueses, and Italians: Wherefore they earnestly wrote to the King to hasten his Bishops, who might maintain and support the Points they had to propose for a Reformation; for want of whom and that nothing could be proposed in the Council, but by the Legats, that clause avail∣ing in the Method agreed, Proponentibus Legatis, the Court of Rome became absolute Moderator in all Disputes, carrying every thing at plea∣sure, by the great numbers of their Pensionary Bishops; and in short, that there was very little hopes of any good result from the determina∣tion of this Council. After this Session; matters were preparing at several Congregations against the next, which was appointed to be held on the 17th. of Sep∣tember for confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Mass: in discussing of which Point; an unlucky question was started, Whether Jesus Christ did then offer, and sacrifice himself, when he first instituted the Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist: for if he did not at that time sacrifice himself, then the Mass which is founded on this Institution, Do this in remem∣brance of me, is no Sacrifice: and if he did sacrifice himself, it must have been propitiatory, and then the Sacrifice on the Cross had been unpro∣fitable, and unnecessary; for it is said, He Offered himself but once; and then the sins of mankind had been expiated by the Sacrifice of the Eucha∣rist: the which created so much doubt, and Dispute, that some were of Opinion, that it were best to leave the ceremonies of the Roman Mass free, and undetermined by any particular Decree or Canon of the Church: the which Opinion though displeasing to the generality of the Council, was yet seconded by the Bishop of quinque Ecclesiae, the Emperor's Ambassador; who moved that Germany might not be obliged to any uniformity of Ceremonies, and particularly might have the Cup granted to their Laiety in the Sacrament, and not be obliged to have their Service in the Latin Tongue. The which he represented in the name of his Master to be so agreeable and necessary to the present State of that Country, that without such a Dispensation it was impos∣sible, to contain his people under any obedience to the Church, or oblige them to make resistance against the Turk, whose violences they less feared, than the impositions, and tyrannies of the Papal Sea. This mat∣ter being argued with great heat on both sides, and without any deter∣mination, it was moved, that this Proposal of the Germans should be re∣mitted to the Pope; but this also was opposed by the Bishop of Lavaur; who argued that it was very improper to remit that to the Pope, which he had referred to the judgment of that Assembly: and that it might reasonably be questioned whether that reference were made to him un∣der the notion of being Superiour, or Inferiour to the Council; and then in that case, that question was first to be determined. Howsoever, at length it was carried in the Affirmative, and the question referred to the judgment of the Pope to consider, and determine under what restrictions, and circumstances the Cup might be granted to the Laiety.
In this manner with a thousand Disputes and difficulties,1562. an other Session was held on the 17th. of September. At which after the usual Ceremonies were performed; they immediately fell upon the particu∣lars treated in the preceding Congregation, containing nine several Ar∣ticles, all which were confirmed, and strengthned with Anathemas: the contents of which were to establish the Doctrine of the necessity of a per∣petual Sacrifice, to verifie the Sacrifice of the Mass, and that the same was truly and really propitiatory. The Ceremonies also of this Sa∣crifice, and the purity of the Canon of the Mass, and the celebration of it in the Latin Tongue, were all confirmed: as likewise that the Mass might be performed without other Communicants than the Priest onely, that it might be celebrated in honour of the Saints, and that the Wine ought to be used with a mixture of Water. To which particulars the Fathers gave their Placet 22, or 23, only excepted, amongst which the chief was the Arch-Bishop of Granada, who could by no means be per∣suaded to relish the Doctrine, that Jesus Christ did offer himself in the first institution of the Holy Eucharist. Moreover, other Decrees were read, and passed relating to the regulation of Bishopricks, giving the Bishops full power to inspect the nature of Dispensations, whether they were fairly or subreptitiously procured; as also Authority to visit Hospitals, and Colledges, and survey the Buildings of religious Foundations, with this clause, and under this Character howsoever, as being Delegates of the Holy Sea. Likewise other things passed of no great moment, with which this Session was concluded. The Decrees of this Session were satisfactory to very few: for the Em∣peror remained highly displeased, that the matter of the Cup was refer∣red to the Pope, well knowing that the concession of this Point would have been much more acceptable to his Subjects from the Council, than from the Pope, against whom they had demonstrated a detestable aversion. Exceptions were also made to that Decree, which gives the Bishops a Power over religious Houses contrary to the intention of the Donors, who desired that the Revenues, and management thereof should be ad∣ministred by Lay-persons: for thus said they, was the manner how the Clergy possessed themselves of the Lands, and Revenues of Hospi∣tals, and Colledges, and other religious Foundations, making themselves Owners, and absolute Masters of what they were onely Stewards, and Administrators: and this formerly the Parliament of Paris looked upon as an Usurpation, and encroachment of the Clergy on the civil Right, and Jurisdiction; the like judgment also they gave of Wills and Testa∣ments, the inspection into which by the Bishop, was judged an intrench∣ment, of the Secular Power. Howsoever, the Pope remained extreamly satisfied with the conclu∣sion of this Session, all things having been managed according to his own Orders, and Instructions. And now for the future he resolved to stand upon his guard, and countermine the Plots, and Artifices of the Cardinal of Lorain, who came, as he was well assured, with vast designs, as did also the French Bishops who were armed with Maxims diame∣trically opposite to his Authority; against whom and the other Ultra∣montanes, he resolved to reinforce his numbers, and power in the Council by new recruits of Italian Bishops.
The same day that this last Session was concluded, the French Ambas∣sadours received Letters from their Master, requiring them to move the Council, that a stop might be given to their proceedings in matters of Doctrine, until the Bishops from France should arrive; and that in the mean time they would prepare matters tending to the Reformation of manners and abuses crept into the Church, which was the only Sovereign remedy capable to cure the distempers of the Church: the which In∣structions the Ambassadours having made known to the Legats, by whom according to due Order all matters were proposed; received this An∣swer from them: That they could not invert the Rule, and method al∣ready designed, for decision of the Doctrines of Faith, and reformation of Manners, but were forced to proceed, in their usual course, without any delay, and interruption; and if their King had any thing to propose, it might be done by them his Ambassadours, whom he had deputed to represent his concernments at the Council. This Answer did little please the Ambassadors, so that they appeared openly discontented: and the Pope on the other side fearing lest the power, and wisdom of the Cardinal of Lorain, should be stronger than his Auxiliaries of Italian Bishops, endeavoured by his Legat in France to take him off, persuading him that his Negotiations in the Council could procure him no reputa∣tion, in regard that all things were already done, and concluded. And indeed they were much in the right, for the Legats having a de∣sire to dispatch, and put a period to the Council, were resolved to hearken unto no delays, but to proceed to the two Articles of Doctrine, namely, the Sacraments (as they called them) of Ordination, and Mar∣riage, which were the onely Points remaining to be examined, and de∣termined. On which Points the Congregations began to treat on the 25th of September, and continued their Discourses and Treatises there∣upon until the second of October.1562. But all the Disputes which arose up∣on these Subjects seemed impertinent, and loss of time to the Bishop of quinque Ecclesiae, and the other Hungarian Prelats, as also to the Polanders and Spaniards; who at a private Conference amongst themselves conclu∣ded, that their meeting was chiefly with design to reform abuses in manners which were crept into the Church, rather than to determine matters of Faith; that in this work it was necessary to begin the Refor∣mation at the Court of Rome, which was the Head, and source from whence the streams ought to be derived in their purity; reflecting with deep sense of displeasure, on the encroachments which the Court of Rome made on their Episcopal Dignity: and in order hereunto the Arch-Bishop of Braganca was of Opinion, that the first thing to be done, was to reduce the Cardinals to their primary Institution; for that until the 10th. Century they were mere Priests; and onely began from that time to exalt their Dignities, and yet until the 12th. Century they were e∣steemed inferiour to Bishops; though since that time by several degrees and steps they have so elevated, and promoted their quality with Titles, and extention of Power, that a Bishop is esteemed to have had honour sufficient, in being onely admitted a domestick Chaplain to a Cardinal, and therefore to bring the Episcopal Dignity again into request, it were necessary to have it expresly declared by the Council, that that Hierarchy is Jure Divino, and that Bishops hold their Power, and Authority im∣mediately from Jesus Christ, and not from the Pope. The which que∣stion
came at a seasonable, and an opportune time to be discussed; for one Article under consideration being then to define that the Order of Epi∣scopacy was above that of Priesthood, it fell naturally into the Enquiry, Whether that Superiority was by Divine Right or not. Now the Legats at first not comprehending the meaning and design, why this question was proposed with so much heat, suffered it to proceed to a free exami∣nation: but so soon as they discovered by the Bishop of Fortosa who was a Spaniard and yet Pensioner of Rome, that the Arch-Bishops of Granada, and Barganca intended on the consequences of this Determi∣nation to infer, that their Order being established by Divine Right and not received from the Papal Chair, their Power would seem more inhe∣rent in themselves, and less dependant on the Supreme Bishop. So that the Legats being awakened by this intimation, denied to have that question put on the tryal, and notwithstanding the high and passionate words which intervened between them, and the Arch-Bishops of Spain, they positively forbad the Divines to treat farther on that Subject. How∣soever after the Legats had considered, that the Authority of these great Men had so deeply impressed this Opinion in the minds of the in∣feriour Clergy, as was not to be defaced by the single dash of an over∣ruling Power; they appointed four Divines to confute the Arguments of the Spanish Prelats, and to prove that the Bishops held their Power from the Pope, and not immediately from Jesus Christ; and that Epi∣scopacy was no otherwise of Divine Right, than as the whole Order of that Hierarchy was inherent in the Pope, as the Head, and source from whence all Ecclesiastical Power was derived; by virtue of which, it was in him onely to ordain Bishops over particular Churches, to aug∣ment, enlarge, or restrain their jurisdiction, and to depose, suspend, and transfer their trust, and dignity unto others, as he in his wisdom, and infallible judgment should determine, and command. In defence of this Opinion Lainez General of the Jesuits, an Orator of particular Note was appointed in a set Speech, and at a Congregation purposely called to hear him on this question; and thereupon such liberty was gi∣ven him of Discourse, that he declaimed for the space of two hours with∣out any interruption, alledging every thing which with any appearance of colour might be deduced from Scripture, or the Antient Fathers; all which was concluded with the general Applause of the Papal Party; whilest others of the contrary Opinion were offended, and netled in the highest degree. Amongst the rest the Bishop of Paris at the next Con∣gregation spake high, and protested publickly against this Doctrine, which (as he said) was invented by Cajetan, who thereby merited the reward of a Cardinals Hat, that the gentle Government of the Church was degenerated into Tyranny, that the Spouse of Jesus Christ was made a Slave, and prostituted to the Arbitrary pleasure of a single Person. That for his part he was weary of those affronts, and contempts which were daily offered to the Episcopal Dignity, on which every petty Monk began to trample; nor could he longer support the neglects which the Order of begging Friers put on that Sacred Function, nor the insolences of the upstart Company of Jesuits, who being neither Seculars, nor Re∣gulars, but a mix'd composition of both, acknowledged no other Juris∣diction, but their own. All which was delivered with such heat and vehemence, as moved the bloud, and farther incensed the minds of all
those who were already enflamed with Resentments against the Speech of Lainez; so that there was a common murmur through the whole Council, universally concluding that the Speech of the Bishop of Paris was a clear refutation of all the frothy Oratory, delivered by the General of the Jesuits: howsoever the Legats still persisted in their Assertion, and for support thereof were forming a new Party against the Spanish Prelats. But these Disputes, and heats were for a while suppressed by the many instances which were made by the Spaniards, French, Germans and others for a Reformation; desiring that all other Debates, and Controversies being laid aside, the Council would be wholly intent to that great work of rectifying abuses, which was the onely means that could produce peace, and quiet in the Church. But the Legats withstood this shock, and endeavoured by delays and Artifices to evade this Assault made up∣on the Papal Power: on which they dreaded the storm, which the Car∣dinal of Lorain would make thereupon; for he being now on his Jour∣ney to Trent, gave out in all places through which he travelled, that his Design was to abate the greatness and pride of the Pope, and to ease the People of their Oppressions, and Tyrannies which they suffered by the Court of Rome. This Cardinal was a Person of great Power, Inte∣rest, and Revenue in France, and therefore impatient of subjection to a Foreiner, and desirous himself to be Pope, or supreme Head of the Gal∣lican Church; to break all these Measures, and countermine these Plots, the Legats proposed several, and different means: sometimes it was re∣solved, that the Pope should come to Bolegna, that his near residence might over-awe the Council; but not knowing how this might ope∣rate; the next expedient was to adjourn the Council to some other place, to proogue it for some certain time, and in fine, if all should fail, then to dissolve it. But this Remedy seeming too violent, it was judged more convenient to suspend for a while the ordinary course of the Congregations, hoping that with time the spirits, and heats which Lainez Discourse had raised, would abate, and be allayed. But this Remedy produced a contrary effect; for the Prelats being at leisure, banded together, and dividing into several Factions, and Meetings, form∣ed as many Councils, as were Parties, or interests. Thus seven days passing without Congregations, the Spaniards grew weary of the delays, and with a haughty, and arrogant manner associating themselves together came to the Legats, and possitively demanded, that Episcopacy should be declared to be by Divine Right, to oppose this Spanish stiff∣ness, natural to the humour of that Nation; eighteen or twenty Pre∣lats were set up to contradict this Demand, and require that no Deter∣mination should be made of that Controversie. So that the Legats making use of these divisions to excuse themselves, not being able to satisfie both Parties, all things remained in suspense, and in the mean time there was nothing but confusion, and tumult, and Consults, how, and in what manner to make Parties, and Interests; which gave the Le∣gats just cause to fear the ill effect which these Disorders might pro∣duce. After this intermission of Congregations; on the 3d. of November they began again to meet; when many Expedients were proposed to accommodate the Disputes which made so great a noise, namely, Whe∣ther Episcopacy, and the Residence of Bishops in their respective Dio∣ceses,
were instituted by Divine Right. As to the latter the Cardinal of Mantoua, one of the Legats, did propose to have the question remain un∣decided; but howsoever, that every Bishop should be obliged under se∣vere penalties to reside in his Diocess; it being not material, whether such residence were Jure Divino, or not, provided that every person, ob∣served, and performed his duty therein. But the first question was con∣troverted with more passion, the Bishop of Segovia averring, that the Order of Episcopacy was declared by the Council held under Julius III. to be Jure Divino. Upon reading the Act, though the Roman Party would not dare▪ to say, that the Council had erred in that Point; yet they endeavoured to evade the force of it, by distinguishing between the Order abstractively, and the Jurisdiction of it. During these Contests the Cardinal of Lorain arrived at Trent, where he made his entry on Horse-back with a great Train, and Pomp, support∣ed between the two Cardinals of Mantoua, and Seripande, who were the principal Legats. By this addition the Council began to be nume∣rous; the Prelats onely amounting to the number of two hundred and eighteen, which though much inferiour to Antient Councils, were how∣soever a greater appearance than any, that had yet been known in Trent. The favourers of the Roman Party looked on this increase, as a recruit of Auxiliaries, which were come in to reinforce their Enemies: and therefore to redouble their vigilance, and augment their force, the Pope dispeeded all the Power he had of Cardinals and Bishops to the Council; fearing that the Union which was formed between the Spa∣niards, French, and Germans, would be too powerful for his Italian Ad∣herents. The 23d. of November was the day when the Cardinal of Lorain made his first appearance in the Congregation: when as a Prologue to all the rest, the King's Letters were first read, containing little more, than to pray, and exhort the Council in general terms, that they would bend all their labours, and endeavours, towards a Reformation, and to those means, which might restore Peace, and Unity in the Church. The Letters being read, the Cardinal, in an elaborate, and pathetical Speech began to relate the calamities which the Wars about Religion had caused in France: desiring the Council that for a remedy thereof they would be pleased to be indulgent to the Protestants, in condescend∣ing to their weak, and tender Consciences so far, as was consistent with the Doctrines of Faith: and then declaiming against the corruptions which were crept into the Church, he instantly desired, that an inspe∣ction might be made into the many abuses of which the Clergy were guilty, to whom he ingeniously applyed the History of the Prophet Jonas. We, said he, are the cause of all these storms, we that have de∣parted, and fled from the face of God, cast us into the Seas, and the tem∣pest will abate. This Discourse was seconded by the French Ambassa∣dour du Ferrier, much to the same purpose, and then concluded, thus: If you ask me, why France is not in Peace, and what is the cause of all these divisions which thus miserably rend, and tear out the bowels of that distressed Nation; I must answer you in the same manner as Jehu did to Joram 2 Kings c. 9. v. 22. when he asked, Is it peace, Jehu? How can it be peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so many? In fine, he frankly told them, That in case
they took not some course to reform the disorders in France, all the bloud that was there spilt, would be laid to their charge: and though this plain dealing did infinitely displease the favourers of the Court of Rome, yet they judged it seasonable to dissemble their Resentments, fearing lest France in that doubtful state, should make a total defection from the Sea of Rome. And now it is curious, and worthy our observation to consider, that whilest the specious Proposal of Reformation was offered, it was plau∣sible, and consented unto in general terms by every Party, and Interest; but when they descended to particulars, and would apply the remedies to the respective abuses, then there appeared a strange, and prodigious diversity in their Opinions, every one being willing to reform others, but not himself, or his Party, easily observing the Moat in their Bro∣thers Eye, but not the Beam in their own. The Court of Rome would gladly assent to a reformation of Princes, and Bishops, but not yield to any inspection which might be made into the corruptions of their Consi∣stories, or into the Power which they had usurped. The Bishops could easily agree to a reformation of Manners in the Courts of the Pope, and of their respective Princes, but could not hear of having their Autho∣rity, or Revenues retrenched. The Kings and Princes instantly pressed to have a reformation of the Clergy both of the Head and of the Mem∣bers, but could not endure to hear of having their Regalia diminished, or the Power of conferring, and disposing Benefices according to their pleasure. Wherefore it was impossible, that all their different Interests could ever be reconciled, or at the end concenter in a single Tertio, or common agreement. Wherefore being wearied with these Debates, and finding out new Expedients, which could never square with the form of such Dissenting Interests; they again re-assumed the old and wearisom Debates about the being of Residencies, and Episcopacy by Divine Right in which no∣thing of the former heats were abated. The Bishop of Auranch declared positively, that his Opinion was, that Episcopacy was by Divine Right, and that the Authority of the Pope differed not from that of an ordi∣nary Bishop, but onely in degree, and was restrained within the limits of the Canons: He farther applauded the Decrees of the Parliament of Paris, which declared the abusive Bulls of the Pope to be void in their own nature, and forbad to have them put into Execution; and thus much, said he, the Power of my Master is able to verify, and make good. But the heats about Residencies began to abate; it being made appear, that if that Point were once gained, it would not onely be an eclipse, but a total ruin of the Papal Authority; for if the Residence of Bishops were declared to be by Divine Right, it would follow, that the Pope thence∣forth remains devested of all Power to transfer, diminish, divide, or make any change, or alteration in the Episcopal Seas. All which though the Spaniards knew very well, and that their aim was onely to advance their own Interest and Authority, yet they would seem to maintain the contrary, and that this Concession would serve to render the Papal Power more considerable, and glorious. In fine, it was agreed to send this Point about Residencies to the Pope by the Bishop of Ventimille. Thus was this whole year consumed in these Controversies, the last day of December, concluding with a Congregation, at which it was resolved, that the Session should be deferred for fifteen days.
At the beginning of this year 1563.1563. the French proposed thirty four Articles in order to a Reformation; the most part of which respected the Clergy, tending to the correction of abuses in Ordinations and promo∣tion of unworthy Persons both for their lives, and knowledg, to places of eminence, and honour in the Church. Some also related to the Court of Rome, and to the retrenchment of its Revenue, the exaction whereof was an agrievance to the People of France. Other Articles forbad Plurality of Benefices; and Moneys, or rewards to be given for administration of the Sacraments. It was also required that Divine Ser∣vice might be rendred, and performed in the French Tongue, at least that the principal Prayers be pronounced both in the French and in the Latin Tongue. That the Communion be delivered in both kinds. That Bishops within their respective Dioceses have a jurisdiction over the Religious in Monasteries, as well as over Seculars. That all abuses be taken away in the superstitious worship of Images, and the fond and vain imaginations which Men conceive of Reliques, Pilgrimages and In∣dulgences. That the Doctrine, and practice of Penance should be again renewed, and established according to the custom of the Primitive Church. All or most of which Articles were ungrateful to the Legats, both for the substance of them, and circumstances with which they were deli∣vered, the Ambassadours at the same time declaring, that in case they were not granted, such provisions would be made in France by a Natio∣nal Council as were agreeable to the State of their Affairs. Howsoever the Legats seemed favourably to accept them, and dispatched them to the Pope by the Bishops of Viterbo. And now by this time the Pope was ready to make a return of the conclusions he had made in the Point about Residencies, dispatched from Trent by the Bishop of Ventimille; the matter of which though couched with great Art, and in such ambiguous terms as might admit of various interpretations; yet that artificial fraud could not pass on such subtil Heads, who for their Learning, and experience were chosen out of the wisest Men of Europe; for they easily discovered the Pope's intent to advance himself above an Universal Council; they could have been con∣tented to have admitted him the Chief super Ecclesias Ʋniversas, but not super Ecclesiam Ʋniversalem; that is over all Churches in particu∣lar, but not over the Universal Church as it was aggregated into one body in a General Council. Hereupon great Contests arose; the Pensio∣ners of Rome produced in favour of the Pope's Authority a Canon made by the Council of Florence, which having been received by the Spaniards, gave them some trouble in what manner to make an Answer thereunto. But the French, who had never received the Articles of that Council for Canonical, opposed the Councils of Constance, and Basil against it, which had determined, that General Councils were superiour to the Pope: but the Italians, who maintained, that the Council of Basil was Schis∣matical, and that the Canons of Constance were partly received, and partly rejected, so heated their French Opponents, that Reasons, and Arguments being on both sides declined, the Dispute ended with high words, and reproaches of one against the other. Which the Legats well observing, and that there could be no good issue of such high Contests, desired time to remit these matters to the Pope's Censures; and so pro∣ceeded again to the Point about Residencies: the which having already
caused inextricable difficulties (for the Pope's words did not please the Council) the Cardinal of Lorain proposed something by way of Ac∣commodation, putting in some gentler terms which might serve the turn of both Parties: but the Legats penetrating with their accustomary A∣cuteness into the words, found that the sense would bear an Interpretati∣on, which might be expounded in favour of the Opinion that Residencies were constituted by Divine Right. Wherefore slighting, or laying aside the words which the Cardinal had projected, they framed another ac∣cording to their own humour, and presented it to the Congregation: the which so incensed the Cardinal of Lorain, that from thence forward, he began to deal plainly, and express himself in free, and high terms, pro∣testing that for the future he would meddle no farther, for that he ob∣served a secret Combination, which in Cabinet Consults assumed to its self an Authority to dispose matters differing from the Sentiments of the General Council. That the Legats sought nothing more than occasions to break up the Council in discontent. That nothing was acted, but according to the will of the Legats, who moved by such measures only as they received from the Pope, whose resolution in every thing they expected from Rome according to that old saying, That the Holy Ghost was brought every week from Rome to Trent in the Courriers Port∣mantle. That he for his part was resolved to have patience until the next Session, at which if matters were not managed with more fair pro∣ceedings, he was resolved to retire into France with his French Nation then at the Council, where renouncing all farther applications to Rome, or Trent, they were resolved to assemble a National Council, by which they would establish such a form of Concordat, as should be agreeable to the present state of their Country, and which might secure the safe∣ty of the King and the quiet of his People. To the same purpose the French Ambassadour expressed himself at Rome; but the Pope who had been long used to such kind of Menaces, and a noise about National Councils; little regarded their Censures, or Threats: but briskly an∣swered, That the Council was free even to a licentiousness; that if there were Parties, and Factions, they were unknown to him, and were only made by the Ʋltramontane Bishops, whose design was to trample on the Authority of the Papal Chair: And in this manner such distractions, and Disputes arose at Trent occasioned by the Power and Interest which the Cardinal of Lorain had there with the greatest part of the Clergy, that the Congregations were for some time suspended, until the Cardi∣nal of Ventimille returned from Rome, freighted with abundance of Complements, and Salutes, and especially with supplies of Mony for the Pope's Pensioners; and then the Congregations being again com∣menced, and with them the Discords renewed; it was agreed, that the next Session should be deferred until the 22th. of April, which was pre∣sently after Easter. The Cardinal of Lorain though he seemed outward∣ly to consent hereunto with some reluctancy, and onely in compliance with the rest of the Council, yet in reality he was well enough pleased, hoping that a short time would put an end to the life of this Pope, who was very aged, and infirm; when he imagined that his Greatness, and Authority would be very instrumental in promoting such a Person to the Papacy, as would be facil, and easie in granting every thing a∣greeable to his desires.
And now to allay a little the heats about the Divine Right of Epi∣scopacy, and Residencies, the Council diverted their thoughts and Dis∣course to eight several Points relating to Marriage. During which time, and the Interval between that, and the next Session, the Cardinal of Lorain took the opportunity to visit the Emperor's Court at Inspruck, which administred great cause of jealousie to the Pope; who not onely observed the Cardinal's dissaffection from his proceedings in the Council, but likewise from his Letter, wherein complaining of the many Factions, and Intrigues which his Italian Bishops had caused, he concludes, that if matters were carried on with the same Measures, there would remain nothing more for him, either to consider, or act, than onely to pray un∣to God to direct the Council with his Holy Inspiration. The Cardinal of Lorain being arrived at Inspruck, where he remained five days, had frequent Conferences with the Emperor, and his Son the King of the Romans, touching the many disorders, and corruptions of the Council at Trent; as also of the means how, and in what manner the Cup might be restored to the Laiety; how Marriage might be granted, and dispensed to Priests; and Divine Service performed in the Vulgar Tongue; but more especially their thoughts were busied about reformation of the Church, and the dissolute Manners both of the Head and Members of it. The Cardinal being returned to Trent kept all his Discourses, and Negotiations at Inspruck as a Secret, declaring himself onely in general terms, that he observed in the Emperor a passionate desire of a Reforma∣tion, but yet without any diminution or abatement of the Papal Autho∣rity. About this time the Cardinal of Mantoua died, who was the first President of the Council, by whose decease the Cardinal Seripanda be∣ing the next Legat, took on him that Office until such time as the Pope nominated two other Cardinals (namely Moron, and Navagier to suc∣ceed into his place, the which he did with admirable expedition to pre∣vent the instances, which the French might make in the behalf of the Car∣dinal of Lorain. And now the Point of Celibacy, or single lives of Priests which was one of the eight particulars relating to Marriage came into question, which was reserved until the time that the Cardinal of Lorain could be there present; in handling of which all the Divines agreed; that it was Heresie to believe, that the Priests of the Western Church being under a Vow, and an Ecclesiastical Canon to the contrary, were capable of en∣tering into a lawful State of Marriage; onely the difficulty was, whe∣ther it was in the Power of the Pope in some cases to grant a Dispensa∣tion to a Priest against his Vow of Celibacy, and Chastity; and whether the present emergencies, and necessities were such, as might induce the Pope to grant such Dispensations. In discussing of which question, it was confessed, that the Oriental Churches, did frequently confer Holy Orders on Persons, who were already married; but yet that it was ne∣ver their custom, to give liberty to unmarried Priests to change the State of their single life. But others extended this liberty yet farther; not restraining even Monks from that satisfaction, in maintenance of which they alledged the Authority of St. Austin; whose Opinion it was, That Monks taking Wives, their Marriage was Legal, though it was undecent, and what rendered them Prevaricators from their Vows to God, and
their Promises to the World. In fine, though the generality of Voices would not proceed so far as to make the marriage of Monks lawful, yet by Plurality of Votes, it was carried, that in some cases a Dispensation might be granted for a Priest to marry: for which Sentence, and for hazarding that question on its tryal; the Pope much blamed his Legats, in excuse of which, they alledged their inabibility to withstand the ear∣nest instances which the Emperors, and the Duke of Bavaria's Ambas∣sadours had made in that particular. About this time the Cardinal of Lorain received the bad news of the death of his Brother the Duke of Guise, who was murthered by a Ruf∣fian before the City of Orleans; which allarm'd the Cardinal and caused him to set a more secure Watch, and Guard over his own Person; nor was the Council less concerned in the death of this great Man, who was esteemed the Head, and Chief Protector of the Catholick Party in France. Amidst these troubles the Bishop of quinque Ecclesiae returned from In∣spruck to Trent bringing two Letters with him from the Emperor; one whereof was to the Council, instantly exhorting them to labour in the work of Reformation; and another to the Pope, earnestly entreating him not to dissolve the Council, lest thereby he should give scandal to the Hereticks, and cause them to reproach, and divide both the Church, and its Assemblies. But above all, he desired that the Council might be free, and not confined by the Orders of his Court, nor by such Me∣thods of proceeding as stop'd the mouths of all but his Legats, there being nothing to be propounded but by their words, Proponentibus Le∣gatis: and in fine he complained, that after all the labours, and Disputes of the Bishops, and Divines to set things right, there was no conclusion, or establishment of any matter, until it had first received its approba∣tion from Rome. This bold Letter which the Emperor adventured to write with more plain dealing than ever Charles V. or his other Prede∣cessors durst to use, highly offended the Pope, causing him to return a smart Answer to it in terms very disobliging to the Emperour; telling him amongst other things, that he was very acute in observing the Dis∣orders of the Council; but in the mean time was blind in discerning from whence they proceeded; which if well considered, were chiefly from himself, and from others who instead of receiving Laws, were pleased to give them, and that had he followed the example of Constan∣tine, and Theodosius, those divisions, and discords which appear in the Council would never entered, or would speedily have vanished. Howsoever, the Emperor still continuing to oppose the Pope, joyned with the Cardinal of Lorain, and the French Party, to examine▪ and con∣fute the arguments which the Papal Faction brought to sustain the clause of Regens Ecclesiam Ʋniversalem, which set up the Pope above the Au∣thority of a General Council. So that the Pope perceiving, that there was no hopes of gaining either the Emperor, or the French to his side, resolved to joyn himself to the Spaniards, who having received the Council of Florence were easily persuaded to admit the clause, against which the others had objected. So that the Pope having his chief sup∣port from the Spanish party treated the Ambassadour of that Nation with a distinguishing kindness, and respect; for which reason the Count de Luna, then Ambassadour for Spain at the Emperor's Court, wrote to
the Secretary of the Embassy at Trent, as also to the Arch-Bishop, and Bishop of Granada, Leon, and Segovia, desiring them to persuade the o∣ther Spanish Bishops to moderate their passions against the Court of Rome, and convert them into a zeal for the Papal Interest; so that the like in∣clinations swaying that whole Nation, the Count d' Avila who was Am∣bassadour for Spain at Rome, became extreamly partial to the Pope's side: for when the Imperialists at a Conference with the Pope demanded, that the Cup might be given to the Laiety, and that Priests might be per∣mitted to marry, the Spaniards opposed both; by which Divisions the Pope gladly made his excuse to determine neither Point, pretending in that doubtful condition to refer all to the determination of the Council. About this time the Cardinal Seripanda one of the Legats died, as had not long before his Colleague the Cardinal of Mantoua, so that for some time the Congregation adjourned, until the supply of new Legats were come from Rome, who were daily expected. And now the Pope, who with long delays and general terms had wea∣ried out the patience of those, who expresly contended for a Reforma∣tion, began to consider of the ways, and means, how he might absolute∣ly throw off the thoughts of it, and handsomly acquit himself with the French Nation thereupon, He was once inclined, as was▪ said, to have granted all the Points demanded, which did not intrench upon the Pa∣pal Authority, and voluntarily have yielded a License for Priests to marry, and to the Laiety the Communion in both kinds: but then considering that these concessions would open a gate to other Demands, and to such a croud of Novelties, which pressing in at this breach might ruine, and over-run all the constitutions, and Canons of the Church; he therefore resolved to keep himself firm to the present State of Prin∣ciples, and Governments, which he doubted not but to maintain, in case he could work off the Emperor from the French Party; to which end, he ordered the Cardinal of Moron who was to succeed into the place of one of the deceased Legats to pass from Trent to Inspruck, there to treat with the Emperor; and representing to him, how fatal such Novelties would be to the Church, endeavour to persuade him not to insist far∣ther on those Points, but leaving the French to their own Opinions, to take part with the Pope, and the King of Spain, whose friendship was more stable, and secure, than that of France. At this time news came to Trent, that the King had concluded a Peace at Orleans with his Protestant Subjects; and it was suggested at Rome, that this Peace was made by contrivance of the French Bishops, who secretly, and in their hearts were tainted with Heresie; at which the Pope was so in∣censed, that at a Congregation of Cardinals convened the 31. of March, he ordered the Judges of the Court of Inquisition to proceed against such Persons, as were Instrumental in that Peace: and accordingly Co∣ligny Cardinal of Chatillon, St. Romain Arch-Bishop of Axi, John de Monlue Bishop of Valence, the Bishop of Troye, the Bishop of Pamiers, and the Bishop of Chartres, were all accused of Heresie, and cited to ap∣pear at Rome before the Tribunal of the Inquisition. By these Acci∣dents the quarrels of France encreasing both at Trent,, and at Rome; the French Divines being displeased both with their ill treatment, and with the long delays in all matters at Trent, resolved to take their leave
of the Council; which the Legats easily granted; and to which the French Ambassadours so readily assented, that they even forced them to retire, by denying to them their Pensions, in case they continued in that station against the pleasure of the King; howsoever three Friers who were Pensioners of Rome continued still there at the Pope's charge, resolving to see the utmost issue of all those Affairs. The 22. of April having been the day formerly appointed for the Session, a general Congregation was held the day before; at which the Legats declaring that matters were not prepared for a Session did pro∣pose, that it might be again deferred until the 3d. of June following: to which the Cardinal of Lorain replyed, that it seemed derogatory to the wisdom, and gravity of that Council, so often to appoint times for a Session, and then again to subject them to farther delays; wherefore it would be much more advisable to prefix the 21th. of May follow∣ing for the time when a day should precisely be appointed for holding a Session: This Proposition so generally pleased the Council, that with a common Voice they assented thereunto; and though this unanimous concurrence with the Cardinal in this matter of small importance admi∣nistred subject both of jealousie, and envy to the Legats; yet they could well enough rellish any thing of delay, in hopes that the most violent, and hot spirits being wearied with long expectation▪ would either abate of their mettle, or else retire in despair or discontent. The Cardinal Moron was detained at Inspruck for a longer time than he expected, by reason that the Emperor suffered all his Papers, and Memorials to be inspected, and examined by certain of his own Di∣vines; which the Cardinal highly resented as an indignity to the Pope, whose Proposals were more sacred, than to be exposed to the censures of a few silly Priests; and indeed it was believed, that this manner of treatment proceeded from the dictates of the Cardinal of Lorain, who at that time had dispatched one of his Gentlemen to the Emperor, desiring him to speak plainly to the Cardinal Moron, giving him to understand; that the Council ought to be free, and not to be translated from Trent unto any other place, as some had contrived out of no good intent to the publick welfare. In the mean time the Pope was dealing with those Ambassadours who resided with him at Rome, to prevail with their Masters, to refer all Disputes about Reformation to himself, rather than to the Council: for that the abuses in Discipline were never esteemed the causes of Here∣sies, as plainly appeared in the Primitive Church, where Heresies were very importunate and troublesom, notwithstanding the purity of their Government and the incorruption of their Manners. That it was im∣possible to extract a Reformation from the common consent of such dif∣ferent Interests, most of which being guided by a zeal without prudence, served onely to discover the nakedness of the Church, and make it ma∣nifest to all the World, that her Evils were incurable. After a long vacation for some weeks a Congregation was held on the 14th. of May, when the Cardinal of Lorain made a long and Elo∣quent Oration about Bishops, and the means how to prevent the abuses in their Election; he first began with those of France, which was onely an Introduction to his Satyr against the Court of Rome, which he termed the source, and original of all the abuses, and corruptions in the Church:
he inveyed chiefly against those Cardinals who held Pluralities of Bisho∣pricks; shewing that all the tricks and contrivances for holding several Benefices in Commendam, and the like, were only Artifices to delude that wise God, who would neither be mocked nor deceived. Which Dis∣course might proceed well enough from the mouth of another; though it became not the Cardinal who was known to possess a Revenue from the Church of a million of Livers per annum; to all which the Cardi∣dinal Moron who was newly returned from the Emperor, replyed with great sharpness, nor sparing the Cardinal himself in the least, which served to enflame those Feuds, which had taken their Original from for∣mer causes. And now upon return of Cardinal Moron from the Emperor, every one began to discourse of the issue, which his Negotiations had produ∣ced; on which Subject, the common report was, that the Emperor had promised to defend the Authority of the Pope against the opposition and resistance of Hereticks. That he would not pass beyond Inspruck, nor consent to have the Council removed from Trent to Bologna; nor could he accept the Proposition of coming to Bologna, and there be crown∣ed by the hands of the Pope without the advice, and consent of a Diet. This, as we said, was what appeared above-board, and the more com∣mon Discourse of the Town: but the truth, and the secret of it was this, That the Cardinal Moron had persuaded the Emperor, and the King of the Romans to consent to have the Council dissolved; for in regard the intention and design of the Council was really no other, than to re∣form the Church, and the many corruptions in the several Members of it, and whereas it was apparent by plain experience, that a Council com∣posed of such different Interests, and Members, who were wedded to their own Parties, and their self-conservation would never endure a Re∣formation, which should impair, or lessen their condition: which being granted for a certain truth, the continuance of this Council would serve onely to multiply trouble, and inflame dissentions: of which the Em∣peror being perfectly made sensible, consented to have an end put to the Council: but lest a sudden dissolution of it, should make too great a noise, and render it ridiculous, or contemptible to the Protestants; it was judged most convenient to have the Council die of a Consumption by suffering the Members to retire by degrees, whereby it would come to expire without noise, or trouble: and indeed every one growing now sensible, of the little fruit, which might be expected from the continua∣tion of this Council, were of themselves inclined to retire; many of them reflecting on the saying of Gregory Nazianzen. That the troubles of the Church are always augmented by the Assemblies of the Bishops. Now when the 20th. of May was approaching,1563. which was the day appointed to consider of a time to be prefixed for the following Session; it was thought fit, at a Congregation held on the 19th. to defer the day for appointing a Session until the 10th. of June following, by rea∣son that the spirits of Men were still boyling with high fermentation, all Controversies being still in dispute, and nothing tended to a conclusion. And in the mean time the Count de Luna Ambassadour from Spain, being to be introduced publickly into the Congregation, gave occa∣sion to revive that antient quarrel about precedency between the Crowns of France and Spain; the which Point being obstinately maintained by both Parties, various ways, and expedients of Accommodation were
contrived both at Rome, and Trent to satisfie and content both Par∣ties: but the French who resolved not to retire the least step back∣wards, declared, that they would keep that station and rank which was due to their place, and rather than recede in the least they would a∣bandon the Council, and protest against all the Acts of it. So that the Count de Luna found great difficulty in being admitted to a place in the Council; nor could he be received there but at a time, when it was purposely contrived that the French Ambassadour should be absent. At Rome also the like Dispute arose between the two Ambassadours, which thé Pope finding impossible to be reconciled with indifferent terms, thought fit at length to speak plainly to the Spanish Ambassadour and tell him, that he was resolved to maintain the King of France in his pri∣viledg of Precedency, of which he had ever been possessed: Hereupon the Spanish Ambassadour desired liberty to make his Protest; which being admitted, and he introduced into the Pope's Chamber with four Witnes∣ses, he kneeled down, and having declared that his Master justly chal∣lenged the Precedency, as well on the Title of antient Right as from the grandeur of his Kingdom of Spain, and the large extent of his other Do∣minions; he proceeded farther to magnify the constancy of his Master to the Catholick Cause, which he had with Valour, and success defend∣ed against all its Enemies, having never condescended, as the French had lately done to terms prejudicial to the Church, nor dispensed with the Articles of Faith with such easiness as they had done by their Treaty with Hereticks at Orleans. The Pope being greatly overswayed with this last argument, began to relent of his former Sentence, and gently replyed, That he was ready on all occasions to serve, and favour the Catholick King, and therefore not to appear positive in his own Opi∣nion, he intended to remit the consideration of this knotty difficulty to the Colledg of Cardinals. Thus gently was this matter managed at Rome; But at Trent it made greater noise, and disturbance; for notwithstanding the various con∣trivances, and Propositions which were made to accommodate, and salve the honour of both Nations in this Point, nothing proved effectual; the expedient offered to have a separate place both in the Chappel, and in the Congregation for the Spanish Ambassadour, which should neither seem above, or beneath the French: and that when the Incense, and Peace were given at High Mass, they should be performed at the same time by two Censors, and two Officials, that so neither Ambassador could have cause to complain, that the other was preferred before him. But this equality, and concurrence was dispeasing to the French, who would not be contented with indifferent terms which should conserve the Point undecided; but required that judgment should be clearly given in right of their Precedency; in default of which the Cardinal of Lorain did not onely threaten to cause great disturbances; but the French Ambas∣sadours declared their resolution to make their Protest: not (as they said) against the Legats who acted according to their Instructions, nor against the Catholick King, who had reason to support and maintain his own Right; nor against the Count de Luna, who obeyed the Orders of his Master; nor yet against the Papal Chair to which they bore all De∣votion, and Obedience, but against Pius IV. who falsly stiled himself Pope, having by Simony, and corruption subreptitiously got himself to be Elected, and placed in the Apostolical Sea. In proof of which they
produced two Cedules for considerable sums of Money. One of which the Cardinal Caraffa had received from the Duke of Florence for the fa∣vour, and assistance he had given in the Election of the Cardinal of Me∣dicis; the which was afterwards sent by the said Caraffa to the French King; the other Cedule, though not produced, was positively alledged to remain in the possession of the Cardinal of Naples, subscribed by the proper hand-writing of the Pope himself. And farther, besides this high manner of proceeding by Protest; the Ambassadour du Ferrier prepared an eloquent Speech in Latin, which was afterwards published in Print, though not spoken in the Council, wherein, after he had proved the right of Precedency to belong to his Master, he reproached the Person, and conduct of Pius IV. for having sowed the seeds of Dissention, and War between two such great, and powerful Allies; and that having by a criminal Ingratitude forgotten all those Obligations, which the Apo∣stolical Chair owed to Pepin, Charlemagne, and Lewis his Son Kings of France, by whose favour it had been exalted to its present greatness; he did therefore Protest, that he would never more acknowledg this Pope for the Vicar of Jesus Christ, nor own the Acts of this Assembly as of a General Council, having never been free, but restrained wholly to the Dictates of this Pope: And therefore he did in the name of his Ma∣ster Order, and command all the Prelats of the French Nation to retire unto their respective Dioceses, until such time as a more free, and law∣ful Council were convened. To this high pitch and degree of Dissen∣tion were both Parties transported, that no other event, or issue thereof was expected, than a speedy and rash dissolution of the Council, of which every one growing weary, wished to see an end of their fruitless labours; but the Spanish Ambassadour remitting something of his for∣mer heat, desired time to acquaint his Master with all the preceding passages; in which Interval these Heats abated, and the Council proceed∣ed to other matters. And now after all these Stirs, and Combustions, and the many Pro∣testations which the Cardinal of Lorain made against the Pope, and his complaints against the abuses, and corruptions of the Court of Rome; on a sudden his humour, and affections changed without any visible causes which might move him thereunto, so that now instead of in∣veighing against the Pope, or being the Chief in private Cabals against him; he with wonderful address applyed himself to the Legats, and re∣ceived the flatteries of Cardinal Moron with a pleasing rellish, content∣ing himself to hear the Legats tell him, that they desired to act nothing without his privity, wishing that he would bear a share of the burthen with them, being infinitely satisfied to have all their Affairs guided by his direction. But this dearness between them lasted not long, before the Queen Regent wrote a Letter to the Cardinal, in which she required his speedy return into France, where his presence would be much more serviceable to the Crown, than it could be at Trent, from whence no good effect either towards Peace, or Reformation could be expected. That ha∣ving now concluded a Peace with her Protestant Subjects, which seemed to be well established, and permanent, there was no farther necessity of giving them other satisfaction from Acts of the Council, or concessions of the Pope; and therefore that for the future he should give Order to the French Clergy, not to combat with the Papal Authority, but rather to
be concurring in whatsoever might fortifie, and confirm the same: To which part and action the Cardinal seemed easily to incline; in regard that standing on ill terms with the Protestants, who were mortal Enemies to the House of Guise, he found it necessary to support himself with the fa∣vour of the Court of Rome, to which notwithstanding all former quar∣rels, and Piques, he professed himself a true Friend and an obedient Servant. And now a new Ambassadour called Birague arrived at Trent from the Court of France with Letters, rendering an account unto the Council, of the Peace lately concluded with the Protestants, for which, and for the Articles granted to them in the free exercise of their Religion, there was such a necessity, that without such an accord, the Crown, and wel∣fare of France would have been exposed to utmost extremity; the which being performed with design of reducing the straying, and wan∣dering Sheep into the path, and fold of the Church; it was hoped, that the Council would put a good Interpretation on this transaction, and approve of this Cure, and remedy which was unavoidable. The Coun∣cil being doubtful what Answer to make unto this Letter, desired time to consider thereof, intending to dispeed it by the Ambassadour Lansac, who was preparing for his return into France; Birague having in the mean time Commission to pass unto the Court of the Emperor. And now the Congregation proceeded to examine the Point about Ecclesiasti∣cal Ordinations; in the discussing of which, the Bishops did not so strict∣ly adhere to the matter in hand, but that they made frequent excursions into the abuses of the Court of Rome; and thence descended to the old controverted Points about the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and Resi∣dences, which were never mentioned without Heats and Quarrels. In the treating of which Lainez General of the Jesuits undertook to give a more home-blow than any had done before him, which he did with so much heat, and vehemence, as if the salvation of mankind had depend∣ed thereupon: He took that occasion also to excuse Dispensations, the Im∣positions and Taxes laid by the Church, the Riches of the Court of Rome, and all those things which are commonly termed Abuses; thence he proceeded to exalt the Papal Authority above the Council, above all the Church, nay above the Clouds, and higher than we can imagine: the which Discourse, tho displeasing both to the Spaniards, and French, and all but the Pensioners of Rome, was highly applauded by the Legats, to whom his long Orations did never seem tedious, as if they had chosen him for the Interpreter, and Explainer of all their thoughts and designs; to which end, when his turn came to speak he was commanded to take his place in the middle of the Assembly, and heard always with patience, and applause of the Legats, when the Chiefes of other Orders were or∣dered to speak in their places, and were brow-beaten, and discouraged. Howsoever, a certain Benedictin Monk offered to confute Lainez, and prove that the Position maintained by him, namely, That the Tribu∣nal of the Pope, is the same with that of Jesus Christ, was impious, and scandalous. But the Cardinal of Lorain, who had now changed his Designs, and Interests, moderated the zeal, and heats of both Parties; and the Legats laboured to pen such a Determination of that matter, as might by the subtilty, and ambiguity of those words seem to content all Parties: which Instrument though the Cardinal of Lorain seemed
to remain satisfied, yet the Canonists of Trent, and Pensioners of Rome made a thousand difficulties, imagining that the words did not screw or strain up the Papal Authority to its true Note, and degree. About this time Maximilian who was no great Friend to the Pope, having been lately chosen King of the Romans, sent his Ambassadour to Rome to give him notice of his Election; but not in the same method which his Predecessours had practised, who promised, and swore to whatsoever the Popes imposed upon them: for before he would pass that Point, he desired first to know what terms the Pope would require of him; to which answer was made by the Cardinals, That he should acknowledg his confirmation to the Pope's Authority, and swear Obedience to him in such manner, as his Predecessours had formerly practised; which though the Ambassadour in the name of his Master refused to do, in such strict sense, as the Pope required, and would onely promise Devo∣tion, Reverence, and compliance with the Apostolical Chair; yet the Pope was pleased to accept thereof, and interpret those Expressions to be equivalent to the term of Obedeince, and accordingly granted the Con∣firmation, which was never demanded, and accepted the Obedience, which was never offered. At a Congregation held on the 21th. of June, all things were prepa∣ring against the Session appointed for the 15th. of July following, that nothing might then obstruct the proceedings, or give occasion to de∣fer the time, as had formerly been done to the great dis-reputation of the Council, and scandal of its Enemies. The great difficulties, in the questions so often discussed, about Residences, and Institution of Bishops were still undecided; and therefore the great care then incumbent on the Legats was to frame, and pen those Points in such words, as might please at least the Plurality, or major part of the Congregation, which being tired out, and wearied with the frequent recital of those Argu∣ments Pro, and Con, were willing to accept of indifferent terms, or such, as might bear a dubious Interpretation, or such perhaps as contained no sense at all; and others were for having those Articles buried in silence; only the Spaniards remained unchangeable and unwearied, being still con∣stant to their first Principles. Howsoever, the Legats were resolved to exhibit their Decree about Residences, in the manner, they had already penned, namely, That all those, who have a Cure of Souls were obliged by the Commandment of God, to have a particular knowledg▪ and ac∣quaintance with every Member of their Flock; which not being to be performed but by a continuance in the Parish, or Diocese, it was thence inferred, and interpreted that Residences were by Divine Right. The second Point about Episcopal Institution was concluded in gene∣ral terms, that the Hierarchy of Bishops was an Ordinance of God. Howsoever these terms did not please the subtle, and hot-headed wits of neither side. The Spaniards did not think the words plain, and expli∣cite enough: and the Bishop of Tarante, and the other Favourers of Rome, who were jealous of the least shadow of that, which might infringe or abate the Papal Authority, were apprehensive, that such consequences might be deduced from those words, as might plainly infer, that the Orders of that Hierarchy were rather by Divine, than Papal Institution: but these People were more jealous of the Pope's Authority, than the Pope himself; for though this very form of words had been debated
above a hundred times at Rome, and approved, and proposed by the Le∣gats, yet these Canonists, and zealous favourers of Papirius were vio∣lent sticklers against and opposers of the Decree; howsoever the Assem∣bly by plurality of Voices passed the Decree, and ordered, that they should remain in the same form and words delivered. In fine, the 15th. of July which was the day of the Session being come, which had been so often adjourned, and with such impatience ex∣pected; all the points of Doctrine were▪ reduced to four Chapters, and eight Canons with Anathemas. The first established, that Ecclesiastical Ordination is a Sacrament: That under the New Testament there is but one visible Order of Men, which can offer the Sacrifice of the true, and real Body, and Blood of Jesus Christ: That there are several degrees higher, and lower of this Order: That Priesthood hath a character im∣pressed upon it; and inspires with it the Holy Ghost. That Unction is necessary at the institution of a Priest: That the Hierarchy of Priests is by Divine Right: That Bishops are superiour to Priests; That the Bishops, and Priests who are established by the Pope, or by Authority derived from him, are onely true, and Evangelical in their Orders. Then proceeding to the eight Canons which respect Reformation; the first was that about Residence, which had made so much noise, and disturbance, the words of which obliged every Pastor to be acquainted with and to feed his Flock; in explanation of which, this Canon forbad all long absence from their charge under severe penalties; howsoever, that clause was moderated with a Dispensation for three months, and with a proviso, unless the benefit, and service of the Church, and State should require it. The other Canons had respect onely to the collation and regulation of Orders: and that they were not to be conferred upon debauched persons, or such, as were unworthy of them; and directed the manner, and government of Seminaries, in which Priests were educated; with several other matters of little importance; all which passed, and were enacted in the Council without any opposition, or disturbance: though the Spaniards would never more be reconciled to the Cardinal of Lorain, for deserting their party, in the point of Residencies to which he had so often promised, and assured them of his constancy; but what he lost on one side, he gained on the other; the Legats, and favourers of Rome crying up his wisdom, and conduct, and true zeal to the Church and the Apostolical Sea. All Europe in the mean time was in great expectation of the issue of this Session, which had been preparing for the space of ten months, and with the wit, and contrivance of two or three hundred Prelats, and Divines. At the end of which, nothing could be more surprizing to the World, than to find their expectations so wholly defeated, and the pro∣duct of this mighty Machine, or Engine to be so inconsiderable as not to have yielded matter sufficient to have employed the brains of one intel∣ligent person for the space onely of a single Week: the contradictions which appeared in their Canons, and the weak preambles to all their conclusions were the common talk, and subject of sport and derision in all places, and administred matter and discourse for the Protestants to treat, and rally upon in their Sermons; particularly Vergere who had once been the Pope's Nuncio in Germany, but now become a preaching Minister in the Valtoline, (which is a Country of the Grisons, did with
great perspicuity, and strength of reason lay before his Flock the many false reasonings, and vain contestations amongst the Bishops, and the scandalous proceedings of the whole Council; the reports of which with all the particular passages he dispatched to all places, where the most Emi∣nent Divines, and Preachers of the Protestants resided; for he being a near Neighbour to Trent, was in a better capacity to receive true, and constant information of all passages, than those who resided at farther distances: for which the Pope and the Cardinal Moron were so offended at him; that they endeavoured by menaces to affright, and drive him to more remote parts: but he resolved still to continue his Station, notwithstanding several attempts, that were made upon his life. The Session being in this manner ended, the Legats designed to hasten all remaining Points, and contract them in such a compass, as might tend towards a speedy end, and conclusion of the Council. The points of Indulgences, Invocation of Saints, Images, and Purgatory were ga∣thered all into a bundle requiring no great examination, in regard that being matters which intrenched on the Interest of no Party, administred little cause of Dispute, or opposition: onely a Controversie arose about Clandestine Marriages, or such, as were contracted without the consent of Parents, which the French would have to be declared in themselves void, and null, by reason of the inconvenience, and ruins which such sort of Marriages have proved to certain Families in that Kingdom: but herein a difficulty arose, for that Marriage which is one of the seven Sa∣craments being once celebrated, is of force, and not to be again dissolved, but by Authority and dispensation of the Church. After divers de∣bates thereupon, the Bishop of Metz was so happy as to find a form of words for that Canon, which contented all Parties, which was this, That though the Church hath ever forbidden, and detested Clandestine Marriages, yet whosoever denies Clandestine Marriage to be a Sacra∣ment, let him be Anathema. The marriage of Priests admitted now of no farther difficulty; for though the Emperor, the King of France, and the Duke of Bavaria, demanded that priviledg in behalf of their People, yet that Point was now laid aside, and all instances in that matter were denied to be heard, or admitted to farther question, or exa∣mination in the Council. After this the Legats proposed thirty eight Articles in order to a Re∣formation, which contained the many abuses, and encroachments which Secular Princes had made upon the Rights of the Church: but the Car∣dinal of Lorain was for abbreviating the Articles, and for cutting off all those which might administer matter of Controversie, so that by a speedy dispatch thereof the Council might tend towards a conclusion; which caused many to wonder, that the zeal which he had so warmly evi∣denced at first for a Reformation, should so soon vanish and be evapo∣rated. A Copy of these Articles being communicated to the Ambassa∣dours, every one made his observations, reflections, and additions there∣unto, as was most consistent with the affairs of their respective Masters; For the chief Remarks and alterations of the Ambassadours tended to something which might abate the Power, and Authority of the Pope over the Ordinaries, and the jurisdiction of the Bishops themselves over the Civil and Municipal Courts. But the French were the most severe of any in the rules of Reformation. For they would have the number
of Cardinals restrained to twenty four; that the Nephews of Popes, during the life of the Pope should not be capable to receive a Cardinals Hat, that Cardinals should be made uncapable to hold Bishopricks; that criminal causes against Bishops should not be judg'd at other Tribunals, than such as are within the Dominions of France. That Bishops should be endued with plenary Power to give absolution in all Cases. That Ecclesiastical persons should not be concerned, or intermedle in secular Affairs; and in short, that they do no act or thing which may infringe the Law of France, or intrench on the Liberties of the Gallican Church. These particulars for reformation of the Church thus delivered, were to be prepared against the next Session, and as resolved so to be enacted; and for Reformation of the Courts of Princes it was by agreement of the Ambassadours re∣served as the chief matter, and subject for a subsequent Session. These Proposals were in no manner acceptable to the Pope who could not endure such fatal attempts on the Power and prerogative of the Church; to avoid which nothing could be a defence, or remedy, but onely the dissolution of the Council; to which end he earnestly wrote to all his Nuncios residing in the Courts of forein Princes, commanding them to use their utmost art, and skill to persuade the respective Princes to be aiding, and concurring herein. And farther, gave orders to his Legats at Trent to grant freely whatsoever could not be refused, and with all decent speed to put a final end and conclusion to the Council: but this Design encountred some rubs, and obstructions from the Spanish Ambassadour and others of that Party, who complained of the private Cabals which the Legats held with certain Cardinals, and other Confi∣dents, in exclusion of the Spanish Interest. But their complaints were little regarded by the Legats, whose greatest incumbence then was, to satisfy the Bishops, without whose concurrence the Council could not be dissolved. For now the intention of the Bishops being to make use of this occasion to enlarge their Power, and obtain some priviledges which were derogatory to the Papal Chair; made that point of gaining the good will of the Bishops to be the more difficult; because that their pretences of subjecting Monasteries and regulation of Friers, and certain priviledged Churches to the Episcopal Jurisdiction, which were exempted from it by Orders of the Pope, found most opposition from the Gene∣rals of the respective Orders; and indeed the Ambassadours themselves did not much favour this Demand, which seem'd too highly to advance and exalt the pride and power of the Bishops. Whilest these things were under Debate, the French Ambassadours re∣ceived a large Pacquet from their Master, in answer to the late Propo∣sals projected for a Model to reform abuses in the Courts of Princes: the which much displeased the King, and his Ministers of State, who wondered at the daring attempts of the Clergy on the King's Royal Power and Authority under a pretence of Reformation, contenting them∣selves in the mean time with a slight, and superficial review of their own abuses: and therefore persuaded the Fathers of the Council, to at∣tend unto matters purely Spiritual, and to such Acts as might serve to reform corruptions crept into the Church, and to correct the debauch∣ed lives of Priests, and Monks, (the scandal of which had been the cause of all the Schism in the Church) rather than to intermedle with the sacred Prerogative of Kings, or abett, and maintain the Clergy in
their opposition and contumacy against their Sovereign. Thus much the Ambassadours had Orders to signifie to the Council, with farther In∣structions, that in case they should notwithstanding this intimation, pro∣ceed to encroach on the King's Regalia, that then they should make their Protest, and retire to Venice; all which the Ambassadours made known to the Cardinal of Lorain, and declared to the Legats, requiring the Bishops to supersede their pretensions to those honours, and priviledges which were the sole Right, and Prerogative of Kings. The Bishops who were resolutely bent to maintain those Emoluments which so nearly concerned them, protested before the Legats, that they would neither enter more into the Congregation, nor give their advice, or Voice in any matter, unless they were first secured of the Rights to which they pretend∣ed, which a hundred of them obliged themselves by solemn Oath never to remit. All which violent Contests took up so much time, that when the 15th. of September was come which was the day before the Session,1563. nothing was duly prepared in order to pass into a Canon; and there∣fore the time was prorogued until the 11th. of November, that so in the interim the Cardinal of Lorain might have sufficient time to make his Journey to Rome, where he was greatly desired by the Pope, and all that Party. The Cardinal being arrived at Rome, was received with all the joy, and honours imaginable, he was lodged in the Pope's Palace and im∣mediately in Person visited by him, which was a Complement that ne∣ver Pope had made before to any under that character of a Cardinal. After which there passed such kindness between them at several private Conferences, that the Pope seemed to refuse nothing which might en∣gage, and oblige the Cardinal, having at his instance granted an aliena∣tion from the Church of three hundred thousand Livers a year to the King of France, which Bene had formerly been demanded, and sollicited with great importunity, but could never be obtained, until this endear∣ment happened between the Cardinal, and the Pope. For now their mutual intimacy, and friendship began to be so great, that the Pope opened his bosom and heart to him, giving him to understand, that the Council being become a burden to him, which he could not support, he had therefore sent a private Bull to his Legats either to prorogue, or adjourn it to some other place, as should be most agreeable to the state of Affairs: but the Cardinal who professed to have the same Interest, for that his occasions required his presence in France, yet could not concur in Opinion either to have the Council prorogued, or adjourned to an o∣ther place; but rather to dispose matters in order to a Conclusion, which might easily be effected, by laying aside all those Points which might administer matter, or cause of Dispute; promising to contribute to this Design all the Power, and Interest he had with the Ambassadours and Bishops, that so every thing might terminate happily, and to the satis∣faction of the Court of Rome. The Pope being overjoyed with these Promises, was comforted in the highest degree by the consolatory ex∣pressions of the Cardinal; in return for which, he promised to use all his endeavours to create him his Successour, by engaging such a num∣ber of Cardinals in his favour as should secure his Election; promising in the mean time to make him the chief Instrument of all his grand De∣signs. Thus was the one elevated in his hopes, and expectations of high
preferments; and the other encouraged against the refractory oppo∣sition of the French Prelats, who were now grown mutinous, and the Papal Authority rendered contemptible to them. For at that time Chatillion had voluntarily renounced his character of Cardinal, and cal∣led himself by the title of Count de Beauvais, and in contempt of that Dignity, was married in the habit of a Cardinal, as if he intended by that action to have rendered that Honour ridiculous. The French Prelats also being disgusted, five of them retired from Trent, having easily obtained their license from the Legats, whose chief endea∣vours, and labour was now to appease the Sedition, and mutinies of the Bi∣shops, who were come to that unbridled usurpation, and entrenchments on the temporal jurisdiction of Princes, and Magistrates, that they constrain∣ed the Legats to read in the Congregation, that Model of a Decree which they had projected for Reformation of Secular Magistrates; the parti∣culars of which were so licentious, and extravagant, as deserve to be noted for discovery of that Pride which reigned amongst the Clergy of those days, the contents of which were these: That a Clergy-man was not liable to the Sentence of a Secular Court, nor could he be tryed at that Bar, though he himself should consent thereunto, that the Secu∣lar Judges should not intermedle with causes relating to Matrimony, to Heresie, to Tenths, Advowsons, or rights of Patronage, nor with any other causes whether civil or criminal, wherein the Ecclesiastical Cen∣sure was or might be concerned, That no Injunction be issued out of a Secular Court, to hinder the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical, in points of Excommunication, though taken out against the Emperor himself or against Kings. Nor shall the Civil Law contradict, or interfere with the Ecclesiastical in matters which relate to the Affairs, Goods, or possessions of the Church; which is endued with a Power of constituting its own Courts, and Officers of several degrees, ranks, and qualities. That the Clergy shall be exempt from Taxes, Imposts, Tithes, or Subsidies what∣soever. That Princes or Magistrates shall not have Power to quarter Sol∣diers, Officers, or Horse within the Houses, or on the possessions of the Clergy, with several other Articles of like tenure, which were so repug∣nant to the Power of Kings, that is seemed to shake their Authority, and set up an other Soveraignty within their own Kingdoms indepen∣dant of the Regal Jurisdiction: for which reason the French Ambassa∣dours having made their Protest against these Articles in the space of fif∣teen days afterwards, retired from Trent to Venice, according to the Or∣ders which they had received from France. The news of this retreat of the Ambassadours was very unwelcome to the Court of Rome, and especially to the Cardinal of Lorain, who apprehended that this unexpected accident would much eclipse his Cre∣dit, and Reputation with the Pope, and defeat the hopes he had con∣ceived of his new preferment; which that he might still keep up, he promised the Pope to write and accordingly did write unto the King in such terms, as plainly evidenced, how far he had abandoned the Prin∣ciples he brought from France, and sacrificed them to a new aad strange Interest which he had acquired at Rome. After which the Pope wrote to the Legats to prepare for the following Session according to the time appointed, and to commence immediately after the return of the Cardinal to Trent; and then speedily to wind all things up, so as to put
a final conclusion to the Council, in which there seemed no great diffi∣culty, for that the French, and Germans being drawn off, they had none to deal with, but onely with the Spaniards. Howsoever the Pope re∣senting highly the retirement of the five French Bishops, accused them of Heresie, and cited them to make their defence before the Tribunal of Inquisition at Rome: in like manner he issued out Process against Jane Queen of Navarre Widow of Anthony of Bourbon upon an accusation of Heresie, in order to depose her from her Crown and Dignity; the which Decrees were divulged, and affixed on all publick places. And though the Cardinal did in dislike thereof, represent unto the Pope, that this manner of proceeding was contrary to the received Maxims of France, and the liberties of the Gallican Church, and that it was not seasonable to proceed with such rigour against a Queen, who was an Ally of France, and the Relict of one lately slain in Battel against the Hugenots; and that it was too early to summon Bishops to receive judgment at Rome, against which the Council of France had so lately protested: yet the Cardinal having performed this Office in a cold, and perfunctory man∣ner, as if he intended rather to acquit himself with his Master, than gain his Point, gave no satisfaction to the Government of France; which therefore making use of the Ambassadour Monsieur d' Oisel in this Ne∣gotiation; his endeavours succeeded so well; that the Process against the Queen of Navarre and the five Bishops, was superseded, and the whole matter buried in silence: And that the King might shew, how little he regarded the Decrees of the Council; he proceeded actu∣ally to alienate the Lands of the Church, before the License and Grant of the Pope arrived his hands, and raised thereupon two millions and five hundred thousand Livres. By this time the Cardinal of Lorain was returned, and the eleventh of November came, which was the day appointed for the Session; after the usual ceremonies of which were per∣formed, the Article about Clandestine Marriages was read, and after some Contests thereupon, was passed by plurality of Voices: but yet it did not pass the raillery of some witty Men; who reflected on the words of the Canon, which pronounces Anathema against those, who deny Clan∣destine Marriage to be a true Sacrament; and yet in the conclusion saith, that the Church hath ever disapproved and detested it. Afterwards the Decrees of General Reformation were read, which are too long to be here inserted, upon passing of which, the Cardinal of Lorain declared, that the French Nation did so far accept them, as they were not preju∣dicial to the Priviledges, Rights, and antient Constitutions of the Kings of France. Howsoever, amongst all the Chapters of General Reforma∣tion, there was not one Point of those many touched, which the People of divers Nations required; nothing being therein contained, or resol∣ved, but what served to advance the Pope's Authority over the Clergy, and warrant the Power of the Clergy in oppression of the People. A∣mongst these Points of General Reformation, there was one which made void all Titles, or Rights to Benefices which were obtained by Simony, which in the Opinion of some, would have ruined the greatest part of the Pope's Annates, or yearly Income, had it been strictly observed: but this was as duly obeyed, as the Canon which prohibits Cardinals to enjoy plurality of benefices; in both which, time, and experience have shewn us, how little either the one, or the other hath been re∣garded.
Another Chapter which ordained that those who had publick∣ly sinned, should do publick Penance, seemed, as if it designed to re∣store the Primitive Discipline; but that was again spoiled by this clause, Ni aliter Episcopo videatur, with these, and matters of the like nature, this Session concluded. And now the Scene of Affairs began much to change their face; for every one growing weary of Disputes, passed every thing almost with∣out examination, or contest. The Pope was infinitely tired, and faint∣ed under the burthen of the Council. The French who now expected no benefit from this Assembly, followed the dictates of the Cardinal of Lorain, who had intirely devoted himself to the Papal Interest. The Germans had long since abandoned the Council, despairing of any good, or cure from it: onely the Spaniards to whom delays have been always pleasing, and to whom by force of gravity all fatigues of long con∣tinuance are rendered Ease, were those, who willingly would have protracted the longer course of the Council; but not being able to stem the Torrent, with which other Nations precipitated the Council to a conclusion, they yielded to the same humour, and concurred with the Cardinal of Lorain, and others in their Design to put an end to the Council at the next Session. The Points about Indulgences, on which Luther had grounded his first quarrel with the Pope, Adoration of Saints, Purgatory, Images and Fasts, were all slubber'd over, and passed in the space of fifteen days: The greatest difficulty was that, which related to the Reformation of Princes, against which the Ambassadours of France had so seriously protested; which being a knotty, and insuperable Point, it was resolved to leave it undecided: and in lieu thereof to perform something for the better satisfaction of the Clergy; allowing unto the Bishops some en∣largement of Power over their respective Chapters. But as to the De∣cree which was drawn up, for reforming, and moderating the Authority of Princes, they thought fit in lieu thereof to renew the tenure of the Antient Canons, not enforcing them with Menaces, or Anathemas, but onely with exhortations to Princes, to conserve, and maintain the Church in its priviledges, concluding with gentle terms full of respect to the Sovereign Power. The expressions of this Article being thus moderated to the satisfa∣ction (as the Cardinal of Lorain imagined) of temporal Princes, he en∣deavoured to persuade the French Ambassadours to return again from Venice to Trent, which they absolutely refused to do; for though the Article for reforming Princes' was revoked, yet several other Acts being pass'd to the prejudice of the Gallican Church, the Ambassadours pretend∣ed that their return and presence, would imply or argue a concurrence, or an assent to all the Decrees of the Council. Notwithstanding this refusal, the Council proceeded forward to consider of the reformation of Friers, Monks, Abbots, and other Religious; in respect to whom, few Rules were altered, onely some additions were made, according to the Proposals and desires of the Generals of the respective Orders. All other things (as we have said) proceeded smoothly, the Point of Indulgences being superficially touched; for considering the many difficulties comprehended in that question, which might, if distinctly treated, have taken up a long time in the examination of every Point;
it was thought fit to couch all in few words, prohibiting the abuses there∣of in general terms. Thus did matters hasten towards an end, but what did more eagerly precipitate a conclusion, was the Pope's indis∣position of health; for it was feared in case the Pope should die du∣ring the Session, that then the Council would by the example of that of Constance, take upon themselves a Power of electing an other; so that notwithstanding the opposition of the Spaniards (who desired to proceed with gravity, and phlegm, until they could receive an answer of what they had wrote to Madrid) the ultimate Session was appoint∣ed for the 9th. of December: but in regard that time seemed too long to Persons impatient of an end, the day was shortned to the third of that month, and to be continued on the day following in case the Affairs seemed too weighty and various to be ended at one sitting. The Spanish Ambassadour with fourteen of his Bishops not being able to withstand this general Torrent, promised to concur with the others on these two conditions; First, That the Pope should regulate all matters not deter∣mined by this Council; And secondly, That in the Chapters of Indul∣gences, the word (gratis) should not be used, lest it should prejudice the Indulgences granted by the Crusada of Spain. All the difficulties being now overcome, the Session was held on Fri∣day the 3d. of December, at which, after the Sermon, and usual Ceremo∣nies, all the Acts prepared according to form were read, but being too long for the work of one day, the remaining part was left until the day following: at the conclusion of all, fearing lest in any of the Decrees of Reformation, some words should have escaped, which might seem to en∣trench, or diminish the Pope's Authority; it was determined that the In∣terpretation of the Canons, and the liberty to dispense with any of them should remain in the breast, and at the free pleasure and will of the Pope; in confirmation of which it was publickly declared by com∣mon Voice, that the intention of the Council in all, and every of their Canons was to maintain the Papal Dignity in its antient Power, and Authority, without any abatement, or diminution thereof. And final∣ly an Act was read, and published, whereby it was declared▪ That the place, or rank which any Ambassadour or Representative had holden, or possessed in that Council, should give no Title, or ground of claim for the like degree, or place for the future; the Council not pretending to determine any thing in prejudice of the rights and priviledges of Kings, Princes, or States. Lastly, at the breaking up of the Council, Excom∣munications and Anathemas were read against all Hereticks in general, mentioning Luther, Zuinglius, or others in particular. And then the period was closed with loud acclamations in praise of the Pope, the Emperor, the Kings, the Legats, and all the Fathers: which was per∣formed in a different manner to the practice of other Councils, which ended with acclamations, and blessings pronounced with the confused noise, or murmurings of the whole Assembly; but at Trent it was per∣formed by way of Responses, or Antiphonas; in which the Cardinal of Lorain pronounced the first Sentence, and was again answered by all the Prelats; which being the part of a Deacon, or Chanter, seemed an Of∣fice too mean to be personated by his Eminence, and not onely gave subject of railery to the World, but subjected him to a thousand Cen∣sures at his return home, where it was charged upon him, that in the
Acclamations, or Antiphonas, then made, there was no mention of the King of France. And in the last place it was ordained, That all the Prelats should sign the Decrees before their departure upon pain of Ex∣communication; for execution whereof a form of Congregation being ap∣pointed, the Hands, or subscriptions consisted of four Legats, two Car∣dinals, three Patriarchs, twenty five Arch-Bishops, two hundred sixty eight Bishops, seven Abbots, thirty nine Procurators, or Substitutes in behalf of such as were absent, and seven Generals of the Religious Or∣ders: the subscriptions of the Ambassadours were not required, to avoid the late Contestations, and Disputes about place. And yet notwith∣standing this number of Bishops, there was not one of Germany present in the last Convocation, which was far the most numerous, and solemn of any: for Hungary, or Poland, there were very few Bishops present; there appeared not one for Sweden, Denmark, England, or the Low-Coun∣tries. The Bishops of France which came onely towards the latter end, being joyned with the Bishops of Spain, could not in all make above the number of forty; so that of the two hundred and odd Bishops of which this Council was composed, there was at least one hundred and fifty of them Italians, who were Creatures, and Pensioners of the Pope. For which reason this Assembly was justly termed the Council of the Pope, and his Italians. The Council being in this manner broken up every one returned to his home, and Country; and all things being concluded to the satisfa∣ction of the Pope, caused great joy in the Court of Rome, where the Legats, and the other Favourers thereof were received and welcomed with applause, and commendations; and the Pope to gratifie his Friends, who had taken such pains, and served so well in this important Affair, promoted nineteen of them to the Dignity of Cardinals, and amongst the rest the Arch-Bishop of Taranto was in a singular manner remembred, and gratified. Nor had the Pope so much taken up his thoughts with the Council, but that being transported with a spirit of munificence and Building, he could attend to raise, and continue his Name by mighty, and Excel∣lent Structures: and figuring to himself a model of the antient Rome, as if he intended to have restored it to its antique glory, he command∣ed the antient Monuments to be conserved, the Streets restored, and at his great expence the Aqueducts which brought the Water from distant places to the City to be again repaired. It was this Pope who re-built the Baths of Diocletian upon Mount Quirinus, converting them into a Church, and to a Monastery, which he personally consecrated. He fortified the Castle of St. Angelo and repaired the ruins of the Castle of Civita Vecchia, and made many other Structures for convenience, and Ornament of the City. 1564.Whilest he was intent upon these Affairs, a certain number of Vil∣lains designed to have murthered him, and to have perpetrated this wickedness at the time, when he was busied in reading a Paper which they were to consign into his hand: the Person who was to deliver him the Writing was one Acolti; and the Contents, or substance there∣of was a persuasion to resign up his Papal Authority into the hands of such a Person, whom they should describe to him; for they pretended to have received a Revelation, and seen a Vision, that the Successour
to this Pope should be of an Angelical Spirit, elected by the common consent of all Christendom, that he should become the Universal Mo∣narch of all the World, reform the Manners of Mankind, teach them to live up to the perfection of humane Life; and in short, convert all People and Nations to the Christian Faith. Acolti having delivered his Paper, and being about to strike the fatal blow, his heart failed him: upon which one of the Assassinates discovering the Conspiracy, they were all seized, and justly executed with such torments as the blackness of the Crime deserved. Not long after this being on the 10th. of December, 1565. the Pope died, having governed five years, eleven months and a half; he had du∣ring his time created forty five Cardinals, some out of favour to Princes, and others in reward of their own worth, and merit; and had he lived, his intention was to have made up his number a full hundred, so that they might have been called, Centum Patres. But he died in the 77th. year of his age, and his body was buried in the Baths of Diocletian, lately converted into a Church by him, and called Sancta Maria Angelo∣rum. And the Sea was vacant twenty nine days. PIƲS V. PIƲS the Fourth being dead, and his funeral Rites after the accustomed manner being performed, the Cardinals entered the Conclave to the number of fifty two, and by common consent with the concurrence of Cardinal Borromeus (afterwards canonized for a Saint) and of Cardinal Farnese, the two leading Men at that time, elected Anthony Ghisler to the Succession in the Papal Chair. This An∣thony Ghisler so called by Papyrius Massonius, but by Cicarella named Michael, was born of mean and ordinary Parents at a Town called Boschi, not far from Alexandria della paglia, which lies between Montferrat, and the State of Milan; he was entered into the Order of Jacobin Friers at the age of fourteen years, and then changed his name to Michael; he was ordained Priest at Genua, and proved a most strenuous Preacher, and Master of a most powerful, and moving Eloquence; he was after∣wards constituted Prior of his Convent of Vigevani, and Commissary of the Inquisition; he was by Paul the 4th. made Bishop of Nepi, and then Cardinal de Sancta Sabina, but in regard, that he was born at Boschi not above six miles distant from Alexandria, he was commonly stiled Car∣dinal Alessandrino; and then as we have said, without much faction, or de∣bate, he was with common consent on the 7th. of Jan. 1566. created Pope. All the Writers of his Life, give him the commendation of unble∣mished Virtue, of a strict, and severe Devotion, and of a most excellent Spirit in the government of the Church; but for a more perfect Chara∣cter of him take the words of Papyrius Massonius, which are these: He did neever seek, or pursue honours, but walking always in the direct, and even path of Virtue, he was always courted and overta∣ken by them: the Dignity of Cardinal had changed nothing in his humour, and served onely to render his Virtues more conspicuous to
the World: for he still reserved the same sweetness and affability in his nature, the same severity in his life and discipline, and the same freedom, and candour in his advice and Counsel, as he had maintained in his private condition, having always a more strict regard to Justice, and Truth, than to the favour, and flattery of great Personages; and in delivering his Advice, as his words were plain, and sincere, so his gestures, and countenance enforced them with prevailing Authority. Thus was his advancement to the Papal Authority raised on the pe∣destal of his own merit, so that there is no place left for doubt, but that his Election proceeded from Divine Providence, or Inspiration, rather than from the judgment, or direction of Men: for he had no fumes, or vanities of an antient Family to boast of, no grandeur of richness, nor favour of Princes, which might assist, and concur to his Instalment, and prepare his way to the Papal Sea; onely the same Vertue which had accompanied him from his youth, gave him favour in the eyes of the World, and lead him by the hand to this degree of Sovereignty. On the Festival of St. Anthony being then of the age of sixty two, he was Crowned Pope but not without the fears, and apprehensions of the World, who imagined, that his quick, and hot nature being prone to sudden anger, being conjoyned with that severity of Life which he had always professed, would render him as froward, and impetuous as Paul IV. but his teasty nature which was subject to sudden anger, was as easily, and quickly past; and then his good nature returning again, he would execute his passion, which being free from Pride and Ambition, and worldly considerations, did never transport him beyond the limits of Decency, and Reason. Being now seated in the Papal Chair, the Establishment, and Ornament whereof he esteemed to be holiness of Life in himself, and purity, and religious deportment in the Clergy; he endeavoured to put those Rules of Piety into practice, which the Coun∣cil of Trent had prescribed for reformation of Manners, and Discipline amongst Priests, and religious Persons. In order unto which, he design∣ed to banish all the Cortesans from Rome, which was a work of no small adventure at that time, when those Ladies of pleasure possessed the most sumptuous, and magnificent Palaces of the City, and were favoured by the Patronage of some Senators, and Cardinals, who to hinder that un∣kind action, alledged, that the Church would not onely lose a conside∣rable Revenue, which did arise from the pains of that industrious sort of People, but also Strangers be deprived of those entertainments of Musick, and Dancing; which they promised to themselves during their residences at Rome: howsoever, though these considerations did not wholly avail with the Pope, yet they did moderate the rigour of his Sentence; so that some of the Cortesans were permitted License to re∣main, and abide in a certain corner of the City being forbidden to pass through the high, and publick streets, and to frequent any of the Churches, excepting two or three which were appointed for them, where Masses were allowed and Sermons preached on Texts proper to their condition, and in order to reduce them to contrition, and conversion of life. As he was severe in this manner against the Cortesans, so he carried a strict Eye over all the Clergy; enjoyning all such as enjoyed any Bene∣fices
from the Church to have the Crown of their head constantly sha∣ved, and never to wear Silk in any of their Habits and Garments, un∣less in their Stoles and Vestments in which they officiated, or celebrated Mass; the like modesty, and grave deportment he ordained amongst all the Officers of his own Family, where he appointed three Lectures of Divinity to be read every Week for entertainment of the Clergy: and commanded his Suisses, and Soldiers of his Life-guard to comport themselves with Civility towards all, without Extortion, or Inso∣lence. As to his own Relations, he commanded them all to retire from Rome, having provided for them in other places with small Pensions; excepting onely one young Nephew, who was a Student in the Ger∣man College; and an other called Michael Bonnello who being a youth of excellent parts, and a hopeful disposition, was at the great instance of Friends promoted to the degree of a Cardinal. A certain rich Jew at Rome called Elias, one learned in the Rabbins and Mosaical Law, and Master of a Synagogue, did usually frequent the So∣ciety of this Cardinal Alexandrino, before he came to be Pope; between whom questions being often controverted about Religion: the Cardinal by the force of Reason and the Example of his holy life so prevailed at length upon the Jew, that he promised to become a Christian, and pro∣fess that faith, so soon, as this Cardinal should be created Pope: the which promise Alexandrino immediately challenged so soon as he was promoted to the Papal Chair: the Jew was not able to resist or deny the engagement; but believing that this unexpected advancement of his Friend to the Popedom, was an impulse of the Holy Ghost for his conversion, did immediately profess the Christian Faith; and together with his Wife, three Children, and a Nephew were all baptized by the Pope himself about the Feast of Pentecost in the year 1566. And thus much shall serve for a Character in general of the humour, and tempe∣rament of this Pope Pius V. Now as to the management of his temporal Power; he was extream∣ly zealous against the Protestants on the one side, and against the Turks on the other: For as to the first he sent Cardinal Commendone to be present at a General Diet in Germany, convened by the Emperour Maximilian and be their assistant to the Roman Catholicks, and offer such cautions, and Caveats in their proceedings, as might defend, and secure the Papal Authority, as much as was possible. Then to subject and subdue the Protestants in France, he furnished King Charles IX. with an Army of four thousand four hundred Foot; and nine hundred Horse under the command of the Count St. Fleur: and farther to supply the occasions of this King with Money, he gave license to sell, and alienate so much of the Church Lands in France, as might suffice for the carrying on of this War, in which Trust of Sales the Cardinals of Lorain, and Bourbon, being made Commissioners, the Lands belonging to the Church, which were then sold amounted to the value of one hundred and fifty thousand Crowns of yearly Revenue. In the next place, it was this Pope Pius V. who out of his great zeal, excommunicated Elizabeth Queen of England, with all her Subjects of the same profession. And in the year 1569. conferred on Cosmo de Me∣dicis Duke of Florence, the Title of Great Duke of Tuscany; in Grati∣tude
for which the Duke coming to Rome to acknowledg the honour done him, was there crowned with a Ducal Crown by the hands of the Pope, about the Circle of which this Motto was engraven, Pius quintus Pont. Max. ob eximiam Dilectionem, ac Catholicae Religio∣nis Zelum praecipuumque Justitiae studium donavit. Then to demonstrate his zeal against the Turks, the prevailing Ene∣mies over Christianity under the conduct of Solyman the Magnificent, who at that time was entered into Hungary with an Army of two hundred thousand fighting Men: He instantly desired, and exhorted the Christian Princes unto Unity amongst themselves, that they might repulse the common Enemy of the Christian Faith: and to shew that he would not persuade others to that performance, in which he did not readily offer himself to be an Example; he freely sent unto the Empe∣rour a Present of ninety thousand Ducats, with promise to furnish fifty thousand Crowns more every year, so long as the Wars should con∣tinue. And indeed at that time there needed Counsel, and Arms, and Mo∣ney to resist Solyman, who had besieged the strong Fortress of Segeth, which was then commanded by Count Serini, whose Family like that of Hanibal against the Romans, had ever sworn enmity, and irrecon∣cileable hatred to the Turks. It happened, that though Solyman died in the Siege against this City, yet the assaults, and force were continued by Mahomet the Grand Visier, who concealed the death of Solyman, until he had first advised the news thereof unto his Successour Sultan Selim the Second, during which time, he plied the Town with such continual storms, as reduced the Defendants to the last extremity; and to a resolution of selling their Lives at the dearest rate; which they accordingly performed by a Sally of five hundred Men, in which all of them being slain with their Leader Count Serini, the Town was soon after surrendered into the hands of the Turk. It was now the year 1570. when Sultan Selim succeeding his Father the Great Solyman, and being a Prince as ambitious and as desirous to enlarge his Empire, as was his Predecessour, resolved upon the Conquest of Cyprus, then belonging to the Venetian Dominions. But that he might not seem to attempt the Countries of his Neighbour, before he had first denounced War; he dispatched a Chiaus to Venice, demanding the sur∣render of the Kingdom of Cyprus, as a dependance on the City of Con∣stantinople, and a Member of the Grecian Empire, to which he had gained a Title by the power of his Sword. This Message or Sum∣mons being delivered in full Senate, was seconded by many Incur∣sions made into Dalmatia, and Sclavonia, and great preparations for transporting Soldiers into Cyprus. The Venetians being thus assault∣ed by the potent Enemy of Christendom, applyed themselves to the Pope, desiring him that he would be pleased out of his paternal com∣miseration to the Christian Cause, to administer some effectual help from his own hand, and exhort all other Christian Princes to enter into a League, and unite their Forces against the common Enemy of the Christian Faith: In compliance with this Request, the Pope prevailed with the King of Spain to furnish the Venetians with fifty Sail of Gal∣leys under the Command of John Andrew d' Oria, a valiant, and expe∣rienced General, requiring him to obey Mark Anthony Colonna Com∣mander
in Chief of the Pope's Gallies; and accordingly in the Month of August 1570. a very considerable Force met at the Rendezvouz in Candia consisting of one hundred and eighty Gallies, eleven Galeasses, and six Ships of War. But the Turks being more forward in this Expe∣dition, had a Month before that time landed a formidable Army in the Island of Cyprus; where after having taken the Cities of Nicosia, and Famagosta with great effusion of blood, they made themselves Masters of the whole Island; whilest in the mean time the two great Comman∣ders Colonna and D' Oria, being at variance, for D' Oria refused to yield to Colonna, the design was frustrated, and the Fleets returned home without any Action considerable in that Voyage, which verified the truth of that saying of Livy, Quam plurium imperium bello inutile. How∣ever his ill success did not discourage these Allies from making farther trial of their fortune; for being all concerned to resist the Turk, they re∣newed their League again for the succeeding year which was An. 1571. And that they might prevent the misunderstandings which the year be∣fore had happened between the two Generals; it was agreed, that Don John d' Austria, who was natural Brother to the King of Spain should be Commander, or Generalissimo of the whole Navy, that Mark Anthony Colonna General of the Pope's Gallies, should be his Lieutenant, and ac∣cordingly preparations being made, Messina in the Island of Sicily was appointed for the place of Rendezvouz, where about the Month of August the whole Fleet joined together, consisting of one hundred Vene∣tian light Gallies, 6 Galleasses, two Ships, besides Brigantines, Felucas and other smaller Vessels under Dominico a Nobleman of Venice. The Pope's Gallies were twelve, commanded by Mark Anthony Colonna, and the Fleet or Spain commanded by Don John d' Austria consisted of eighty one Gallies, amongst which the three Gallies of Malta were comprehend∣ed, and twenty two Sail of Ships. With this Force this mighty Fleet departed from Messina on the 16th. of September 1571. and sailed to Corfu a safe Port belonging to the Venetians in the Adriatick Sea: where having advice that the Turks Armata, was in the Gulf of Lepanto; they weighed Anchor, and stood directly for that place, where on the 3d▪ of October they joined Battel with the Turks, and gave them that memo∣rable overthrow; which hath ever since disabled them from forming any considerable Force at Sea against the Christians: for in that fight the which continued not above five hours, the most formidable Fleet that was ever equipped, or set out from Constantinople, was destroyed; for they lost one hundred and seventeen Gallies, eighty Brigantines, or smaller Vessels which were sunk, or burn'd, or put ashoar, forty Sail of Gallies, or thereabouts were taken in the pursuit. Of the Turks were killed thirty two thousand Men, amongst which were many Bashaws, and Beglerbeges, and three thousand five hundred Captives were taken, and fifteen thousand poor Christians were released, who had been chained to the Oar in the Gallies of the Turks: Of the Christians after the fight was ended, upon the numbers wanting in every Vessel, the account of the slain amounted to seven thousand six hundred fifty six. This signal Victory was attributed as much to the devout Prayers, and Benediction of the Pope, as to the valour of the Soldiers, and con∣duct of the Captains: the report of which as it filled all Europe with joy, so it made way for the glories of Don John, who was received in∣to
Messina with all the Triumphs, and Festivals which that City could express; also Antonio Colonna was with the like honour, and triumph re∣ceived at Rome. Nor did the Venetian General want such encourage∣ments and honours, as that Republick commonly bestows in reward of Valour and Merit; In memory of which signal Victory, they stamped divers Medals with this Inscription, Anno Magnae Navalis Victoriae Dei gratiâ contra Turcas. This memorable Victory was obtained in the time of this Pius V. who was certainly one of the best of the Popes, and therefore I know not why we may not say without offence to any; that this happy suc∣cess might be given in reward of the Devotion, and Piety of this Pope; for I am persuaded that God hath a particular care of godly Kings, and Princes, for whose sake as he often blesseth their people, so he bestows some memorable blessings on them of signal Remark in their Reign. On which persuasion, I am apt to believe, that as God bestowed this Vi∣ctory on the Christians in the time of this Pius V. against that great Sultan Selim II. So now in these our days, he hath given Victory, and unexpected success to the Christians before the Walls of Vienna a∣gainst Mahomet IV. in reward of the great Piety, and Devotion of Leopold the Emperour, whose Devotion, and Prayers joyned to the Arms of the King of Poland, and of other Princes have operated Mi∣racles, and delivered Germany in a wonderful manner from the power of the Turk. And yet notwithstanding the religious temper of this Pope, we find that he excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, as far as his Bull would o∣perate he deposed her from Royal Dignities, and conferred her Crown on Mary Queen of Scots; and persuaded Philip King of Spain, to seize on the effects of the English Merchants at Antwerp, and other parts of the Low-Countries, and to assist the Catholick Subjects in England in their godly,Lib. 3. cap. 9. and religious Conspiracies, as Gabutius calls them, a∣gainst the Queen their natural Sovereign. Pius oblatam occasionem haud contemnendam esse ratus, efflatigabat ab Rege ut Anglorum in Eli∣zabetham pie conspirantium studia foveret. Thus we see, how far a mistaken zeal may transport good Men, which though it may in some measure excuse from the aggravation of a Crime, yet it cannot prove sufficient to set Men entirely upright at the great day of the just Ballance. This Pope added also to his other Excellencies▪ the Virtue of loving wife, and learned Men, and such as were endued with a vivacity, and acuteness of parts; for he scarce preferred any to considerable Dignity, but such as were excellent in some degree or other; and of the twenty one Cardinals which he created at three several times, there were five of them at least who were Men of extraordinary Abilities, and famous in their Generation. He founded certain publick places for Learning, and Piety, amongst which he endowed a College in the University of Pavia, for the Edu∣cation of Youth, and affixed over it the Arms of the Ghislers; at Boschi the place of his Birth, he built a Monastery for Dominican Friers, and endowed it with a competent Revenue; and to demonstrate his grati∣tude to his Antient Benefactors, he created a Magnificent Sepulcre in memory of Paul V. by whom he was created Cardinal: and in short
he made many new Buildings, and repaired several that were decayed in the Vatican, and both within, and without the City of Rome. After all which about the middle of March 1572. he became indi∣sposed by a stoppage of Urin, of which he commonly had a fit in that Month; the which illness encreasing upon him gave him notice, that his end approached, from which time converting all his thoughts to holy, and pious meditations, he spent the short remainder of his time in the preparation of his Soul for death, which happened on the first of May following; the same day he died, his Body was embowel'd, and three little stones found at the neck of his bladder, which the Physiti∣ans declared to be the cause of his death. He was generally lamented by all, and especially by vertuous Men for considering his principles, his Enemies had nothing worse to object, than that he gave a Dispensation to Philip King of Spain to marry with the Daughter of his Sister and of Maximilian his near Kinsman, and yet would never be induced to consent unto the Marriage of Margaret of Va∣lois Sister of the King of France, with Henry King of Navarre, making the difference of Religion a greater bar to Marriage, than the degrees of con∣sanguinity forbidden by the Levitical Law. The day after his death his Body being clothed in the habit of a Jacobin was carried into the Church of St. Peter, where the people as∣sembled in great numbers to render him Honour, and Veneration, every one touching their Beads, and Rosaries at his Body in the same man∣ner as was their practice at the Reliques of Saints; and afterwards he was honourably buried in the same Church; where his Body lay de∣posited, until afterwards Sixtus V. in grateful remembrance of the benefits he had received from him, transported it to the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, and erected a stately Monument over it in a Chappel built for that purpose with this Epitaph inscribed upon it. Pio V. Pont. Max, ex Ordine Praedicatorum Sixtus V. Pont. Max. ex Ordine Minorum grati animi monumentum posuit. GREGORY XIII. PIƲS the Fifth being dead, and his Funeral Rites after the ac∣customed manner being performed; the Cardinals entred the Conclave, and with common consent elected Hugo Buoncom∣pagno, who was Priest and Cardinal of S. Sixtus to the digni∣ty of Pope; he was born at Bologna of the antient Family of the Buon∣compagni, his Father was called Christopher, and his Mother Agnola Ma∣rascalchi, by whom he was at first educated in the Studies of the Civil Law, in which having made great proficiency; he took his degree of Doctor in the University of Bologna at the age of twenty eight years, and in a short time was made Judg of the Court of Trade, erected in that City for tryal of Mercantile Causes; afterwards in hopes of better preferment he went to Rome, where he was constituted an Assi∣stant to the Senator, who was Judg of the Court held in the Capitol,
and the year following he was made Clerk of the Signet for Dispensa∣sations, and other Beneficences. In the time of Paul III. he was em∣ployed at the Council of Trent, and made Vice-Auditor of the Camera: under Julius III. he was made Secretary Apostolical, and sent Vice-Legat with Cardinal Cigalla into the Campaign of Rome. Under Paul IV. he was ordained Priest and Bishop of Veste, and in the year 1562. he was employed to the Council of Trent, where he remained until the prorogation thereof. Under Pius IV. he was constituted As∣sessor of the Papal Chappel, and on St. Gregory's day was created Car∣dinal of St. Sixtus, and employed by him for his Legat into Spain; from whence returning again to Rome in the time of Pius V. he performed his several Offices with such Integrity, and general satisfaction; that having acquired a singular Fame, and good esteem, he was by the com∣mon consent of all the Cardinals, and particular concurrence of Morone, Granvel, Farnese, Altemps, and Borromeo, who were the Leading Men in the Conclave, promoted to the Papal Chair, and on the 13th. of May 1572. declared Pope, stiling himself by the Name of Gregory XIII. out of the great devotion, and respect he had to Saint Gregory Nazianzen, on whose Festival he had been created Cardinal. In which Election there was nothing more remarkable, than that it was made in the space of four or five hours, different to the Customs, and former practices of Conclaves, in which by Factions, and Artifices of prevailing Cardi∣nals Elections have been protracted for several Months. On the day of Pentecost or Whitsunday Gregory XIII. being Crowned; and established in the Papal Chair, his first Enterprise was in prosecu∣tion of the Design commenced by his Predecessour against the Turk, in which the Spaniard and Venetians being already engaged; the Pope for better strengthening of this League dispeeded Fulvio Cardinal of Ʋrsino into France unto Charles IX. with Letters exhorting him to enter in∣to the Alliance, and sacred League which he, with other Princes, had formed against the Turk: but that King being then engaged in a War with his Protestant Subjects, had neither Men nor Mony to spare; so that the Legat returned to Rome with fair words, and professions only of Obedience to the Papal Sea. Howsoever the Allies being encouraged by their late success, proceed∣ed in the War; in order unto which, Colonna was confirmed General of the Gallies by this Pope's Commission, and with his Fleet joyned to that under the command of the Providitor General Soranzo, and to 20. Gallies supplyed by Don John of Austria, (who promised to follow them with the main body of his Fleet unless he were diverted by the Wars in Flan∣ders) they sailed to the Rendezvouz at Corfu. Towards the end of July 1572.1572. they arrived at Corfu, and there joyning with Foscarini Ge∣neral of the Venetians, composed a considerable Fleet, consisting of one hundred and thirty Gallies, six Galleasses, and ten Ships, with which they esteemed themselves of sufficient strength to encounter the Turks, whose force, (notwithstanding the late Defeat) was reported to con∣sist of two hundred and fifty Sail; but they being for the most part Vessels built in haste, and framed of green and unseasoned Timber, were notwithstanding their numbers esteemed of inferiour force to the well-built and equipped Fleet of the Christians; who on that confidence resolved to attaque the Turks, then anchoring on the Coast of Mavoisia.
The Christians being come as near to them as Cerigo, weighed their Anchors, and had sight of the Turks about Capomalio: upon which Ʋzun Hali Captain Pasha of the Turk's Armata not adventuring to stand a shock with so well composed, and so well ordered a Force, turned the stern of his Gallies to the Enemy, and rowed to the Westward, direct∣ing his course to the Isle of Cervi: the Christians in the mean time toaing their heavier Vessels, pursued them so slowly, that the Night came on, before they arrived within shot of the Enemy; at which time Ʋzun Hali putting a good face on the business, as if he intended to engage, but with hopes, that the Night would soon separate them; he turned the Prow of his Gallies on the Enemy, whom when he observed coming on, with heat, and valour; he tacked about, and basely put himself into flight, and rowed away so hard, that the Christians not being able to overtake him, returned again to Cerigo; where having re∣mained for the space of two days, they returned again in pursuit of the Turks: and on the 10th. of August, they discovered them at an Anchor in the Port of Quailes under Cape Matagan. The Turks on fight of the Christians not daring to engage with them, fled and saved themselves in the Port of Coron; from whence the Christians returned again to their Rendezvouz in Cerigo. By this time advices came that Don John was arrived with his Fleet at Corfu, and that he was highly displeased, that the Confederates should endeavour to engage the Enemy without the conjunction of his Forces; Colonna was sensi∣bly touched at this displeasure of Don John, as were all the other Commanders, and therefore it was agreed, to return unto Corfu, to unite themselves with Don John; which being accordingly performed, and the Forces joyned; the whole Fleet consisted there of one hundred and eighty light Gallies, eighteen Ships, and six Galleasses: Upon this con∣junction of Forces a Counsel▪ of War being held, it was resolved, to surprise the Turks in Coron, but they having Watches on the top of the Hills, discovered the Christian Fleet at a distance, by which means they had time to retire to the Port of Modon, which being a secure and well guarded place, they could not be provoked by all the insults, and de∣fiance the Christians could make to adventure a Battel with them: for now not farther confiding in their Maritime Forces, they applyed them∣selves to fortifie the Hills, and Eminences about the Town with Canon, for better defence and security of the Haven; by which this Enterprise on Modon appearing difficult, the Christians resolved to attempt the Castle of Navarine, and to that end landed three thousand Italians, and one thousand two hundred Spaniards under the command of Prince A∣lexander Farnese, intending the next day to raise Batteries against the Castle; but being advised by some fugitive Slaves which escaped from the Turks, that great preparations were making, and eight thousand Horse were already in a Body, for the relief of the Castle, the Design was given over, and the Forces recalled again aboard the Fleet; upon whose retreat a Body of ten thousand Horse appearing, the Christians had been greatly worsted, had they not embarked under the security of their own Cannon. It being now about the 7th. of October, that the Winds were high, the Rains falling in great abundance, and the Seas unsafe for Gallies; and no hopes appearing, that the Enemy would be drawn to an Engagement; it was resolved to conclude the Designs of
this year; And so the Christian Fleet sailing to the Westward, Don John and Colonna directed their course to Messina and Foscarini to Corfu. When the success of this year was told the Pope, his Answer was; That it was well it was no worse, for if the first year of his Reign had been celebrated with the like glory, as was the former; his beginning would have been too happy, and auspitious. Therefore that the ensuing year might prove more fortunate, he intended to make it his chief employ∣ment of the whole Winter, to offer his Prayers, and supplications to God with fasting, Masses, and Processions, that he would be pleased to favour, and assist the Cause, and Arms of the Christians against the Ene∣mies of the Cross of Christ. But whilst the Pope was meditating of these things, and contriving means to prosecute the War with most advantage; the Venetians un∣expectedly about the beginning of the year 1573. clapt up a Peace with the Turks by the mediation of their Bailo, who then with the French Ambassadour at Constantinople had treated the Conditions with good success; to which Sultan Selim the more readily inclined; for having done right to his honour by the Conquest of Cyprus, and by taking se∣veral Fortresses in Dalmatia, he more easily condescended to terms of Peace without diminution, or disparagement as was supposed to the greatness of his Power. But both the Pope and the Spaniards were not satisfied with the Venetians, for having without their consent and privity, and contrary to the Articles of their League made this Peace with the Turk: In excuse for which the Venetians dispatched their Am∣bassadours to the Pope and King of Spain, giving them to understand, that the extream urgency of their Affairs, which by many circumstances were rendered difficult had forced them to an Accommodation with the Turk; and in like terms they expressed themselves to Cardinal Buon∣compagno the Pope's Nephew, whom Gregory had in the year 1574. sent unto Venice to complement Henry King of Poland, who by the death of Charles IX. was returning by that way into France, to take possession of that Kingdom. In this manner the Pope being eased of his expensive War against the Turk, converted the current of his Treasure to the assistance of Henry III. against his Protestant Subjects in France: for supply of which, he raised the sum of four hundred thousand Crowns by Impositions, which he laid on Cities belonging to the Church; and confirmed the Bull given by Pius V. for sale of Church-Lands; of which there re∣maining as yet to the value of fifty thousand Crowns of yearly Rent, unsold: he constituted the Cardinals of Bourbon, Guise, and Lewis d' Ee, Commissioners for the Sales. Nor was this Pope in other matters esteemed less generous, and mag∣nificent; for to the Duke of Bruswick, who came to visit him at Rome, he made a Present of seven thousand Crowns, and erected many Churches there from the foundation, and built Colleges and Churches to the num∣ber of twenty seven in divers remote parts of the World for Seminaries, and places of Worship, and Religion. And for the more solemn, and ornamental Celebration of the Jubilee in the year 1575.An. 1575. he enlarged the Street leading from the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore to the La∣teran, for the more commodious passage of Pilgrims; and having re∣paired the Portico or Porch of S. Maries, which was become ruinous, he
caused this Inscription to he engraven over it. Gregorius XIII. Pont. Max. Eugenii labantem Porticum refecit, & magnificentius restituit. Viam rectam ad Lateranum aperuit. Anno Jubilei MD. LXXV. In this year arose dangerous Discords, and civil Dissentions between the antient, and the new Nobility of Genoua; to which latter the Com∣monalty of the City adhered, having by them been possessed with an Opinion, that the Antient Nobles, in favour of whom most of their Laws ran, intended to usurp such an Authority over them, as should be little different from Slavery; this jealousie made so deep an impression in the minds of the people, that they betook themselves to Arms, and had proceeded to blood, and ruin, had not a stop been made thereunto by the Wisdom, and Oratory of Senarega the Chancellour, who being a moderate Person, and one, of whose prudence, and honesty the people had a great Opinion, persuaded both Parties to remit their differences to the Pope, the Emperor Maximilian, and the King of Spain. The which being accorded on all hands, Senarega was in behalf of the New Nobility dispeeded to the Pope; with whom whilst he was stating the case between both Parties, Intelligence was brought to Rome, that Don John d' Austria was then at Gaeta preparing a very great Fleet against Genoua, in expectation, and with probable hopes to prevail by the means and advantages of those intestine Discords of the City. But the Pope at the request and upon the applications made by Senarega, dispatched a Letter to Don John, exhorting him to desist from his De∣sign, which was so displeasing to him, that in case he persisted therein, he was resolved to raise all the force of Italy to oppose his Enterprise; the which Menaces having given a stop to the proceedings of Don John; several persons were substituted Arbitrators in these differences by the Pope, the Emperor, and the King of Spain; namely, Cardinal Morone, Castacciaro, Borgia, and Idiaquez; who taking the state of the whole matter into their consideration, rectified, and reformed many antient Statutes, established new in their places, and so governed all things with that even hand, that an accord was made and concluded in the Month of May 1576. with that satisfaction to both Parties, that the Citizens, and Inhabitants who had retired from Genoua for fear of the civil Dis∣sensions, returned again to enjoy their repose and ease according to their accustomed Liberty. Nor was the Pope less concerned for the Peace of Poland, where great differences arose amongst the Nobility (as hath been accustoma∣ry) about the election of a King. For Henry III. of France, having (as we have said) resigned his Elective Government to take possession of his hereditary Kingdom of France; the Election of a new King ad∣ministred great cause of dispute, and argument; by reason of the many powerful Princes which stood in competition, and were Candidates for the Election; as namely the Emperor Maximilian II. and Ernest his Son, with his Brother the Arch Duke of Austria, Stephen Battori Prince of Transilvania, Alphonso II. Duke of Ferrara, together with the Great Duke of Moscovy. The Contests between these mighty Rivals proceed∣ed to that degree, that nothing but force of Arms could determine the Controversie; which the Arch-bishop of Gnesne with many other Associates intending to prove, forsook the place of Election, and with armed Bands declared for Maximilian the Emperor; against whom an other party ap∣peared
in favour of Anne Daughter of the Royal Family of Jagellona in Poland, intending in right of her to confer in Marriage the Crown upon Battori Prince of Transilvania: but these dissentions were soon after con∣cluded by the death of Maximilian the Emperor; Battori being after his Marriage with Anne by general consent of all the Nobles received, and crowned King of Poland; and thereupon sent his Ambassadours to Rome to pay his respects, and obedience to the Papal Chair. In the year 1576. a grievous Pestilence afflicted most parts of Italy, especially Trent, Milan, and Venice: it is recorded of Cardinal Borromeo who was Arch-Bishop of Milan, that he was in a most pious manner charitable to the Poor, and others of his City at that time of common Calamity, to whom he not onely contributed a maintenance for their food, and Medicines for their sickness, but in person visited such as were afflicted with the Pestilence, and administred to them the Sacraments of the Church and other spiritual comforts; for which and other works of like piety he was afterwards canonized for a Saint. Nor was Venice less afflicted with this spreading Contagion, of which most of the Friers, and other Religious, whose duty it was to visit the sick, died of the same Disease; for which reason the Pope sent his Indulgences into the afore∣mentioned places, that all such who died with a sorrow for their sins, should obtain the same pardon, as if they had confessed, and communi∣cated, and received the other Sacraments of the Church required for dying persons. It will not be very pertinent to this History to relate the Troubles which happened in Portugal in the days of this Pope; which in reality were very great, caused by the rashness of Sebastian King of that Coun∣try; who suffering himself to be persuaded by Mahomet King of the Moors, who was expelled his Kingdom, transported an Army of thirty thousand Men into Africa, to restore again the expelled King to his Go∣vernment. But as this Design was commenced against the Opinion, and counsel of the King of Spain and the other Friends of King Sebastian; so accordingly the success was unfortunate, for his whole Army was de∣feated near the City of Alquivir,1578. and himself slain in the year 1578. Sebastian dying in this manner without Issue, Cardinal Henriquez Uncle to the deceased, and Son of King Emanuel was Crowned King; but he being at that time Aged and infirm, and unfit for Matrimony convened an Assembly of eleven Barons of the Land, to consider of a Successour, that so future Contests, and civil Wars for the Crown might, if possible, be avoided. Whilst this matter was under consideration the Cardinal King died, and then all things were in confusion; the Commonalty cryed up for Don Antonio who was the bastard Son of Don Alvize Brother to the Cardinal; but the Nobility declared for King Philip of Spain, to whom the right of succession to the Crown did legally appertain according to the Opinion of all the Doctors of the Civil Law, this Controversie came at length to be decided by the Sword, in which King Philip having the advantage, sent an Army of thirty thousand Men under the Com∣mand of the Duke of Alva into Portugal, where having taken several Towns, at length made himself Master of Lisbon; where Philip soon af∣ter arriving was acknowledged King, and Fealty paid him by all the Nobles, and Commonalty of the Land; and having remained some short time at Lisbon returned in peace to his Court at Madrid. Whilst these
things were in action the Pope sent Cardinal Riario to accommodate dif∣ferences, and moderate between both Parties; but coming too late, af∣ter the Controversie was decided, he changed his Office of Mediation to Complements, and joy for the successes of the Conquerour. About this time Pope Gregory confirmed the Excommunication which Pius V. had published against Elizabeth Queen of England; and outed Gilbert Truckhesius Bishop of Cologna of his Arch-Bishoprick, for marry∣ing, and for adhering to the Confession of Augsbourg: He also rectified the Kalendar, which we call the New Stile or Gregorian Account, differ∣ing ten days from that which we use in England, called the Julian Ac∣count: the which was to commence in all places where they would re∣ceive it in the year 1583. About this time also there happened an irreconcileable difference be∣tween the Grand Master of Malta and the chief Knights of that Order; which arose to that degree and height, that the Knights deposed their Master, put him into Prison, and having accused him of many enormous Crimes, they created Marturin Romagasso a Gascon to succeed him in his place. On the other side the Grand Master appealed to the Pope, and complaining of the many injuries he had susteined, desired that he might be removed to Rome, and his cause heard before the Apostolical Tri∣bunal. The Pope highly resenting this insolence, and indignity which the Knights had exercised towards their Master, dispatched his Legat to Malta, who by virtue of a Writ from the Pope, brought the Grand Master to Rome; and with him came three hundred Knights on three Gallies; where being arrived, the Pope favoured the Cause of the Ma∣ster, and in evidence thereof, sent eight hundred Horse to meet him, which with great pomp, and triumph conducted him to the Palace of Cardinal d' Este, where he was lodged with much honour. After a few days allotted for his refreshment he was admitted to Audience with the Pope, and having in humble manner kissed his feet, he re∣peated the Hymn of Nunc dimittis,, or, Lord lettest thou now thy Ser∣vant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Which piece of flattery so pleased the Pope, that he would give no credence to the Calumnies, and charge of his Accusers, but dismissed his Cause, and returned him back to his Lodging with honour, and entire satisfa∣ction. After which Romagasso his Rival coming to Rome to hear, and see how matters were carried; and finding himself discountenanced both by the Clergy and by the Princes, conceived so sad a resentment of this miscarriage, that falling sick with grief, he soon after departed this life about the beginning of November 1581. Two Months after which the Grand Master being also transported with a different passion died at Rome; both which accidents so happily concurring obviated all the difficulties which might offer about a new Election, Hugh de Verdal a Gascon being chosen by common consent without trouble, or other tumult. The year 1583. began with two unfortunate Calamities which much afflicted the Pope, and the City of Rome: the first was Famine, and want of Bread-corn which so miserably pinched the poor, for the space of two Months, that many of them were starved to death. The other was a sad, and doleful Tragedy which began at Rome, and ended at Padoua; the cause and matter thereof in short was this. The Head
Bayliff of Rome with his Followers, understanding that a certain Ban∣dito was come for a Spy to Rome, and for Sanctuary was fled to the Palace of the Orsini; by one means, or other he seized, and brought him from that place; but it happened that as he was carrying him from thence, Raimond, Orsini, Savillo, and Rustici being on Horse-back with their Servants unhappily met the Bayliff, and commanded him to release the Prisoner, who was illegally seized within the priviledges of the Orsi∣ni. The Bayliff refusing so to do, Rustici strook him over the Head with his Cane, which so incensed the Bayliff that he commanded his Fol∣lowers to revenge this affront with their Arms; which they readily o∣beying immediately shot Rustici dead from his Horse; and so mortally hurt Orsini, and Savello, that in two days after they died of their wounds. This unhappy accident troubled all Rome, but especially incensed the party, and Creatures of Orsini to that degree, that rising in a tumult, they ran with Weapons in their hands to kill all the Sbiri or Bayliffs they could find, and having way-laid all the Avenues, where they could make an escape, the confusion continued for the space of two days, and rendered the City a sad spectacle of blood, and massacre. In the mean time the Pope, and civil Government not being able to apply a Remedy gave way to the fury of the people, which (as it was believed) would have been inflamed higher by opposition of the civil Magistrate; The Head bayliff having hidden himself for some days was at length taken, and beheaded at Rome. But this evil ended not here: for from this fatal accident, another quarrel arose between Vitelli who was Deputy to Buoncompagno General of the Church and Lodwick Orsino Brother of Raimond, who was lately killed; in prosecution of which, Orsino taking with him several persons in disguise, and Masks, assaulted Vitelli in his way from Monte Magnopoli to Rome, and shot him dead with a Carbine in his Coach, for which offence Orsino being condemned to banishment, he departed from Rome, and went to live at Padoua, where having ta∣ken up his Lodgings, he soon after committed a like murther on Vitto∣ria the Wife of Paul Giordano, and her Brother; for which Crime being prosecuted by the Justice of Venice, he fortified himself within his House, resolving to preserve himself by force of Arms; but not being long able to hold out against the Soldiers which were sent against it, the House was almost levelled to the ground, and the Defendants taken Prisoners, which being all punished by death, or other Sentences of Justice, this fatal Tragedy was at length ended. After these sorrowful Stories, the Pope being willing to cheer and comfort the City, created nineteen Cardinals, amongst which his Ne∣phew was made one with the title of St. Sixtus, and John Anthony Fa∣chinesti of Bologna, who was afterwards made Pope by the name of In∣nocent IX. After which he received no small contentment to see his Stately Structure of the Jesuits College finished at Rome, over the Gate of which these words were Engraven. Greg. XIII. P.M. Religioni, & Bonis Artibus MDLXXXIII. in memory and in gratitude for which the Jesuits at their own expence painted in their wide Court, or Area, all the Colleges, and Foundations which this Pope had built, and endowed in divers parts of the World: and particularly in reference to their own College, this Inscription was engraven in Capital Letters. Grego∣rio XIII. Pont. Max. Hujus Collegii Fundatori Societatis Jesu amplissimis
ab eo Privelegiis Munita, & Ingentibus Aucta Beneficiis, Ʋniversa in hoc totius Ordinis Seminario parentis Optimi Maximi Memoriam, suique grati animi Monumentum P. Nor were these favours ill bestowed on the Jesuits, who had always been so industrious, and true Drudges to the Sea of Rome, that they brought Proselytes from the most remote parts of the World; and in the year 1585. after a long Navigation of three years, conducted four Ambassadours to Rome from the Island of Japan in the East-Indies, sent from some great Lords, and from the Community of Christians convert∣ed in that Country to the Faith of the Gospel. The arrival of such Strangers at Rome filled all the City with Discourse, and Novelty; and were entertained with free treatment at the expence of the Church, being lodged in the Jesuits College, who were the Authors, or Apostles of their conversion: though some years afterwards by the indiscreet management of the Jesuits, who usurped too much on the civil Jurisdi∣ction and temporal Power of that Kingdom, Christianity was totally ex∣tirpated by the most cruel persecution that the most fierce Enemies to the Gospel of Christ had ever exercised against his People: for the parti∣culars whereof which are most doleful, and Tragical to relate, and not pertinent to this History, we shall refer the Reader to the Writers of the Description of Japan. But as to these four Ambassadours who were all young Men, not much exceeding the age of twenty years, they had remained but few days in Rome before Pope Gregory departed this life. He was rather surprized with death, than reduced thereunto by long sickness, his indisposition being discovered by his countenance, before he was really sensible thereof within himself; his Distemper was esteem∣ed by the Physitians to be a Quinsy with which he was suffocated, and died the tenth day of April 1585. being aged eighty three years, and three months. He may be numbred amongst the good Popes, ha∣ving ended his days with a general good esteem of all, and especially of the people of Rome who bewailed his death, and in honour to his me∣mory engraved these words, under his Statue of Brass which he had in his life-time caused to be erected in the Capitol. Gregorio XIII. Opt. Max. ob farinae vectigal sublatum Ʋrbem Templis & Operibus Magnificentis exornatam H.S. Octingenties Singulari beneficentiâ in egenos distributum Ob Seminaria Exterarum Nationum in urbe, ac toto pene Terraram Orbe Religionis propagandae causa instituta Ob paternam in omnes gentes caritatem Qua ex ultimis Novi Orbis insulis Japoniorum Regum Legatos Triennii Navigatione Ad obedientiam Apostolicae Sedi Exhibendam Primum venientes Romam Pro Pontificia dignitate accepit. S.P.Q.R. The Pope being dead, his Corps were with funeral Pomp brought into St. Peter's Church, and buried in a Chappel which he himself had erect∣ed, which was afterwards richly adorned, and beautified by his Kindred and Relations.
He was naturally of a cheerful Countenance, and pleasing Aspect, and being of a good habit of Body, and sound temperament by tempe∣rance and sobriety he conserved that good constitution unto old Age: he used much Exercise, and delighted in Riding, being so active, that to his latter time he could mount on Horseback without the help of his Servants; the place of his Recreation, and retirement was Monte Dra∣gone at Frescati, about ten Miles distant from Rome where he frequently enjoyed the fresh Air, which is accounted the most healthful of all Italy. This Palace now belongs to the Prince Borghese, and is situated in a most delightful prospect from one of the open Galleries, of which I copied these Verses. Thessala quid Tempe, qui quaeris Adonidis hortos? Haec tibi pro cunctis villa Dragonis erit. Prospicis hinc Tybur, colles, & rura Catonis Pulchrior aspectu quae tibi Scena subit. The greatest care and trouble which this Pope susteined in the time of his Reign, was to suppress the unruly numbers of the Banditi who were grown to that bold insolence, that they commanded and pillaged all the Cities round; nor were the Lives, nor Estates of honest Men safe, nor secure within the Cities. It is incredible to relate what numbers they murthered in divers places, and what Robberies they committed; and though this Gregory sent many Troops of armed Soldiers against them, yet he was not able to extirpate those bands of villanous Men; that work being reserved for Sixtus Quintus, whose Life is the next which offers it self to our Pen. SIXTƲS V. GREGORY being dead, the Cardinals to the number of thir∣ty nine entered the Conclave on Easter day being the eleventh of April, which were all that were then present at Rome; to which in a short time afterwards three more were added, namely, the Cardinals of Austria, Madrucci, and Vercelli: The Con∣clave being divided into no less than six Factions, prolonged the choice by the many Scrutinies that were made; but at length all things seemed to favour Cardinal Montalto and the minds of the Conclave to encline to∣wards him; for he was considered as a Person learned, peaceable, plea∣sant in his Conversation, and one, who was free of dependancies or Re∣lations; for he had onely some Nephews by a Sister who were all so young, and of that tender age, that they were never likely to put him to expence, or intrude into the management of Affairs: besides he had been always obliging in his carriage, and given demonstrations of due honour, and respect to all the Cardinals; he was also of a quiet beha∣haviour living in a modest retirement, and having at any time enter∣tained a Dispute, or controversie with any Cardinal in the Consistory, he would rather gently yield the question, than seem obstinate in any
impertinent adherence to his own Opinion. When at any time he had been reviled, as once he was in the Consistory, where one of the Cardi∣nals called him, the Ass of la Marca, he laughed, and took it for a jest, and as an effect of that intimacy, and familiarity which was between them. In short, his plausible carriage made him acceptable to all and opened a way to his Election, which happened the 24th. day of April, the Sea having been vacant fourteen days onely. This Pope was named Felix or Felice born of poor, and obscure Pa∣rents at Montalto in the Marches of Ancona: at the age of fourteen years he took the habit of St. Francis and became a Cordelior Frier, in a Convent at Ascoli not far distant from the place of his birth. As he grew forward in years, he became a good proficient in his Studies, and so subtil a Disputant, that he was always challenging and provoking his fellow Students to Disputations, which moved them to that anger, and envy against him, as made them often to fly into passions, and re∣vile him with the meanness of his birth, terming him with the reproach of being the Son of a Hog-driver, or the Boy of a Swineherd; all which he took very mildly, and without displeasure to be accounted of mean Parentage; for he would often in jest, say, that he was born of an Il∣lustrious House which was so conspicuous, that the very Sun-beams darted through it. But when he had passed from his Sophistry to more sub∣stantial Learning; he took his Degree of Doctor of Divinity in the City of Fermo; and soon after in company with certain other learned Fathers he went to a publick Disputation held at Asciti, where in presence of Cardinal Carpi, who was then Protectour of the Franciscan Order, he shewed so much subtlety, and acuteness of Wit in defending certain con∣clusions, that he acquired the esteem both of a learned Disputant and an elegant Oratour. In the year 1551. he was ordained Preacher, at Siena, and the year following at Camerino; and afterwards by order of his General he was appointed one of the Lent Preachers, in the Church of the Holy Apostles at Rome, and therein acquitted himself with great honour and applause. Afterwards he was made one of the Council of the Inquisition, and constituted by Pope Pius IV. Vicar General of his Or∣der, and together with Cardinal Buon-compagno made Legat Apostolical in Italy. Pius V. created him Bishop of St. Agatha, and Cardinal with title of St. Jerome: And lastly (as we have said) he was on the 11th. of April 1585. chosen Pope, giving himself the name of Sixtus V. though desired by others to assume the name of Nicholas in honour to Nicholas IV. whose memory he was observed much to affect, as appears by a stately Monument, which he at his own charge, when Cardinal, e∣rected over the Sepulcre of that Pope in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore at Rome: But the name of Sixtus prevailed with him, both in Complement to Cardinal St. Sixtus, as also in honour to the memory of Sixtus IV. who was a Frier likewise of the same Order. Sixtus being thus Elected, he contrived to be crowned on Wednesday the first of May; which day had often proved auspicious to him; for on a Wednesday he was first initiated into the habit of St. Francis, and on a Wednesday he was created Vicar General, Cardinal, and Pope; on Sun∣day following he went to St. John of Lateran (according to usual cu∣stom) to take possession of his sublime Office. But before we pro∣ceed to the particular Affairs which occurred in his Government;
it may not be unpleasant to the Reader to recite some delightful pas∣sages which happened upon his Election. For when the Scrutiny was past and that Montalto thought himself secure of his Election, he im∣mediately began to cast off his disguise of Humility, with which he had for above fifteen years cloaked his Ambition: for no sooner were half the Votes recited in his favour, by which he found himself secure of his Election; but being impatient to enjoy the honours of the Papal Throne; he arose on his Feet, before the Scrutiny was wholly finished, and placing himself in the middle of the Hall; he threw away his little Staff, which he usually carried for a support of his crooked old Age, and then strut∣ting and stretching himself bolt upright, he seemed a foot higher than before, that all wondered to see the Pope grown in a moment so much taller, than when he was Cardinal: and with that he began to hum, and spit with as much force as any young Man of thirty years of Age and of sound Lungs was able to do. At which the Cardinals looking one upon the other, wondred at this strange Metamorphosis shewing some kind of dissatisfaction at their Choice; and therewith the Cardinal Deacon cryed aloud, Hold, fair and softly, here is an Errour in the Votes, the Scrutiny is not good. But Montalto would by no means be so put off, but boldly replyed, It is good, it is good, and began to sing Te Deum Lau∣damus, with such a clear and Audible Voice, that he made the whole Hall ring again; though an hour or two before, he did not speak a word without Coughing, or spitting three or four times. And therewith placing himself before the Altar, with his Eyes on a Crucifix, he said a short mental Prayer, as was accustomary; and then the Master of the Ceremonies asked him, Whether he was pleased to ac∣cept of the Papal Office? At which turning about with a Majestick, and grave Countenance; he replyed: We are not now to receive that which we have already accepted; but if you had another Popedom to confer, we were capable also to receive that, for by the Grace of God, we are well assured, that we have force, and vigour sufficient to Rule, and go∣vern two Worlds with as much facility, as we can do this one Popedom. When the Masters of the Ceremonies vested him in his Pontifical Ha∣bit, they observe;d with what marvellous vigour he extended his Arms, to cloth himself with his Robes, which he performed with such haste and agility, as if he feared to lose his Office, and honour, by appear∣ing slow and unactive, which Cardinal Rusticucci attentively observing, said to him, Most Holy Father, the Papal Dignity is a most admirable Medicine, for it turns old Cardinals into young Men, and sickly and unfirm Persons, it makes sound, and robustious; To which the Pope replyed, That it was very true, for he found it so by good experience. But what was most remarkable in this Pope was, that no sooner was the Scrutiny past, than immediately the Scene was changed with him; for he was now no longer the humble, modest, and infirm Cardinal Montalto, but the haughty, Majestick, and grave Pope Sixtus,; he was now no longer familiar, and jocular with the Cardinals, but severe, and morose, dis∣daining to maintain an easie conversation with any, nay even with those who had promoted him to the Papal Dignity. Being thus habited in his Pontificalibus, and conducted to St. Peter's Church, where was a great concourse of People from all parts of the City to behold the new Pope; and being come to the Portico, he was met by
the Canons of that Church singing that Antiphona. Ecce Sacerdos Mag∣nus, qui in diebus suis placuit Deo, & inventus est Justus; which is, Behold the High Priest, who in his days, was pleasing unto God, and was found just. As he passed forward into the Church, he went ma∣king Crosses, and scattering his Benedictions on the People, with such firmness of Hand, and strength of Arm; that they all wondered at the change, and as if they could not give credit to their Eyes, they cryed aloud, which is the Pope? which is the Pope? Others also running to one, and other, said, is this the Cardinal, who the other day was so feeble and decrepit, that he seemed ready to fall at every step? is this he, who walked always stooping, with his Head hanging down, and awry to∣wards one shoulder, but how is he now changed! with what vigour and Majesty doth he now walk like another Aaron! It is reported, when his Physitians came to pay him their respects and adoration, as he sat in his Throne in St. Peter's Church, that one of them should say to him, Your Holiness seems to have another garb, and meen, than when you were Cardinal: to which the Pope replyed; 'Tis true indeed, for when we were Cardinal, we went always stooping, and poring on the ground, to find the Keys of Heaven gate; but now having found them, we need not to look so low, but rather cast our Eyes aloft towards Heaven; ha∣ving need of no other matter now upon Earth. The Ceremonies in S. Peter's being over, he was conducted by the Car∣dinals to the usual Lodgings of the Pope, where having left him alone, he refreshed himself onely with a little Bisket, passing the whole day with great abstinence: and being alone, his Servants observed him to walk in his Chamber quick and fast, but in a thinking and pensive manner, at which they much wondered; because they never knew him before to move from his Chair, to walk in that manner; and being in this melan∣cholly motion, the Steward of his House came to him, (as usually) to know what he was pleased to order for his Supper; whereunto the Pope replyed, with his Eyes fixed on him, and with a stern countenance. It is not accustomary to demand of great Princes what it is that they are pleased to eat; but prepare us such a Supper as is Royal, and then we shall choose that Dish, which is most agreeable to our Palate. Then he commanded, that the Cardinals Alessandrino, Medici, Rusticucci, Este, San-Sisto and Altemps, should be invited with him to Supper: which being accepted by them, they all appeared, except onely Este, who for some reasons excused himself; and being sat down at the Table, the Pope began a Discourse of the great honour which was due to the Papal Dignity; and of the high favour which Christ had bestowed on the Pope in making him his supreme Vicar on Earth, repeating often those words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. And then with vehemence of Speech, he proceeded: O said he, how pro∣found are the Judgments of God: Christ would not ordain on Earth more than one Peter, one high Priest, one Vicar, one Head; To one single Person onely, he gave Authority to govern his Flock, and to feed his Sheep. Tu es Petrus. Thou, Thou onely art High Priest: To thee will I give the Keys of Heaven, To thee onely do I give the Keys to open, and shut, and to bind and loose. To thee, to Thee onely do I give Authority to sustain, and govern my Flock: to Thee only who art my Vicar, and not to others, who are Servants, and simple Ministers of thine.
The Cardinals had all this while wit enough to understand, that this whole Discourse was levelled onely at them, and at the beginning to take them off of all expectation of governing, or managing Affairs for him. For he was willing to eradicate that Opinion out of their minds, which they had conceived of him; that being a weak, and an infirm per∣son, he would easily have submitted to the management and direction of his Cardinals; which was true enough, and which doubtless was the chief motive at his Election. And to evidence farther his resolution to rule alone, he would scarce suffer any of them to interpose a word, but he would take them short; and still repeat that saying, That in the Church there ought to be but one Commander. With this satisfaction the Cardinals after Supper returned to their own Lodgings, discoursing as they went of the Complement the Pope had passed on them, and of the manner how he had unfolded his mind and thoughts; but above all, Cardinal Medici seemed to be most concerned, having had the fairest game in all appearance at the Election; and there∣fore could not contain himself from saying: I see a great storm coming towards us, but who is to be saved, shall be saved. The day following, or some short time afterwards, the Pope called before him the Governour of Rome, and all the Judges of civil and cri∣minal Causes, to whom he recommended with great fervour and zeal of spirit an impartial, and severe Administration of Justice, but uttered his words with such vehemence of speech, that they seemed rather like Me∣naces, than gentle Exhortations, concluding at their dismission with these words: Non veni pacem mittere, sed gladium, I came not to bring Peace into the World, but a Sword. The reception he gave to Ambassadours and forein Ministers as also to Princes, and great Lords of Rome, was with a cheerful Aspect, and Countenance; but their Audience was but short, excusing himself, that the first days of his Pontificate were taken up with so much solid busi∣ness, that he had not leisure to bestow much time on superficial Com∣plements. Howsoever he shewed himself more benign, and obliging to the Ambassadours from Japon, who (as we have said) arrived in the latter days of Pope Gregory late deceased; and to whom Sixtus was very ambitious to shew the glory of his Coronation, which being now pre∣paring with great pomp and magnificence, he was desirous to have the report of his State and Grandeur extend to the remote confines of the World. And now Sixtus being seated in his Chair, he was affected with the same desire, which commonly possessed the mind of Popes, of shewing his greatness, and glory to his near Relations; in compliance where∣with, he gave orders for conducting his Sister Camilla with her Sons to Rome, warning them beforehand, that they should content themselves with that sober modesty which became the meanness of their birth, and the gravity of those who were related to the Papal Chair, where no∣thing but decency, and awful reverence did reside. But so soon as news came, that the Lady Camilla was near the City, the Cardinals Medici, Este, and Alessandrino, intending to oblige the Pope, went forth to meet her, and having detained her at a Palace near adjoyning, until she was dressed in the habit of a Princess, they afterwards conducted her to Rome, where the Pope expected her with great impatience: but being present∣ed
before him in that garb and habit, by Cardinal Alessandrino; the Pope would not seem to know her, saying, where is my Sister? Behold her, quoth the Cardinal, Most Holy Father here before you. No, replyed the Pope, this cannot be she; for I have but one Sister and she a poor Coun∣try Woman living in a Cottage; but this wherewith you present me here, is a Princess of Rome: when I see her, in such a homely, and Country habit, as I left her in, I shall then own her, and ackowledg her for my Sister. The next day Camilla returned to him again in her own simple, and Country habit, accompanied onely with her Daughter, and the two Sons from that Daughter; and then when he saw her he tenderly em∣braced her, and said, This indeed is my Sister, we now acknowledg you in this habit; and none shall make you a Princess but my self; for his humour was to be obliged by none, nor would he have his Cardinals to boast and glory in a report of having clothed, and adorned his Sister, and setting her up in the garb and state of a Princess. The first of May was now come, which was the day appointed for his Coronation, which was performed with all the solemnity and pomp that could be contrived. After which he proclaimed that publick Prayers should be made, that God would be pleased to illuminate his Vice-ge∣rent here on Earth with Grace and Wisdom sufficient to govern the vast extent of his Universal Church, granting to such as were devout Suppli∣cants in his behalf Indulgences, and Pardons in a most ample manner. Which being performed, he armed his mind with such constancy, and resolution in the administration of Justice, as seemed to surpass the usual severity of former Popes; and for the first Assay, and proof thereof, he caused four Men to be hanged, for carrying prohibited Arms, notwith∣standing the great Intercessions, and Interest which particular Friends made in their behalf. The which piece of Justice was most seasonable in those days, considering the insolence of the Banditi, or banished Men, who in the late times of Gregory, did so infest all parts of Italy, that nei∣ther the City, nor Country could secure the Estates or Lives of honest Men from their rapine and violence. Nor was he rigorous onely in his own proceedings, but required the like severity in all the Officers and Ministers of Justice, that acted under him: so that if he observed any of his Judges either remiss in their duty, gentle, or inclinable to mercy, or moderation in what the Law inflicted; he would presently discharge them from their Office, and place others more severe, and morose; and in case he observed any of a Saturnine, tetrical aspect; he would presently enquire after him, and having recei∣ved any tolerable character of his condition, he would esteem him a Man sit for his turn, and prefer him before a mild and gentle temper, which he thought very disagreeable to the constitution of Magistracy. As to his Politicks, he thought Intelligence to be the life of Govern∣ment, and therefore would have Spies over every Cardinal to watch his most private actions; that nothing was either said at his Table, or whi∣spered in his Bed-chamber, but what was reported to the Pope. He ap∣pointed also Spies over the Princes and Barons of Rome; and over the Prelats of the Court who observed their actions, and remarked their Discourses: others also crept into Shops, and insinuated themselves a∣mong the vulgar at publick Meetings; others had a Station allotted in
the Monasteries, that the very Secrets of the Cells were discovered: the like course was taken in all Towns and Cities of Italy; and with such secrecy was every thing managed, that one Spy was not acquainted with the walks, nor business of the other. To all the Nuntios, and Inter-Nuntios residing in the Courts of forein Princes, it was ever an Instru∣ction the most warmly recommended of any, to be diligent in their Ad∣vices; and not to content themselves with the common reports of the Town; but to penetrate into the secrets, and Cabinets of Princes; to which end, no Mony was spared which might corrupt the chief Mini∣sters, and Secretaries of Councils. He ordained certain Visitors to review all criminal Cases, which for the space of ten years past, had been recorded in any Court within the Ecclesiastical State, with power to reverse the same, and proceed a∣gainst the Offender, in case the Sentence upon due examination should be found remiss, or moderated below that rigour which the Law requi∣red: In prosecution of which, many who were already dead were mulct, or fined in the Patrimony they had left; others who for the space of four or five years past had been released from Prison, either by the In∣tercession of Friends, or by Bribery, or by other indirect means, were remanded back again, until the extream rigour of the Law was sa∣tisfied. He farther issued out Warrants of discovery of all Thefts and Rob∣beries committed; charging the people upon pain of Excommunication to reveal, and inform every matter of bribery, corruption, or misbeha∣viour, which they knew, or of which they could accuse their Judges, who had for the space of five or six years sat in the Seat of Judicature. By these means every day one poor Judg or other, who perhaps also was out of employment, was dragged away to Prison, and close shut up for what Crime he knew not, or perhaps had forgot the Sentence he had passed in the Case, for which he was accused. These and many such like cases of severity strook such a terrour into the minds of those who sat on the Tribunals of Justice, or managed any publick employment; that every one became cautious, and nice in the Sentences he gave, or how, by fear, or bribery he remitted the least scruple, or severity which the Law enjoyned, or required. Farther, he gave strict charge to all Sindics and Governours of Towns, and Castles, to give in, a particular List, or account of all Felons within their respective Precincts, who had for the space of ten years past been accused, or branded with Capital Crimes; and also of all such, who had been convicted for scandalous, and infamous persons, and Incorrigible du∣ring the time of their Sindicate; In which Lists he required such an exact impartiality; that upon Information given against the Sindic of Albano, how in the List of the Dissolute and Incorrigible, he had omitted to in∣sert the name of his Nephew; he was sentenced by the Pope himself to undergo the Strapado in the publick Market-place, from which punish∣ment all the Intercession, and Prayers, and Interest which the Spanish Ambassadour could make in his behalf, was not able to deliver him. By these means the Lists of Dissolute Persons which were immediately di∣rected to the hand of the Pope, were so very exact, that no person was exempted, who was guilty of the least Crime. Which when the Pope saw, and observed every Week, as they were sent him, he was great∣ly
pleased, and especially with those which were filled with a great num∣ber of names; for in reading of them, he would often say, Oh happy Gallies, which I intend to build: O happy I, who have first found Men for my Gallies, before I found Gallies for my Men. The which se∣verity of the Pope, (from whom there could never be any expectation of Pardon) so terrified all sorts, and conditions of People; that every one comported himself with the greatest modesty, and gravity imagi∣nable, that an Oath, or a rude, or uncivil word was not heard through any of the streets of Rome: but every one being alarm'd, and dreading, as if he had always a Constable, or a Pursuivant at his back, walked with his beads in his hand, repeating a Pater-Noster, or some other Prayer, with a sorrowful and penitential countenance. By these Methods all the Banditi, who being grown licentious under the gentle Government of other Popes, and who spoiled and destroyed all Italy, were now by the Justice of this Pope almost wholly extirpa∣ted; for such as fled out of the State of the Church to the Dominions of other Princes, he so prosecuted, by laying Fines on any who secured, or succoured them, and setting a price on the head of every considerable Bandito; that in a short time he reduced them to a small number, and totally suppressed the pride and insolence of that pest of mankind. And thus resolutely was Sixtus bent to punish the Enormities of wicked Men; that whereas it had been the custom of former Popes to shew acts of mercy and pardon on the day of their Coronation, opening the Prison Gates, and enlarging the Prisoners; this Sixtus absolutely refused to grant releasement to any, though instantly urged by the Cardinals; al∣ledging, That there were Rogues sufficient about the streets, without ransacking the Prisons for them: That he had taken a resolution, when he was first made Pope, to chastise the wicked, and not suffer their Vil∣lanies to corrupt, and intermix with the Vertues of good Men. By these severities all people lived in quiet and peace one with the other: no Sword was drawn in the City, nor quarelsom words, or uncivil lan∣guage uttered: it being a common saying to Men at variance together, Remember these are the times of Sixtus. Thus when the Banditi were suppressed, the good and benefit was so great to all Italy, that the Citi∣zens of Rome erected a Statue of Brass to the memory of this Rome, on which these words were engraven. Sixto V. Pont. Max. ob quietem publicam compressa Sicariorum Exu∣lum{que} licentiâ restitutam Annonae inopiam sublevatam, urbem edificiis, viis, aquaeductu illustratam SPQR. And farther, to demonstrate the inflexible humour of this Pope; it is observable, that a poor Youth of about seventeen years of age, making a resistance against the Bayliffs, who came to distrain an Ass, for some Du∣ties owing, and by Law ordained to be paid; in which seizure though the Officers made a mistake, for that the Ass did not belong to the party who owed the Mony; yet because he offended against the course of Ju∣stice, by making opposition to it, he was condemned to die; nor could the persuasions or Intercessions of the G. Duke's Ambassadour, nor of the Cardinal of Medici prevail in his behalf, or mitigate the rigour of the Sentence: and when the Governour of Rome alledged that the youth
being under age could not by Law be put to death for this Crime: the Pope replyed, If he want years, I will lend him ten of mine. Nor did Sixtus exercise this severity onely towards his own People; but he was brisk, and haughty towards all Christian Princes, for in a few days after his Coronation, or at most in two months after, he quarrelled with Henry III. King of France, with Henry King of Navarre, and with Philip II. King of Spain. The occasion of his quarrel with Spain seemed to have had no other cause or foundation, than his own pride, and desire of usurpation, and which happened in this manner. It had been the custom ever since the time of the Emperour Charles V. for the King of Spain by his Ambassadour at Rome, to present yearly on the 29th. day of June, which is the Festival of St. Peter, a white Horse, with a Purse of seven thousand Ducats in Gold to the Pope, for a Tribute, and acknowledgment for the Kingdom of Naples, which that King holds, as feudatary to the Ecclesiastical State: And now on the usual day Sixtus appearing on a Throne with pomp, and mignificence to receive his Tri∣bute, which the Ambassadour in a quaint Speech, and with fine Com∣plements presented: he seemed not very well satisfied therewith, but returned this tart, and Satyrical Reply: You think now, said he, that you have made a fine Speech, and indeed so you have, for you have made us change a Kingdom for a Beast; and still seeming uneasie, as he was about to rise; he added these suspitious words: But we believe, that this business will not proceed long in this manner. These words immediately touched the Ambassadour to the quick; and giving him just cause of reflection thereupon, he dispatched them for Spain by the first Post, and to the Duke of Ossuna then Vice-King of Naples; the which administred not onely cause of jealousie, and incited the Vice-King to be watchful against the least commotions; but was the cause of misun∣derstanding and ill correspondence between Sixtus, and Philip of Spain. But the quarrel which he had with the French King was of another nature, and grounded on more substantial differences: and considering the fierce resolution of Sixtus might have produced more prejudicial consequences. The Dispute had its beginning from a Message sent by the Pope to the French Ambassadour, signifying to him by break of day in the morning; that it was the Pope's pleasure, that in t space of two days time he should depart from Rome, and from the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical State: the occasion of this intimation was this. The Pope for reasons best known to himself, had recalled from the Court of France his Nuntio the Bishop of Bergamo, with intention to dispeed Fabio Mir∣to the Arch-bishop of Nazaret to reside in his place; for he being a Per∣son of prudence, and noted for his admirable conduct, and dexterity in the management of Affairs, the Pope took an extraordinary liking to him, especially for having managed the Office of Nuntio at other times with great success: but the French King so soon as he received Intelli∣gence, that this Arch-bishop of Nazaret was coming Nuntio to Paris, and understood by his Character, that he was a Person zealous, and en∣tirely devoted to the Interest of the Pope; he immediately dispatched an Express to him with Letters, desiring him, that wheresoever those Letters should be delivered to his hands, he should remain, and abide, until new Orders should come to the Pope, whom he had instantly de∣sired, that the Bishop of Bergamo might still continue in his Office. The
Arch-bishop of Nazaret being proceeded as far as Lions, when he recei∣ved the King's Orders, seemed greatly surprized with this unexpected interruption; saying, that his Master the Pope, who was impatient of Injuries, would highly resent an Affront of this nature; and that whereas he had Instructions to return back from what place soever, he found the least difficulty, or interruption in his Journey; he was resolved the next day to set his face towards Rome; the which would produce an ill correspondence with France; for the Bishop of Bergamo would cer∣tainly be recalled, and the Kingdom left without the residence of a Nuntio. So soon as this News was brought to Rome, the Pope resented it in a fierce manner, and with high words against the French King, threatned revenge with Thunderbolts of Excommunication, and other Ecclesia∣stical Censures: and in the heat of this fury without the consultation of a Consistory, he sent immediately to the French Ambassadour to depart from Rome, and out of the Dominion of the Church. On the other side when this news arrived at the French Court, the King expressed his resentments thereof to his Council, and calling together all the Mini∣sters of forein Princes, he in their presence, stated the difference in the case between himself and the Pope, protesting against the Injuries he had received. In fine, after several Letters which passed by Expresses be∣tween the King and the Pope, without any good understanding on either side, for the Pope was resolved not to yield his Point; at length by the mediation of forein Ambassadours at Paris, and the interposition of Cardinal d' Este, and other Cardinals at Rome the matter was accommo∣dated, so that the King received the Arch-bishop of Nazaret at Paris, and the Pope recalled the French Ambassadour the Sieur St. Godart to Rome, whom in his fury he had lately dispeeded from thence. But such quarrels as these, were like the fallings out of Friends, which are easily reconcileable; and of small importance in respect of those grand Feuds which were commenced between the Pope, and Henry King of Navarre on the score of Religion: for in regard, that in the Reign of Gregory XIII. a League was made against the Protestant Religion, and directed against the Person of the said Henry; which Pope Gregory re∣fused to subscribe: but now this Sixtus V. who was of a towring Spirit, and one, who delighted out of the pride of his heart, to mortifie Princes, and contend with great Personages, not onely subscribed to the League in a most solemn manner; but with terrible maledictions issued out his Bulls of Excommunication against the person of Henry King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, declaring them guilty of Heresie, and to be the chief Fomenters and Protectors of the heretical party: and that consequently the said Henry, his Heirs, and all descended from him was by the just Censures of the Canonical Law rendered uncapable to suc∣ceed in the right of any Principality, and particularly to the Crown of France; and accordingly he did absolve all his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and the Obedience they had sworn to him. Notwithstanding all these Menaces of the Pope, and the power of the League, Henry comported himself with that Courage, and generosity of mind; that the Pope could not but much admire the heroick spirit of that King, and conceived such an extraordinary Opinion of his Abi∣lities and worth, that he would frequently say, that there were onely
two Princes in the World, namely the King of Navarre, and Elizabeth Queen of England, whose friendship, and correspondence he would court and desire; but that the guilt of Heresie had rendered them un∣capable of his Acquaintance. And in such esteem those two were with him, (notwithstanding the prejudice he had to them, for the cause of Religion,) that in his ordinary Discourse he would use this saying: That to make things go well in the World, there was need onely of three Persons, viz. Elizabeth, Henry, and Sixtus. It is said also that Queen Elizabeth conceived such an esteem for this Pope Sixtus, that she would often commend his Talent, and excellent Qualities for Govern∣ment. And that when some would discourse of her Marrying; she would often say, that if she did marry she would have no other Hus∣band, than Pope Sixtus; which being reported to him again, he replyed thereupon, That if they two should lie one night together, they should beget an other Alexander for the World. The Duke of Ossuna in the time of this Sixtus was Vice King of Naples, a Person esteemed the wisest Governour, and the best Politician of his Age; and yet was highly blamed by this Pope, for not revenging the murther of Starace, who in a popular Insurrection was assassinated by the people, for no other reason, than that he was esteemed a Confi∣dent, and a Creature of Ossuna: upon which neglect, and default the Pope entertaining Discourses frequently with the Spanish Ambassadour, would often say, That two Instruments were necessary for the people, that is, Bread and cold Iron, repeating those words often, Bread I say and cold Iron. But Ossuna, who had no need of those Admoniti∣ons, not long after, (or so soon as it was convenient) revenged the blood of his Friend Starace in such a signal manner; that the Pope chang∣ed his Note, and began to applaud him, and estow the Character on him of a most Excellent Governour. These Commotions happened at Naples some few days after Sixtus was elected Pope; and before he was scarce warm in his Chair: for had he been well setled therein, it may reasonably be collected from some sayings of his; that he would rather have nourished, and somented those broils, then instigated the Vice-King to punish the Authors of them: for having always had an ambi∣tion, to convert the feud of that Kingdom into an actual possession, he would have made use of those late disturbances, to inflame the minds of the people and exasperate them against the Government, as a means to introduce his own Authority into the place thereof; and so much may be collected from his words one day to Cardinal Rusticucci when discoursing of the death of Starace. This Man, said he, might have done us great Service, had he lived at least one year longer. Sixtus all this time would not suffer, or endure any Counsellour to advise or direct him in his Affairs, but affected to manage all by his own wisdom and conduct: howsoever he was desirous of Confidents, and fa∣miliar Acquaintance, with whom he might discourse matters, and use for Spies to inform him of all passages in the World: amongst this sort of Creatures, his Nephew Cardinal Montalto possessed a considerable share of his affection; for though he was but a young Man, yet he was of a mature judgment, and for his years well practised in the Affairs of the World: howsoever he gave him this caution, that he should beware how the kindness he had for him, did encourage him to a confidence
of making any request for Benefits, or favours either for himself, or o∣thers: the like Admonition he gave also to his Sister, and his other Ne∣phews, whom he tenderly loved, and laboured to make rich; often∣times forbidding them, to ask any thing of him: For, said he, I charge you, never to make any motion to me in behalf of any; for we resolve to do all our selves; and consider, that what bribes soever you take, are but unlawful, and ill-gotten goods; but what Money you receive from us, will be hallowed, and blessed. Notwithstanding this severity, and morose humour of Sixtus, he would sometimes divertise himself with more pleasant and delightful entertainments; amongst which he took a particular contentment to read a Book of Memoirs, or recital of several passages, which in the time, when he was a young Frier, he had wrote for his own remem∣brance; the which being now Pope, he was much pleased to read, and contemplate. One whereof was, That being at Macerata, he had oc∣casion to buy a pair of shooes, for which the Shoo-maker demanded se∣ven Giulios or three shillings and six pence English. Frier Montalto de∣sirous to get them cheaper, offered him three shillings, and assured him, that some time or other he would bring him the other six pence: Yes, said the Shoo-maker, and when? when you are Pope, I warrant you. Yes, said he, stay but till then, and I promise to pay you the Money with full Interest until that time. The Shoo-maker laughing, deliver∣ed him the shooes, and said, since I find you disposed to accept the Pope∣dom, be sure you remember to pay this Debt, when you are exalted to that Dignity. Sixtus, as I say, reading this passage in his Book; im∣mediately wrote to Macerata, to know if this Shoo-maker were living; which when he understood, he ordered the Governour of the place to send him up by one of his Officers. The poor Shoo-maker surprized, and affrighted with the news, that the Pope desired to see him in Rome, for he neither remembred any thing either of the shooes, or of the Giulio, it being a matter of forty years standing; so that at every step he made, he was still thinking, and wondring at these Summons, recalling to mind all the sins he had committed in his life, considering for which of them he was thither cited. Being come to Rome, and introduced to the Pope's presence; He asked him, whether he remembred ever to have seen him at Macerata? the poor Shoo-maker trembling, told him, No. Nor do you remember ever to have sold me a pair of shooes? No, said the poor Fellow shrinking up his shoulders: but, said the Pope, we well re∣member, that we are your Debtor, and have sent for you to pay you your Money; for we owe you a Giulio on account of a pair of shooes, which we are now to pay you with Interest according to agreement: and so calling for the Steward of his House to pay him the Giulio, with the Interest upon it for forty years which amounted to two Giulios more, he then dismissed the Shoo-maker, bidding him go in peace. The Shoo-maker having received his three Giulios; murmured, and com∣plained very much, that the Pope should send for him, and bring hm from so remote a place, and from his Trade and Employment, which was above twenty Crowns charge and damage to him, onely to give him three Giulios, or eighteen pence; which he always carried in his hand, and complained to every one he met. The news of the Shoo-ma∣ker's laments being brought to the Pope by his Spies; he presently
sent for him again, and demanded of him, if he had a Son? the Shoo-maker answering, yes, and that he was an honest good Priest of the Or∣der of the Servi; whereupon the Pope caused him to be called to Rome, and before the departure of his Father, invested him in a small Bisho∣prick within the Kingdom of Naples: and then bid the Shoo-maker make up his Account, and see, to what sum the Interest of his Giulio had amounted. Many are the stories of this nature recounted of this Pope, which we shall omit, contenting our selves to have given the Reader this familiar Tale, which seems too light, and frivolous for Hi∣story: yet since it is our end, and design to give a Character of the Popes; their humour, and disposition, may some times be more clearly shewn by familiar passages, than by the more profound transactions of business. The Jesuits, who formerly were in high esteem with Gregory XIII. and influenced his Counsels in such manner, as that he acted nothing but by their pleasure, and direction: were very studious to insinuate themselves in the like good Opinion of Sixtus; and to that end courted Cardinal Montalto, inviting him often to the Recreations, and Exercises of their Schools, that (if possible) they might prefer a Confessor to the Pope: which motion when it was made to Sixtus; he in great in∣dignation answered, That it were better, that the Jesuits confessed to the Pope, than the Pope to the Jesuits. Howsoever, they still continued their courtship towards him, and in∣vited him one day to hear Mass in the new Chappel built by Gregory; and being introduced thereunto by way of the Cloisters, he was detained a while by the young Scholars who rehearsed many Verses in honour of their great Benefactor Pope Gregory, particularly recounting the thou∣sand Benefits and Donations they had received from him; hoping by this example to excite Sixtus to the like bounty; but he not being a Person to be wheedled with fine Verses; after he had heard all they could say, he told them plainly: Fathers, said he, you are much mistaken, you take us to be Gregory, and we are Sixtus, and We promise you ever to remain the good Sixtus, and never to be the bad Gregory. At another time being persuaded by them to come to a solemn Festival celebrated at their College; they with that occasion shewed him the mag∣nificence, and neatness of their House, and the convenience of their Of∣fices: all which Sixtus much approving, merrily told them, That he would rather see their Treasury, than their Refectory: to which the Fa∣ther Rector answered: That they had never been so poor, as at present. Continue so still, said Sixtus, for unless you be poor, you shall never be truly Religious; for your Poverty is beneficial to the Church, and your Riches prejudicial to the Popes. By these sharp Replies, the Jesuits had touched the pulse of the Pope, and finding that nothing was to be gotten by him, would never trouble him afterwards with Requests or begging Petitions. Howsoever Sixtus in his heart loved and affected this People, eing excellent Spies, and such as brought him the best Intelligence; and therefore he was often heard to say, That the Jesuits were the best sort of Religious Orders, and useful in the Church, and that he loved them heartily, because they asked him nothing. Sixtus had for a long time got a fancy, or project in his head to con∣fine all the Courtesans, or Whores in Rome within a place, or circuit of the
City, as the Jews were; and having communicated this Design to the Governour of Rome, he was made sensible by him of the great difficulty of the thing; for that their numbers filled the greatest part of the City: howsoever, not being able to suffer the propudious, and shameless Cour∣tesans to live intermixed with the honourable, and vertuous Matrons; he banished the most common and impudent strumpets from the City, confining the remaining part within a certain limit, and quarter of the Town. But this remedy of Vice, enereased two great Evils: for the small number of Courtesans did not abate the sin, but procured greater custom and Trade to the Ladies of Pleasure, who having more employ∣ment than they could turn their hands unto: the looser sort of Italians for want of Women burned in lust one towards the other, and addicted themselves to that abominable, and unnatural Crime of Sodomy; of which the Pope being made sensible, he reversed his sentence, and gave license to the banished Whores to return to their usual stations: howso∣ever strict Orders were given, that Priests should not entertain Wenches in their Houses under the notion of Servants, or House-keepers; which yet was so connived at, that when it was told the Pope, that a certain Cardinal kept a Mistris; The better, said he, for having his Conscience stained with this scandal, he will be the more cautious, how he speaks boldly, or with freedom in our presence. This first year of the Pontificate of Sixtus was in the Month of De∣cember ended with the promotion of eight Cardinals, all Men of ho∣nour, and merit; amongst which Hippolito Aldobrandino of Florence was one, with title of Cardinal Pancratio, who was afterwards created Pope, and called Clement VIII. Sixtus being now at ease in his Chair, began his second year with the long desired work of raising the Obeliske, called by the Italians Aguglia,An. 1586. or Guglia, which had lain for many years neglected in the Circus of Nero, where now is the Sacristia or Vestry of St. Peter's Church. This Obeliske, as some Writers affirm, was made by Nycoreus, who reigned in Egypt about the time of Numa Pompilius; and that at first it was one hundred and fifty Cubits high, but in raising of it, it broke, and so was shortned fifty Cubits, which afterwards with several others of less mag∣nitude was brought to Rome, and consecrated to Octavianus Augustus, and Tiberius his adopted Son, as may be seen by this Insciption now remaining, Divo Caesari Divi Julii F. Aug. Tiberio Caesari Divi Aug. F. Augusto Sacrum. But being erected in the times of Christianity, it was consecrated to the Holy Cross, with this Motto: Sanct. Cruci Sacravit Sixtus V. Pont. Max. E priore sede avulsum, & Ces. Aug. & Tib. ablatum. On the Basis of it on the South side are these words; Sixtus V. Pont. Max. Cruci Invictae Obeliscum Vaticanum. ab impurâ superstitione expiatum justius, & felicius Consecravit Anno MD.LXXXVII. Pont. II.
To erect this Obelisk without breaking it, was accounted a matter of that difficulty, and Art, that none would undertake it: till at length Dome∣nico Fontana a rare Architect of Como contrived the Engines to perform the work, which were so many, that the materials of them, the labour, and the workmanship cost thirty six thousand Crowns; there is a Book extant in the Vatican Library, which I have seen, that describes all the Instruments, and Engines which were formed for that Design. The whole weight of the Obelisk rests on four Lions of Brass, which are placed on a Pedestal. Besides this great Work, Sixtus also was very industrious this year, and intent in great and mighty works of Munificence and Charity. For he raised, and repaired four other Obelisques in divers parts of Rome. He built also a Chappel in Santa Maria Maggiore which he dedicated to the Manger of Christ, called ad praesepe, which he adorned with rare, and precious stones of the finest Marble, Porphiry, Alabaster, Agats and the like, which cover the walls of the Chappel within; he erected a stately Sepulcre, or Monument in memory of Pius V. He was at great charge, and expence in bringing the Water by Aqueducts to his Palace of Monte Cavallo, antiently Mons Quirinus. He also brought Water to Rome by Pipes from the possessions of Prince Colonna far di∣stant from Rome; yet by the help of two thousand Men which he em∣ployed for the space of eighteen Months, he happily finished the same; the charge of which amounted to 270000 Crows, comprehending the sum of twenty five thousand pounds, which he gave to Prince Colonna in purchase of that stream of Water, which he had taken from his Land. To which Aqueduct he gave the name of Felice, which was the name he owned, when he was a Frier. He built also the Portico of the Lateran which is a Noble Sructure. He caused a Statue of St. Peter to be cast in Brass, and placed it on the Pillar of Trajan; and an other of St. Paul, which he set on the Column of Antonius Pius. He enlarged many of the streets in Rome, made them strait, and so wide, that five Coaches might pass abreast. He built a very stately Church and dedicated it to St. Jerome, and endowed it with a plentiful Revenue. But amongst all the magnificent structures which he hath raised, there is none so famous, and worthy of his Name as the Vatican Library, being about three hundred and eighteen foot in length, and sixty nine in breadth; on the Walls are painted all the Ge∣neral Councils in Fresco, with the famous Libraries mentioned by antient Authors, as also the manner of raising the Guglia or Obelisque before St. Peters. At the entry to this Library are two Statues of Marble, that on the right hand represents Aristides an antient Philoso∣pher of Smyrna, that on the lest is Hypolitus who first invented the perpetual Kalendar, he lived fourteen hundred years ago. The Books are all kept in Presses containing twenty thousand Manuscripts, and six∣teen thousand Books which are printed; round about thee first Cham∣ber the Pictures are placed of all those, who have been Library-keepers since Sixtus V. The Books commonly shewn here to Strangers are: The antient Copy of the Septuagint, a vast Bible in Hebrew, a little Book written on the bark of a Tree, certain Sermons, with Annotations wrote by Thomas Aquinas, and with his own hand, an old Terence wrote one thousand two hundred years ago, a Letter which Henry VIII. of England wrote to Anne of Bolen with his own hand, as also his Book
against Luther: hereunto is added the Duke of Ʋrbin's Library, be∣queathed to this place, as also that of the Prince Palatine Frederick, trans∣ported from Heidelberg to the Vatican, after that Town was plundered by the Duke of Bavaria. All which and many other rare Works of the like nature were performed at the charge of this Pope, which are now ex∣tant at Rome and commonly seen and observed by Travellers. Besides all which he built several other Colleges, Monasteries, and places of Charity at Bologna and in his own Country. And at a vast expence he turned the poor Village of Montalto, where he was born into a City, encom∣passing it about with a Wall, to perform which he was forced to cut through a Rock, and threw down a high Hill to make it equal to the lower Level; and to give some more esteem and honour to this place, he made it a Bishoprick, endowing it with a thousand Crowns of yearly Revenue, besides many other priviledges, and immunities which he be∣stowed both on the Diocese, and the Government of the City: during the time of which Work he built a Bridg at Rome over the Tybur which was of great use, and benefit to the Trade and Commerce of the City, called at this day il ponte Sisto tras Tevere. Thus far have we discoursed concerning the humour and disposition of this Pope, his Conduct, and Wisdom in the management of Affairs rela∣ting to Rome, and the Church, together with his Munificence, and great∣ness of his Soul in matters of building, and stately Structures, which have perpetuated his memory to these times. Let us now proceed to other particulars which may demonstrate his dexterity and conduct of Affairs relating to Negotiations with forein Princes; and in what man∣ner he studied to fortifie the Ecclesiastical State as well with the Sword of St. Paul, as the Keys of St. Peter. In order whereunto, in the first place, he formed and setled the Militia of the Church in so good a method, that he was able within the space of one Month to bring twenty thousand fighting Men into the Field; and in the next place, he consulted with the most knowing Enginiers in what manner the Ecclesiastical State might be most commodiously, and with most advantage fortified, the which was executed with most Labour, and Art on that side which borders on the Kingdom of Naples; which was a just cause of jealousie to the Spaniards, who by the words, and actions of this Pope, had long suspected, that his Intentions and De∣signs tended towards that Kingdom, the possession of which he had for a long time swallowed in his thoughts, resolving not longer to content himself with the bare feud, or tribute for it: the which jealousie was encreased, when they found the Pope intent in building ten new Gal∣lies, for defraying the cost of which, and of their maintenance, he im∣posed a new Tax on the people of Rome, and the whole Ecclesiastical State. About this time the Cantons of Switzerland, which continued firm to the Church of Rome, sent their Ambassadours to the Pope, not onely to make their acknowledgments of Obedience to the Papal Sea; but likewise to inform his Holiness of the unhappy state and condition of their Country, caused by the neighbourhood of the Protestant Cantons, who daily sent Preachers into their Dominions, who seducing many from the Catholick Doctrine, their numbers, and force did daily en∣crease. For prevention of which and to confirm the doubtful in the Ca∣tholick
Religion they desired, that the Pope would be pleased to send his Nuntio into those parts, which would be an encouragement to the people to continue in the way of truth, as well as an honour to their Country. The Pope with all readiness embracing the Proposition, di∣spatched Baptista Santorio Bishop of Fricarico and Steward of his Hous∣hold, to be, and remain his Nuntio within the Dominions of the Catho∣lick Cantons. Santorio being there arrived, found all things in great disorder, the people living without, (as it were) any respect, or dependance on the Roman Sea, by reason that for many years the Popes had not thought this Country worthy the charge or maintenance of a Nuntio therein. But now Santorio appearing there with the Character, and in the quality of a Nuntio, caused speedily a Diet to be convened in the Month of October 1586. at which two things were agreed, and concluded highly advantageous to the Papal Authority. The first was, that all the Depu∣ties, which were present in great numbers received the Communion from the hand of the Nuntio, and then entered into strict League and Confederacy together, solemnly swearing before the Altar to maintain, and uphold the Papal Authority, and to sacrifice their lives and fortunes in the defence thereof. In the second place, they gave full power and Authority unto the Nuntio to exercise a free, and Arbitrary Jurisdiction over all Ecclesiastical persons within their Dominions, subjecting them to his Courts as well in criminal, as in civil Causes: which was a con∣cession, that the Wise Republick of Venice did never judge fit to grant, notwithstanding all the bluster, and noise with which the Popes requi∣red, and challenged it from them. But this Power given to the Nuntio, was the cause soon after of some disturbance amongst the Cantons; for it happened, That one day the Nuntio having Complaints brought him against a certain Priest for scandal, and misbehaviour, he immediately issued out his Warrant to the chief Constable and his Officers to take, and seize the person of that Priest, and put him into safe custody: the Priest hearing of this prosecution, fled into the Dominions of the Pro∣testant Cantons, where the Officers pursuing him, took him, and by violence and force brought him thence, and secured him in the Nuntio's Prison. The news of this Attempt allarm'd all the Protestant Cantons, who by way of Reprisals seized the first Priest they could meet, and confined him within their own Prison, resolving not to set him at liberty, without the release, or enlargement of the other. This Accident caus∣ed great disturbance and commotions both amongst the Protestants, and Catholicks: Diets being called on both sides, matters ran so high, that a general rupture, or War was feared of all the Cantons. The Nuntio being also sensible of these disorders, and not knowing un∣to what they might amount, wrote to the Pope the whole sum of this matter, to which he returned answer in this manner: We have sent you to pacifie, and quiet matters, and not to make disturbances, to give ease, and repose to the Catholicks, and not to put Arms into the hands of the Hereticks, to convert the one, and not to put the others into danger, no people will be contented to lose their own right; the point of Jurisdiction is more nice, and brittle than a Christal Glass, and therefore those cases are to be managed tenderly, and with severe caution: troubles, and dis∣quiets are dangerous to Catholicks, but to Hereticks it may be profitable
to fish in troubled Waters: to give to Hereticks is a great evil, but to take from them is highly dangerous. Be therefore prudent in this case, both for your own quiet, and for mine. The Nuntio collecting from this Answer, that it was the Pope's pleasure to accommodate these matters; He ordered it so, that the Priest should be set at liberty, but by way of escape, rather than by formal enlargement; the like expedient the Pro∣testants took, as to the other Priest, by which means these matters were pacified, and concluded. Henry III. King of France, (as before related) having composed his quarrel with the Pope about reception of his Nuntio the Bishop of Na∣zaret; so good and fair a correspondence passed between them, that the King adventured to demand license of the Pope to raise a hundred thou∣sand Crowns from the revenue of the Church. Sixtus who was unwil∣ling to deprive the Church of such a sum, nor yet to disoblige the King by a plain and positive refusal; entertained his Ambassadour the Mar∣quess Pisani with a delatory Answer, such as this, We shall consider, we shall do nothing rashly, but with Mature consideration; which being often repeated, and the Ambassadours wearied with such insignificant puts off, which according to the stile of Italy, and Rome, imported no less than a civil denial, acquainted the King with their Sentiments in the case, which were, that nothing could be expected from the Pope's bounty or concession; upon which advice, and upon a belief, that this refusal was instilled by such Instruments, as were employed in the Catholick League, and particularly by the Duke of Guise, and his party: the King resolved to stand on his own bottom and to steer a course between the League, and the Hugonots, for as he durst not confide in the Catholick League, so he feared the issue of the War against his Protestant Subjects, both which though to appearance were equally dangerous, yet a peace with the latter seemed most safe, and desireable; in pursuance of this Coun∣sel, a peace being concluded with the Protestants by negotiation of the Queen, the promotors of the League, of which the Duke of Guise was the Chief, dispatched an Express immediately to Rome, giving the Pope to understand the matter in these precise words: That the cause of Re∣ligion was betrayed: That the Cause of the Hugonots was openly, and publickly favoured: That the measures of the War were broken, and all expectation of good, and benefit lost, which might redound by means of the League to the Catholick Cause: That the heart of the King seemed much estranged to the Catholick party, resolving to e∣spouse, protect, and maintain the Heresie in France. The Pope, so soon as he received this Intelligence, called the French Ambassadour, to whom with words full of disdain, and fury he com∣plained of the proceedings of the King, whom he mentioned as one in∣fected with Heresie, and already alienated and estranged from the Papal Sea; and having called a Consistory, Letters were wrote to the Nuntio Nazaret, with Orders to intimate the Pope's just complaints to the King, giving him to understand, how much he did resent the Resolution he had taken to the prejudice of the Catholick Church, which was of such ill consequence, as took deep impression in the mind of the Pope, and would be recorded with everlasting Characters of Infamy in the Histo∣ries of his Reign. The Nuntio having received these Instructions, and being backed by the instigation of the Duke of Guise, represented the
Pope's sence in warm, and passionate terms: In return unto which, the King, contrary to the equal temper of his nature, retorted an Answer in brisk and sharp Expressions: That it was a fine, and easie matter for the Pope to stand and behold at a distance the miseries and afflictions of his Country, and to give Counsel without assistance, or contribution to the War; for want of which, and of a license to alienate so much of the Lands of the Church, as might serve to raise the sum of a hundred thousand Crowns, he was forced for preservation of his Kingdom, and Regal Dignity, to ac∣cept those Conditions, which they called, ruinous to the Church. And then moderating his passion a little, in more gentle, and mild terms, he de∣sired the Nuntio, to assure the Pope; That he would ever adhere, and remain constant to the faith of the Catholick Church, and act in every thing to the advancement of it, so far, as he was able, and that the want onely of Money had forced him to this resolution. These particulars being wrote to Rome, quieted a little the mind of the Pope, who did all the time before, do nothing either in the Consistory with the Cardi∣nals, or in his Discourses with the forein Ministers, but rail and storm against the French King. But being now satisfied by his Nuntio that the King had changed his mind, and would be induced to continue the War against the Protestants, provided he could be assisted with Aid from the Church; the Pope immediately appointed a Bull to be drawn up, and sealed, giving Authority and Power to the King, not onely to raise a hundred thousand Crowns out of the Estate of the Church, as the King had demanded, but also twenty thousand Crowns more for better encouragement to continue, and persevere in the assurances given; en∣joyning the Nuntio to raise those sums on the Clergy, without any con∣tradiction, or delatory proceedings. Thus as Sixtus was zealous, and profuse in such Expences, as he judged conducive to the support of the Papal Authority; so he was no less generous in works, which might tend to the honour and ornament of it: In which consideration reflecting one day on the manner, and garb, in which he desired his Nuntios might live in the Courts of forein Princes; he thought it would be more magnificent to buy, or purchase Palaces for them, in the Capital Cities, and Courts, rather than to rent Houses which appeared mean and low in the Eyes of the World. The Venetians so soon as they understood the Pope's Design herein, which they were extreamly forward to gratifie, immediately wrote to their Ambassadour residing at Rome, ordering him to acquaint the Pope, that the Senate out of their good will, and affection to the Papal Sea, had resol∣ved to bestow on the Nuntios Apostolical a Palace, wherein to reside at Venice, and to remain to them, and their Successours for ever: And ac∣cordingly gave possession, to Matteucci the Pope's Nuntio then residing, of a magnificent Palace in the square of St. Francis at Venice; and by Deeds, and conveyances under the Seal of St. Mark passed over the right, and title thereof unto the present Nuntio and his Successours for ever. The Pope having received the news hereof, confirmed by the authentick Copy of the Deed, was so greatly pleased, that with a Letter full of kind Expressions he returned his thanks to the Republick for their generous Present; and lest he should seem to be backward or defective in the like liberal returns, he assigned to the Minister of Venice an other Palace at Rome, in lieu of that which they had presented to his Nuntio
at Venice. Other Princes according to this Example were inclined to ac∣commodate the Papal Minister with a Habitation; in expectation of a like exchange at Rome; but the truth was, the Pope began to grow sensible of an inconvenience in this sort of Presents; for that he could neither find Palaces in Rome sufficient to receive so many Ministers, as were sent him from forein Princes, in lieu of those which were allotted to his Nuntios in the respective Courts; nor situation of places so fitted to the humour and rank of each Representative, but that the condition of the Palace being more, or less magnificent might administer cause of exception, and quarrel to the respective Ministers: for which reason the Pope consider∣ing better of this matter, refused after the Present made him by Venice, to accept the like from any other Prince, declining the Obligation with a Complement, and an Excuse; and that rather than put the Prince to so great an Expence, he was resolved to purchase Houses for the con∣venience of his Nuntios with his own Money. Thus as Sixtus was haughty in his nature, and affected high, and glorious matters; so he was severe, and morose, judging every criminal action, or misbehaviour in Men to proceed from a contempt, or want of fear, which Men ought to bear towards his Government. Several in∣stances of which might be given; but because we would not enlarge into many particulars, we shall only mention one Story not unpleasant to be related, which was this: The Statue of Pasquine (into the hand of which all Libels are put at Rome, from whence they are called Pas∣quils) was one day covered with a very dirty Shirt; and that other Statue called Marforio asking the reason of it, Pasquine answered, be∣cause his Landress had left him to be made a Princess, alluding to the Lady Camilla the Pope's Sister, who from a Landress was promoted to be a great Lady. The report of this Pasquil was immediately brought to the Pope, who conceiving thereat a secret indignation, endeavoured by his Spies to detect the Author of it; but this being a secret known only to the Party himself, the discovery seemed impossible by other means, than the Confession of the Author; to procure which, the Pope pub∣lished an Edict, wherein he promised upon the word of a Pope to give two thousand Pistols, together with the safety of his life to any person, who should reveal the matter and confess himself to be the Author of this Pasquil; and on the contrary threatned the Gallows, and Torments to whomsoever should be discovered, and by sufficient testimony be proved guilty. The Author being more covetous of the two thousand Pistols, than wise, went directly to the Pope, and confessed and acknowledged him∣self to be the Person, who made the Pasquil: which when the Pope heard; he admired not a little at the boldness of the Man, and earnest∣ly looking on him gave him this Answer: We are obliged to maintain the word and faith we have given you, and therefore we order, that the Money promised you, shall be paid: which being performed, and a Re∣ceipt given for it, the Pope farther added: It is true, said he, We promised you the Money, and your life, both which we have performed, but howsoever we have reserved another Reward for you in our breast, which is a Sentence that both your Hands, and Tongue be cut off, that so you may not be able to speak, or write more Satyrs of this kind. In pur∣suance of this intention of the Pope, this person was taken into custody▪
and immediately his Confession produced as a testimony against him be∣fore the Judges; by which being convicted, immediately without delay his Hands were cut off, and his Tongue bored through; which sort of severe poceedings affrighted all Rome, which was not accustomed to such Cruelties; the which action, with several others of the like nature strook an awe, and fear into the minds of all Men, so that generally people walk'd with great circumspection, lest they should fall into the merciless, and unrelenting hands of Sixtus. Cardinal Buoncompagno, who was constituted Gran Penitentiary by Gregory XIII. dying this year with great Riches; that Office by his decease becoming vacant, it was expected, that the Pope would have conferred the place on Cardinal Montalto his Nephew: but to convince the World, that merit, and not affection prevailed in his mind, he readily conferred that Office on Car∣dinal Aldobrandino, a person of singular prudence and Learning, and one whom he gladly found an occasion to gratifie the services he had perform∣ed to the Church; the choice of a person so deserving was acceptable to all Men, and of whom the Pope conceived such an esteem, that he communi∣cated to him all the secrets of his Counsels, being confidently assured of the prudence, sincerity, and profoundness of his judgment. 87.The year 1587. being the third year of the Pontificate of Sixtus, was now entered, when the People of Rome reflecting on the great plenty, and abundance of all provisions within the City, caused by the care and wise contrivance of the Pope, whilest all the neighbouring Dominions laboured under want, and scarcity: And also beholding the City of Rome by the munificence of this Pope adorned with stately Edifices; the Citizens received so much satisfaction thereby, that they erected a Statue of Brass to him in the Capitol with this Inscription: Sixto V. Pont. Max. ob quietem publicam compressâ Sicariorum, Exulumque licentiâ, restitutam Annonae inopiam, sublevatam urbem, Edificiis, Viis, Aquaeductu illustratam, S.P.Q.R. Sixtus for his divertisement did often use to walk about the City In∣cognito, or in disguise; in which kind of perambulation passing once in his Coach by the Convent of the Holy Apostles he was pleased to alight and enter into the Convent; the Gate being open, he went first into the Porters Lodge, who was then a Probationer, or in the first year of his Novitiate: the Pope surprizing him, whilest he was eating a dish of Beans, was pleased with the remembrance of his own poor condition, when in the like posture he was forced to content himself with the same Diet; in contemplation of which, he sat down on the stairs, and taking a wooden Spoon began to eat heartily, and help the Porter to make an end of his Mess. The standers by wondered at the humour, and fancy of the Pope, and especially to see him eat up the oiled Beans so heartily; which when he had done, he arose up and thanked the Porter: saying, These Beans will add two years of life to us, because we have eaten them with a good appetite, and without fear. And then lifting up his eyes to Heaven, he said, Blessed be thy Name most Almighty Father, that thou hast grant∣ed this favour to thy High Priest to eat once in peace and quietness. Thus much he was apprehended to say, out of the caution and fear he had of Poison; for he was confident, that the Porters Beans were free from such Ingredients; though he could not be secure of his own Dishes at home; of which living in continual suspition, he confined his Cook al∣ways
ways to his Kitchin, keeping a Guard always upon him to keep him from all correspondence or communication with others. The Pope thus pleased with his Entertainment, commanded that the Porter, who was a Probationer onely, should be immediately vested in the Friers habit; which being performed; in his presence he gave him his Blessing at de∣parture, adding these words: We have been what you are, do you endea∣vour to be what we are. But we must not omit to recount one pleasant passage, before we re∣turn to more serious, and important Affairs. Sixtus out of an affection to the Friers of his own Order, had a desire to celebrate this year a Chapter General, over which he would preside in Person, giving license not onely to such Friers as were invited thereunto; but also to all others, who had the curiosity to be there present: and not to burden the Order with the expence, which such a concourse of people might bring, he declared that he would bear the charge on his own account; by reason of which, never was any Chapter at Rome celebrated with such State, and Magnificence as this. At this Chapter a new General of the Order being chosen; the Pope commanded, that after the Election all the Friers should walk in procession to kiss his Feet at the Vatican; giving the Friers to understand the day before, that he gave license to every one of them to demand some grace, or favour from him, by which di∣stinguishing Act of benevolence, he might give sufficient testimony to the World of that love, and affection which possessed his heart to∣wards the Companions of his Order. The Friers receiving this gracious Message by their Cardinal Prote∣ctor, were highly exalted in their spirits, and every one began to con∣sider with himself what Boon, or Gift, or priviledg would be most cor∣responding to his own convenience. In the mean time the report of this excessive Grace flying about into all Convents of the City: the Friers of other Orders began to envy the happiness and fortune of the Cordeliers: the Dominicans murmured against Pius V. who had never evidenced the like respect towards them: the Cardinals also repined, and blamed the prodigality, and excess of the Pope in promising favour to every individual Frier of his Order; when on all the Cardinals together he never bestowed one ray of his bounty, nor granted one priviledg to the whole Sacred College. But these Discourses little touched the mind of Sixtus, who the next day gave admission to the Friers one after the other, as they were in Precedency, and Seniority; at the reception of whom the Pope sat in his Chair of State, and his Secretary on his left hand at a little Table to take their Names, and a brief of the Petitions, and Requests they made, the which for the most part were so ridiculous, and extravagant, as yielded the Pope, subject sufficient for laughter, and pass-time: For one being a Napolitan whispering in the Pope's Ear, desired, that he might have license to renounce his Order, and marry, or else, that he might have a Dispensation to keep a Wench, and not be liable to the Censure of his Superiours: some of them demanded to be made Cardi∣dinals, others to be made Arch-bishops, Bishops, and Abbots with other Dignities: some would have crept into the Offices which belonged to other Orders: one particularly demanding to be made Chief Master of the Sacred Palace, which belongs to the Dominicans: and an other desired
to have Bishops removed to make places for them. In short, their Re∣quests were so exorbitant, that to satisfie them all, Sixtus must have overturned the whole Order of Friers, and unhinged all the Dignities, and Rules of the Church. Only it is observable that a poor Lay-Bro∣ther, who had been a Cook, and Butler in a Convent, being one of the last to kiss the feet of the Pope; shed many tears of joy at his admit∣tance to so unexpected an honour, which having done, the Petition he made was this: That since his Holiness was pleased to suffer such a poor wretch as he, to speak to him, all he had to desire, was onely this, that he would vouchsafe out of his great bounty to build a Fountain for his Convent, which suffered very much (as his Holiness well knew) for want of Water. The Friers having thus in their order exposed their several Petitions, they were called in together: and then in a full Assembly, the Pope made this general Answer to them all; Had your petitions, and demands been correspondent to our expectation, we should have made no difficulty of giving satisfaction to your desires: We imagined, that you, who are persons sequestred from the World, would have entertained no thoughts of particular interest: for Friers having their wills restrained, and bound up with chains of Obedience; can possess nothing in reference to their own persons, but onely with regard to the publick benefit; to which Rule had you confined your desires, our bounty had been enlarged to the ultimate concession of what you could demand; which we are now forced to deny, lest we should offend against the Rules of your primary Institution and Vows, which require you to mortifie, rather than me to gratifie your Ambition. Thus were the Friers all dismissed from the Pope's presence, where Pe∣titions and Desires became the common talk and laughter of the Town, and served to discover the secret, that the minds of mortified Friers are as capable of vain thoughts and ambitious desires, as those of secu∣lar Men, who profess not the like strictness of mortification and sancti∣ty. Howsoever, the poor Lay-brother's request for a Fountain was taken into consideration; for that being agreeable to the Munificent hu∣mour of Sixtus was received, and immediately ordered to be put in execution by bringing Water to the Convent from the Pope's Gardens at Monte-cavallo, which flows there in plentiful streams. But now to proceed unto more serious matters. Towards the end of this year 1587. Stephen Battory Prince of Tran∣silvania, and King of Poland, having reigned in that Kingdom for the space of nine years, departed this life: his death was universally la∣mented by all, having proved a most excellent Prince, and a zealous Champion of the Christian Religion against the Turk: for he recovered the Dukedoms of Suevia, and Smolensko from the Moscovites, and united them again to the Crown of Poland. He also behaved himself with constant resolution against the Turk, who having in the year 1584. de∣manded according to antient Articles assistance of some Polish Troops against the Persians: Battory resolutely denied them to him, saying, That, whereas the white Eagle of Poland had lately moulted her feathers, and was displumed, and become weak, she had now recovered her wings, and her train, and had sharpned both her beak, and her talons: Which brisk Reply and bravery of Battory in all the actions of his Reign,
did calm the spirit of the Turks, and checked those frequent Incursions, which they made into Poland. But Battori, as we have said, dying this year, the Nobility of that Kingdom were very desirous to elect a King, who might in Wisdom, and Courage prove equal to the valour of the deceased Prince. Many there were, who offered themselves Candidates for that Election. Ri∣dolphus the Son of Maximilian the Emperor, was one, who for being of the House of Austria, seemed qualified for that Crown: Some cast their eyes on the Duke of Parma, who for his prudence, and experience in War, was one of the most renowned Captains of those days: but being an Italian, it was suspected, that his humour would not be agrre∣able to the customs of Poland. The Vaivod of Transilvania, and Car∣dinal Battori were others, who appeared fitly qualified for this Dignity: the first being a young Man, and full of spirit, assisted with the advan∣tage of his own Riches, and in great reputation with the Turk, appear∣ed with a lustre deserving a Crown, but having been Nephew to the late King, his Alliance prejudiced his pretentions, not being consistent with the policy of that Nation, to have a succession in the same Family; the same consideration also was an impediment to the Cardinal, though otherwise a Prince of excellent Endowments. The Duke of Ferrara was an other proposed, but he, as well as the Duke of Parma was an Italian, whose humour was inconsistent with the Poles. Many Nobles also of Poland it self seemed fitly qualified both in Riches, and Vertue for that Dignity; amongst which Zamowski the Grand Chancellour had a most considerable party: for, he having managed all the Affairs of that Kingdom during the Reign of Battori, who commu∣nicated all his Counsels with him, and entrusted him with the greatest secrets of State; by which he became the most experienced in Affairs, and high in Reputation, living little inferiour to the Royal pomp: how∣soever the Nobles not enduring at that time subjection to any of their own degree, and Country; and having never for the space of six hundred years admitted a Prince of their own to reign over them, they would neither now introduce a Novelty repugnant to their antient customs, and constitutions. Upon the preceding considerations the election falling on none of the foregoing Princes; the Votes came at length to concenter between the Prince of Sweden, and the Arch-Duke of Austria called Maximilian, Bro∣ther of the Emperor Ridolphus, a person of that affable, and obliging deportment, as took much with the humour of the Polanders. How∣soever, the contrary party and the most prevalent objected; that being Brother to the Emperor, he might be too potent, and in time by the power of Germany subvert the Government, and turn it from an elective to an hereditary Kingdom: wherefore totally declining Maximilian, this party resolutely fixed on the Prince of Sweden a youth of twenty years of age, greatly favoured by the Poles for being descended from the Fa∣mily of Jagellona; which for having added the Dukedom of Lituania to their Commonwealth, was so highly esteemed by them, that the merit to that Family could be no otherwise extinguished, than by transferring the Crown to the Prince thereof. But these considerations in favour of Sweden were turned to quite contrary Sentiments by the differing par∣ty,
so that the whole body of the Nobility being divided between these two Princes, the Election still remained in suspense; both designing to determine the Dispute by force of Arms. Whilest the Election remained under these doubtful circumstances, Sixtus wrote to the Arch-bishop of Naples, then Nuntio residing at the place of Election, secretly to favour the side of Maximilian, but yet with such caution, as not too far to engage himself, but that, in case fortune favoured the Prince of Sweden, he might without a blemish de∣clare himself for that party, that so he might own in some measure his Election unto him. Maximilian to make good his cause appearing before Cracovia with an Army of sixteen thousand fighting Men, demanded of the Citizens to receive him in; but they refused it, and sent with all diligence to the Prince of Sweden to expedite his March, for that delays in this case were dangerous, and that the day of his Coronation was fixed to be celebra∣ted on the Feast of St. Luke, then near approaching: In the mean time, they repaired their Fortifications, and strengthened their Suburbs, ma∣king daily Sallies on the Forces of Maximilian, and most commonly were successful therein to the great encouragement of the Citizens. In a short time after, Ambassadours arrived at Cracon from the Prince of Sweden, advising that the Prince, though detained by contrary Winds, was come as far as Donzilca, and that though it was impossible for him to be so soon with them as St. Luke's day; yet certainly he would not fail to be there by St. Martin's, which was on the 15th. of Novem∣ber, and be ready to receive that Dignity on the Sunday following; for according to the custom of that Country the Coronation must always be solemnized on the Lord's Day. During all this time the Army of Maximilian was greatly weakned for want of provisions; and having neither Wine, nor good Beer, they were forced to drink bad Waters, which with the cold and moisture of the season caused Fluxes and Dysenteries and other distempers amongst the Soldiery, which reduced them to small numbers. Howsoever Ma∣ximilian leaving the City of Cracovia, marched towards Pietricovia with intention to stop the march of the Prince of Sweden: but finding that the Army of his Enemy was greater, than his own, and that he recei∣ved the worst in many Skirmishes, he retreated to Bellone, and thence to Pitschen of the frontiers of Silesia belonging to the Duke of Briga. But being pursued thither by the Enemy, he was there besieged, and after∣wards taken Prisoner towards the end of January 1588. The Pope who was greatly concerned for this disgrace of Maximilian, dispeeded Cardinal Aldobrandino into Poland to treat a Peace, and an Accommodation between Maximilian, and the Prince; the which after various difficulties, and Disputes was happily concluded, about the begin∣ning of March 1589. The Articles of which were, that Maximilian should renounce all Title, and pretence to the Crown of Poland by reason of the late Election, or any other demand whatsoever; and that the Prince of Sweden should remain the lawful and undoubted King: which being agreed the Prince took possession, and was named Sigismond III. The Pope, who was no less zealous for the success of the King's Arms in France against his Protestant Subjects; sent a Sword to the Duke of Guise, who was chief of the Catholick League, as he had lately done
to the Prince Farnese, who was Governour of Flanders; the which was delivered by a Bishop who was purposely sent to present it, and there∣with to tender his paternal love, and benediction to the Duke, assuring him that he possessed a large room in the heart and breast of the Pope. The Ceremony of delivering this Sword was performed with such pomp, and triumph at Paris, and with such popular acclamations of the multitude in favour of Guise, as administred just cause of jealousie, and fear to the King; and though Guise was ambitious enough to be pleased therewith, yet being immoderate, and irregular, his modesty told him, that they were undecent. The King in the mean time being eclipsed by the po∣pular grandeur of Guise, and by the troubles of a Civil War with which his Kingdom was infested, did seem to resent the favours which the Pope shewed to Guise, as unseasonable; of which when Sixtus had knowledg, and of the popular acclamations at the delivery of his Sword, he was much troubled; for he being of a humour always desirous to maintain Sovereignty in its highest degree of Honour, and Power, did by a Letter to the King exhort him to maintain his Prerogatives, and conserve the honour of his Crown against the Insolencies, and rebellions of his Sub∣jects: adding, That a Canker in the bowels of his State was curable onely by cauterizing, and by fire, and Sword: and that it was necessary to vent some of that blood, which was too redundant in the veins of his Subjects. The King made frequent reflections on this Letter, and often gave it to the Duke of Guise to read, and consider: and being one day in Par∣liament, where many Debates arose touching the ways, and means by which the Civil Wars might be accommodated, and a good understand∣ing produced between him and his Subjects; the King declared the great aversion of his mind to blood, or other extremities; which though he might justly by the Counsels, and persuasions of the Pope, yet he was more tender of the lives of his Subjects, than to cure his troubles by such severe Remedies; and to confirm the truth thereof, he produced the Pope's Letter, causing it publickly to be read in that Assembly: which when the Parliament heard, they Blessed themselves, and as well the Catholicks, as Protestants remained astonished and scandalized at this cruelty of the Universal Pastor, who with such little remorse could suck the blood of Christ's Sheep, as if he had rather been the Wolf, than Shepherd of the Christian Flock. Which when the Pope un∣derstood, and was informed of all the Satyrs, and Libels which the Pro∣testants had composed on this occasion, he was greatly disturbed, that the King should so publickly expose his Counsels, which he designed for his secret directions; and having signified his resentment thereof by his Nuntio, he would never afterwards adventure to write him a Letter, but on all occasions of business referred himself by word of mouth to the report of his Nuntio. And now Sixtus whose thoughts were ever employed on means which might enlarge, or make great the Church; did much incite Philip II. King of Spain to make War on Elizabeth Queen of England, pres∣sing him to re-assume his Right to that Kingdom which he had once go∣verned; and for encouragement thereunto, he promised Count Olivarez the King's Ambassadour at Rome, that so soon as the Spanish Army should be landed on any part of the English shoar, he would immediately con∣tribute
a million of Crowns to that Design. Nor was the Pope moved hereunto out of a zeal onely to Religion, but out of a secular Design; supposing that the chief Flower of the Nobility and Soldiery of Naples being drained thence on this Enterprize, he might have a more facil passage to the possession of that Kingdom. In pursuance therefore of this Design, a great and wonderful Fleet of vast Caracks to the number of one hundred and fifty Sail being set to Sea, on which were twenty three thousand Land Soldiers, with two thousand pieces of Cannon, of which the Duke of Medina Sidonia was made General; they entered the Channel of England, where being met by a small Fleet of Ships under the Command of Sir Francis Drake, several broad-sides passed between them: but at length the Di∣vine Providence assisting England, and defending the Protestant Cause; the valour of the English, and the successful direction of the Fire-ships prevailed with admirable fortune over the Spaniards, against whom also God himself fighting, (as we may say) by his Storms and Tempests: totally defeated, and destroyed this invincible Armada, as we may more at large read in our Chronicles of England. Sixtus having received the news of this unhappy defeat, wrote Let∣ters to Philip to condole with him for the loss: and therewith taking an occasion to blame the management and conduct of his Officers, he attributed the miscarriage of all to the want of care, and experience of the Chief Commanders: by which reflection of disgrace his intent was, to prevent all Demands from him of reparation for this loss; and on this subject he proceeded in a publick Consistory to blame, and tax every Individual Chief both in the Army, and in the Council of ill ad∣ministration; onely he took upon him to excuse Alexander Farnese Go∣vernour of the Low-Countries, and to answer the aspersions which his Enemies had charged upon him, declaring him to be the onely person, who for his personal Valour, and excellency of his Conduct was the most approved Captain of that Age. This Letter of Condolance wrote by the Pope was dispatched to his Nuntio at Madrid to be delivered to the King, whose constancy of mind, and evenness of temper was such, that though the Nuntio well knew he had no need of Cordials, or consolatory Exhortations, yet the Commands of his Master, were to be obeyed, and the formality obser∣ved. Whilest King Philip was reading the Letter, he often smiled, as if the Stile had rather been to congratulate his Victory, than to condole for his loss: Howsoever he thanked the Nuntio, and promised to re∣turn an Answer thereunto speedily, the which he accordingly did in the space of two days after in words to this effect. That his Holiness would be pleased together with him to render thanks to God Almighty, for being pleased to conserve the remnant of his Fleet from such dreadful storms, and tempests, and for bestowing on him Riches, and Power sufficient to set out, and equippe an other equal to the former. That he had sent his Fleet to fight against the Enemies of Christ, but not to Combat with the Seas, and Winds, and therefore saw no cause to blame his Officers either Civil or Military: And in fine, perceiving the subtil manner of the Pope to forestall his de∣mands of succours, or reparations, he concluded his Letter in this man∣ner: That the loss did as well concern the Pope, as himself, by whose
directions, and encouragement he had undertaken that Enterprise: That he having had the glory to have lost a Fleet in the service of Christ; had already performed his part; and that now for the future the next attempt belonged to the Church, in which he promised to follow, but not to precede. It was believed, that the King wrote with this resolution, and indifferency of mind to the Pope; to let him know that this misfortune did not abate his Courage, or force in defence of his own Dominions; for the King was jealous, and had cause sufficient to suspect, that the Gallies which the Pope had lately built, and the vast sums of Money, which he had lately amassed were with design on the Kingdom of Naples; on which the Count Olivarez Ambassadour at Rome, having always a vigilant Eye, did constantly inculcate to the Pope in his Discourses: That so much as his Master had lost in seeking the Conquest of others Kingdoms, as much he did not doubt but to recover on any Prince, who should attempt on his Dominions. This year 1588. famous for the destruction of the Spanish Armada, was signalized also towards the end thereof on the 23d. of December by the death of the Duke of Guise, a Prince of such popular esteem, that he appeared greater than the King, and to eclipsed the Sovereignty, that not longer enduring to be so clouded, he resolved to break through the obscurity, by the destruction of the Duke, whom the King caused to be assassinated by eight Executioners, as he was entering into his Closet, being thereunto called by his Command; these Officers of the King's displeasure so effectually performed their work, by the mortal stabs they gave him, that he had not time to utter one word, but onely breathed out his life with dying groans: the same day the Cardinal his Brother was imprisoned, and the next day being the Eve of Christmas was put to death: the which misfortune to the House of Guise was followed by the imprisonment of the Cardinal of Bourbon the Pope's Legat at Avig∣non, the Arch-bishop of Lions, and of the eldest Son of the Duke of Guise. The news of the Duke's death was dispeeded to Rome with such di∣ligence by an Express, that the Pope received it on the 3d. of Janua∣ry 1589. at the same time, that he was discoursing with the Cardinal Joyeuse touching the Affairs, and interest of France. The Pope at the arrival hereof, did not seem troubled, or in the least manner surprized; for though the Duke was a zealous Defender of the Roman Catholick Religion, yet considering that he was ambitious, and popular, and one who checked the Sovereign power; the Pope who was a great Assertor of the Monarchical Authority in its Supreme degree, received the news of his unhappy fate without any remorse, or resentment; and so shrink∣ing up his shoulders, said: Had we been King of France, we should have done the same. And when the particulars were all recounted, he added, Such is commonly the destiny of Men, who committed many Errors with subtil Arts, but then know not how to conserve themselves with mature judgment, and due caution. But when about four days after that Intel∣ligence came, how that the Cardinal of Guise was likewise put to death, and that the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Arch-bishop of Lions were im∣prisoned; he then began to fume and storm like an enraged Bear, venting his passion with ten thousand violent expressions against the King, clapping his hands, and stamping with his feet on the floor, in such manner as af∣frighted all his Servants, and Attendance.
Henry III. of France being acquainted with the humour of Sixtus; and how apt he was to resent the least injuries towards Ecclesiastical persons, and encroachment on his Authority; dispatched Girolamo Gondi a Florentine Gentleman with all expedition to Rome to join with his Ambassadour the Marquess Pisani in making excuses for the death of the Cardinal, and the imprisonment of the Cardinal of Bourbon, and Arch-Bishop of Lions, being thereunto necessitated contrary to his own nature for the conservation of his own life, and Crown. Gondi being arrived at Rome, and having consulted together with the Ambassadour, the way, and manner, to address themselves unto the Pope; and being admitted to Audience, the Pope with a stern Countenance looked on them, and with sharp, and severe terms began to reproach the King, wondering how he could dare to violate the immunities, and priviledges of the Ecclesiastical State, and the dignity of Cardinals, and against all Laws both Divine, and humane, could entertain so much wickedness in his heart, as to murther a Cardinal, and imprison two others of eminent dignity in the Church, as if they had been subjected to the Secular power. The Ambassadours for Reply hereunto in modest terms, but yet with grave, and unmoved constancy began to relate the Treason, and Plots of which the Cardinal was guilty contrary to the Faith, and Alle∣giance which he owed unto the King, with whom also the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Arch-bishop of Lions had been Complices. It is true, said they, it would have best become the righteousness, and judgment of a King to have proceeded in a juditiary way according to all the methods, and rules of Law, but the Cardinal assisted by the power of his Brother, and by the Authority of the two other potent Prelates, was become too strong for the Law, or to be treated by the usual for∣malities of common Process; for they having forced the King to aban∣don his Palace, and fly in disguise through the streets of Paris, there remained no mild terms of Accommodation, but either the King must become a Subject unto them, and divest himself of his Dignity, and re∣sign his Power into the hands of those Guardians, as if he were in his pupillage, or years of minority, or else he must serve himself of those means, which God appointed him for conservation of his Crown, and Regal Office in which he was anointed. In fine, they concluded, that the King was an obedient Son of the Church, and was ready to satisfie the desires of his Holiness to the utmost of his power; and to that end he had expresly sent this Gondi now present before him, humbly to be∣seech his Holiness to pardon what was past, and as a testimony, and evidence of his reconciliation to send him his Blessing. But Sixtus having neither by these reasons, nor yet by the gentle and submissive terms of the Ambassadours, abated the fury and anger which appear∣ed in his countenance: Replyed with a loud Voice; That, he was well assured, that Gondi was dispatched on an other Errand, than this; and that by any thing they had said, there was no judgment to be made of sorrow, or repentance in the King for the Crimes he had com∣mitted, or of such obedience, which they professed to the Apostolical Sea, so long as contrary to the priviledges thereof, he detained the Prelates in Prison; and that in case he expected absolution, he was to seek it with tears, and by a Person express, and employed to no other purpose, and that there ought to be a Session of Prelates thereupon,
to consider, whether such repentance were real, and unfeigned. And at last concluded with these sharp words. You, said he, think you have to do with some poor simple Frier, that is unacquainted with Men, and the World; but you shall find, that you have to do with Sixtus, who is ready to ex∣pend blood in defence of the Dignity of the Holy See. After which he dismissed the two Ambassadours, and the next day called a Consistory, in which he appeared with a countenance full of Choler which boiled in his breast; and then began to exclaim against his Legat Morosini resi∣ding at Paris, as if he had consented to the death of the Cardinal, or at least might have prevented both that and the imprisonment of the Pre∣lats, in case he had vigorously appeared against such indirect Counsels: In the next place he railed against some Cardinals, who had the bold∣ness to excuse the murther which the King had committed; wondering that Cardinals should so little esteem their Dignity, and degree, as to ex∣pose the sanctity of their purple to be profaned, by the unhallowed vio∣lences of an usurped jurisdiction. As to us (said he) it concerns little what affronts are put on the Cardinals dignity, but we are sure, that it is of a high consequence to you: for we cannot believe, that you would readily consent to be dispoiled of their Authority, your liberties, pre∣rogatives, and other priviledges with which you are adorned: of which you will certainly be, if this murther of a Cardinal be connived at, or passed by without any resentment. We therefore are resolved to per∣form our duty, and do that which God, and his Laws require at Our hands: and if from thence, as you may possibly object, ill consequences ensue to the Kingdom of France, we shall remain acquitted in the sight of God; for justice must be done, though the World should be ruined, and dissolved thereby. The Cardinals remaining all silent, none daring to make a Reply. The Pope proceeded, and said: We shall depute a Congregation of Cardinals to examine this case, and search farther into this matter, and accordingly the persons nominated were Anthony Sorbellone, the Arch bi∣shop of Santa Severina, Facchinetto, Lancilotto, Sastagna and others; the which Deputation was now the common Discourse, and filled all the World with high expectation of the success, and issue thereof. The King being informed of these proceedings, redoubled his Guards, and cautions in the Court of Rome, to which place he dispatched the Bishop of Mans, a person of singular probity, and eloquence to make his defence: and having received his Instructions, and being fully informed of all the reasons, and arguments which might be produced in behalf of the King, he arrived at Rome, where having first consulted the Ambassadours, he was with them admitted unto Audience with the Pope: to whom he be∣gan with most profound humility to argue and plead: That the King had not incurred the punishment of any Ecclesiastical Censure, having in no manner violated, or infringed the Liberties, or Immunities of the Church. For that the Cardinal having been found guilty of high Trea∣son against the King, was by the fundamental Laws, and constitutions of France, subjected to the Secular Power: and in regard he was a Peer of that Realm, his Cause was more immediately triable in the Parlia∣ment of Paris, and in a grand Assembly of all the Princes, and Officers of the Crown; so that if the King had trespassed against any Laws, it was against the priviledges of his own Parliaments, and not against the
jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical State. In the next place he argued, that a King of France according to the priviledges of the Gallican Church could not incur the Censure of Excommunication. But these Arguments, and ways of reasonings were in no wise pleasing to the humour of Sixtus, being against the Idea, and Scheme that he had figured to himself of the Power of the Church and Keys: but rather served to inflame his passion, and therefore setting aside all those Arguments, as not worth an Answer, he declared, and sentenced, That in case within a certain time limited, the King did not free, and set at liberty the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Arch-bishop of Lions: and that in case within the space of sixty days after such releasement, the assurance thereof were not intimated to himself and the Apostolical See, by writings under the King's own hand, and the Royal Signet, That then in such case the King remained actually Excommunicated, and incurred all the Ecclesiastical Censures, as expressed in the Sacred Canons, and Constitutions of the Church. Farther, The Pope cited the King to appear at Rome either in person, or by his Proxy within the space of sixty days after intimation of these Summons should be given him; to render an account, and to give answer to the accusation charged upon him, for having murthered the Cardinal of Guise, and imprisoned the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Arch-bishop of Lions: and for default of such appearance, that then the King did actually incur the pain of Excommunication, from which he could not be absolved by any other person whatsoever, than onely by the Pope himself, unless at the point of death; nor then neither, un∣less upon a confident, and faithful assurance and Vows to act, and obey all matters and Injunctions whatsoever which should be enjoyned, and commanded by the Holy Church. Two Months, and some few days after the Pope had issued out this Excommunication; it happened, that the King being at the Head of a great Army near St. Clou about two Leagues from Paris was on the first day of August 1589. stabbed in the Belly by a Dominican Frier, who was a youth of about twenty three years of age: and with him ended his quarrel with the Pope. 1589.Such being the fate of Henry III. the news thereof flew speedily to Rome, where the Spaniards caused a report to be spread: that the Af∣fairs of the King of Navarre were reduced to a mean, and a low condi∣tion, and almost desperate; and that not onely those of the League, but also the whole Kingdom had declared the Cardinal of Bourbon to be King by the name of Charles XI. Upon this grand Crisis of Affairs, the Pope resolved to dispeed Cardinal Cajetan in quality of his Legat into France with a numerous train of Prelats famous for their Wisdom, and Learning, intending to furnish him with the sum of a hundred thou∣sand Pistols to defray the charge, and pomp of his sublime Character. Whilest things were thus preparing, Advices came from the Duke of Luxemburg that Henry of Vandosme King of Navarre having been victo∣rious in many bloody Battels, was acknowledged by all the Nobility to be the true, and lawful King of France: and that he, (namely the Duke of Luxemburg) was designed Ambassadour by the said Nobility unto his Holiness, to inform him of the reasons, which moved them to such an acknowledgment, and to demand his Counsel and direction, as the common Father, how, and in what manner they might apply such re∣medies,
as might tend to a happy, and a well grounded peace. The Pope discovering hereby, that the Agents of the League had falsely re∣presented the state of Affairs to him, immediately dispatched a Letter in answer to the Duke of Luxemburg, acquainting him, that his Person should be welcome at Rome and civilly treated; together with an other to the Nobility of France in the Camp of Navarre, exhorting them to remain firm and constant to the Catholick Religion; adding, that as to the person of the King, it was indifferent to him, who it was that reign∣ed, provided, he were a true Son of the Church, and such as the Nobility desired. And now the Legat being upon departure, the Pope altered many particulars of his former Instructions, and expresly warned him to keep, as much as was possible, an even, and steady hand in all the pretensions of Secular Princes; but that he should be sure always to incline towards the side of the Church, and Religion: that he should not shew himself an open Enemy to the King of Navarre, until his case was desperate, and past all hopes of being reclaimed to the Church; but that so soon as he found him wavering, he should then encourage him; but stand a Neuter, until he professed himself a true Convert, and from that time to declare for his Person, and Interest. But the Legat not well observing these Rules, but running quite con∣trary in favour of the League, and making his aboad at Paris, which had declared it self against the King of Navarre; did greatly incur the displeasure of the Pope, who not approving his Negotiations, gave a stop to those sums of Money which he had designed for him. In short therefore this deportment which the Pope used towards Henry, did greatly contribute towards his establishment: for the World observing, that so wise a person as the Pope, professing no other quarrel to him, than onely on the score of Religion; and that this scruple being removed, he was ready to side with him against all other Interests; and that he had induced the wise, and politick Senate of Venice to ac∣knowledg him for King of France: there is no doubt, but that these favourable appearances did bring great reputation to the Arms of Henry, and much facilitated his ascent to the Crown. Having in this manner laid down the Methods, and ways of proceed∣ings in Secular Affairs, and with forein Princes; let us now before we conclude the Life of this great Man, return to the treatment which he exercised towards his own People, and the rules he observed in the main∣tenance, and nourishment of his own natural Body. Sixtus having now for five years observed many things relating to Government: nothing appeared more extravagant than the gallantry which people used in their Clothing; which was become so excessive, that for the regulation thereof, he constituted Cardinal Aldobrandino to be the Reformer; by whose care, and wisdom such sumptuary Laws were enacted, as reduced all persons into a modesty of dress, and habit; which being imposed with severe penalties on the Transgressour, which Sixtus would never remit, all the Rules were observed and obeyed, du∣ring the time of this Pope, who did not supervive for many Months after. It is observable that this Sixtus, when he was a Frier, and a Cardinal, and not incumbred with a load of business, was very temperate, and
abstemious in his Diet: but being made Pope and burdened with an in∣tense application of mind to business, he seemed to want greater nou∣rishment to keep up his spirits, which otherwise might have sunk un∣der the weight of Affairs; and therefore did eat much, and drink often of divers sorts of delicious and exquisite Wines, and would often sit two or three hours at Meals discoursing of Theological, and political Subjects: howsoever his Diet was ordinary, and course, and his Table as frugal, as of any Pope that ever preceded him. He slept little, ha∣ving his mind always intent to Studies, or businesses, giving Audiences to forein Ambassadours, or hearing the Consults, and Advices of his Car∣dinals, or administring Justice, so that he was never observed to be idle, or at leisure. He was ever chiding in a clamorous manner with his Servants, and yet he loved them, preferring many of them to high degrees, and digni∣ties, having made three of them Cardinals, and Bishops besides Castruccio Ardas; as he was forward to advance those who had merited well from him, so he was rigorous and severe against any, who offended either out of negligence, or malice: An example of which, he shewed in the condemnation of Bellochio his Cup-bearer, to the Gallies, for having affixed the Annulus Piscatorius, or the Pope's Seal to a certain writing, which Sixtus had refused to pass; nor could he be dissuaded by all the Intreaties which the Friends of Bellochio used, and being cast into the Gallies, he died miserably in two Months time of his disgrace, and ser∣vitude. He was extreamly tender and affectionate to his own Kindred and Relations, and in an especial manner to his Sister Camilla, one of whose Grandsons by a Daughter, a youth very young he raised to be a Cardi∣nal in the first Month that he was made Pope, who so well improved himself by time, in the dexterous management of all Affairs, that he became so very useful to his Uncle the Pope, that he bestowed a Re∣venue upon him of an hundred thousand Crowns of yearly Rent. The Palace of Montalto is to this day to be seen at Rome rarely furnished, and famous for the abundance of rare Pictures, Statues, and Urns, and the Garden one of the best in all Rome. He was infinitely covetous, and contriving for Money, for raising of which he laid Taxes on those things which were never before charged, and sold those Offices, which were never until his time set to sale; so that he advanced the Papal Revenue to above six hundred thousand Crowns a year, above the ordinary Income: and in the first year of his Reign, he laid up a million of Gold in the Castle of St. Angelo, ordain∣ing, that this Money should never be employed in any thing whatsoe∣ver, unless it were towards maintenance of a War for recovery of the Holy Land. In the third year also of his Pontificate, he laid up another million to the same end and purpose, swearing himself never to make use of the same, but for that War, or for some other War in defence of the Church against Infidels, or Hereticks; and this Oath of his, he would have all Popes obliged to conserve, and keep inviolate. And that he might the better accumulate Wealth in this nature, as he was sparing in his Diet, so he was also in his Clothing, causing his very Shirts to be patched before he would give them to his Servants: and besides these two millions, he laid up three other in the same Castle; so that at his
death five millions were found of his hoard, and heaps. And yet not∣withstanding all this Riches, which he had spared, he had been most profuse in his publick Buildings, and magnificent in Noble Structures, Aqueducts, and other things of common use, and benefit; and besides all this, he employed a stock of two hundred thousand Crowns to main∣tain plenty in Rome, during the times of scarcity and famine in other parts of Italy. He ordained that the number of Cardinals should not exceed seventy in all, amongst which four at least ought to be Doctors in Divinity, chosen out of the several Orders of Friers as well Mendicants as Regulars: and that Cardinals should never be ordained, but in the Ember Week of December, as had been observed from the time of Clement I. though in the promotions of Cardinal Allen, and Morosini he himself transgressed that Rule: and created in his time thirty three Cardinals. For more speedy decision of matters of Law, and that Suits might not spin out into many years, he erected a Court of Conscience, compo∣sed of wise and godly Men, and such as feared God. He enacted that Adultery should be punished with Death; and prohibited judicial A∣strology. About four Months before his death, he began to find himself indi∣sposed, and complained of an illness in his Head; of which distemper and of the nature of his Disease he often discoursed with much reason according to the Rules of Galen, and Hippocrates; howsoever during the time of this indisposition, he omitted nothing of his business, and ate and drank of such Meats, and Liquors, as are usual for Men of the best health; having often in his Mouth the saying of Flavius Vespatian the Emperor, That a Prince ought to die on his feet, and in action, signifying that a Prince ought to die in the work of his Vocation. But being more grievously feised by a malignant Fever on the twentieth of August 1590. on the thir∣tieth of the same Month in the Evening he died, being in the seventieth year of his Age, having governed the Papal Sea five years, four months, and three days. The Night after, his Body was carried in a Hearse to the Church of St. Peter near the Vatican, for he died at his Palace of Monte Cavallo; from whence Cardinal Montalto caused it to be transport∣ed with solemn and Princely equipage to a Chappel which Sixtus had built adjoyning to the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore. After whose death the Sea was vacant eighteen days. ƲRBAN VII. URBAN the Seventh, called John Baptista Castagna was born at Rome, his Family came from Genoua, being descended from the Antient Nobility of that City; but his Mother was a Roman of the house of the Ricci. He was educated in all the usual Methods of good Literature; and applying himself chiefly to the Studies of the Canon, and Civil Law, he became so good a Proficient therein that he attained the degree of Doctor in the University of Be∣logna: In the time of Julius III. he accompanied his Uncle Veralli into
France, who was employed in that Court in quality of Legat; and acting there under his Uncle, he gave clear demonstrations of quickness of parts, and vivacity of Spirit, fit for great and important undertakings: returning afterwards to Rome, he dwelt in the House of the Arch-bishop of Rosano. Paul IV. made him Governour of Perusa: and Pius IV. who immediately succeeded him, sent him with the Character of his Legat into Spain; in which employment he was continued by Pius V. for the space of seven years. Gregory XIII. recalled him out of Spain to Rome, and bestowed on him the Arch-bishoprick of Rosano, without reserva∣tion to himself of any quit-rent thereupon: and afterwards delegated him his Nuntio to Venice, and with that Character gave him a Commis∣sion to treat a Peace in the Low Countries between King Philip and those States. At his return to Rome, he was made Counsellour of the Ecclesia∣stical State, and assumed into the number of Prelats of the Office of the Inquisition; in which Employments he continued until the year 1583. when he was created Cardinal by the said Gregory with the Title of Saint Marcellus at a promotion of nineteen Cardinals, and soon after he was sent Legat to Bologna. He was also held in great esteem by Six∣tus V. and entrusted by him in the management of the most important Affairs both in Church and State; and by him judged the most pro∣bable person to succeed him in the Papal Chair; the which he expressed one day, when contriving in what manner to enlarge the Street from Santa Croce to Santa Maria Maggiore, and thence how it might be con∣tinued in a direct line to Santa Maria del popolo, he turned about to Cardinal Saint Marcellus, and told him, That to finish that work, would belong to him; meaning, that the succession being his, it would apper∣tain to him to compleat what he had happily begun. Nor was it onely the Opinion of Sixtus, that Cardinal Marcellus was to be his Successour; but the common Voice, and rumour of the people fixed the Papal Dignity upon him; the which accordingly succeeded: for so soon as Sixtus was dead, and the usual Obsequies of his Inter∣ment solemnized; the Cardinals to the number of fifty four on the 7th. of September 1590. entred the Conclave, where a very great party la∣boured much for the election of Cardinal Colonna; who though he were a person of merit and worth, yet he was so highly opposed by a contrary faction; that both parties being intrigued in difficulties, did, as it were by mutual consent concur in their suffrages for Cardinal St. Marcellus, who was a person without exception, and grateful both to Princes, Car∣dinals, and People; for no sooner was the Scrutiny begun, than all things so appeared in his favour, that on the 14th. of September at Night, the Cardinals were assured of the person, on whom the Election should fall; more Votes appearing for him than the Complement requi∣red; howsoever, though the Election was deferred until the next day at Noon; yet so unanimous, and constant was every person to his Vote, that the delay of time produced no alteration: so that on Saturday the 15th, he was with common consent declared Pope. And then clothing himself in his Pontifical Habit, whilest he took the Rocket, which is made of a fine sort of Tiffany, he was observed to say these words: Who would think that this light Habit should be of so weighty a Burden. And now being seated in his Chair, and adored after the accustomary manner by the Cardinals, he was pleased to call himself by the name of
Ʋrban VII. signifying thereby the urbanity of his Disposition, which was inclinable to use all Persons with an obliging, and gentle treatment. The same Evening that he was created Pope he presented two thou∣sand Ducats to Cardinal Sans, and a thousand to Cardinal Alano in con∣sideration of the want, and poverty of their condition: and when Car∣dinal Albano desired him onely two days forbearance of the payment of three thousand three hundred Crowns, which were lent him by Sixtus V. he freely forgave him the Debt, as he did several other great sums of Mony, which he had lent when he was Cardinal. The second day after he was chosen Pope, not finding himself well dis∣posed in his health, he determined to remove from the Vatican to Monte∣cavallo, as being a more wholesom and pleasant Air; but being put in mind, that it was not the custom for Popes to remove or pass the streets of Rome without an Equipage, and attendance of Cardinals, Prelats, and other Lords, which was never done, until his Coronation was so∣lemnized; in compliance with such admonition, he deferred his remo∣val until that function was performed; when the day following his in∣disposition turning to a malignant Fever, he grew worse and worse, and on the 27th. of September he expired his last breath, dying on the thir∣teenth day of his Papacy, and in the seventieth year of his Age, and was buried in St. Peter's Church. Some do alledg, that having not been Crowned, he ought not to be numbred amongst the Popes; but this matter is otherwise determined by an Antient Canon, which says: Ʋt is, qui electus est in Apostolatum si juxta consuetudinem inthronizari non va∣leat; electus tamen sicut verus Papa obtinet auctoritatem regendi R. Ec∣clesiae, & disponendi omnes facultates illius, guod B. Gregorium ante suam coronationem cognovimus fecisse, &c. Ʋrban being dead, the Sea was vacant two months and nine days. GREGORY XIV. GREGORY the Fourteenth, called Nicholas Sfrondati, of a Rich, and antient Family in Milan, was on the 5th. of De∣cember of this year, elected Pope: his Father was Francis Sfrondati a Senatour of Milan, and by Charles V. was con∣stituted Governour of Siena. Pope Paul III. who was always inquisi∣tive after wise, and able Men whom he might raise, and prefer unto places of Trust, made him Bishop of Cremona, after the death of his Wife, and Cardinal with the same Title. This Nicholas being descend∣ed from Francis a wise and excellent Parent, was educated in all man∣ner of Learning, and good literature agreeable to his rank and quality: he first studied at Perusa, afterwards at Pavia, where he took his de∣gree of Doctor of the Civil Law: Pius IV. created him Bishop of Cre∣mona, with which Title he resided at Trent three years, during which Council, the affability he used in his Conversation, was very pleasing to the other Fathers, and the knowledg he had in the Law made him useful in the service of the Pope; though he was one of those Prelats who contended much, that Risidences were Jure Divino. Gregory XIII.
promoted him to the Dignity of Cardinal, and in honour to his memo∣ry, when he came to be elected Pope, he called himself hy the name of Gregory XIV. The Conclave in which he was chosen was very memorable, as name∣ly for the number of Cardinals there present who were fifty four, also for the many pretenders to the Papal Dignity, who were no less than sixteen, all persons of great worth and merit, also for the Leaders, and Heads of Parties, who were six, and for the time that the Conclave con∣tinued being almost two months; which at first according to the com∣mon Opinion, was believed not to last two days, all persons concluding, that the Election would terminate in the person of Cardinal St. Seve∣rina, one of great Learning, and experience in Affairs, and most zealous for the welfare, and honour of the Papal Chair: But he being a person of a morose humour, and austerity of life, was rejected, and endea∣vours made for Cardinal Colonna, a Prince of that high reputation and merit, that at Rome his Election was generally believed, and concluded to be certain; but for want of some Votes, both he and Mandovi, who stood equal with him were laid aside. Cardinal Aldobrandino was the next brought to the Scrutiny; and after him Cardinal della Rovere, but those, who delighted to find difficulties in all matters rendered their Elections void, like the former. At length to bring things to a period, seven Cardinals were proposed, who were esteemed Men of that Integri∣ty, and of that general good reputation with all, that none of them could be chosen amiss, and that (as it was believed) the choice would come to terminate in one of them: but upon a Scrutiny made, the same dif∣ficulties occurred, as in the former; the like also happened to Paleotto, and Santi quatro. At length after divers, and various turnings of Af∣fairs,, Cardinal Montalto followed by many other Cardinals to the num∣ber of twenty six, who were his own Creatures moved for the Election of Cardinal Cremona, and with this train went to his Chamber, where they found him on his knees at Prayers; in which posture Montalto told him, that he should prepare himself against the next day to receive his promotion to the Papal Chair: and accordingly the next Morning early he raised him from his Bed, and causing him hastily to cloth himself, conducted him with seven Cardinals to the Chappel, where Scrutiny being made, Cremona was with common consent, and suffrages of all elected Pope: presently after which the Adoration was made with all the other usual Ceremonies. So soon as he was promoted to this Dignity, he made large Presents to many of the Cardinals, giving a thousand Crowns to each, telling them, that it was to defray the charges they had been at, during the long time they had resided in the Conclave. He bestowed also great sums to pious uses: and ordered that the domestick Servants of his Family should be clothed in new and rich Habits: He provided against the scarcity, and dearness of Corn and other provisions; and restored those Romans to their Places, and Offices which Sixtus V. had taken from them. Howsoever the day but one after he was chosen, finding him∣self indisposed, he refused to give Audience either to Cardinals, or to the Ambassadours of Princes; yet notwithstanding on the 18th. of Decem∣ber, being the Feast of the conception of our Lady, he forced himself in despight of his distemper to pass all the Ceremonies of his Coronation,
and on the 13th. to take solemn possession of the Papal Chair at the La∣teran; all the streets through which he passed were hung with Tapistry, and other Ornaments, and thronged with people to receive his Benedi∣ction; at which great honours, though he was observe;d to smile, and carry a countenance not becoming the gravity of a Pope, yet he would often praise God, and say, Lord, I thank thee, that with all these ho∣nours, and worship, thou hast not suffered the heart of thy servant to be puffed up, or transported with worldly glory. And for the greater solem∣nity of this Procession, the People of Rome erected a triumphal Arch, with this Inscription, Gregory XIV. ob Egregia, & Felicia Pontificatus auspicia pristina Mu∣nera, & Beneficia Capitolio restituta, Civitatem egestate, atque an∣nonâ laborantem opportunâ liberalitate sublevatam, insignibus ejus virtutibus SPQ.R. On the other side were Inscribed. Optimo Principi Gregorio XIV. Pont. Max. ab ineunte aetate per gra∣dus verae Sapientiae, Pietatis, Beneficentiae, caeterarumque virtutum ad Apostolici Fastigii gloriam, & Majestatem evecto, ob fausta Sacri, Augustique Principatus initia, & non dubiam spem rerum Maxima∣rum Reipub. Christianae oblatam, S.P.Q.R. Fornigem Trium∣phalem pro tempore excitavit; On the other sides were divers Verses Inscribed out of Holy Scripture, signifying the great hopes, and expectations they had from the administration and good Go∣vernment of Gregory. On the 19th. of this Month of December he held the first Consistory, commonly called the Consistory of peace, because as is usual the Popes do with fair words harangue the Cardinals, and endeavour an amicable correspondence with them; after which, he at this Consistory created his Nephew Cardinal. On the 18th of January he published a form of Jubily, whereby he ordained. That all Christians should offer up their Prayers unto God in his behalf; that he might have grace faithfully to feed the Flock of Christ, and wisely, and successfully to administer the Affairs of the Universal Church. On the 6th. of March following he created six Cardinals; and a short time afterwards he made his Nephew Count Sfrondati Duke of Mont-Marcian, and General of the Forces of the Church, sending him into France with an Army for assistance of the League, in which War he spent five hundred thousand Crowns of Gold. At Whitsunday which hap∣pened that year on the 9th. of May, he bestowed on the Cardinal Friers a License, and priviledg to wear red Hats, for until that time, their Hats were of the same colour with the habit of their Order: the which fa∣vour of wearing red Hats, and Caps was demanded in the time of Pius V. Gregory XIII. and Sixtus V. but it was refused, and those Cardinals confined to their own colour. In the Month of August the Duke of Ferrara came to Rome, to re∣ceive his Investiture into the Dukedom from the hands of the Pope; where he was received with great pomp, and honour, and his Table, and other Charges defrayed at the expence of the Pope.
On the 22th. of September he began to find himself indisposed of a Fever, the which encreasing daily, caused by the Stone, and retention of his Urin, he expired his last on the 15th. day of October 1591. with excessive pains. Being dead his Bladder was opened, a stone taken from thence weighing two ounces and a quarter. His Body was carried that Night to St. Peters, where it was buried in the Chappel of Gregory. He had been Pope ten months, and ten days, after which the Sea was vacant fifteen days. INNOCENT IX. IF ever any Person was elected to the Popedom with the com∣mon, and general consent of the whole Conclave, and without those factions, and parties which usually arise at those Meet∣ings, it was certainly this Innocent IX. who in the Conclave, which chose his Predecessour Gregory XIV. had so fair a prospect of this promotion, that he missed of it then but by some few rubs onely, which he had time afterwards to remove: and so probable was the Pa∣pal Diadem to be his, that the Mitre of Gregory fell on his Head, when he came in an humble manner to pay his Respects, and obedience at the feet of the Pope; the which accident seemed to foretel, and be pro∣phetick of that fortune which afterwards ensued. An. 1591.In this manner on the 29th. of October 1591. the Papal Chair was again supplied by John Anthony Fachinetti commonly called Cardinal of Santi Quattro, taking on himself the name of Innocent IX. but his time was short, for he reigned onely two Months: his Father and Mother were Natives of Gravegni a City in Navarre, but he was born at Bo∣logna, and there educated in good Learning until the year 1544. when he took the degree of Doctor: Afterwards coming to Rome, he was entertained in the Family of Cardinal Farnese, who sent him for his Vicar to Avignon, and afterwards to Parma. Pius IV. created him Bishop of Nicastro a City in Calabria, and in the year 1561. employed him at the Council of Trent. In the year 1566. Pius V. delegated him his Nuntio at Venice, where he was a successful Instrument in making a League, and confederacy between the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Venetians against the Turk. Gregory XIII. created him Patriarch of Jerusalem, President of the Court of Inquisition, and Cardinal with the Title of Santa Quattro, by which appellation he was commonly known. And lastly, after the decease of Gregory he was unanimously elected on the day before-mentioned. The first thing he did after his Election, and which he was so ready to perform without loss of time, that even then, when he was vesting himself in his Pontifical Habit, he signed the Bolle, De non alienandis bonis Ec∣clesiae; and then declared with words proceeding from the depth of his heart, that he was resolved to provide for the afflicted people of Rome, and contrive some effectual means to relieve the necessities of the City, which laboured almost under a Famine, or scarcity of Bread: To which end he summoned a Congregation, and commanded that the Barons of
Rome should bring their Corn into the City, and made Vitelli Overseer of the Provisions, or Praefectus Annonae. On Sunday the second of November he was Crowned, but not on the stairs ascending to St. Peters, but in a little Apartment which looks to∣wards those stairs, by which means a thousand Crowns were saved of the expence: the next day he held the first Consistory, at which he re∣turned his hearty thanks to the Cardinals for favouring his Election, proposing several things which he esteemed convenient for conservation of the Ecclesiastical State; amongst which he gave them to understand, how necessary it was to keep always a considerable sum of Money in the Treasury, as a reserve at all times to supply the necessities, and emer∣gencies of the Church: the which had been an antient practice in the Republick of Rome, where as Tacitus saith, they ever reserved a secret Treasure distinct from their running Cash, never to be used, but then only, when the ultimate exigencies of State required it. In the next place, he wrote Epistles to all Patriarchs, Arch-bishops, and Primates, giving them advice of his promotion to the Papal Dig∣nity, exhorting them within their respective Jurisdictions to make Prayers for him, that God would inspire him in such manner with his heavenly grace, as might enable him to support the great, and impor∣tant burthen of Ecclesiastical Government. The 29th. of this Month of November, the Duke of Mantoua arrived at Rome to do him homage, and was received with a chearful welcome, being lodged in the Pope's Palace, in the Apartment belonging to his Nephews. On the 11th. of November he issued forth a regulation of the prices of all Provisions, which were mounted to an excessive rate: On the 18th. he created two Cardinals, namely Segas Bishop of Piacenza, and Anthony Fachinetti his great Nephew, whom he also constituted Referendary of both the Seals. On the 21th. he began to find himself indisposed in his health, which encreasing to a high degree did on the 23th. give indications of a malignant Fever, which in eight days time put an end to his life, and dying on the 29th. of December 1591, his Body was buried in the Church of St. Peter, having reigned only two Months: and the Sea was vacant a month, and a day. And now to shew the frailty of humane condition, and the uncertainty of great Places, one year, four months, and three days made an end of four Popes. CLEMENT VIII. IN the place of Innocent Cardinal Hippolito Aldebrandino was elected Pope, and possessed the Chair thirteen years or there∣abouts. He was descended from an antient Family of Florence, which had continued from the Langobards for the space of a thousand years, originally called Hildebrando, or Hildebrandino, and so by corruption Aldebrandino: his Ancestours had held the chief Offices, and Dignities in that City, having the honour to have had the chief and su∣preme
Magistracy of Gonfaloniere twenty three times in their Family, of which great promotions, and Dignities in that City none can boast so much, as this, unless the House of the Medici, who in this Age are Dukes of that City and Country. This Hippolito was the Son of Silvester Aldobrandino, born at Flo∣rence, where, and at Pisa having studied the Law, he gained consider∣able knowledg therein, to which having added an excellency in the gift of Eloquence, and a just, and upright mind he became fit and qualified for Government, and for management of the most important Trusts, and charges of State. After many honours and Places which he had obtained, as well at Florence, as with the Dukes of Ferrara, and Ʋrbin; he was at Rome made Auditor of the Rota, and Datary under Sixtus V. who afterwards created him Cardinal, and sent him under Character of his Legat into Poland. He afterwards was employed in matters of great importance under Ʋrban VII. Gregory XIV. and Innocent IX. in all which acquitting himself with singular Justice, and Wisdom, he prepa∣red his way to the attainment of that supreme Dignity, after which the Cardinals so much thirst, and languish. The Funeral Obsequies of Innocent being performed, the Cardinals having celebrated the Mass of the Holy Ghost, and heard an Oration pronounced by the Bishop of Traw de eligendo Summo Pontifice, they en∣tered the Conclave on the 10th of January to the number of fifty two, singing the Hymn of Veni Creator Spiritus. Many and various were the endeavours, and practices amongst the Cardinals, during the time of this Conclave: Montalto who was the great stickler, and promoter of Elections, designed the choice for Cardinal Santa Severina, being a person much esteemed for his Vertues, and Learn∣ing; but such opposition appearing against him, as could not be with∣stood, divers others were put into the predicament, as Como, Paleotto, and others: Colonna had a fair prospect of success, and so also had Ma∣druccio, but were all excluded by contrary factions: so at length Mon∣talto proposed Cardinal Aldobrandino, who being nominated, was gene∣rally acceptable, and esteemed for his rare qualities, and the excellency of his Vertue, and Piety; and disquisition or trial of Votes being made, there soon appeared a unanimous consent, and concurrence to create him Pope, which was accordingly effected on the 30th. of January 1592. and publication made in the Conclave that Aldobrandino was chosen: whereupon Madruccio, Montalto, and others assembling together went in company to his Cell to congratulate his Election; which he received without any alteration, or change of countenance; and being conduct∣ed thence to the Chappel Paolina, he was there by publick Scrutiny of all the Cardinals, and with their common, and unanimous Vote Ele∣cted Pope. It is said, that after his Choice, he kneeled down before the Altar, and instead of shewing that joy, which Sixtus V. and others had betrayed, he let full abundance of tears, seeming to be filled with great fear and confusion: and when according to the usual formality, it was inquired of him by the Masters of the Ceremonies, whether he accepted of his Election to the Popedom, he remained silent without returning any An∣swer, so that the Cardinals who were standing near his Person, made Answer for him, that he did accept it: but the Masters not accepting
this assent from the mouth of others: told him, That his consent could not be recorded from the words of others, but onely from his own; wherefore being thus urged, he with abundance of tears expressed him∣self in this manner: O Lord God, who seest the hearts of all Men, and from whom no secrets are hid, and knowest what is present, and what is to come; if this Election which thou hast made of me, to be thy Vicar on Earth, shall not be to thy glory, and service, and good of thy faithful people, Grant, I beseech Thee, that my Tongue may cleave to the root of my Mouth, Ʋt lingua mea adhaereat faucibus meis: but if thou by thy Providence dost foresee that I shall be useful, and serviceable to thy Holy Church, then do I in vertue of thy Divine Assistance, accept of this Office, and be it unto thy Servant according to thy Will. And thus being, as accustomary, vested in his Habit, and placed in the Chair, he was with great joy of all the Cardinals adored by them; calling himself by the name of Clement VIII. he was afterwards condu∣cted to St. Peters, where he was met by the Canons, singing the usual Antiphona: Ecce Sacerdos Magnus, qui in diebus suis placuit Deo, & In∣ventus est Justus. All the Ceremonies of his Election, and Inauguration being compleat∣ed; he immediately applyed his mind to the Affairs of Government. And in the first place after the Example of Sixtus V. he resolved to de∣stroy and extirpate that vile, and abominable sort of Men, called Ban∣diti, who were Vagabonds, and Robbers, and committed most execrable Murthers, and spoils in all parts of the Roman Territories: to effect which he sent several Troops of armed Men against them, who cut them in pieces, and destroyed them without any remorse, or compas∣sion, as the Enemies, and pest of humane Society. But that which was of greatest importance to him, was the success of the League against Henry King of Navarre; to support and strengthen which, he dispatched the Bishop of Viterbo into France with Instructions, and Money to fa∣vour the Party and Interest of the Allies against the King and his Pro∣testant Party, who stood Excommunicated by Pope Sixtus. I is not our part here to relate all the passages, and successes of that War, being that which appertains to the History of France; we can onely say, that Henry IV. being victorious in all the Battels which he fought, and ha∣ving entered all the Provinces of that Kingdom with Triumph: we may imagine that France stood at that time on its vertical point of be∣coming all Protestant. But certainly that wise King considering, that Victory in War is not sufficient to settle a Prince quiet, and secure in his Throne, unless his inauguration be attended with the affection of his People, and a concurrence, or conformity with the professed, and esta∣blished Religion of the Country, did suffer himself to be overborn by those arguments, which were produced in favour of the Church of Rome, whose greatest weight consisted in those considerations which had respect to the Union, and peace of the Kingdom. And thereupon, all the pretences of opposition to their lawful Sovereign being taken off from the people; Meaux, Lion, Orleans, and Bourges with other places, which stood in Rebellion against him, submitted to his pleasure, and the King was received into Paris with all joy and triumph imaginable.
The King having made profession of the Roman Catholick Faith, was absolved by the Arch-bishop of Bourges in the Church at St. Denys; at which the Pope was highly displeased, in regard the absolution of Mo∣narchs in cases of Heresie could not be performed but by the Pope him∣self in Person, or by immediate Deputation from him: Howsoever the Duke of Nevers being sent Ambassadour to Rome, carrying with him from the Nuntio Attestations of the King's sincere conversion; which was confirmed not long afterwards by the Sieur du Perron, the Excom∣munication was taken off, which Pope Sixtus had thundred against him; and having received him for the eldest Son of the Church, the Pope solemnly gave him his Absolution, and blessing in the year 1595. In this year Pope Clement restrained the liberal Grants of Indul∣gences, which having for Money been issued to every Chapman, they became common even to contempt; for remedy of which he imposed a greater difficulty on the concessions of them. He also at that time relieved the people of Rome by abatements on the price of Corn, ha∣ving caused great quantities to be imported from Sicily: he likewise suppressed by his Naval Force the many Pirats which infested the Me∣diterranean Sea: and concluded a League between himself, the Emperor, the Prince of Transilvania, and the Princes of Germany against the Turk: for the effectual prosecution of which, he afterwards in the year 1597. sent ten thousand Men into Hungary paid at his own charge under the conduct of Francis Aldebrandino, which being joyned with six thousand, which the Emperour sent into Transilvania, and other Forces raised, and paid by the circles of the Empire, composed a strong and formidable Army against the Turk. Howsoever the Wars between France and Spain still continuing with∣out any probable appearance of accommodation, the Turk availed him∣self of those unhappy divisions; and forced the Emperor to raise the Siege of Raab; and shamefully caused the Transilvanians to retreat from Temeswar, and being victorious in all parts of Hungary, threatned to enter Germany by force of Arms: with which the Pope being greatly alarm'd, and fearing the success of the common Enemy of Christendom, bended all his thoughts towards making a Peace between Spain, and France, which he hoped to effect in that juncture of time, when the circumstances of Christendom made it almost necessary to put an end unto the War: In this grand Affair he employed Cardinal Alexander de Medicis, (who was afterwards his Successour) to be his Legat to Hen∣ry IV. of France, and by his Nuntio who resided with Philip II. in the Court of Spain, he used many instances, and warm Exhortations, per∣suading both of them that laying aside the hatred, and animosities which were between them, they would seriously apply themselves to em∣brace such Conditions, which might produce Amity and a Christian peace between them, that so they might join in a League against the Turk, who was now victorious, and breathed out ruin, and destruction to all Christendom: but because these two Princes were high spirited, and haughty, as not to be the first to condescend, and ask a peace, the General of the Cordelier Friers was employed by the Pope, to carry the Offers, and proposals of mediation between one, and the other, in which he had such success, that labouring with the Legat, and Monsieur de Sillery, who was aftewards made Chancellour of France, they agreed at
St. Quintin on the most difficult, and disputable Points and Conditions, which were afterwards perfected, and concluded at Vervins in the year 1598. But that which had like to have interrupted and spoiled all this Treaty, was the restitution of the Marquisat of Salluces, which the French King demanded of the Duke of Savoy: but lest this pretension should fru∣strate and defeat the former Agreement, the King was contented to con∣stitute the Pope sole Arbitrator and Judg of this difference, promising to stand to his Umpirage and Award, provided, that his Sentence were published in one year after the Date of this present Peace. But this Peace did not produce that union of Arms against the common Enemy, as the Pope expected; the Kings resolving to make use of this Peace, for the quiet, and repose of their Subjects; and therefore taking no notice of any preparations against the Turk, they dispatched their respective Let∣ters to the Pope, freighted with Salutes and Thanks for the good Offices he had performed towards the happy establishment, and conclusion of a Peace. But before this Peace was agreed in the Month of October 1599. Al∣fonso d' Este the second of that Name Duke of Ferrara died without issue Male, by which the City of Ferrara, and the Territory thereunto belonging devolved to the Papal Chair, which the Pope made known to the Cardinals in a full Consistory; with his Claim thereunto, according to antient Articles agreed between the Ancestors of the Duke of Fer∣rara, and the Sea of Rome: But news coming afterwards that Cesare d' Este Bastard brother of the Duke deceased, had made seisure, and taken possession of the Dukedom by vertue of his Brother's Testament, resol∣ving to defend his Title thereunto by force of Arms; the Pope was great∣ly troubled, and incensed, and immediately gave Orders to raise an Army of twenty five thousand Foot and three thousand Horse, to march under the Command of his Nephew Cardinal Aldobrandino; (John Francis Al∣dobrandino, being, as we have said, at that time in Hungary) and to make these temporal Arms the more available, he accompanied them with the Spiritual Artillery of Excommunication, which he caused to be thunder∣ed out, and affixed in all the publick places of Ferrara. The Cardinal being proud of the honour to be so great a General, used such di∣ligence in raising and providing his Army, that in less than two Months after his departure from Rome, he had compleated his Leavies, and ap∣pointed his general Rendezvouz at Rimini. With the unexpected news of this speedy dispatch, Cesare d' Este was much surprized, and being now in great fear, and doubt of his success, began to consult of what moderate, and reasonable propositions he might offer unto the Pope: wherefore he desired his Friends at Rome to intercede for him, and by their hands offered many, and various expedients, condescending every day to Conditions more favourable to the Pope than the former: but the Pope refusing all other terms than those, which made him Master of the City, and jurisdiction of Ferrara; he was at length obliged to yield thereunto, whereby that Dominion devolved to the Church, and the de∣livery thereof was agreed by Articles signed at Faenza; of which when the Pope received advice, he sang Te Deum, and rendered thanks pub∣lickly to God; and with the general concurrence and Counsel of the Cardinals in a full Consistory, he constituted Cardinal Aldobrandino
his Legat at Ferrara; giving him order to take possession of the City; which about the end of February 1598.An. 1598. was accordingly surrendered with all quietness, and peace, not so much as with a Sword drawn, or a Musket fired: before which time Don Cesare retired to Reggio, and Modena, of which Cities he was shortly after created Duke by the Emperor and in∣vested in the Government thereof, and also made Prince of the Ro∣man Empire. Afterwards the Pope resolving to make a Journey to Fer∣rara, to settle, and establish Affairs in his new Dominions, he caused on Sunday being the 12th. of April (according to the usual Custom, when Popes travel) the Sacrament of the Altar to be carried the day before his departure; and then the next day after Mass, laying his Vestments aside, and clothing himself with his shorter Garments, the Antiphona was sung: In viam pacis, with other short Prayers for the happy suc∣cess of this Journey: and then mounting into his Horse-litter he was accompanied to the Gate of the City by the Cardinals, where turning towards them he gave them his Benediction, and proceeded on his way, in this order. First, after the Baggage, belonging to the Kitchin, the Horse-litters, and Horses appertaining to the Pope preceded, led by the Grooms of the Stables, clothed in red: next followed the Carriages with the Robes: next to them a Squadron of Light-Horsemen with four Trumpets before them, then the Pope's Family, with the Guard of Switzers on foot armed with Carbines, and Halberts: after followed the Governour of Rome, who accompanied his Holiness as far as Ponte Molle, then went the Standard-bearer carrying a Crucifix, and immediately af∣ter him went the Pope in his Litter, and then followed the Cardinals Baronius, Arigoni, Monte, and St. Georgio on Mules with Ombrelles in in their hands, with a great number of other Prelats, some on Horses, and others in Coaches: In this manner they travelled until Thursday in the Evening, (being treated on the way by several Cardinals) when they arrived at Loretto, and there for Devotion, and for refreshment re∣mained until Sunday. When the Pope being on his departure, present∣ed to the Lady of Loretto a stately Cross with six Silver Candlesticks, and two Bases of massive Silver, with a thousand Crowns in Money, and rich Vestments with which the Pope was clothed, when he said Mass in that Chappel. Departing on Sunday from Loretto; they arrived that Evening at Ancona, where being received with Triumphant Arches and splendid entertainment, they were pleased to remain until the Friday fol∣lowing; during which time Cardinal Aldobrandino arrived, and was re∣ceived by the Pope with all the demonstrations of kindness, and respect imaginable. On Thursday being Ascension day, and the day before the Pope's departure, the Sacrament of the Altar took its journey forward for Sinigag∣lia, where the day following it arrived, as also did the Pope, being received by the Duke of Ʋrbin with a sumptuous, and splendid entertainment. From Sinigaglia they came to Fano, which being the City where the Pope was born, he was received with all demonstrations of joy, and triumph; from thence they travelled to Pesaro, where the Duke of that place was not wanting in his respects and duty, and next day to Rimini where the Duke of Modena came to kiss the feet of the Pope. On Tuesday they came to Ravexna, on Thursday they arrived at the Church of St. George, not far distant from Ferrara, where was a stately Monastery possessed by Monks of the Order of Mount Olivet; the Sacrament being there arrived in the
Morning, was met about a Mile distant from the Church, by the Clergy, and Religious of Ferrara, with all reverence, and devotion: where the Pope coming afterwards about an hour before Sun-setting, retired into the Convent, where his Lodgings were prepared, being the very same, in which Clement VII. had formerly been received: and here all things were prepared for the solemn Cavalcade, and entry into Ferrara. We shall not need to entertain the Reader with the Order and sump∣tuous manner of this Cavalcade, as we have done of the Pope's Journey to this place; it is sufficient to mention that the Entry into Ferrara was truly Royal, and Magnificent, and what might suit with the State, and glory of the greatest Monarch of Europe. During the time of the Pope's residence in that place which was from the Months of April, until the middle of December following, several matters, and actions of importance succeeded: and particularly a contract of Marriage between four per∣sons of the same Name, Family, and bearing the same Escutcheons, and Arms; to wit, between Philip III. King of Spain, and Margaret of Au∣stria, Sister of the Arch-Duke Ferdinand of Austria; and between the Arch-Duke of Austria Albert, late Cardinal, with the Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia Sister of the King of Spain; the which most illustrious Persons were joyned together by the hands of the Pope, during the time that the Pope resided at Ferrara. For though in the life of Philip II. the Marriage was agreed between his Son, and the Lady Margaret, yet not being celebrated before his death, the consummation thereof was deferred until the days of mourning for the deceased King were accom∣plished: which happening to be at the time, when Pope Clement was at Ferrara; it was thought fit, that the Lady Margaret in her passage to Spain, should take Ferrara in her way; which accordingly she did, be∣ing splendidly treated by the State of Venice, as she journied through their Dominions, and being conducted by the Governour of Milan with a numerous train she entered the City of Ferrara, where she was mag∣nificently received by the whole College of Cardinals, and lodged at the expences of the Pope. The same Evening that she arrived, she made her visit to the Pope, and being admitted to his presence, she kissed his feet; and then his Holiness vouchsafed to arise, and bow to her, and give her his blessing: after her the Arch-Dutchess presented her self; who was received with the like forms of blessing. On the Sunday fol∣lowing, which was the day appointed for the Marriage, the Queen ap∣peared richly adorned like a Bride, and being conducted into the Cathe∣dral, which was magnificently prepared, she was there by the hand of the Pope espoused to Philip the third King of Spain, the Arch-Duke Al∣bert representing the person of the said King; and then the Arch-Duke himself espoused the Infanta of Spain, the Ambassadour of Spain stand∣ing in her stead, and in representation of her person. After all which Ceremonies and Festivals were ended, at which there was a concourse of almost all the great personages of Italy; the Queen took her journey by way of Mantoua into Spain, where she was splendidly treated by that Duke. And the Pope also having resided for the space of eight Months at Ferrara to the great satisfaction of his new Subjects, who were not used to such sights, not to such plenty of Mony, as the concourse of such great Personages had brought them, were high∣ly pleased with the Ecclesiastical Government. At length the Pope in∣tending
for Rome, departed from Ferrara with many expressions, and evidences of love, and affection towards his people, recommending them to the care of Cardinal St. Clement, whom he had made Governour of that City, and jurisdiction belonging to it. On the 20th. of December the Pope arrived at Rome, full of joy, and triumph for the happy acqui∣sition of his new Dukedom; but this contentment was much allayed by the sudden irruption of the Tybur, which overflowing all its banks, made such an inundation as drowned all the City, and the Country round about; which was not onely of damage to many in their Estates and ruin of their Houses; but divers persons were drowned with all their substance, and Estate; never did Rome endure such desolation; for on Christmas Day the Churches being filled with Water, there was neither Mass nor Prayers, nor Priest, that was heard, or seen within those Walls, and the Pope himself was forced to pray on the tops of the Hills of Rome: the poor that had saved themselves, were yet in great misery and want, and though spared by the Waters, might have perished by Fa∣mine had not the charity of the Pope, and Cardinals administred a re∣lief to them; and herein especially Cardinal Aldobrandino was signally useful; for he visited the Houses of the poor in Boats, and supplied them with Bread and other Victuals, as their occasions required. The like almost we read of in the Life of Adrian I. And now the year of 1599.An. 1599. being entered, the Pope began to make preparations for the following year, which was called and appointed for the year of Jubilee; and in order thereunto he exhorted all Christian Princes to peace, and unity, especially his labours were more intent, and concerned for peace, and good correspondence in Italy, inviting all Sovereign Princes by his Apostolical Letters (as they called them) to Rome to gain the Jubilee, promising all those Blessings, Indulgences, and Pardons which are of as high moment, as the Salvation of their Souls. And because I am of Opinion that the form of this general Letter may be curious, and pleasing to the Reader, I have undertaken to transcribe the same, as translated from the Latin, the words are these: Clement the Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, to all the Faith∣ful in Christ, who shall read these present Letters, be Health, and the Apostolical Benediction. Since that by the Grace of God (beloved Children in Christ) the ac∣ceptable year of our Lord,Isaiah 61. which is the year of Remission and Pardon doth approach: and the day is come of Eternal Salvation, and redemp∣tion from your sins:Cor. 6. Now that we are come to the year so much de∣sired by all Christian people, which is the most Holy Jubilee, and which since the birth of Christ born of the blessed Virgin Mary, is the year 1600. and which is now according to the usual custom to be cele∣brated with so much the greater joy, and concourse of people, by how much it is to be represented without corruption in the pure Original, and primary Institution thereof: for in regard we have by antient Tra∣dition, and testimony of our Forefathers received assurance, that it was accustomary for the Church of Rome to grant Indulgences, and remis∣sion of sins to all such who in every Age, that is in the term of every hundred years, came to Rome to visit the Churches of the Holy Apostles
St. Peter, and St. Paul: and because that this Custom should not be e∣steemed by the World, as a vain, and superstitious rite of Gentilism, Boniface VIII. our Predecessour thought fit to confirm the same by his Apostolical Decree to all Ages: howsoever other Popes who were our Predecessours have undertaken to reduce the same to a shorter term of years. And indeed, it hath not without the Divine, and mysterious Ordina∣tion been enacted, and decreed, that within the Age, and memory of Man, this great benefit of God to mankind should be celebrated, and re∣membred: who when like the Sun of Righteousness, he arose from the Inclosures of the Virgins Womb, to bestow eternal Salvation on all the World, he was pleased to appoint, that the remembrance of this Bene∣fit should be celebrated in no other place, than this (of Rome) which is the Rock, and the receptacle of the Christian Religion, where all the Subjects, as Sons of one Father, and Sheep of one Shepherd, resort to the Chair of St. Peter, and to the firm Rock of Faith which shall never by the continued Course of Ages, nor variety of times be altered, or changed: that the World may see one Sheep-fold, and one Shepherd, and the true splendour of one Faith, and all the members thereof joyn∣ed, and cemented together under one Head with the bonds of Love, and Charity: and lastly, that they may see, with what unity in the Roman Church, the religious Solemnity of this year is observed in its due course which we may truly stile the Holy year. This year therefore we may reasonably call the Holy year of Our Lord, and the acceptable year; because that Jesus Christ himself, who is the Author of our Sal∣vation, the Son of God, who was sent by the Eternal Father in the ful∣ness of Grace, and of the Holy Ghost, hath so named it:Isaiah 61. To heal the contrite in heart, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them who are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of our Lord. And whereas we though unworthy, do sit in the Seat of Christ upon Earth, and are stated in this sublime Place, watching as a Centi∣nel, and a Guard Apostolical, do declare, publish and preach to all you who are the faithful in Christ this year of Jubilee; which though it be a year of repentance, yet it is also a year of Jubilee, and of spiritual joy and comfort. Now because the love of Christ for whom we are Ambassadours to all Nations constraineth us, and the zeal which we have for your Souls,2 Cor. 5. Psalm▪ 68. doth consume our spirit; we exhort, and beseech you all by the blood which Jesus Christ hath spilt, and by his coming in the last day of Judgment, especially at this time of Jubilee: That every one be convert∣ed from the evil of his way, and turn unto the Lord with a pure heart,Hebr. 12. Isaiah 35. and good conscience and faith unfeigned, because the Lord is gracious,1 Tim. 1. and merciful, full of compassion and long-suffering.Joel 2. Wherefore according to the duty of our Pastoral Office, we do call, and chearfully invite you Our dear Children in Christ, namely the Emperor, the Kings, and Catholick Princes, with all the faithful of Christ wheresoever dispersed in the most remote parts of the World, that they would be present at this joyful solemnity of the Jubilee; though we cannot but at the same time be mi∣serably afflicted with consideration of the great numbers of people who have separated themselves from the union and Communion of the Ca∣tholick and Apostolical Church, within the last Age of one hundred
years past did with one mind and heart celebrate this holy year of Ju∣bilee: for the eternal salvation of whose souls, we would gladly and willingly spill our blood, and give our lives. Wherefore you who are obedient Children, and Catholick, and beloved of God and us, Venite, & Ascendite ad locum quem elegit Dominus.Deut. 26. Come unto this spiritual Jerusalem, and to this holy Mount of Sion, not according to the letter, but Allegorically and by spiritual understanding; because that from this place, the holy light of Evangelical truth hath from the first beginning of the Primitive Church been diffused through all Nations. This is that happy City, whose faith the Apostle praises, and commends in these words:Rom. 1.8. I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole World. This is the City where the Chief of the Apostles Peter and Paul, did vent their Doctrine with the effusion of their blood; that Rome being the sacred Seat of St. Peter, might become the capital City of the World, the Mother of all the Faith∣ful, and the Majesty of all the other Churches. Here is the Rock of Faith placed, and from hence springs the fountain of the Priestly unity; from hence are derived the clear streams of the purest Doctrine; here are found the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven with full power to bind, and loose: and lastly, here is conserved that Treasure of Indul∣gences which shall never fail, of which the Roman High Priest is the principal keeper and Dispenser. And though he doth dispense some part hereof every year, as occasion doth require, yet more especially in this Holy year of Jubilee a greater affluence thereof is dispersed, when ac∣cording to the solemnity of the most antient Churches of Rome, when the gates are opened by the pious and liberal hands: that so entering into the presence of God with joy, and having cast off from their shoulders the yoke of sin, and the tyranny of the Enemy, you may be reconciled unto God by means of the Sacrament; and therefore come you as true Children, Heirs of Heaven, and Possessours of Pa∣radise. Given at Rome near St. Peters, in the year of our Lord's Incarna∣tion, 1599. June 18. in the 8th. year of our Pontificate. The Copy of this Letter being sent to all Christian Princes in com∣munion with the Court of Rome, the Pope busily employed himself in making preparations, and provisions for entertainment of Pilgrims, who in the following year of Jubilee crouded in those numbers to gain the In∣dulgences and Pardons as of Men and Women the account made, a∣mounted unto three Millions of Persons. But the Pope was not so busily employed in his preparations for the Jubilee, but that he attended to the decision of the Controversie of the Marquisat of Saluces, which (as we have said) was at the late Treaty at Vervins put into his hands and power to be concluded, and deter∣mined in the space of one year: In order unto which the President Bru∣slard was dispatched to Rome in behalf of the French King, and the Count d' Archonas of the Duke of Savoy, and both met there about the be∣ginning of this year 1599. the Cause being pleaded before▪ the Pope, both Parties pressed the Arguments so home in favour of the right of their respective matters: that the Pope esteeming the Point difficult to be decided, required some longer time before he would undertake to pass his judgment: and in the interim proposed, that the Marquisat
should remain in his hands as a Depositary, and an indifferent person be∣tween both Parties. And though neither the King nor the Duke were well pleased with these delatory proceedings, yet the King was content∣ed to allow two Months for such determination; but the Duke, who had been possessed by the suggestions of his Minister at Rome, that the Pope required to be the Depositary with design to bestow the Marquisat on one of his Nephews, conceived such a jealousie of the Pope's intentions, that he began to decline the Umpirage; which when the Pope under∣stood he with great indignation refused to interpose farther, resolving neither to meddle with the Arbitration, nor the Deposite. The King who knew well, in what manner to do right unto himself by his Sword, was not much concerned for the rejection which the Pope had made of the Arbitration: and the Duke being contented to have his Cause pass by other formalities than that of the Consistory, judged his right more secure, and more easily convincing by a personal Treaty with the King himself; which matter being now taken out of the hand of the Pope, we leave to the temporal determination of these Princes and pro∣ceed to other matters more agreeable to this History. Henry IV. of France being in good favour, and correspondence with Clement VIII. treated with him about obtaining a Divorce, or rather a dissolution of marriage between him, and Margaret Dutchess of Valois; to which this Pope might perhaps be more inclinable and easie on some reflections he made on the ill consequences which the delays of the like Divorce to Henry VIII. of England, produced to the Papal Power. The Cardinal d' Ossac with the President Monsieur de Silery, having Orders to prosecute this matter in the Court of Rome, represented to the Pope the state of the marriage with Queen Margaret, and that though the King their Master had ever since his conversion to the Ca∣tholick Religion entertained reverend, and obedient thoughts towards the Papal Sea, and might on score of being the eldest Son of the Church expected more than ordinary favours, yet on consideration of the Nul∣lity of this Marriage, he desired nothing more than common justice. The Pope who was very desirous to favour, and oblige the King, re∣ferred the disquisition, and examination of the Marriage to the Cardinal Joyeuse, the Bishop of Modena, who was Nuntio for the Pope in France, and the Arch-bishop of Arles, whom he delegated to consider of those reasons which were offered to invalidate the legality of the Marriage. In the mean time Henry treating a Contract of marriage with his Mistris Gabriele d' Estrees, God disposed otherwise of that intention; and the Delegates who were willing to comply with the desires of the King, de∣clared the Marriage Null having been in the third degree of consan∣guinity, by which both parties were set at liberty, and put in the same estate and condition as before their Matrimony. Of which the King having received information from his Ambassadour Monsieur de Sillery then residing at Rome, he immediately dispatched the Sieur d' Alincourt Governour of Pontois, to render his humble thanks to the Pope for his obliging determination, and to demand his Counsel concerning the Al∣liance which he intended to make with the House de Medicis, having placed his affections on the Princess Mary Niece to the Grand Duke of Florence. The Sieur de Sillery taking Post upon this Errand arrived at Rome the 6th. of February being Ash-wednesday in the year 1600.An 1600. and
the year of Jubilee, which made that Lent the more Solemn, and de∣vout, than that of common years: for it was commanded that Prayers of forty hours continuance should be made in the Churches of the Je∣suits: the Pope himself with the Colledg of Cardinals began the first hour, and every hour afterwards was employed in Prayers, and ended with an Exhortation made by some Cardinal, or Learned Prelat. To gain the Indulgences of this Jubilee though many personages of great quality did resort to Rome, yet none was of higher dignity than the Duke de Bar, who Incognito and with a small train, and equipage tra∣velled to Rome to gain a Dispensation for his Marriage, which he had ce∣lebrated between himself, and the Princess Catharine the Onely Sister of the French King: for having performed the same within the degrees of consanguinity forbidden by the Church, the Bishop of Lorain, and others had refused to admit him to the Sacrament, and Communion of the Church. Thus we see, whilest the King sues for a Divorce, the Duke desires a confirmation, and dispensation of his Marriage and both were granted, though the same reasons, and considerations were in both cases; the same ground which might dissolve the one might null the other, and the same salve might serve for both Cures: In short, the Duke de Bar applyed himself with all the humility, and submission imaginable to the Papal Chair, and carrying with him the King's recommendatory Letters to the Cardinals Aldobrandino, Ossac, and his Ambassadour, he obtained as much favour in his Cause as he could expect, or de∣sire. On the other side, in pursuance of the late Divorce, the Sieurs de Sillery, and Alincourt went to Florence to treat a new Marriage between the King▪ and the Princess Mary de Medicis. As the Duke of Florence received the honour of this Match with great readiness, it being an ad∣dition to the grandeur of his House; so the Pope to forward the same, contributed on his part a hundred thousand Crowns with many Jewels by way of Dowry, or Portion, which was agreed to be six hundred thousand Crowns in ready Mony. So soon as the Articles were signed, the Duke of Florence published the intended Marriage; and the King to bring it to a consummation, being then at Lions in order to his Journey to Grenoble deputed Bellegarde his Grand Escuyer with Commission to the Grand Duke, to espouse Mary de Medicis in his name: and the Pope to have a farther hand in this work, deputed his Nephew Cardinal Al∣dobrandino to be his Legat at Florence, and to be present at the Nuptials, which he accordingly performed, and bestowed the Benediction in the Pope's Name. The Cardinal having performed this piece of service hastned away by order of the Pope to Tortona, there to find the Duke and stipulate with him the conditions of a firm Peace; for the King had already com∣menced a War, and taken several places both in Savoy, and Bresse. The Cardinal representing before the Duke the danger, and inequality of a War with France, persuaded him to resign his pretensions and interest to the Marquisat of Saluses; and having obtained this promise, he proceed∣ed to Lions, where managing this Affair with the King, a Peace was con∣cluded▪ and published in the year 1601. on Conditions, that the Duke should quit all claim to the Marquisat of Saluces in exchange for Bresse, and some other Countries.
In the mean time the Queen embarqued at Ligorne with seventeen Gallies, arrived happily at Marseille, and thence was conducted with great honour and pomp to Lions, where meeting with the King the marriage was consummated, and the Nuptial Benediction given by Car∣dinal Aldobrandino the Pope's Legat before the great Altar of St. John's Church in the City of Lions. All these kindnesses passed between the Pope, and the King; the Pope resolved to make use of this good Cor∣respondence to intercede in behalf of the Jesuits, whose whole Order having for certain reasons been banished, and exterminated from the Do∣minions of France, was now at the instance and desire of the King re∣stored again under certain Conditions to their possessions, and habita∣tions in that Kingdom. And in regard the Emperor was at the same time hardly pressed by the Turk, the Pope, as at other times furnished him with a hundred thousand Crowns, which was a seasonable Recruit and supply in those exegencies of the Empire. And now it was about the year 1603.An. 1603. that Elizabeth Queen of Eng∣land dying, and James VI. King of Scotland succeeding to the Crown, when the Pope conceived great hopes, and expectations, that by means of this King, (whom he fancied to be a favourer of the Roman Church) the Kingdoms of Great Britain would submit unto, and acknowledg the Papal Authority; but what ground, or reasons there were for such an Opinion▪ or why the Roman Catholicks in England had conceived, and (for forty years together) had framed such a fancy to themselves no ra∣tional account can be given: but this conceit soon vanishing by the con∣trary effects which appeared, the Papists of England made two Remon∣strances to the new King in favour of their Religion, desiring at least that a liberty of Conscience might be granted to them; but these had no more effect, than the Declaration, which the Protestants made the same year in favour of their Religion in France. The Cardinals Bonvisi, and Ossac dying this year at Rome,An. 1604. Henry the French King did greatly urge the Pope for a promotion of Cardinals, recommending several of his own Creatures, and Friends to that Dignity: And though the Pope was very desirous to have reduced the Order of Cardinals to their ancient number, yet being overcome by the instances of some Friends, he bestowed a Cardinals Cap on the Son of one of his Nephews, being a Youth of about fourteen or fifteen years of age; and suffering himself to be prevailed with by the passion of Princes, he created in this very year at least eighteen Cardinals, amongst which there were not above two French, and two Spaniards. The first which was found in this List was Serafim Olivari Patriarch of Alexandria, who was originally of Italian extract, but born at Lions, and proved to be a Prelat of Incomparable parts, and Learning, being always educated a∣mongst Men, and business; the Bishop of Eureux was an other promo∣ted to this Dignity, which were the two French-Men, who received this honour by the recommendations of their King: all the others were Ita∣lians, unless the Bishop of Cracovia who was a Polander, and Madrutio Bishop of Trent, who was a German, and two Spaniards. Cardinal Al∣dobrandino preferred also his Secretary Erminio to this honour; and the Pope himself forced Anselme Marzat a Capucin to accept the red Hat; which he had often refused, protesting that such preferments were a∣gainst
the Rules, and a violation to the Orders of St. Francis, but the express commandment of the Pope prevailing; he unwillingly, (or at least seemed so) from the mere consideration of obedience submitted to the promotion. About this time three Questions were moved, and discussed at Rome, the first was managed by a notable Disputant, and a great Sophister; his position was this: That it was not an essential, or a fundamental point of Faith, to believe that Clement VIII. was the true and lawful Succes∣sor of St. Peter: it was a bold Thesis for that time, and place; for he was imprisoned for his impertinence, and it had cost him dearer, had not the Spanish Ambassadour interceded for him. An other published an Opinion, That Confessions wrote in Letters and sent by the Post, were as available, as those, which were whispered into the Ear of the Priest. A third was about Grace, and Free-will, in such manner as held, and maintained by Pelagius; which latter was debated in the presence of the Pope and Cardinals but remained without determination, by reason of more important matters which at that time lay before the Consistory. For then the Canonizing of Ignatius Loyola for a Saint was first pro∣pounded: and also the Deputies of the Clergy of the City of Milan pre∣sented themselves before the Pope, and Cardinals, desiring that their antient Arch-bishop Charles Borromeo might be canonized. Upon these two motions the Pope constituted a certain Committee of Cardinals to enquire into the sanctity of the Lives, and of the Miracles which were done at the Invocation of the Names, and at the Sepulcres of these Saints. After which an Ambassadour was introduced into the Consistory from the Emperor, representing the many occasions of advantage which were lost in Hungary for want of Money to carry on the War; to which the Pope gave Answer, That his Coffers at the present were empty, but howsoever he would lay a Tax of decimation on the Clergy, whereby to supply the urgencies of the Emperor against the common Enemy. Thus did this Pope, (who in reality merited the name of a good Man) employ his whole time in the Consistory, either designing to make peace between Christian Princes, or to carrry on a War against the Turk, who is the common Enemy of Christians; and in these good works of Piety he incessantly laboured, being frequently in consultation concerning the temporal, and spiritual Affairs in the Church; in dis∣charge of which his fortune was to be assisted with many wise, and able Cardinals, such as Joyeuse, Serafim Olivari, and Perron and other Coun∣sellours, who amongst several other matters advised him to take a Guard of Corsi, or Men of the Isle of Corsica, who being quartered in several parts of the City might be ready to suppress the Banditi who began again to be troublesom and to infest Rome, as well as other parts of Italy; from which time until the reign of Alexander VII. this Guard was maintained, when upon some Affronts, and violences offered to the French Ambassadour, they were disbanded and dismissed never afterwards to appear in Rome. The Arch-bishoprick of Ravenna in this year 1605.An. 1605. becoming vacant, the Pope bestowed it on his Nephew Cardinal Aldobrandino, who was no sooner received into that City with such pomp and solemnity, as be∣came the dignity of that Episcopal Sea, than news arrived of the Pope's
indisposition, which speedily posted the Cardinal back to Rome; for the Pope falling ill on the 10th. of February his sickness still increased, not∣withstanding all the Remedies, and care which Aldobrandino, and his Physitians could use: for after he had sat in the Papal Chair for the space of thirteen years, one month, and three days, he expired his last breath on the third of March, in the sixty ninth year of his Age,An. 1605. and was interred in St. Peter's Church, and the Sea was vacant twenty nine days. LEO XI. CLEMENT the Eighth having departed this Life, and his Funeral Obsequies being performed, the Cardinals to the number of sixty one entered the Conclave on the 14th. of March, and having according to the accustomed manner sung the Hymn of Veni Creator, and celebrated the Mass of Spiritus Sanctus, and every Cardinal having received the Sacrament from the hand of the Dean of the Conclave, they immediately made the first Scrutiny, where∣by it might appear unto whom the plurality of Votes was most probable to incline; but at first the Conclave was so divided, that no person had any considerable number of Votes bestowed on him; for Bellarmine, who had the most, accounted but eleven, and Baronius but eight, and all others an inferiour number: at length after several other Scrutinies, Baronius by the assistance of Cardinal Aldobrandino arrived to thirty, thirty one, and thirty two, and thirty seven, but still wanting some few more to make the number arise unto two thirds of the Conclave, the E∣lection was imperfect: nor could he arise higher, by reason that the Spanish faction opposed him out of a pique and exception they had ta∣ken against him, for what he had wrote in the 11th. Tome of his Ec∣clesiastical Annals, disproving the title of the King of Spain to the King∣dom of Sicily. Whereupon Cardinal Joyeuse concurring with Aldobran∣dino, (without whom nothing was to be done in the Conclave) nomina∣ted Alexander de Medicis; who was no sooner proposed than a strange concurrence, and union appeared in the minds of all the Cardinals to∣wards him, so that he was as it were elected by an unanimous consent, and saluted Pope on the first of April 1605. calling himself by the name of Leo XI. He was then of the age of seventy years, or thereabouts, of a chearful and sanguine Aspect, grave in his Speech and deportment, and of a strong and vigorous Complexion, only he sometimes was subject to pains of the Cholick; he was a great lover of the virtuosi, and Learn∣ed Men and zealous for the interest of the Church. After his Election he seemed not in the least manner altered, or tran∣sported, conserving still a Majesty becoming the gravity, and seriousness of the Papal Chair unto which he was promoted. Nor did he ascend unto this height on a sudden, but by degrees, and previous dispositions; for besides the advantages of his birth being the Son of Octaviano de Me∣dicis, Cousin of Cosmo Great Duke of Tuscany, he had exercised many honourable, and important Offices: for in the first place he had been Arch-bishop of Florence, and Francis the Great Duke of Florence had
sent him his Ambassadour at Rome. Gregory XIII. created him Cardi∣nal under the Title of St. John and St. Paul; and the 13th. of Decem∣ber 1593. Clement VIII. deputed him his Legat to Henry IV. King of France and Navarre; in which Office he was a good Instrument in making the Peace between this Henry and Philip II. King of Spain, in recompence of which, and to evidence the respect he had for him, King Henry presented him with a Jewel of ten thousand Crowns: and final∣ly being chosen Pope to the general satisfaction of all Rome, he was on the 2d. of April carried with the usual pomp to the Church of St. Peters, where Te Deum was solemnly sang; after which the people of Rome coming to salute him, he promised to abate their Subsidies, and Taxes, to adorn the City, to treat the Nobility with favour, and respect, and conserve and maintain the priviledges of all People respe∣ctively according to their qualities and conditions. On the 10th. of April being Easter day he was solemnly Crowned, but the day of Procession to St. John de Lateran where the Pope takes the possession was deferred until the seventeenth instant, when the Flo∣rentines, and the several Orders of the City did endeavour to outvy each other in such demonstrations, as might evidence the satisfaction, and contentment they received by this Election: amongst which the Florentines erected a Triumphal Arch with this Inscription on the one side thereof: Leoni XI. Florentino P.O.M. Florentini ad declarandam fidem, laetitiam, & animi alacritatem. And on the other side: Dignus est Leo in virtute Agni accipere librum, & solvere septem signacula ejus. But this joy, and contentment did not continue long; for the Pope be∣ing wearied with the tedious length of these Ceremonies, and over∣heated with the Weather, and weight of his Vestments took an extream cold which turned to a Fever, which encreasing daily on him, he expired his last breath on the 25th. day after his Election, and in the seven∣tieth year of his age; the same Evening his Body was carried to the Chappel of Sixtus, and the next day being the 28th. of April to the Church of St. Peters, where according to the usual custom great num∣bers of people thronged to kiss his feet. The sadness at Rome for this sudden accident was certainly very great; but none had so much reason to lament this loss, as his own Family, who had not time to receive the honours designed for them, and particularly his great Nephew Octaviano on whom he intended to bestow his own Cardinals Hat. After which the Papal Sea was vacant for nineteen days.
PAƲL V. LEO the Eleventh being deceased, the same Cardinals who had elected the preceding Pope to the number of sixty one, entered the Conclave on the 8th of May, where the day fol∣lowing the first Scrutiny was made; but without effect, by reason of the diversity of Votes, and divisions amongst the Cardinals. Sauli was then proposed, but excluded: Bellarmine was then next who in all probability might have carried the Prize, had not the Scrutiny been deferred, after the Pratica was made for him. Camerino, and Clemente were also put to the Votes, but excluded; only Cardinal Tosco had gained so great a Party, being assisted by Aldobrandino, Montalto and others of the best Interest, that his Election had certainly been per∣fected, had not Baronius, and Farugio crossed the matter, which caused a loud cry for Baronius, but by a like accident of contradiction, as well Baronius, as Tosco was excluded: at length after diversity of Successes Cardinal Borghese being nominated, such unanimous consent appeared in all the Conclave, that every one seemed to assent having no other ob∣jection against him, than the small number of his years, having scarce attained to the age of fifty three, but that scruple not availing, he was conducted to the Chappel of Paolino, where he was elected, and having vested himself in his Pontifical garments was worshiped as Pope on the 16th. of May, which being performed he took on himself the name of Paul. V. This Camillo, for so was his Christian Name, was born at Rome, his Father was Antonio Borghese of Siena, but his Mother was a Roman Lady. His Studies were chiefly in the Civil Law, in which having taken his degree of Doctor he became so famous, that he was made Referendary both of one, and the other Signet. In the year 1588. he was constitu∣ted Vice Legat of Bologna. Gregory IV. made him Auditor of the Cham∣ber, which is an Office that requires great dexterity, and experience in Affairs. Clement VIII. created him Cardinal with the title of St. Chru∣sogono, and afterwards made him his Vicar, which is one of the four principal Dignities of Rome. In this manner he still advanced in greatness and honour, until he came to the height of the Papal Dignity, seeming to have arisen thereunto rather by the force of his own merits, and Virtue than by fortune, or the favour and recommendation of Friends or Patrons. On the 29th. of May being Whit-sunday he was Crowned with all the usual Ceremonies; and then he bestowed freely his general Indulgences, exhorting all people to pray for the encrease of God's Church, the tranquillity and peace of the Christian State, and extirpation of Heresie. He abated, or took off some of the Taxes, which lay most heavy on the People, moderated the price of Pro∣visions at Rome, and contrived a great abundance of all things necessary, or convenient for humane life. And to give some indication to the World of his magnificence, and generous Mind, he built a Chappel in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, just opposite to that of Sixtus V.
which he enriched, and adorned with Porphiry, and Marble, and en∣dowed afterwards with a considerable Revenue. Paul V. being thus setled in the Papal Chair, and invested with all the Power attendant on that supreme degree, made it the scope, and chief end of all his designs, and Counsel to scrue up the Ecclesiastical Autho∣rity to the sublime pitch of greatness; or (to use his own words) to re∣store it to that State from which his Predecessours, and particularly Cle∣ment VIII. had by their remissness, or want of care suffered it to elapse, and decay. And indeed his own natural disposition, and the course of his life seemed to have fitted him for such a work as this; for having been educated a Lawyer, and made Auditor of the Chamber, whose title is, Sententiarum, & censurarum intus, & extra latarum universalis Executor, he made such use of his Trade, that all the Popes his Predecessours, for above fifty years before, had not thundered out so many Briefs, Moni∣tories, and Excommunications, as he had done, in the space onely of five years: In order to this design of advancing the Ecclesiastical Power, (to which all his thoughts were applyed) he constituted a new Congre∣gation at Rome, whose business it was to contrive ways and means to amplifie, and enlarge the Authority, and Dominion of the Church: and all the Nuntios, or Ministers which he sent to Christian Princes were all prepared, and composed of the same humour, having special Instru∣ctions to cry up the Vertue and sacred force of the Ecclesiastical Au∣thority; amongst these Champions none was more zealous than Oratio Mathei Bishop of Gierace, whom the Pope had made his Nuntio at Venice; where one day making a Speech before the Doge and Council; he had the impertinence, or rather the impudence to say, That Alms-deeds, and other works of Charity and Piety, and frequent Communion in the Holy Sa∣crament, and the most sublime works of Christian devotion, ad nihilum va∣lent, were all nothing, unless they were attended with respect, and favour to the Ecclesiastical liberty and authority. To which he added: That the Pope had commanded him to persist in this Opinion to the death, and accordingly he was resolved to endure martyrdom, rather than be remiss or cold in advancement of the Papal Authority. And these words he delivered with such arrogance, and supercilious affectation, that he seemed to say, I am Pope in this place, and expect no Reply, or Contest, but onely O∣bedience. Howsoever at first for several Months this design was not prosecuted with such heat as the importance of the matter did require; for we must allow some abatement, and allay for the joy, and satisfaction which the Pope would take within himself for his late Atchievements: And like∣wise upon farther thoughts, he judged it not convenient to erect the Congregation he designed; for that it would be a means to lay open, and discover his contrivances, and make Princes more jealous: a proof whereof was given by the Congregation, which was constituted for ma∣nagement of the Affairs of England; which served onely to give better light and aim to King James than reigning, and to render him more watchful, and observing over all the actions, and designs of the Papists in England. And moreover, the Pope having passed some few days of joy after his Inauguration, was possessed with a melancholly caused by an hypocondriacal Fancy, that he should speedily depart this life, which gave some retardment for a while to the heat of his actions: and in∣deed
the ground of his apprehension proceeded from a common report about Rome, that the Image of the Virgin of Subiaco had sweated, which commonly fore-runs the death of Popes: also a Dutch Astrologer had predicted, that Clement VIII. should die in March, and that after him Leo, and Paul should succeed, and both Reign for a short time. The thoughts hereof so disturbed, and perplexed his mind, that for the space of five Months he could not apply himself to any business of moment; until in the Month of September certain of his Friends being desirous to cure this melancholly assembled all the Astrologers, and Diviners toge∣ther in the House of the Pope's Brothers, where having had a Consul∣tation, they all concluded, that there had been certain black and unhap∣py Influences which threatned the life of the Pope, but being now past and blown over, there remained nothing but chearful, and auspitious Omens, which promised long life, and happiness, and great successes unto him. Thus being relieved of his Melancholly, his thoughts were at liberty to reassume the design to advance the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; in or∣der to which his first beginning was to persuade the King, that the Council of Trent might be received in France. In Spain he laboured to gain an exemption for the Jesuits, that they might be freed from pay∣ment of their Tenths. At Naples he endeavoured to have had the Marquess of Morcone called the Regent of Ponte, sent to Rome, for con∣demning a Book-seller to the Gallies, for printing libellous Pamphlets, the which he pretending to belong to the Inquisition, was an encroach∣ment on the Ecclesiastical Power, and therefore merited the Censure, and punishment of the Church. He also took away certain Rents, and Be∣nefices belonging to the religious Order of Malta, and conferred them on Cardinal Borghese, who was his Nephew by the Sisters side, called Scipio, of the Family of Caffarelli a youth of twenty three years of age. But these, and other matters of this nature made no great noise, and only served to open the gate or way to particulars of greater importance, the which soon afterwards happened in two considerable Instances. The first related to the Republick of Luca, which observing that many of their Citizens having professed the Protestant Religion were retired from their Habitations and Country, had in the times of former Popes for∣bidden, and interdicted them from all Commerce, or correspondence with their fellow-Citizens: the which Act though well approved by the Pope to be in it self both pious, and commendable, yet he pretended, that such Act of Interdiction belonged to the Ecclesiastical, and not to the Civil Power; and therefore required that the same should be cancel∣led, and made void, that so place, and room might be opened for the Censure of the Church. The second related to the City of Genoua, where at the Jesuits Col∣ledg an Oratory or Chappel was set up for Christian exercises, and here the Citizens of this Congregation agreed amongst themselves to favour none with their Votes at the Election of Magistrates, but such as were entered and enrolled in this Confraternity. This resolution being made known to the Supreme Rulers of the City, they immediately dissolved the Congregation, not knowing what might be the ill effects and con∣sequences of such Sedition. This, and other matters of like nature were ill resented by the Pope, as encroachments on the Ecclesiastical liberty;
wherefore he commanded that such Orders be reversed, and if not, then he threatned them with Censures, and Excommunications. But the Pope began to deal more roundly with the State of Venice; for being very urgent with them to assist the Emperor with Money to∣wards his Wars against the Turks in Hungary, he exacted it in such a man∣ner, as Kings, and Emperors require contributions from their Subjects; which though the Venetians could not digest without secret resentments, yet their Answer was with much modesty: That though the Senate would gladly contribute towards a War against the Turk, yet being at high charge, and expence to conserve their own State, and secure themselves a∣gainst those fears, and jealousies which were given them by their Neigh∣bours, they could not apply their nerves and sinews of War to any design, but what tended to their own security at home. This Answer seemed very strange to the Pope, who had learned from the doctrine of the mo∣dern Casuists, That Popes might lay any Tax or Imposition on Christian Princes, and require from them whatsoever they judged for the common good, and welfare of Christendom. But the Pope did not think this ground to have sufficient foundation, on which to build, and commence a quarrel, but rather on the matters, which did more neerly relate to the Interest of the Papal Sea. It was not long before an occasion of this nature offered it self by means of one Scipio Saraceno a Prebend of Vicenza, who had contemp∣tuously torn off, and broken the Seals which the Magistrates had fixed on the Episcopal Chancery, during the vacancy of that Office: and like∣wise finding that he could not debauch a Lady of known Vertue, whom he tempted in the Churches, and Streets, and in all places where he could have any convenience to meet her; he became so enraged with lust, and malice, that he besmeared with filthiness and tar the Gate, and front of her House; which being a high affront, and disgrace to the Lady, she with the advice of her Friends cited this insolent Prebend be∣fore the Court of Justice at Venice, who as readily and willingly appear∣ed, being encouraged and bolstred up by the Bishop of Citta Nuova, a person of great esteem in Venice, and one who was Director of the Af∣fairs of all the Nuntios and Papal Ministers at that place. The Nuntio who was desirous to obtain a licentious exemption of all Priests from the Secular Power, embraced the cause of the Prebendary with all rea∣diness imaginable, and immediately dispatched the news hereof to the Pope, and to the Bishop of Vicenza, who was then at Rome; where after divers Consultations, it was resolved as an essential Point relating to the Ecclesiastical liberty, that the Cause of the Prebend should be maintain∣ed and defended: and therefore the Pope who was glad of this occasion to assert the Authority and Rites of the Churches, stormed, and raved with the Venetian Ambassadour, telling him, that he would not endure or suffer the imprisonment of an Ecclesiastical Person by the Precepts of a Secular Tribunal; nor would he admit that a Judg of temporal matters should take cognisance of any Cause, wherein a Priest, or Churchman was concerned. Of all which, the Ambassadour gave advice to the Senate. The Pope at an other Audience complained to the said Ambassadour, that the Senate of Venice had since the death of Clement VIII. made a Statute of Mortmain, whereby Lay-persons were forbidden, and restrain∣ed
from bequeathing, or bestowing their Estates on the Church; which Statute though it were founded on an old Law, yet the new one was more restrictive: but both of them being against the antient Canons, Councils, and Imperial Laws were in themselves void, and null, being scandalous, and impious, in that they made the state, and condition of Churchmen worse than that of infamous persons; and therefore those who made these Laws did incur the Censures of the Church: in the like terms the Nuntio at Venice explained the mind of the Pope unto the Senate: and when the Ambassadours arrived at Rome to congratulate the Pope for his exaltation to that dignity, he could not refrain even before the Ceremony was ended, to make his resentments, and com∣plaints of those Laws made in derogation of the Rites, and immunities belonging to the Church. And thus we have laid down the true state of the quarrel between the Pope, and the Venetians: to which we shall add a third Point, namely a Law made at Venice in the year 1603. pro∣hibiting the building of Churches without consent, and license for it ob∣tained from the Senate; which the Pope termed a piece of Heresie. These being the three Points in Controversie, the Senate for answer thereunto commanded their Ambassadour to represent in their name unto his Holiness; That the just Right, and Title they had to judg Ec∣clesiastical Persons in Secular Causes was founded in the natural Power of the Supreme Prince, and confirmed by an uninterrupted course of a thousand years, the which may be proved by the Pontifical Briefs extant in their publick Archives, or Records. That the Law of Mort-main, or Statute restraining Laymen from alienation of their Estates to the Church, was not onely enacted at Venice or peculiar to the Cities under that Me∣tropolis, but exercised in other Christian Kingdoms, and States; and that this Law was more conducing to the welfare of Venice, than to any other people; being that which could onely conserve its Forces entire against the common Enemy of Christendom, which would otherwise be enfeebled by those daily Legacies, and Endowments which were be∣queathed, and conferred on the Church. The Pope was so netled with this way of reasoning, that he sat all the time uneasie in his Seat, shrugging his shoulders, and turning his head which intimated the unquietness of his mind. At length he replyed: That those arguments were invalid, and of no force: for that there was no foundation to be made on the accustomed course of their Judicature, which was so much the worse, by how much more they pretended An∣tiquity. And as to the Briefs, there was no authentick Register or Re∣cord of them, but what was found at Rome, and that the others were forged Copies, and cheats imposed on the Clergy. And as to their Acts, and Ordinances, he was so well acquainted, and versed in them, since the time of his youthful Studies; and that having passed the Of∣fices of Vice-Legat, Auditor of the Chamber, and Vicar of the Pope, he was sufficiently assured, that that Law could not stand, and that the old Act made in the year 1536. which takes from the Laiety a power of disposing of their own private Estates, was in it self void, and of no force, and a tyrannical imposition on the Subject. That the Senate themselves were so sensible of this injurious Law, that they were asha∣med to issue forth any Copies of it: and if in case a Law of this nature, were found in any other Country, it was established by the Authority
and with the concurrence of the Popes; and then he concluded, that he was resolved not to make a long work of it, for that in case he were not obeyed, he would make use of such Remedies as he thought convenient, being so positive in this matter, and zealous for the Church, that he was ready to spill his blood in this righteous Cause, and in the defence there∣of; That in case it were necessary to give a stop to the alienation of Lands, or a restraint of building Churches, he would always have been ready to have followed the sentiments of the State, and to have concur∣red in just causes with the desires of the Secular Council: but as to the point of drawing the Clergy to the Secular Tribunals he would never admit, that such as were his Subjects, should be liable to the sentence of an other Jurisdiction; this in fine was his resolution on the three foregoing Cases, in which he was resolved to be obeyed, and make use of that Power which God had given him over all things, and over all Princes to depose them, and could command Legions of Angels to come to his aid and assistance. The Senate having received these Informations from their Ambassa∣dour did well weigh, and consider the anger, and furious displeasure of the Pope on the one side, and the publick liberty, and the necessity of upholding their Government on the other: and having put both these considerations into the balance, they returned this answer to the Pope's Nuntio, and wrote also to their Ambassadour at Rome to this effect. That they could neither release the Prisoners lawfully arrested, nor re∣peal, or dispence with those Laws which were justly established, lest they should violate that natural liberty which God had bestowed on their Republick, and which had been conserved for many hundreds of years by the wisdom, and with the blood of their Ancestours. For that to admit such a breach into their Power, would breed such confu∣sion in their Government, as could not but end in a dangerous Sedition. The which resolution was so unanimous, and general that not one Vote in the Senate was dissenting, and accordingly it was signified to the Nuntio, that so they might disabuse and take off the Pope from those ex∣pectations, which the Jesuits had promised, of making a division, and Schism amongst the Senators. But these reasons made little impression in the mind of the Pope, or did in the least move him from prosecuting the violent course he design∣ed, and accordingly he ordered two Briefs to be drawn up; one rela∣ting to the two Laws, and the other to the two Prisoners; for besides the Canon or Prebend whom we have formerly mentioned, the Abbot of Nervesa was also apprehended by the Secular Justice. The Crimes laid to the charge of this Abbot were such as were flagitious, and of a high nature, being accused of having exercised an unlimited tyran∣ny upon his Neighbours, and Tenants; that he had robbed, and taken away their goods at the prices he was pleased to set; that he lived in Whoredom, and committed Rapes on the Bodies of vertuous and chast Women; and that in order thereunto he used Magical Spells, and En∣chantments, and compounded subtle Poisons, by which he had destroyed his own Brother who was an Augustine Frier, and with him his Servant; that by his Poisons he had macerated the Body of his Father in such manner, as had reduced him to the last extremity of life. That he had committed Incest with his own Sister, and poisoned her Maid, lest his
Crime should be detected by her; besides many other Murthers, and wickedness of the deepest dye of which he was guilty: and this was the pretious Fellow, with his Comrade the Canon of Vicenza whom the Pope was so instant to defend and exempt from the Sentence of the Secular Justice. The Breviates (as we have said) being wrote, and Sealed were di∣rected in this manner, Marino Grimano Duci, & Reipub. Venetorum, and then dispeeded with all secrecy by the Pope to his Nuntio at Venice: which when he had done he called a Consistory of Cardinals, and then first published, and made known the whole matter to them, enlarging him∣self with such heat, and vehemence on every particular Point, as that he seemed impatient of any contradiction, not admitting any debate, or consultation thereupon. The Cardinals not being used to this manner of treatment, who according to the antient constitution of Consistories were not only reputed Counsellours, but Parties also in all matters of this moment, did murmure at this rash and precipitate resolution of the Pope: and having understood the reasons of the Pope on the one side, and of the Republick on the other, were divided into various Opinions: The Consistory being ended, the Cardinals Baronius, and Perron used many arguments in private to the Pope persuading him to desist from so difficult and hazardous an Enterprise; at least that he should expect a more favourable conjuncture of Affairs, rather than adventure all by a hasty and inconsiderate advice: but the Pope who was fixed on his Design became deaf to all Counsels which concurred not with his sense. The Nuntio having received the Briefs, delivered them on Christmas day in the Morning to the Counsellours at the time when they were assembled, to hear the high Mass; but the Doge Grimani lying at that time on his Death-bed, and dying the next day, the Senate delayed to open the Briefs, until according to their usual Methods, they had com∣pleated the election of a new Prince. Of which the Pope having advice he immediately dispatched Orders to his Nuntio, commanding him to protest against the Republick, and against their Election, as being void, and invalid, and of no power, whilest they remained under the Censure of Excommunication: with this new device the Pope expected to make a division, and a confusion in their Councils; for he measuring the constitu∣tions of Venice at the death of their Prince with those at Rome during the vacancy of the Sea, did imagine that such a Bone as this thrown into so numerous an Assembly would beget great disturbances, and diversity of Opinions; but this Government which hath always been firm, and constant, and which admitted of no Interregnum kept constant to their antient Principles, refusing to give Audience to the Nuntio or any other forein Representative, unless it were to pass the Offices of Condolance for the death of the Prince. Thus (as we say) this Election admitting of no interruption, the same was compleated on the 10th. of January 1606.An. 1606. by the unanimous consent of the Nobles concurring in the choice of Leonard Donato a Se∣natour of great eminence, and esteem for the probity of his life, his ex∣perience in Government, and knowledg in Learning: besides his heroick Vertues, and qualities which recommended him to all mankind. After this Election all the Ambassadours from forein Princes went to congra∣tulate
with the new Doge; onely the Pope's Nuntio refrained from this Office; notwithstanding which the Doge according to the usual form wrote to the Pope giving him advice of his Election; to which the Pope contrary to his former intentions returned a favourable answer, giving his Nuntio Order to pass the Complement, and in person to congratulate with the Doge for the honour with which he was invested. The first thing which after the election of the Prince was transacted in the Senate, was the Controversie between the Pope, and the Repub∣lick; and in the first place the Cavalier Peter Duodo was appointed Ambassadour to be dispeeded to Rome, Then the Pope's Briefs were in the next place to he considered: the which being opened, and read, were found to run almost in the same stile, and tenure; one having reference to the Laws, and the other to the Prisoners, the Contents whereof were as followeth. That whereas for some years past the Senate had in their publick Coun∣cils, transacted, and established several matters against the Liberties and Immunities of the Church, and against the Canons, Councils, and Pontifical Constitutions: And whereas the Council of the Pragadi in pursuance of such Laws made by their Predecessours, had in the year 1603. Ordered, and enacted, That no Churches, or religious Houses should be built, or ere∣cted without license first obtained from the Senate: And whereas such Laws being in themselves void, ought to have been repealed, and cancelled; the said Council did not onely confirm but enlarge the same, making those Laws which were once restrained, and limited to the City of Venice onely, to reach, and extend to all parts and places subjected to that Dominion, un∣der severe forfeitures, and penalties to the Offenders; as if both Churches, and Ecclesiastial persons were subjected to the temporal Jurisdiction, and as if it were a capital crime, nnd wickedness to build a Church. And where∣as in pursuance of an other Law made in the year 1536. whereby a Sta∣tute of Mortmain was made, and penalties laid on such, who should with∣out license obtained from the Senate alienate the Lands of Lay-persons and bestow them to pious uses; which Law, as it ought to have been repealed, so on the contrary in the Month of March last past the Senate did not onely confirm the same, but did likewise enlarge, and extend the power thereof to all parts within their Dominions: as if that Signory which is but a temporal power had Authority with consent, or concurrence of the Pope to dispose of Ecclesiastical Estates, Goods, or Revenues, though left by pious, and faithful Believers as an Offering for sin, and as an ease to their bur∣dened Consciences. The which things being damnable, scandalous, and con∣trary to the Ecclesiastical liberty are null, and void in themselves, and from the observance of which, all persons are disobliged. And it is hereby farther declared, that those who have been contrivers, or Legislators of these or the like Statutes, have incurred the censure of the Church, and a forfeiture of all those Lands which they hold of the Church, and their States, and Dominions are also liable to other punishments. So that unless every thing be restored to its pristine State, perseverance in the same will be an aggravation of the crime, for which no absolution can be given, but on terms of restauration of all matters to their original condition. Wherefore being exalted on our supreme Throne, on which we cannot nor ought to dissemble any matters, We admonish you to consider the danger of your Souls, for which this Republick is obliged to provide: for we com∣mand
under pain of Excommunication that the aforesaid Laws, whether an∣tient, or modern be revoked and cancelled, and that the same be published in all parts of your Dominions; and in case you refuse to perform the same, We shall then be forced to proceed to the execution of this Our Sentence, so soon, as we have understood the presentation of these Our Letters, from the report of Our Nuntio; and afterwards you are not to expect any other citation, or process from us: for we are unwilling, that God should in the last day of Judgment demand an account of this matter, and condemn us for want of performance of Our duty in this case. Wherefore we, whose end, and design it is to govern the Christian State in peace, and righteous∣ness, cannot dissemble in cases, where the Apostolical Sea is offended, the Ecclesiastical liberty trampled under foot, the Canons neglected, the Rites of the Church and the priviledges of the Clergy violated, which is the sum of this Our accusation against you. And We do farther make known unto you, that we are not moved to pass this Our Censure out of any worldly respect, having onely an ambition of zeal to exercise our Apostolical Government as far as we are able, in its due perfection. And as we would not in∣trench on the temporal Authority, so neither will we permit that the Ec∣clesiastical should be infringed. But in case the Republick would be obedient to these Our Commands, they would free Ʋs from great troubles, and anguish of mind which we sustain for their sakes: And they also may conserve the Lands which they hold from the Church: nor can this Republick defend themselves from the force, and violence of Infidels by any better, and pre∣vailing means, than by doing right, and justice to the Clergy, who day and night watch over them, and pray unto God for this Republick. The Senate having read, and considered these Briefs, thought fit to confer, and consult with the most judicious, and able Lawyers of their age, such as Antonio Pellegrini, and Erasmus Gratiani, together with Fa∣ther Paul of the Order of the Servi a person profoundly learned in Theo∣logy, and the Canons of the Church: unto these three, they added se∣veral other learned Men, eminent for wisdom and piety of Life, not Subjects onely to the State of Venice, but belonging to other parts of Italy, namely Menocchio President of Milan, and others; in conside∣ration of which case, they perused, and search'd the Books, and Wri∣tings of the most famous Doctors of France and Spain: and according to the Opinion, and sence of all those learned Men in the Law, the Con∣troversie between the Pope, and the Republick did relate wholly to temporal matters, unto which the Papal Authority did not extend; and that the Republick might in such cases order, and determine according to the nature, and exigency of their Affairs: and in farther proof and testimony hereof, many Laws were cited, which had been enacted in o∣ther Christian Countries, and Dominions, of the same substance, and te∣nure with these. And in this manner the Senate having received and understood the Opinion, and report of their Doctors returned their an∣swer unto the Pope to this effect, dated the 28th. of January.An. 1606. With much astonishment and trouble of mind this Republick hath been informed by Letters from your Holiness, that those Laws which for some ages have been observed with much benefit to this Republick, and never questioned by your Predecessors, should now be reprehended, and repealed by the Authority of the Apostolical Sea, the which Laws are so sound, and safe for us, that the alteration of them would shake the very foundation of
this Government; And we are troubled to think that those Persons who were of excellent piety, and vertue, that made and established these Laws, and who are now in Heaven, should be termed, and branded as violators of the Ecclesiastical liberty. And now according to the desire of your Holiness, we have caused all our Laws, both antient and modern relating to the points in Controversie to be reviewed, and examined; and we find nothing which hath been established by the Power of the Supreme Prince, in the least derogatory to the Papal Authority: it being apparent, that it is the duty of the Secular Magistrate to inspect and consider what kind of Compa∣nies are fit to be admitted into the City; what Edifices are fit to be erected, and what are not, and what may in time prove hurtful to the publick safe∣ty: for in regard the Dominion of Venice doth abound with Churches, and religious Houses, as much as any other part, and that when it was conve∣nient to erect more, a license to build was not onely granted, but contribu∣tions made thereunto by the publick liberality, and munificence; so when it was necessary to set bounds and limits thereunto, this Senate made use of their own Power alone without any diminution to the Canons of the Church. And whereas the Pope hath a Power to restrain the Clergy from alienating their Lands, and Estates to the Laiety without his consent, and dispensation, so also hath the temporal Prince the like Authority to forbid and inhibit all Lay-persons from making alienation of their Estates unto the Church. Nor do Ecclesiastical persons lose any thing by this restri∣ction, but rather procure a benefit; for when the temporal Power is weak∣ned by such alienation, this State which is the Bulwark of Christendom, will not be able to withstand the common Enemy, nor afford due protection either to the Clergy, or Laiety. And therefore the Senate doth not be∣lieve, that they have incurred the Ecclesiastical Censure, considering that Secular Princes have received that Power from God of making Laws, which no other humane Authority is able to take from them: and much less have the Briefs of your Holiness any place, or prevalence in matters purely temporal, which are clearly distinct from those which are spiritual, to which the Papal Power doth singly extend. Nor can this Senate imagine, that your Holiness, who is full of Piety, and Religion, will persist in these your Comminations, until the cause hath first been fully examined, and discussed. And thus much they thought fit in short to make known unto your Holiness, referring all things to be treated and explained more at large by their Am∣bassadour Extraordinary. These Letters of the Senate being arrived at Rome were presented to the Pope by the hands of the Ambassadour, who immediately opened, and read them; but the Contents so little pleased him, that he was angry, and froward all the time that they were in reading: and in fine, he told the Ambassadour, that those Letters were no Answer to his Admoni∣tory Briefs, that the Answer was frivolous and insignificant; that the matter was clear and evident on his side, and that therefore he was re∣solved to proceed unto Sentence: that the Senate must resolve to sub∣mit, and obey, for his cause was the cause of God. Et Portae Inferi non praevalebunt adversus eam. If the Monks of Padoua had purchased more Lands than were requisite, or consistent with the welfare of the State, upon address made to him he could have applyed a Remedy, but the Senate proceeding in another manner were Tyrants, Usurpers, and Men of Principles different from their Ancestours: wherefore he exhorted
them not to deceive themselves with the thoughts of protracting the time, in hopes of deciding the Dispute by his death, for that in case he received not satisfaction therein, in the space of fifteen days he would then proceed to execution of his Sentence. The fifteen days were scarce expired when the Ambassadour Nani acquainted the Pope that Duodo was dispatched from Venice in quality of Ambassadour Extraordinary to inform his Holiness more amply of all matters; to which the Pope replied, that there was no need of farther expostulations, the matter was clear, and he would be obeyed. But notwithstanding the Pope's hast time was protracted till towards the end of March, when Duodo the Ambassadour Extraordinary arrived at Rome; to whom the Pope would not have patience to grant all the methods of Complements, but immediately at his arrival admitted him to Audience; when the Ambassadour largely discoursing on every point in Controversie, concluded that the Senate could not yield to the De∣mands of his Holiness, without betraying that Power which God had put into their hands. But the Pope making no reply to the Arguments in particular, adhered close to the Conclusion, that Ecclesiastical persons were exempted Jure Divino from the Secular Dominion, that he had heard enough from Nani of this kind of reasoning, that the Cause was God's, and must prevail. This resolution of the Pope being made known at Venice, the Senate thought fit to communicate these their differences to the Ministers of fo∣rein Princes, desiring their Opinions on those Points. From which the Spanish Ambassadour excused him, not desiring to concern his Master in those matters, which might yield the least displeasure to the Pope; but the Imperial, and French Ambassadours were much more frank and open in their Opinions; for the first did allow and approve the reasons of the Senate, alledging the Customs of his own Country the French Comte, where the same things were practised, and Monsieur de Fresnes the French Ambassadour declared, that he could not understand those Papal Laws which deny unto Princes the Government of their own State, and therefore the Republick was much to be commended for preferring their liberty before any other respect. At Rome the Cardinals of Verona, and Vicenza used all the Interest, and persuasions they were able to induce the Pope to defer the pro∣mulgation of his Sentence for some time; putting him in mind, that the Spiritual Arms were not to be exercised, but in cases where they were sure to prevail; Then said the Pope, I shall make use of the Temporal: and in the mean time to manifest to the World my patience, and ten∣derness towards them, I shall grant them the term of twenty four days to consider, and repent: and accordingly having formed and printed his Monitory on the 17th. of April, he caused it to be read and published in the Consistory. After which he added, That he had greatly studied this Point, and having consulted with the most famous Canonists, the general Opinion of them all, was, that the Republick acted contrary to the Authority of the Apostolick Sea, and against the liberties, and im∣munities of the Church; alledging in his favour the Council of Simmaco, and of Lions under Pope Gregory, with other Decrees made by the Councils of Constance and Basil: and that the same was so declared in the case against Henry II. against the Kings of Castile, and other Kings;
and caused a Constitution made by Innocent III. to be read; and to pro∣ceed the more regularly in this important matter, the Votes of the Car∣dinals were distinctly required: the number of Cardinals then present in the Consistory were forty one, all which did either in few words as∣sent, or more at large produce the Authority of the Canonists in con∣firmation of the Pope's reasons. And indeed little less than this free concurrence could be expected from them: for though some few out of a zeal towards the Ecclesiastical liberty, might really be possessed with this Opinion; yet the generality were guided by other Principles; some perhaps were unwilling to displease the Pope in expectation of prefer∣ments of themselves, or Friends; others had a prospect of arising to the Popedom, and for that cause were willing to exalt its Power: every one had some consideration or other for his own benefit, but not such con∣sideration as was required in study of the case, or to find out the truth of the matter under debate. For Popes in the Consistory are always sure to find the Cardinals pliant, and ready to yield assent unto whatsoever they propose, that is Assentiri in Assentari. The Consistory being risen the Monitory was affixed in all the pub∣lick places of Rome; of which a multitude of Copies both in Latin, and Italian were printed, and dispatched into all the Cities of Italy, especial∣ly into the Dominions of Venice, and dispersed into all parts by the Jesuits accompanied with seditious Letters, and Pamphlets derogatory to the honour of the Republick. The Monitory was directed to the Patriarchs, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Vicars, and all Ecclesiastics either Secular, or Regular, who held any Dignities, and preferments of the Church within the Dominion of Venice, and therein it was exposed. That whereas some Months past he was given to understand, (that is the Pope) how that the Doge, and Senate of Venice, had for many years past made several Decrees in prejudice of the Apostolical Sea, and priviledges of the Church, notwithstanding that the same were repugnant to the General Coun∣cils, and to the antient Canons, and Constitutions of the Popes of Rome: and now more lately a Law was made in the year 1602. whereby Ecclesia∣stical persons are incapacitated to appropriate to themselves any Lands, or Estates. Secondly, He mentioned the Law made in the year 1603. which restrains, and prohibits the erecting or building any Churches, or religious Houses without the leave or license of the Senate. Thirdly, He mentioned the Law in 1605. which extends these Laws over all the Dominions of the Republick which formerly were terminated to the City of Venice onely; and lastly, the imprisonment of the Canon of Vicenza, and the Abbot of Nervesa: by which particular offences the Ecclesiastical liberty being in∣fringed, the Doge, and Senate of Venice have to the danger of their own Souls and scandal of the World incurred the Ecclesiastical Censures to the forfeiture of their Lands, and Jurisdiction, from which they cannot be ab∣solved but by the Pope himself, who being satisfied with their repentance, demonstrated by a repeal of those Laws, and restauration of all things to their pristine condition, hath the sole power to receive them again into the bosom of the Church. And whereas the Doge, and Senate after many fa∣therly Admonitions, have not repealed those Laws, nor released the Priso∣ners, he could in no wise suffer, that the liberties and immunities of the Church, and the Authority of the Apostolical Sea should be violated, and infringed: And though those Laws are in themselves void and of none ef∣fect,
yet by the example of ten Popes and more his Predecessours in confirmation hereof, and by and with the consent, and counsel of the Cardinals (with whom he had advised hereupon) he doth farther declare those Laws to be null, and can∣celled: and doth farther declare, and denounce Excommunication against the Doge, and Senate in general, in such manner, as if they had been par∣ticularly named, and against their Successours, Councellours, Adherents, and Abettors, in case the said Doge and Senate shall not within the space of twenty four days after the publication hereof, (assigning eight days for each term of Admonition) repeal, cancel, and make void the aforesaid De∣crees, with all Writs, and Orders proceeding thereupon: and without far∣ther delay or Excuse, shall not restore all things to their former, and ori∣ginal condition, with promise never to do, or perform the like again; And shall not consign into the hands of his Nuntio both the Canon, and the Ab∣bot, giving advice, and notice of all unto the Pope himself: and for de∣fault thereof the Excommunication to remain in force, from whence no Absolution can be granted, but by the Pope himself, unless at the point of death: from which State in case the person so absolved shall recover, and still continue, and persist in the same obstinacy, he shall again be liable to the same Excommunication as before; and in case he die his body notwith∣standing shall not be interred in any consecrated place, until obedience be yielded unto these Commands by all others concerned. And in case after the expiration of twenty four days the Doge, and Senate shall still persist in their contumacy for other three days, then he did Interdict all their Dominion, forbidding all Masses, and divine Offices to be performed there∣in; unless in such places, manner, and cases as are granted by the Com∣mon Law: And farther, he did deprive the Doge, and Senate of all their Revenue, and possessions which they hold of the Roman Church, or other Churches and of all the priviledges granted them in favour thereof; re∣serving still unto himself, and his Successours a Power to aggravate and encrease the Censures, and penalties against them, their Adherents, and A∣bettors therein, &c. And to proceed unto farther punishments, and Remedies in case of continuance in such like contumacy. Notwithstanding, &c. Com∣manding all Patriarchs, Arch-bishops, and Bishops, and other Inferiour Clergy upon penalty, &c. That after the receipt of these Letters, or no∣tice thereof given, that they publish the same in the respective Churches, at such times, as when the greatest concourse of people is present, and to affix the same at the Church doors, &c. After publication was made of this severe Excommunication thun∣dered out against a Republick of such greatness and esteem in the World: all the Ambassadours and Ministers of foreign Princes residing at Rome were greatly troubled, and concerned, considering that an Act of this nature had some oblique reflection on every Prince, that professed obe∣dience, or devotion for the Papal Sea. Wherefore every one of those Ministers residing at Rome made their applications, and addresses to the Pope, desiring him to moderate, and prorogue the Sentence until the matter were examined, and considered by the Republick, and ways or means contrived for an accommodation. To whom the Pope returned this general Answer, That the way to compose, and accommodate these differences were to incline the Republick to a resolution of becoming obedient; but that word Obedient would not well pass with the Mini∣sters, who made some reflections thereon, as unbeseeming the degree of
Sovereign Princes, and therefore persuaded the Pope rather to use some more moderate, and gentle terms, and enlarge the time allotted for ter∣mination of the Sentence. The news hereof being come to Venice, the Senate immediately and in the first place ordered, that Prayers should be made in all Churches, and Chappels imploring the Divine assistance in that great emergency of Affairs; and in the next place they resolved to recall their Ambassa∣dour Extraordinary from Rome, leaving Nani to reside there, lest they should seem to despise, and stand in open defiance against the Apostolical Sea. Sir Henry Wotton was at that time Resident for the King of England at Venice, when the Senate thought fit to communicate to him the ri∣gour of the Pope's Sentence, for until then they had never mentioned any thing with him of their Controversie with the Pope, as they had also ordered their Ambassadour in England not to discourse any thing of that Point unto his Majesty or his Counsellours. But when the mat∣ter came to be advised to Sir Henry Wotton, he complained that the Se∣nate had been much more free, and open to other Ambassadours than to him; and as to the pretensions of the Pope, he said, That he could not understand that piece of Romish Divinity, which was contrary to Justice, and moral honesty. And now to provide against all those inconveniences, and mischiefs which might be the consequences of this Excommunication, the Senate commanded all Prelats, and Ecclesiastical persons not to permit or suf∣fer any Bulls, Briefs, or any other Writing to be affixed at any Church door, or publick place whatsoever, ordaining upon pain of the Prince's displeasure that every person whatsoever, who had any of the Copies of that Brief, which was lately published at Rome against the Republick, should immediately deliver them up into the hands of the Magistrates in Venice, and to the Rulers, and Governours respectively in all places subject to that Dominion: which the people so readily obeyed, that in a short time so great a number of Copies were brought in, as was won∣derful to consider, how so many could be printed: and such diligence was used by the Magistrates, and by the people themselves, that not one Brief was affixed in any publick place; the persons who endeavour∣ed to act therein being discovered, and prevented. And farther, the true state of that difference, which the Republick had with the Pope was advised, and intimated to all the Ministers for foreign Princes residing at Venice: and the same also signified to all the Agents residing for that Republick in forein parts. In like manner the Senate wrote to all their Governours, and Magistrates of Towns, and Cities subjected to their Dominions, acquainting them with the injuries they had received from the Pope, and with the reasons they had to de∣fend their Laws, and Liberties, all which being signified as was com∣manded unto the Counsels, and Magistracy of the Cities; it took such impression every where that the people yielded a most entire, and chear∣ful obedience thereunto, shewing themselves ready to defend the pub∣lick Liberty, and in maintenance thereof every one offered Money, and Arms according to his ability: and in pursuance of such Resoluti∣on, furnished the same, as time required. After publication made of the Monitory Brief, the Pope's Nuntio spent most of his time in the Jesuits College, where many of those Fathers
were received, who had been eminently known for the confusions, and disturbances they had created in the World: and particularly amongst the rest was one Bernardino of Siena, who had lately acted the like part at Paris, when the Jesuits were expelled from that City: and Antonio Possevino who was famous for his Actions in Moscovy, and Poland, and skilful in the management of Intrigues: there was also Barone a Venetian a bold confident Fellow, one that would have a hand in every matter of publick disturbance: likewise John Gentes, who made profession of truly stating all cases of Conscience, being endued with an excellent fa∣culty, of finding fault, and of condemning, and reproving every thing which was acted without his concurrence, and of justifying every thing which was appointed, and directed by the Jesuits; all of them being ex∣cellent Instruments in their way, and faithful performers of the fourth Article of their Vow. But the Nuntio having thus frequented the Society of Jesuits, and learned his Lesson in every particular made a visit to the Doge, to whom having in the first place expressed his grief for the unhappy estate of Af∣fairs, he desired his Serene Highness to consider of some ways, and means, by which these differences might be composed, and in order thereunto he promised his ultimate endeavours, and all the good Offices which his authority, and interest were able to perform: which Discourse he sweet∣ned with the most persuasive, and affectionate expressions imaginable, often invoking the name of Almighty God; of whom when he had occasion to speak, he called him Our Lord, and in like manner, when he had occasion to mention the Pope, he called him, Our Lord, so that in his Discourse, it was difficult to distinguish which of the two Lords he meant; onely some observing persons, had taken notice, that when he intended the name of God, he kept his head covered, but when he meant the Pope, he always took his Cap off. The Pope having understood how resolute the Senate seemed in main∣tenance of their Laws, and Liberties, and with what chearful readiness the people obeyed them, conceived little hopes at the present of obtain∣ing his desires; and therefore judging that his Nuntio could not continue longer with honour at Venice, he dispatched his Letters to recal him from thence, and intimated to the Ambassadour Nani by the bishop of Soana that he should depart from Rome, not leaving any of his Dome∣sticks, or Substitutes in his place. At Venice the Superiours and Priors of Monasteries, and other Churches were convened before the Council of Ten, who signified to them, that the pleasure of the Prince was, that they should still continue to officiate and perform the Divine Offices, and that none of them should leave the State without license obtained. It was also declared, that protection should be given to such as remained, and that such as would depart, should not carry with them the Utensils, or Vestments, or Riches be∣longing to the Church. And that in case any Brief should be sent them from Rome, or Order from their Superiors, they should first present it to the Magistrates, before it was read by themselves; and the like Command was given to all Governours of Cities, and places under Dominion of Venice. As yet the Capucins, Theatins, and other Religious, had not en∣tertained thoughts of departure; for when the Monitory was first published at Rome, the Provincial, and other Capucins held a Consulta∣tion
together, where it was concluded, that in regard the differences be∣tween the Pope and the Republick had no relation to matters of Faith, they were not obliged to follow the Pope's dictates so far in this case, as to abandon their Habitations, and subsistence: yet afterwards the Supe∣riours obeying the pleasure of the Pope expresly commanded all sorts of Religious Orders to depart, and leave their Dwellings within the ju∣risdiction of Venice; saying unto them, Come forth from them, O my People. The term of twenty four days being almost expired, when the Mo∣nitory was to Commence, the Senate called the Jesuits to know their resolution whether they would continue in the City, or not: to which they made answer, That they had intentions and desires to stay, but could not promise to say Mass, excepting which, they would engage to perform all other Divine Offices, and Service. The Senate taking this Answer into consideration; resolved that the Jesuits should either cele∣brate Mass, as formerly, with all the other functions of Priesthood, and not remain in a kind of indifferency between the Pope, and the Republick, serving God and Mammon, or otherwise should have inti∣mation to depart. The which Order was signified to them by the Pa∣triarchal Vicar, with positive Orders immediately to depart, and to con∣sign into his hands all the Plate, Vestments, and goods belonging to their Church: and in like manner Orders were given to all Governours to execute the same Decree in their respective jurisdictions. This Command being signified to the Jesuits, they assembled all their Vota∣ries into their Church, and gathered great Contributions from them; and persuaded the Capucins, that when they departed, they should march two and two in a rank, as in Procession, with a Crucifix on the breast of every one which perhaps might move some disturbance in the minds of the Commonalty, who beholding so many Crucifixes departing from them, might apprehend also, that Christ himself, and the light of the Gospel was leaving their City, which Opinion might be the beginning of some happy Sedition. The Jesuits themselves were hastned away, and forced to depart a∣bout two hours in the Night, every one carrying his Christ as they cal∣led it about his Neck; the People flocked in great numbers to see their departure, and accompanied them to the Boats, shouting, and crying aloud, Let them go to the Devil. In divers parts of the City they had concealed, and hid away the Vessels, and pretious Ornaments of their Church, and their best Houshold-stuff with their Library: leaving their College empty, and void of all Furniture whatsoever, or of any thing of moment, unless the Library given to them by the late Arch-bishop Lewis Molino, with an other Library of prohibited Books. And though the Jesuits of Venice had burnt many of their Papers, yet at Padoua they left divers Copies of a certain Book containing eighteen Rules, with this title, Regulae aliquot servandae, ut cum Orthodoxâ Ecclesiâ verè sentiamus. In the seventeenth Rule of which, they were commanded, not to insist overmuch in their Sermons, on the force and energy of the grace of God. And in the third Rule, they were enjoyned to believe according as the Hierarchy of the Church believed; that is, if the Church determined any thing to be white, they should believe it so to be, though the colour appeared black to the sight of their own eyes. And lastly,
they left unto their Disciples and Votaries certain Rules, whereby to go∣vern themselves during this Interdict. But though the Jesuits, Capuchins, and other Orders of St. Francis Re∣formed had abandoned Venice, and were retired to other Convents in Milan, Mantoua, Bologna, and Ferrara; yet the Capuchins of Brescia, and Bergamo, (where were no Jesuits to seduce them) remained in ex∣cellent Concord and Obedience; and securing themselves with that Pro∣tection which they received from the Senate, remained resolute, and con∣stant to their Principles against all the Censures of Excommunication, and other Spiritual penalties issued against them by their Superiours; and in regard many of them were sober and learned Men, they retort∣ed all those Spiritual Arms with great force, and power of argument and reason. It was certainly believed at Rome, that this Monitory would have produced three notable Effects: First it was given for granted, that all the Religious Orders would immediately abandon the Dominions of Venice, by which the Interdict must of necessity have been observed. Secondly, That the City, and People finding themselves deprived of all the Divine Offices, would rise in a mutiny against the Government, and compel them to give satisfaction to the Pope. Thirdly, That it would beget a misunderstanding amongst the Nobility, and cause them to di∣vide into several Factions, towards which the Jesuits, (though absent) did labour with all the Art, and industry imaginable. But the Court of Rome against their expectations finding that all matters had a con∣trary effect, that Mass, and other Offices of the Church were Celebra∣ted without interruption, that the people frequented the Churches with greater Devotion than before; that the Senate were unanimous in their Counsels, and the Commonalty quiet, and obedient; they began to re∣pent them of this proceeding, and many severely blamed the Pope for being over-rash, and hasty: for that though there might be reason in the merit of his Cause, yet the prosecution of it was of that importance, as ought to have been attempered with prudence, and the consequences well weighed, before matters were screwed up to that Degree, as admit∣ted of no indifferent terms, or accommodation. Wherefore now it concerned the Pope, and Clergy to labour with Art, and power of the Spiritual Arms in vindication of their Cause, in order whereunto the Cardinals were set at work to prevail with the re∣fractory Friers, and Monks to leave their Dwellings, and Party and come over to them, promising in reward of that good Service, honours, and preferments in the Church; and on the contrary threatned them with Censures, and punishments both Spiritual and Temporal. How∣soever, they observed a different manner in treating with the rich Friers, and the poor Mendicants. For to the Poor they said, that if they could not observe the Inderdict, they should then depart, and leave all they had for sake of the Gospel; and if that were not permitted, they should then seek after the glorious Crown of Martyrdom; But to the Rich, they thought better than to use this hard saying, Durus est hic sermo, for though they were commanded to observe the Interdict, yet were advi∣sed not to leave, or abandon their Monasteries, and Revenues; and the better to inculcate these persuasions, Commissaries were appointed out of the same Orders privately to convey themselves into the Dominions
of Venice, to instil, and foment this Doctrine in the minds of the Regu∣lars; but the ways were so obstructed by the diligence, and watchful∣ness of the Governours in their respective Dominions: that not a Frier durst adventure to steal in, and engage in that Errand. Seeing therefore that this course would not take: the next expedient was to raise a dust, and disturbance in the Court of forein Princes. And in the first place, the Jesuits (who were and still are very prevalent in Poland) laboured to put an affront on Foscarini Ambassadour for the Republick to that King; causing two of the Gentlemen belonging to his Retinue to be disturbed at Mass, and expelled the Church: And the Nuntio made very warm Instances to the King, that the Monitory a∣gainst Venice might be affixed in all publick places of his Dominions: but the King on the contrary did not onely refuse to grant this request, but highly resented the late Affront offered to the two Venetian Gentlemen, in satisfaction for which by the King's Order, the Marshal of the Court, and the Cardinal of Cracow, having assembled the Friers together, and duly reprehended their insolence, commanding them the next day to sing High Mass in their Church, to which having invited the Ambassa∣dour they obliged the Friers to ask his Pardon for the affront offered to his Servants: And farther the King, with approbation of his Council gave Orders to all his People to treat the Ambassadour, and his Retinue with all kindness, and due respect: and moreover wrote a Letter to the Pope, complaining of the late design of his Nuntio, attempting to pub∣lish Ecclesiastical Censures against forein Princes within his Kingdom, which was a new and an unknown practice within his State; and had been refused in the Case of Henry III. King of France, and in the Cause of Cesare d' Este Duke of Ferrara: much less could he be induced to allow of such proceedings against the State of Venice, whose Cause was the same with that of his own Kingdom. And considering that that State had merited well of Christendom by the opposition they made with their Arms against the common Enemy, he exhorted his Holiness to supersede farther proceedings, for Causes which ought to be stifled, and which for better peace of the Church ought never to be brought into question,An. 1606. or Dispute. Francis Soranzo a Cavalier of Venice being at this time Ambassadour at the Emperor's Court, did rightly inform the Imperial Ministers with the true state of the difference between the Pope, and that Republick: and in regard the Constitutions of all Germany were the same, they could not do less than approve the Cause of the Venetians, and condemn the Cause of the Pope, which confirmed the Protestants in their reasons which they alledged, for detaining Ecclesiastical Benefices in their own hands. Howsoever, the Great Chancellour, and Marshal Prainer were of different Opinions, taking part with the Pope against the affections, sence, and Interest of the whole Court. When news came first to the Court of Spain of the differences be∣tween the Pope, and the Venetians; the constancy and firmness of that State to the Principles of their Government, was highly applauded, be∣ing the common Cause of all Secular Princes. Howsoever, the Nuntio made it his business to have the Venetian Ambassadour declared in all Pulpits to be under Excommunication: The Genoeses also who were powerful in that Court, being touched with envy on old grudges, and
for having lately yielded that Point of their liberty to the Pope, which Venice still conserved, did all the ill offices they were able against the Re∣publick: but above all the Ambassadour of Tuscany joyning with the Je∣suits shewed himself an open Enemy, and so prevailed with the King, and Council, that a Congregation of twelve Divines was held at Madrid in presence of the Cardinal of Toledo to consider, whether the Ambassa∣dour of Venice ought to be admitted into the Church at the time of Celebration of Divine Offices? the result of which was, that the Am∣bassadour should not be excluded, every one concurring in that Opi∣nion, the Nuntio, and Jesuits onely excepted. So soon as the news came to Paris, that the Monitory was pub∣lished against Venice, Barberino the Pope's Nuntio made urgent addres∣ses to the King, that Priuli the Venetian Ambassadour should be exclu∣ded from admission into the Church; but his desire was positively re∣jected; both because the King was willing to remain Neuter, and because it was and is a Maxim of that Kingdom. That Popes have no power over the Temporal Government of Princes, and have no Authority on account for Secular matters to proceed against them, or their Officers by Ecclesiastical Censures. In England we may easily imagine what Opinion was conceived of these proceedings: for when Giustiniano the Ambassadour of Venice had acquainted King James with the state of the difference between the Pope and the Republick: the King did much applaud the Laws and Consti∣tutions of Venice, and the constancy, and resolution of the Senate in the maintenance of them: adding, That he would gladly see a free Council established, which was the onely means to reform the Church of God, and put an end to all Controversies amongst Christians, which had no other original, or source, than onely from the usurpation of Popes, and ambition of the Clergy: in which holy, and sacred Design, he did not doubt but that the French King, and all other Christian Princes would readily concur; and that perhaps a beginning thereof might arise from these troubles, and labours of the Republick. And farther the King added, That the Popes exalting themselves above God were the ruin of the Church, and that it was no wonder, that their Pride admitted of no serious reflections, or moderate advices, being puffed up, and elated by the common adulation, and flattery which was used towards them. The States of the Ʋnited Provinces wrote very obliging Letters to Venice, proffering to assist them with Arms, and Provisions, in case they came to an open rupture, and acts of hostility with the Pope. In the mean time many effectual good Offices were performed both at Rome and Venice by the Dukes of Mantoua, and Savoy, and by Guicci∣ardin Ambassadour of the Great Duke of Tuscany; and more especially by Monsieur de Fresnes the French Ambassadour at Venice: To all which instances, and applications from several Princes the Senate thought fit to make this general Answer: First, they returned thanks for the good endeavours, and labours towards a Mediation, and then complained of the firm resolutions of the Pope, which could not be shaken, or made plyable by any reasonable terms which the Republick could offer. That there could be no hopes of accommodation until the Pope by taking off his Censures, did open a way to Treaties, and terms of Peace. That the Pope had proceeded so far in his injuries and affronts, as were
past all manner of reconciliation, and yet the Republick which was truly Catholick would still bear their due respect to the Pope, so far, as was consistent with their liberty, and with that right of Government which was committed to them by God. But whilest matters were thus in Treaty at Venice and Rome, and in the Courts of Princes; the Jesuits who were vigilant, and intent to do all the mischiefs they were able against the Republick; did not cease to dis∣perse Scandals, and Libels as well without Italy, as within, and to preach, and rail against them in their Pulpits, and Schools, endeavouring to possess their Auditories with the most malicious impressions they could beget, or frame in minds of Men; they also wrote Letters into all places defaming the Republick; some who would not adventure into the Do∣minions of Venice, treated on the Confines with their Disciples and Vo∣taries: and others in disguise entered within the Dominions sowing Di∣vision, and Faction in all parts, promising extraordinary Indulgences to all such as should observe the Interdict. They also forged several Let∣ters entitling one from the Republick of Genoua to the Senate of Venice, another from the City of Verona to the City of Brescia which were most scandalous, and abominable Papers. Then in other Writings they ju∣stified themselves for having in their Sermons inveighed against the Republick, calling it a Lutheran, Heretical, and tyrannical Government, with infinite other abominable Epithets. In fine, it was proved, that the Jesuits were the causes of all these disturbances, having instigated the Pope to this Design, upon assurances, that they were able to divide the Senate, and by confusion of their Councils to make way for the Pope's Authority. It was farther proved, That they had kept corres∣pondence with the Enemies of the Republick to the great damage, and prejudice of the State, always interposing, and insinuating themselves into publick Affairs. That they were always contriving to inveigle sick and dying Persons, persuading them for the sake of their Souls to bestow their Estates, and Inheritance on them, to the ruin, and destru∣ction of their lawful Heirs and Families. And▪ farther, the Senate took into their consideration, their Principles, which were always Monarchi∣cal, in prejudice, and depression of Aristocracy, and dangerous to the Maxims, and principles of their Government. It was farther also al∣ledged, that the Jesuits had been the Causes, and Instruments of all the tolerations, seditious disorders, and evil successes which had happened in our age in all the Kingdoms, and Provinces of the World: and here∣in not only some particular persons were culpable, but even the whole Society, and order of them were dangerous and rotten in their Prin∣ciples, and destructive to the Government under which they lived. All which being proved, and made good in the Senate against them; It was deliberated,An. 1606. and carried in the Affirmative by Decree of the 14th. of June, That the Jesuits, who from their first beginning had been received into Venice, and there cherished and favoured, and having in recompence of such Indulgence and respect returned nothing but Ingratitude: being at present the Authors of all the troubles incumbent on the Republick, vilifying the same with all the Obloquy which could be uttered from the blackest Tongue of malice, and having been false Traitors, and Men of insupportable Insolences; the most Serene Republick did therefore spue them out, and banish them for ever the precincts of the State; and
did Decree, and Enact, that they should never be again received with∣out a concurrence of five Sixths at least of the Senate, the number of which was to consist of one hundred and eighty Votes. In passing of which Act, it is most apparent that their Crimes were as enormous, as they were clear and evidently proved; for the Scrutiny being made by the Ballot, their banishment was pass'd with an unanimous concurrence, and a Decree made for their eternal Exclusion; though perhaps some few might be excepted who had been their Votaries and Penitents. This perpetual banishment of the Jesuits made the breach wider, and more difficult to be reconciled: and the Pope being sensible, that the hopes he conceived from the contrivances of the Jesuits were vain and fruitless, he applied himself to some other new Inventions; one of which was a Jubilee, which was published on the 19th. of June, inviting all Christian people to pray unto God for the unity and peace of the Church, granting Indulgences, Absolutions, and Remissions unto all, excepting such as belonged to Venice, and the Interdicted Churches, to which none of those graces, blessings, and pardons were to be dispensed. Now in regard that nothing is so desireable in Italy, as the benefit of a Jubilee, It was conceived to be a most admirable Artifice to make the Venetian People sensible of their separation from the Church, when they should find themselves uncapable to receive the Indulgences, and excluded from all the priviledges of the faithful: upon which advantage the Jesuits shewed all their Art in the Towns bordering on the Dominions of the Republick, preaching up the Blessings of a Jubilee, and lament∣ing the miseries of that People, who by their disobedience, and contu∣macy had extruded themselves from without the Pale, and become un∣worthy of such mysterious graces. Notwithstanding which, the World was so well satisfied with the Cause, and ground of this Jubilee, that though at other times Men were fond of this priviledg, and held it in great esteem and Devotion, yet the Indulgences granted hereby were coldly received in every place: nor did the Venetian Commonalty so much repine at this loss, as to quarrel or mutiny with their Govern∣ment for want of that Spiritual Benefit. Thus when all religious Arts failed, and the Weapons of the Church were not keen enough to do Execution, the Pope resolved to try what might be effected by the temporal Sword; but in regard his own was not sharp enough, for the Venetians; he applied himself to the Spanish Ambassadour at Rome, desiring to write to his Master the King; giving him to understand, that he did entirely cast himself under his Prote∣ction, desiring his favour and Aid against his Enemies; and therewith delivered him two Letters, one directed to the King, wherein he ex∣posed the Reasons for his proceedings against the Venetians: and ano∣ther to the Duke of Lerma, chief Minister of State, in which he recom∣mended himself, and his Affairs to his care and defence, and with many obliging Expressions and acknowledgments, called him the Basis of the Crown of Spain, on which the Catholick Monarchy was established, and on which the foundation of the Church solely was reposed, and depending. This kind Letter so pleased the Duke of Lerma, that an Answer equal∣ly pleasing was returned from the King to the Pope, and with much for∣mality delivered by the Spanish Ambassadour attended with three Car∣dinals, the substance of which was: That the King was extreamly trou∣bled
to observe, that the breach and differences between him and the Venetians were so widened, and so far proceeded: but in regard the ho∣nour of his Holiness was far engaged, he was resolved to vindicate the Dignity of the Apostolical See with his Arms; and accordingly had wrote to his Ministers, and Officers in Italy, and other Princes depend∣ing on his Crown. This Letter being read, was the subject of great joy and satisfaction to the Pope, and all his Party, and was proclaimed through▪all Italy much to the reputation of the Papal Cause; howsoe∣ver the triumph, and joy hereof was somewhat attempered by the Pro∣posals which were made by Spain in recompence of the troubles, and inconveniencies they were to receive by a War: the which Demands were; A release of the yearly Tribute for the Kingdom of Naples; a surrender of Ferrara for a Garrison to offend the Enemy, and of Ancona for an Arsenal and maritime Provisions. The which Conditions being grievous, and difficult to the Pope were only answered in general terms; but the report hereof was like a Trumpet of War which alarm'd all parts of the Venetian Dominions: and caused the Senate to write im∣mediately to their Proveditor General in Candia to send all the Gallies under his Command into the Gulph: Orders also were given to the Proveditor General in Dalmatia to raise four hundred Albaneses, and Croats under four Captains, and to embark them on ten Vessels which were built for that purpose, placing forty on each Vessel. Likewise thirty Captains were nominated and appointed to be ready as occasion should require. The Pope on the other side, repaired his Fortifications at Rimini, and Ancona, and reinforced his Garrison at Ferrara with a thousand Foot; he likewise banished all Strangers from Marca, and Romagna, and command∣ed the Natives thereof to return into their own Country. But to the management of this War designed, many difficulties occurred: for in the first place, there was an excessive scarcity of all Provisions in Rome, and the Ecclesiastical State as also in Naples and Abruzzo, by reason of which the People cryed out nothing but Peace, and Bread: and on the contrary, there was great abundance of all things within the Dominions of Venice, from whence the People of the Pope's Country receiving the most part of their Provisions were kindly affected to the Venetian State: but notwithstanding all these difficulties, the Pope resolved to proceed in his War, and to recruit his Troops; and for maintenance thereof new Impositions were laid on Salt, Flesh, and Paper, with in∣tention also to lay a Tax on Wine, and Timber, if occasion should re∣quire. And in the mean time the Count de Fuentes Governour of Milan gave out, that he would have an Army speedily in the Field consisting of twenty five thousand Men, composed of Germans, Napolitans, Swit∣zers, and Spaniards. Though the Venetians did not neglect all due care towards the pro∣visions of War, and to make their Defence whensoever they should be attacked; yet with more especial regard they had an Eye to Plots, and Conspiracies within the State; giving Orders to their Sea-Captains to stop all Vessels which sailed in the Gulf, unless such as had Passes from the King of Spain for his own particular Affairs; which caused great embroils along the Coast of Romagna, and the Marca d' Ancona, which seemed, (as it were), to be blocked up: Orders were likewise given
to hinder all exportation of Corn out of the Dominions of Venice; and Sequestrations laid on the Revenues of the Clergy who had quitted, or abandoned the Venetian Countries; for which cause many Prelats at Rome were forced to retrench their Families. But notwithstanding the Promises made by the Spaniards of admini∣string Aid to the Pope, which at the first heat were positive and large; yet the Court at Madrid coming to make more mature reflections on the tenure of their former Letters, thought fit to explicate their sence more at large, and to signifie to the State of Venice, That it was not the intention of his Catholick Majesty to make a War on the Republick, but onely to demonstrate unto the World, that that Crown, would on all oc∣casions be joyned to the Apostolical Sea. And accordingly D. Inigo de Cardenas Ambassadour residing in Ordinary at Venice, did on the 13th. of July present a memorial to the Senate. signifying: That the King being desirous of doing good Offices in the mediation of Peace between the Pope, and that Republick, had commanded him his Ambassadour to interpose therein, assuring him, that whatsoever he should act in order thereunto would be most pleasing to his Majesty. And that some Over∣tures might be made in order to this Accommodation, Cardenas desi∣red, that for a beginning thereunto, the Senate would give him leave, in their name, to desire and supplicate the Pope, that he would be pleased to take off his Censures from them, being much troubled that they had ever given his Holiness any cause of displeasure; which being words of formality, and Complement onely, could not in reality be pre∣judicial to the right of their Cause; and yet were in this state of things of importance, and absolute necessity. To which the Doge made An∣swer, That neither by himself, nor by the Senate was there ever any just cause of displeasure given to the Pope; and therefore to Scandals, and Disgusts voluntarily taken, and not given, there was no other reme∣dy, than voluntary Acknowledgments. The same day the French Ambassadour urged the Senate, to be the first to make Overtures of Peace to the Pope, which could be no disho∣nour to the Republick, considering with what respect, and duty all Christian Princes treated the Pope, and that it is, Jus Commune, to sub∣mit, and humble themselves before his Holiness for other matters, they might with all confidence rely on the directions of his Majesty herein, whom they had always found a true Friend, and a faithful Ally. That considering on what terms the King of Spain stood with them, and how he had declared himself of the Papal Party; it was not now seaso∣nable to disgust the King his Master, and that therefore they would be pleased to think of some Answer, which he might with confidence com∣municate to the King. The Senate having taken these particulars into consideration, gave almost the same Answer, as they had newly done to the Spanish Ambas∣sadour; Adding onely to the French, That by way of Mediation, he would be pleased to represent unto the Pope; That the Senate was troubled, that his Holiness would take displeasure at the actions of a Republick, which was entirely devoted, and dedicated to the glory, and service of God, to the publick quiet, and tranquillity of the World, and to the maintenance of that liberty, and Power which was commit∣ted to them by Divine Right.
These Negotiations being ineffectual, and fruitless; the Senate gave Order to Giustiniano their Ambassadour in England, to inform King James with the progress and success of all these Affairs, and differences with the Pope: which when the King had rightly understood, he returned this Answer: That he was highly satisfied with the constancy of the People, and unanimous resolution of the Senate in defence of their Na∣tive liberty, and justice, and of that Power, which God hath bestowed upon Princes. That the Declaration made by Spain in a Letter was ridiculous, and that matters of such importance required more than words: That he was highly sensible of the honour which the Repub∣lick had done him in sending him an Ambassadour Ordinary, and Ex∣traordinary; wherefore that he might return them the like demonstra∣tions of sincere Friendship, he promised to grant and condescend to all the desires of the Senate; for that he should be very ungrateful, and unjust in case he should deny protection to that righteous Cause of the Republick, which was engaged in the maintenance of that liberty and Authority, which is the common Right of all Princes in the Universe. And therefore in case the Senate should at any time be engaged in War for this Cause, they might be assured, and rely on the word of a Prince, that he would assist them with all the power he was able, and that he had given Commission to his Ambassadour at Venice to assure the Senate the like in his name: And farther, the Earl of Salisbury by the King's Order added, That the King was not induced to grant them these succours, on expectation, that they should leave Commu∣nion with the Church of Rome, but onely from a principle of Justice, by which he esteemed himself obliged to vindicate the Cause of Princes, and the Authority of the Secular Power; as also from a Spirit of Ani∣mosity, being resolved to take that side, to which Spain was declared an Enemy: in return for which the Senate made their due acknowledg∣ments to the King. An. 1606.Whilest these things were in Treaty, the Spaniards endeavoured to raise a War between the Turk, and the Venetians, supposing thereby to drive the Senate to those streights, as would inevitably compel them to a composition with the Pope: To perform which, the Marquiss of Santa Croce having received the Nuntio's Benediction, departed from Naples with a Fleet of twenty six Gallies: and having advice that the Venetian Armata was then at Corfu, he privately crossed the Gulf, and on the 10th. of August arrived at Durazzo a City of Albania; which be∣ing empty almost of all its People, at that season of the year, when the Inhabitants are for the most part in their Fields, and Gardens gathering their Fruits, he easily surprized the place, sacked, and burnt it, carry∣ing away Captives about one hundred fifty five Men, Women, and Chil∣dren, together with thirty pieces of Canon. The news hereof coming to Venice, did much trouble the Senate, who apprehending lest the Turks should attribute this act of Hostility ro the Venetians, would in revenge thereof make War upon them: to prevent which they imme∣diately dispatched advice to their Bailo at Constantinople, giving him to undestand the truth of this Aggression, which being performed by the Spaniards, and not by them, ought to be represented to the Grand Sig∣nior in such manner, as might not be occasion of any Rupture. The Grand Signior being rightly informed of the truth of this matter, did
believe that this attempt was performed by the Spaniards with Artifice, and design, and therefore gave Order to the Captain Pasha or Admi∣ral of his Gallies, to entertain a perfect good correspondence with the Venetians, and joyn with them to the confusion of the Pope, and the Spaniards. Some few days after this, the Turkish Fleet consisting of fifty five Gallies came to an Anchor not far from Corfu, commanded by Gieffier Pasha, to whom General Pasqualigo, who then commanded the Venetian Fleet and was at Corfu, sent a Complement by his Secretary to the Pasha, which was in like manner returned with many obliging Ex∣pressions, telling him of the great Esteem and honour which the Grand Signior had for the Republick; and as a demonstration thereof had given him Commission to joyn with the Venetian Fleet, and to make War on the Pope, and the King of Spain, in such manner, as he should receive direction from the Venetians, acting a part, or in the same body with them, as they should think convenient and necessary: and in farther assu∣rance hereof he dispeeded three Gallies commanded by the Bei of Da∣miata to inform Pasqualigo of these Resolutions, which he had received in Commission from his Master the Grand Signior: to which friendly offer, Pasqualigo returned a like courteous acknowledgment; saying howsoever, that he could neither do, nor act any thing herein without Orders, and directions from the Senate; and in the mean time, whilest these Advices were in going, and Answers expected, he prevailed with the Turks to withdraw their Forces from those Seas, promising to give them timely notice,An. 1606. in case there should be occasion to desire their As∣sistance. About this time being in the Month of August, the Pope in justifica∣tion of these his proceedings, employed Scipio Gobellucci to write the reasons, and arguments which moved and directed him in this Cause, which Papers were dispersed over Mantoua, Milan, Cremona, and Fer∣rara, and Copies thereof sent into Spain, and other parts: which Wri∣tings the Senate taking into consideration, It was proposed that they should be answered by some learned Hand, and that all the Letters, Reasons, and Proceedings in this Cause should be printed, and publish∣ed to the World: but this Proposal was generally disliked by the Senate, as a matter which would exasperate, and keep alive the difference, and rub on the Sore which already smarted too much: that the Cause of the Senate was sufficiently known to the World; and that silence would look more like contempt, esteeming such Pamphlets not worthy the publick notice, or consideration; and would argue greater reverence to the Apostolical Sea, than to expose and lay it open even in those matters, wherein the Republick had received most manifest Injuries. Howsoever, it was impossible to restrain the Wit, and Pens of some working Heads and Spirits, who still were writing Papers on one side, and the other, which being as yet onely in Manuscript could not be so publick to common view, as when they were issued from the Press: howsoever in Milan there was a scandalous Pamphlet printed, and set out by some Churchmen; in which against the Rules of all Sense and Reason, it was intimated; that during this Interdict, all Marriages, be∣ing a Sacrament of the Church, were invalid, the copulation adulterous, and the Children Bastards; the which Paper being spread over all Ber∣gamo, Brescia, and Crema, it was thought fit that in confutation hereof
a Treatise wrote about one hundred and fifty years ago by Gerson, should be re-printed, and divulged; which was so opposite to the matter in hand, and so properly accommodated to the present times, and diffe∣rences, that nothing could then have been better, nor more fitly ap∣plyed: to which was annexed a Letter without name, exhorting all Curates to attend their Flock, and Charge, without fear of giving any offence to God by not observing the Interdict. This Treatise of Gerson being wrote so many years past, carried such Authority, and weight, that Bellarmine esteemed it worth his Answer; and Baronius cryed it down, with such passion, as if the belief thereof had been a total subversion of the Christian Religion: The Authority of these two learned Cardinals was so great, and considerable; that the Senate of Venice thought fit for the better ease of pious, and tender Consciences, to give a License to certain learned Writers to publish their Reasons, and Arguments in defence of the Republick, restraining themselves always within the compass of those Rules which the Laws prescribe: that is, That nothing should be asserted contrary to Faith, good Customs, and manners, and the Authority of the Prince; for perusal, and appro∣bation of which, five Divines were appointed to assemble in the House of the Patriarchal Vicar; and to allow all writings of that nature, with their Imprimatur, before any Printer should dare to put them in the Press, or publish the same. Thus were all the Wits set at work in writing, some on one side, and some on the other: the chief Heads which those who wrote in favour of the Republick were these: That God had constituted two sorts of Government in the World, one Spiritual, and the other Temporal: The Spiritual was commit∣ted to the Apostles▪ and their Successours; the Temporal unto Princes, and both were restrained within such limits, as that one ought not to meddle, or interfere with the other. That the Pope hath no Power to annull the temporal Laws made by Princes, nor to depose them, or free their Subjects from their Allegiance to them; the which practice though endeavoured for the space of above five hundred years to be introduced, is yet contrary to the Scriptures and the Example of Christ, and his Saints. That the Doctrine which teaches, that in case of Con∣troversie between the Pope, and a Prince, it may be lawful to perse∣cute such a Prince either by open War, or secret Treason, and that Dispensations may be given to Subjects to rebel against such a Prince; is a damnable, seditious, and sacrilegious Position. That by Divine Law the Clergy are not exempted from subjection to the Secular Power, either as to their Persons, or Estates though by many immu∣nities, and priviledges granted to them by the favour of pious Princes, from Constantine to Frederick II. several exemptions have been grant∣ed according to the exigence of times, and convenience of places. That the Exemptions which Popes have given to the Clergy from the Secular Power have not been received in many places; and where they have been received, the Concessions, and Grants are no farther obligatory to the Prince, than whilest they are consistent with the pre∣sent state, and convenience of the Publick. Another Point insisted upon was this: That the Pope was not In∣fallible, but onely in such matters wherein God had promised him
his Divine assistance: which according to the Doctrine of some Mo∣dern Divines was onely in necessary points of Faith. And that the Power of binding, and loosing, was onely, Clave non Errante. That according to the Doctrine of St. Austin, An Excommunication against a multitude, or against any one who Commands in Chief is dange∣rous, and sacrilegious. That the new name of Blind Obedience in∣vented by Ignatius Loyola was unknown to the antient Church, and every good Divine, the which as it takes away our Election, and de∣sire of knowledg in every good work, so it exposes Men to the dan∣ger of offending God, and hath been the cause of those many Sedi∣tions, which have arisen in the World for the space of forty years past. The Popish Party on the other side proceeded on these Maxims: That the temporal Power of Princes is subject to the Ecclesiastical; on which ground the Pope hath Power to depose Princes from their Authority for Errours committed in their Government, when the Pope judges it may be beneficial to the Church. That the Pope hath Power to absolve Subjects from Allegiance to their Prince, the which some mo∣derate and modest Men explaining, said, not that Christ had given this temporal Power absolutely to the Pope, but indirectly as it was ne∣cessary to the better Government of the Spiritual; but others who were more bold did not think it worth the while to mince the mat∣ter, but confidently wrote, That the Pope was endued with all Au∣thority both in Heaven and Earth, and made Supreme over all Princes of the World, who were his Vassals, and may punish them for their faults, and errours; that he is the Supreme Temporal Monarch over all the World and appeals may be made to the Pope from all Tempo∣ral Princes. That he can give Laws to all Princes, and annull theirs; As to the Exemption of the Clergy, they all denied that they were subject to the temporal Law; and that this priviledg was not given them by the favour of Princes; but (as some would have it) Jure Divino, others by the Constitutions, and Decrees of Councils, and Popes; but in this they all agreed, that they were not subject to the Prince, not so much as in cases of Treason; and that they were not obliged to obey the Laws of the Land wherein they lived, but onely Vi Directivâ. And some were so bold as to proceed so far, as to say, that the Clergy were Judges, whether the Laws of Princes were just or not, and whether the people were obliged to obey them. That in regard the Pope who hath the Spirit of God cannot err, his Sentences are to be observed, whether they be just, or unjust. That so power∣ful, and authentick is the Opinion of the Pope, that it ought to pre∣vail against all other determinations of the World. That the Pope is God upon Earth, the Sun of stice, and light of Religion, that the sentence of God, and of th Pope are the same, and their Tribunal the same: but it is very observable, what Bellarmine asserted; That to restrain obedience due to the Pope unto matters appertaining onely to the Soul is to reduce it to nothing; that St. Paul appealed unto Caesar who was not his Judg and not to St. Peter, was because he would not make himself in those days ridiculous. That the antient Popes pro∣fessed subjection to the Emperours was to comply with the humour, and affection of those times. Others also have added, That the Em∣pire
of the Pope was to be introduced by degrees, and insisted upon with some moderation out of respect to the infirmities of Princes who were lately become Proselytes to the Church. But to return now to the matter of Treaty. Towards the end of August an other Overture was made, which was the summary of all this Negotiation, though various things were afterwards treated with∣out any effect. For about the 17th. of August Monsieur de Fresnes, the French Minister at Venice did in the name of his Master propose, as entrance to an Accommodation; That the Senate should suspend the Execution of those Laws, which gave offence to the Pope, conditionally that the Pope suspend the Censures of his Monitory for the space of four or six Months: but if this Expedient would not be accepted, then it was proposed, That the Prisoners should be consigned into the hands of the Pope at the instance, and desire of the King without prejudice to the Right, and Reason of the Senate; for that it was necessary to give some colour of submission, and condescention to the demands of the Pope; there being no President, that any Pope did ever recal his Boles unless that which by Authority of the Council of Constance was re∣pealed. These Proposals being debated in the Senate, it was in the first place concluded, and agreed, That the liberty of the Publick was to be conser∣ved, and preferred before all other worldly respects whatsoever. That the Prisoners indeed might be resigned into the hands of the Pope at the instance, and request of the French King, without being made a pre∣cedent in like cases, or be a prejudice to the Liberty in times to come; but that to suspend the force of the Laws, was a certain violation of it, and a shake of the Foundation of that Government which had for many hundreds of years been rooted, and established; for that every suspen∣sion of a Law doth argue either weakness in the Authority, or in the Council, which being the substance of this Consult, it was given for An∣swer to Monsieur de Fresnes the French Ambassadour, as also to the Spanish Ambassadour de Cardenas, who insisted on the like Terms. An. 1606.Whilest these things were negotiating by the forein Ministers; and that the Senate was resolved to adhere to that Principle, That no way or concession was to be given to the least point or particle which might prejudice the publick Liberty; News came about the beginning of Sep∣tember, that a new Congregation was erected in Rome, called the Con∣gregation of War, which was appointed to assemble twice every Week to consult of the manner, and means of waging the Temporal War; This new term of a Congregation of War, which was never heard of before in Rome, administred subject of Discourse to all Italy, both because it was contrary to the antient practices of that Court, which did always cover their temporal Designs with Spiritual names; and because the ma∣nagement thereof was committed to the care of fifteen Cardinals, who were all Men of Letters, but not of Arms: howsoever they served the present turn, for being Men of the Spanish faction, and depending upon Spain, it was believed, that their Interest and Power would have been very available in that Court for carrying forward the War, and engage∣ing the principal Ministers in their quarrel. All Princes of Christendom being now concerned in this difference, and great endeavours made for reconciliation; it was encharged to
Giustiniano Ambassadour to the Court of England to represent unto that King the provisions which were making at Rome for a War, desiring, that his Majesty would prepare those Forces, which he had already pro∣mised in defence of their Republick; for that Spain was arming, and threatned on all sides to invade them: To which the King answered, That he was resolved to defend their Cause, not out of any grudge or quarrel of his own with the Pope; but, (as he called God to wit∣ness) out of a principle of duty to conserve that Liberty which God had given to Princes: nor had he any respect to his own particular benefit, or hopes to receive Rewards from the Republick; but onely to the justice of that Cause which was most just, and pleasing to God: and that therefore he would speedily perform his Promise with more sin∣cerity and constancy of mind towards the Republick, than the King of Spain had done to the Pope, whose Letters, and Promises contained nothing but froth, and vanity. Thus were all Christian Princes concerned in this quarrel on one side, or the other, some being intent to accommodate differences by middle, and moderate terms, and others to take Parties, and assist with Arms, and open Violence: until at length about the middle of October, the Pope taking it into his consideration, that so much the longer, that this quarrel continued, and that the Venetians remained in their separation from the Church, so much more did his Reputation suffer, and the Power of the Spiritual Authority discover its own weakness: where∣fore calling Monsieur d' Alincourt the French Ambassadour unto him, he declared, and protested, that he was infinitely desirous of an Accom∣modation, and was ready to accept of any terms which were not pre∣judicial, or derogatory to the honour of the Papal Sea: Upon which A∣lincourt entering into consultation with the French Cardinals, some Pro∣posals were sent to the Republick, and communicated by the hand of de Fresnes, containing a Project, for making, and establishing a Peace. Nor was the King of Spain unactive herein; but to shew his zeal, he dispatched an Ambassadour Extraordinary to Venice upon this occasion, who declared in the Senate, that his Master was so passionate in this business, That if he had two Sons he would be contented to sacrifice one of them on condition, it might be an offering of atonement, and reconci∣liation between the Pope and the Venetian State. Whilest all these Treaties, and Instances were a foot,An. 1607. Letters were di∣spatched from the Court of Spain to the Count de Fuentes Governour of Milan, that he should levy an Army to be in a readiness for assistance of the Pope, and accordingly three thousand Italian Foot were raised for this Service, which with the other Forces already prepared and le∣vied in other parts: the King designed to compose an Army of twenty five thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse. The Senate of Venice observing, that the Spaniards armed, did not think it agreeable to the Rules of good Government for them to sit idle, but to put themselves in a posture of War to repel Force with Force, and to be in a readiness on all occasions which might happen. And accordingly they added six hundred Italian Foot, and one thou∣sand Albanians to the nine thousand six hundred Foot, and six hundred Men at Arms, and one hundred and fifty Albanian Horse which were already listed and in a readiness. They also ordered Count Martinengo
to raise four thousand French Soldiers, and six hundred Curassiers: and not to be wanting in their Fleet at Sea, they ordered that to the thirty eight Sail of Gallies already equipped, twelve more should be set out with addition of five more which were recalled from the Islands in the Levant. An. 1607.Whilest the Spaniards, and Venetians were arming in this manner on one side and the other: Priuli Ambassadour for the Republick in France, acquainted the King with all these preparations, desiring his Majesty would be pleased to declare himself in favour of the Senate: to which the King gave Answer, That it was not as yet time; and that there remained still hopes of Accommodation; and that being moved and sollicited herein by all the Princes of Italy, he was dispatching the Cardinal Joyeuse to Venice and thence to Rome to interpose effectually in this Mediation. And indeed this Cardinal was the most fit and proper Instrument of any to effect this accord: for he was not onely a Person of great E∣steem and Authority in the Court of Rome, being a Cardinal of the first degree, and rank; but also of great reputation with the Senate of Venice; who being desirous to commit the Office of mediation to the Interest of the French King, whom they had found more sincere, and real to them, than the King of Spain and his Adherents, they received the Car∣dinal with entire satisfaction, who arrived at Venice about the middle of February. The Cardinal spending little time in formal Ceremonies, and Visits, immediately entered on his business, delivered his Credential Letters, and opened his Commission: and in the first place insisting that as it was necessary to provide for the security, and reputation of the Repub∣lick; so also it was necessary to contrive such means as might give sa∣tisfaction to the Pope, whose Proposals were these: That an Ambassa∣dour be sent from the Republick to desire his Holiness, that he would be pleased to take off the Ecclesiastical Censures which he had passed upon them; That all the Religious, as well Jesuits as others, who had left, and abandoned their dwelling, and Habitations, should be again restored. That the King should give his word to the Pope, that during this Treaty at Rome, the Laws about which this Controversie arose, should be suspended: And the Cardinal insisting more on this Point, than on any other, earnestly urged that some resolution might be taken speedily, and with secrecy on which the King might with confidence esta∣blish this his promise and assurance. On this last Point the Cardinal in∣sisted with more than ordinary pressures, declaring, that the season of the year which was now only proper for Consultations, and Treaties was but short; and that the time of War, and action approached, and there∣fore it was necessary to come to a determination; and that the Senate would more especially declare themselves concerning the Laws: for as the King did not desire, nor approve, that any Decree, or Law should be made and recorded for suspension of these Laws, nor any other thing which might prejudice the dignity of the State, and the publick Liberty: so he also did consider: That as the Pope had passed these Censures open∣ly, and in the sight of the World, so he could not take them off, with∣out some apparent reasons and causes, which might salve his reputa∣tion, and his honour. And because the King his Master did well know,
that the Republick was extreamly averse to such suspension, he was wil∣ling to touch that Point very tenderly, and ease them therein by taking the whole burden on his own shoulders, giving his word to the Pope, that those Laws should be suspended during this Treaty, without any Decree, or Declaration on part of the Republick: conditionally, that as the Pope shall hereupon without farther delay take off the Censures; so the Republick shall promise unto the King not to execute these Laws during the time of this Treaty: the which being assented unto by the Senate, he did not doubt but to give satisfaction unto the Pope, and maintain and secure their Liberty, and conclude all with a happy and blessed Peace. As to that Article, which concerned the Jesuits, his Master's desire was, that they should be restored; it being an ordinary concession and grant in the conclusion of all Treaties; that such as have been Parties, Fomenters, or Abettors on either side should be remitted, and included in the Articles, for that indeed it was not consistent with the honour of the Pope, that those, who had suffered for his Cause, and for their Obedience to the Apostolical Sea should be excluded, and suf∣fer for the performance of their duty. To this Speech of the Cardinal the Senate made this Answer, That the expulsion of the Jesuits was resolved, and decreed upon very sound, and mature considerations, and the Law against them so firmly establish∣ed, as could not be repealed: and yet to salve the Pope's reputation herein; all other Religious, such as Friers, and others, who were Par∣ties and Abettors of the Pope's Cause, should be included, and restored to their pristine state, and condition: but as to the Point of giving their word to the King for non-execution, or suspension of the Laws during this Treaty, they could not recede from the determination so often re∣peated, which was, That in the use of these Laws, they will not depart from their antient Piety, and Religion professed. But the Cardinal insisted, and desired to have had some thing more plain, and agreeable to his Proposition: but howsoever (being well acquaint∣ed with the Pope's mind to agree almost on any terms) he made this Reply to the Senate, that though he expected to receive an Answer more satisfactory to his Demands; yet considering that it was the King's plea∣sure that the Republick should have entire contentment, he rested sa∣tisfied with this Answer, which he desired might be kept as a Secret, lest being divulged, it might be interrupted by the contrivances of un∣quiet, and malitious spirits. Howsoever, the Senate resolved to communicate all that passed to Don Francisco the Spanish Ambassadour, who had offered a like Equivo∣lent; and having been to make the Cardinal a Visit had desired to joyn with him in this Negotiation; which the Cardinal refusing, Don Fran∣cisco was very urgent to know all particulars, which the Senate very readily communicated to him. Thus were the Treaties so far proceeded, as administred great hopes of Peace, had not the great preparations made for War by the Count de Fuentes Governour of Milan, and the disturbances amongst the Gri∣sons rendered all things cloudy, and tending to a storm: howsoever the Cardinal Joyeuse with such Answer, and Proposals, as he had obtained from the Senate, resolved for Rome, and accordingly departed from Venice on the 17th. of March.
The Cardinal was no sooner departed, but the Marquess de Castig∣lione arrived at Venice with Character of Ambassadour from the Emperor to the Pope; And though the Duke of Savoy was employed for the Emperour, and then resided at Venice in quality of his Ambassadour, yet Castiglione had Orders in his way to stop there and encline the Senate, (as well as he was able) towards a Peace; but this Marquess could obtain nothing more than what was delivered to the Ministers of France and Spain; of which the Ambassadour Don Francisco made col∣lections in writing, with the proceedings of all the Treaty, Copies of which he sent with diligence to Rome, and were not onely shewed to the Pope, but dispersed through all the Court, to the intent, that it might be made known to the World, that the French were not able to procure, or gain other terms from the Senate, than such as had been already granted to the Ministers of Spain, and other Princes. Of which the Senate having information, thought fit for prevention of false Reports to send authentick Copies of all proceedings to their Ministers in forein Courts, and particularly that of their last resolution. The arrival of the Cardinal at Rome filled all the Town with Dis∣course; every one speaking variously as his passion guided, some being of Opinion that the matters were all concluded; others of different sentiments believed, that they were impossible: and indeed the Pope himself being distracted by both sides, remained unresolved for the space of three or four days; during which time, he confessed himself to have been as it were tormented on the wrack: For he considered, that to yield unto the Venetians almost in every Point, was a scandalous dimi∣nution to the Papal Power; and to abandon the Jesuits his faithful Of∣ficers was yet more hard, and intolerable; for if for two Clergymen onely there had been such a clutter, how much more ought he to be concerned for a whole Order, and for the conservation and re-establish∣ment of his most beloved Emissaries. But in regard the Venetians seemed resolute in that Point, the Cardinal Perron persuaded the Pope to wave the Dispute, lest when all other Points were agreed, it should be said, that the particular Cause of the Jesuits should become the Universal Con∣cernment of the whole Church; and that it was necessary in the first place to establish the Papal Authority in Venice, before he could hope to gain admission for the Jesuits: and that herein he would do well to follow the Example of Clement VIII. who in a Controversie he had with France on the same Subject, was contented to wave the Point concerning the restoration of the Jesuits, and in the time obtained that, which at that present seemed impossible: upon which Advice the Pope was con∣tented to leave that matter wholly to the management of the Cardinal, with Instructions to perform the best he could therein, but not to break off upon the refusal of it. The Cardinal having agreed all matters with the Pope, and recei∣ved Instructions how to manage his Interest, (for he confided more in the Cardinal than in any other of the Ministers:) he in the first place gave account to the King his Master of his success; and then ta∣king Post rode very hard to Ancona, from whence taking a Boat he ar∣rived in hast at Venice, hoping in the Holydays of Easter to operate bet∣ter in favour of the Pope, and prevail on the minds of the Senate, which he expected to find more gently disposed in the days preparatory to that Festival.
The next day after his arrival the Cardinal had Audience of the Senate, to whom he declared the substance of his Negotiations, but did not yet so far open himself, as to specifie the particulars, which were con∣tained in the Pope's Breviate, though the Senate was well advised, that the Cardinal had no other Writing, than certain Instructions subscribed by the Pope's own hand: but yet the reputation which the Cardinal had of being one of the first Degree in the Court of Rome, forbad all farther enquiry into his Power or Authority. The Cardinal therefore in the first place enlarged himself in a Rhetorical Speech concerning the good will, and intention of the Pope, which was directed to no other end, than the good, and welfare of the Christian Church, being desirous to support, and maintain the Papal Dignity with a constancy becoming the Apostolical Chair: and though the Pope had long since endeavour∣ed to accommodate his differences with the Serene Republick, yet the conclusion had been often interrupted by the ill Offices, and contri∣vances of Men not well inclined to the publick Peace; Howsoever his Holiness being willing to surmount all Controversie, the difficulties were reduced unto two Heads: The first Point was, that an Ambassadour should be designed unto Rome before the Censures were taken off; and the second, that the Jesuits should be restored: howsoever, since the Senate had made so much difficulty on the first Point; he had received Instructions to yield it unto them, and in the first place to take off the Censures; but as to that concerning the Jesuits it admitted of longer Dispute, of which he desired to be heard at a more private Audience. In conclusion, after that matters were debated for three or four days in the Senate, all came to be resolved in this manner: That the Cardinal should publickly in the Palace of St. Mark, and in the face of the whole Senate declare that the Censures were taken off, or that he did then make them void, and null. For though the Senate did still insist on their Innocence, and that they had never justly incurred the penalty of the Ecclesiastical Censure, yet however it being judged an Act of no prejudice to their Cause, the Cardinal's Declaration was admitted: though the Senate would not consent, to accompany the Car∣dinal to St. Mark's Church, and there after Mass was ended to receive a Benediction from him, lest it should appear to the People, as if the Censures were taken off by that Benediction, which would be a tacite Confession that the State was guilty of some fault, which they in no wise yielding unto, would not admit of the least colour, or appearance of Absolution. Secondly, That at the same time when the Cardinal declared the Censures taken off, the Doge should deliver to his hand a revocation of the Protest which the Senate had made, when the Censures were pub∣lished. Thirdly, The manner, and form was agreed for delivery of the Prisoners. Fourthly, It was agreed, that all Friers and other Religious should be restored again to their Monasteries, and Convents, excepting onely the Jesuits, and fourteen other Friers who were fled for their Crimes, and not on account of the Pope's quarrel▪ Fifthly, It was agreed, that an Ambassadour should be immediately chosen, and with all convenient speed sent to the Pope.
An. 1607.The Articles being thus agreed, and confirmed, the 21th. of April was the day appointed for putting matters in Execution, which were performed in this manner: The Cardinal being lodged in the Palace of the Duke of Ferrara, Monsieur de Fresnes early attended him at that House, where Mark Ottobon the Secretary, accompanied with two Notaries belonging to the Ducal Office of Chancery, and with other Officers of the Prison, brought before the Ambassadour the two Prisoners, viz. the Abbot of Nervesa, and Scipio Saraceno Canon of Vicenza: and then the Secretary having made his Obeysance to the Ambassadour; said, These are, my Lord, the Prisoners, which our most Serene Prince, according to a late agree∣ment hath sent to be consigned to your Excellency: Protesting howsoe∣ver that the same was done with intent, and design onely to gratifie his most Christian Majesty, without prejudice, or infringment of that Authority and Right which the Republick hath to pass Judgment on Ecclesiastical Persons, and to cite them before their Secular Tribunals of Justice. To which the Ambassadour replyed, That he understood it so, and in that manner he received them; Of which the Ducal Nota∣ries taking notice, entered the same in their publick Registers. This being done, the Prisoners recommended themselves to the Ambassa∣dour's protection, who promised them his favour; and causing them to follow him into a withdrawing Room where the Cardinal was seated; He said to him, These are the Prisoners, which are to be delivered into the hands of the Pope; Then said the Cardinal, consign them into the hands of this Person (pointing to the Officer, who was Claudio Mon∣tano the Pope's Commissary, sent to that end and purpose;) who having touched them in token of seizure, and possession, he desired the Mini∣sters of Justice that they would be pleased to take the care, and custody of them. This matter being past, the Cardinal with the Ambassadour went to the Doge, who after Mass returned to the College, attended with the Signory, and the Savii; and having there taken their Seats the Cardi∣nal entered, and declared himself in these words: I rejoyce much to see this most happy day, greatly desired by me; in which I declare to your Serene Highness, That all the Censures of the Church are ta∣ken off from you, as in reality they are; and hereof I cannot but te∣stifie a most sensible satisfaction, in respect to that great benefit which all Christendom, and Italy in particular will receive thereby. Then the Doge delivered into the hands of the Cardinal the revocation of the Protest, which was in this form directed to all the Prelats, to whom the Protest was sent, and was to this purpose: That whereas expedients and means have been found to make the Pope sensible of the true candour of mind, and the sincere actions of this Republick; so that all Causes are removed of the present differences: And whereas this Republick hath always endeavoured to maintain a perfect good understanding with the Apostolical Chair; so now more e∣specially it remains satisfied in having at length obtained this their most just desire, of which it is thought fit to give them notice. Adding far∣ther, That all matters being performed on both sides, which were most equal, and the censures taken off, the Protest also was revoked.
In the Evening the Senate assembled for choice of an Ambassadour to be sent to Rome and reside with his Holiness; the Person elected was the Cavalier Contarini, who in Company with three others had former∣ly been employed to congratulate with the Pope for his assumption to the Papal Chair: and herewith ended this great Controversie between the Pope, and the Venetians, which had disturbed all Christendom, and might have been the ruin, and destruction of the Papal Authority, had not the Pope wisely in time been made sensible thereof, and granted every thing almost, which the Venetians required: In the beginning and progress of this whole matter, we may observe the spirit of this Paul V. who aspired to make himself as great, as Sixtus V. and seem∣ed to follow much of his way, and method; but he undertok an En∣terprise which was too difficult, and out of his power: his Errour in which was grounded on a mistake; that he was better able to cope, or deal with a Republick, than with a Monarch; for that the first being composed of divers Heads, and humours might sooner admit a division in Councils, than in a single person; and that many of them being zea∣lous, and most of them superstitious in Religion might be affected by Ecclesiastical Censures, and terrified by Excommunications. But the contrary was made to appear by the effects, which most evidently have signalized the Wisdom, and Constancy of this Republick, which would never be obliged to become pliant, and flexible by all the fires of Hell, and damnation which the Pope could threaten. And indeed it farther appears, that as the Republick was of Opinion, that the Censures of the Pope were invalid, when they were not established on just, and le∣gal causes; so likewise they believed, that they could not depart from the least scruple of their temporal Power which God had given them, without betraying that Trust, which God had committed to their charge; and herein they were so resolute and constant, that lest they should seem to acknowledg a fault in any one step of the late transactions, they would not so much as accept of the Cardinals Blessing, lest it should seem to be given in form of Absolution. This Controversie being ended, which had hitherto allayed all the joy, and contentment which the Pope conceived for his late exaltation to the Papal Dignity: the Venetians in pursuance of the Articles agreed, dispatched the four Ambassadours to Rome, namely Francisco Molino Procurator of St. Mark, John Mocenigo, Peter Dudo, Francisco Contareno, all Knights, and Senatours of Chief Renown; whom the Pope received with all imaginable honour, being overjoyed to have put an end to a business so full of danger to himself, and in which his measures having failed him, he no longer argued in defence of his Cause, nor entertained the Ambassadours with Expostulations concerning matters past, which having had little foundation in any reasons, he was desirous to preter∣mit, and to have buried in silence. Soon after the promotion of this Pope, in the Month of November 1605. that diabolical Plot of the Gun-powder Treason to blow up the King and Queen of England, all the Nobles and Commons assembled in Parliament was happily, and by God's immediate Providence discover∣ed, the particulars of which being recorded in our Chronicles, and be∣lieved, to have been contrived at Rome, we shall not need to relate in this place: onely that King James for security of himself and his Do∣minions
issued forth a Proclamation commanding all Roman Priests, Semi∣naries,Baker's Hist. and Jesuits as being the chief Incendiaries of troubles to depart the Kingdom of England, and not to return upon pain of the severity of those Laws which were made against them: as also all Recusants to re∣turn home to their Dwellings, and not to remain in London or come within ten miles of the Court without special License. After which Proclamation, the Oath of Allegiance was presently administred to all sorts of people, and their names certified to the Lords of the Council, who refused to take it. The form of this Oath administred to the Re∣cusants in England was brought to Rome, and examined, and discussed by the College of Cardinals, who after mature, and serious deliberation did unanimously concur, that the said Oath could not be lawfully ta∣ken by any true Catholick with a safe Conscience. Wherefore the Pope signified so much by his Brief, exhorting his people in England to re∣fuse the said Oath, and with patience, constancy, and faith to suffer those persecutions which for this cause were laid upon them. In the year 1607. the King of Congo sent an Ambassadour to this Pope called Anthony Emanuel Vunthi, for so the Jesuits and other Mis∣sionaries into those parts had named him; he was received honoura∣bly at Rome, where the Pope promised to furnish him with several learn∣ed and godly Preachers, which should return with him into his own Country, and there labour to encrease and propagate the Gospel; but this Ambassadour falling sick soon after his arrival at Rome, was buried in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, and with him ceased the design of sending Apostles into those parts. Howsoever the Arch-Bishop of Goa, in imitation of the late Ambassadour from Congo, procured Letters from the King of Persia to this Pope dated at Spahaun the 20th. day of January 1608. and were afterwards followed by an Ambassadour called Ali Golikek Mordar, who arrived at Rome in the year 1609. and was received into the Vatican, where the Pope sate on his Throne, and on each side the Cardinals in form, and manner of a Consistory. Those Writers who favour the Papal Cause, pretend that the King of Persia sent then to acknowledg Obedience to the Pope, who for that cause returned solemn thanks to God for having enlightned those remote parts with the rays of his Gospel, and that the Sun of Righteousness was arisen in those parts, after so long a Night of obscure Gentilism, and false Religion. But the success of following times proved the mi∣stake of this matter, the King's of Persia continuing still in the Doctrine of their Prophet Ali; and therefore it may with more reason be assert∣ed, and believed, that this Ambassadour from Persia, was sent in favour and at the instigation of some of the Persian Subjects, who were, or had been Christians of the Armenian Church, which by some Friers crept in amongst them had been seduced from their own to the Roman Church; which was not difficult to perform, if we consider the po∣verty of those poor Armenians, who were easily inclined to the profes∣sion of that Faith upon promises of preferments in the Church, so that until these days there are several Bishops of the Roman rite in Armenia, and Monasteries of Dominican Friers. In the year 1610.An. 1610. this Pope beatified Ignatius Loyola, who was the first Founder, and Institutor of the Order of Jesuits, giving them leave and permission amongst themselves and publickly in their own Churches
to invoke him as a Saint, or as one of those happy Souls who live, and reign in Heaven with God; but not to be prayed unto, or invoked by the Universal Church. But with more Ceremony, and joy he canonized the same year Charles Borromeo the Arch-bishop of Milan. In the time of Clement VIII. the people of Milan had earnestly desired this grace, and had begun the methods, and rules of proceedings observed in that case, the which being continued until the time of this Paul V. were then at the desire and request of the Kings of Spain, Poland, and Sweden, as also of the College of Cardinals, and Bishops of the Province of Milan, consummated, and finished with great pomp, and expence. In the Month of May of this year 1610. Henry IV. King of France was wick∣edly, and traiterously assassinated by Ravillac, the particulars of which are specified in the French History, the which diabolical Act, as it asto∣nished the whole World, so it sadly affected Pope Paul, who had re∣ceived many Obligations from that King, being endeared to him by many late circumstances in the Controversie with Venice, and upon this score he deeply lamented this unhappy fate, which he said was a loss to all Christendom, and the Universal Church; and understanding that some young French Men, then at Rome rejoyced at the fact, and stiled the villanous Assassinate The Deliverer of their Country, he caused them to be seized, and upon Process made against them, he condemned them to the Gallies. And though Popes do seldom assist at the Obsequies of deceased Princes, yet he was resolved to be present at these, which were celebrated at Rome with great solemnity, where one Sequier preaching the funeral Sermon of this great Prince, he bestowed on him these Titles of Praise, and Dignity, calling him The Protectour of the publick Peace, the Ornament of the Catholick, Apostolick, and Roman Church, the sole Arbitrator between Christian Kings and Princes, and the delight of the Universe; with which the Pope was so well affected, that he acknowledged all that was said of him, to have been true, but yet that this Elogium came far short of the merit of this great Prince. Besides these honours performed to the three forementioned Parties, he beatified Phillippus Nerius Founder of the Order of the Fathers of the Oratory, called in French Les peres d' Oratoire, and in Spain known by the name of Observantes Minores; as also the Virgin Teresa, who for it instituted the Order of descalced Carmelites, with divers others. But now to enumerate the many publick works done by this Pope, we shall find none to have exceeded him in Magnificent Structures. For in the first place, he highly beautified the Vatican Basilicon called by us the Church of S. Peter, which being begun by Julius II. and amplified and encreased by Gregory XIII. and Sixtus V. was not yet perfected until the time of this Pope, who by the help, and contrivance of Mi∣chael Angelo de Bonarora, caused the old Building of Constantine to be demolished, and began a most stupendous work, erecting from the very foundation the whole body of the Church from the Chappel of Gregory to the farthest end, building the Quire, Chancel, and both the lower and upper Portico, from whence the Pope on certain days blessed the People: and in remembrance whereof this Inscription is engraven within the Church.
Paulus V. Pont. Max. Vaticanum Templum a Julio II. Inchoatum. Et usque ad Gregorii & Clementis Sacella Assiduo Centum Annorum Opificio Productum. Tantae Molis Accessione Ʋniversum Constantinianae Basilicae Ambitum includens Confecit Confessionem Beati Petri Exornavit Frontem Orientalem & Porticum Extruxit. But besides this foregoing work of great Magnificence and charge be∣stowed on St. Peter's Church, he enlarged the Vatican Palace, adding several convenient Stairs, and passages into the Garden called the Bel vedere; by which in a more direct way he might pass into it; for that Palace is said to be so great, as to contain five thousand six hundred and fifty Chambers: He also enlarged the Vatican Library, and adorned it with the Pictures of many Men famous in their Ages, made, and drawn by excellent hands; to this Library he added a place to keep the Re∣cords of the secret transactions of the Roman Sea, which he called, Ar∣chivium Apostolicum. Nor did his Munificence end with this work, but with more State and charge he erected a Chappel called the Chappel of Burghese, in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin; the outside of which though built of Stone digged from Quarries on the banks of the Tybur, yet the inside was enriched with Numidian, and Carian Marble, and with Granite Marble, and Alabaster fetched from Chios, and Phrygia, the High Altar was supported with four lofty Pil∣lars of Jasper-stone beset with Topaces, Rubies, Emeralds, Chrysolites, Onyx, Amethysts, and divers other pretious Stones from Persia and India: and dressed up the Image of our Lady upon it, with rich em∣broidered Cloths, with Chains of Gold, and Pearl, and the rarest Gems. To this Chappel he gave a Cross of Silver weighing one hundred twenty eight pounds, costing two thousand one hundred and fifty Ducats; He also erected the Statues of the Twelve Apostles in Silver, which cost six thousand Ducats of Gold, with six silver Candlesticks gilded, which cost three thousand Crowns: also two massy Candlesticks of Silver, which were placed at the foot of the high Altar, weighing one hundred and fourteen pounds, and cost one thousand four hundred Ducats of Gold. Moreover, he gave the heads of six Saints in Silver, which cost two thousand and thirty Ducats, and the Arms of six Saints, which cost one thousand two hundred Ducats; and also two Silver Basons, weigh∣ing twenty three pounds, and which cost five hundred pieces of Eight, the Crown which he bestowed on the Image studded with precious Stones, was valued at twelve thousand Ducats of Gold, before which
was hanged a Lamp of Silver weighing thirty one pounds, with many other rare and rich gifts, which amounted in all to 31725 Ducats of Gold. I remember my self to have seen, and observed this Chappel with great admiration, and particularly noted the four Pillars of Jaspar and Bases of Brass, and that the back of the Altar was all of Lapis Lazuli, and the Cupolo of the Chappel was painted by Guido Rheni of Bologna: this Chappel is just opposite to another built by Sixtus V. the chief Architect, of which was Domenico Fontana, and cost seven hun∣dred thousand Crowns, they are both additions to the Sancta Maria Maggiore, which is one of the greatest Churches in Rome, it is seated on Mons Esquilinus, and by some is nam'd Sancta Maria ad Nives, be∣cause that in the heats of the month of August it was revealed in a Vision to those, who first founded this Church, that they should build it in that place where at that season they found Snow, which it seems appeared within the compass of that Church, and gave measures for all the dimensions of it, there being no Snow in any other part of all the City or Country. And in regard the Vatican Palace was esteemed to be situate in an unhealthy Air, and almost pestilential in the heats of the Summer, it was accustomary for the Popes in the hot season of the year to remove themselves to a small House on the Mons Quirinus, hiring to the great inconvenience of the Inhabitants, several Houses for accommodati∣on of the Servants, and followers of the Court. But this Pope Paul who was of a great and large Soul, not enduring to be confin'd within so narrow a compass; bought several Houses belonging to the Neigh∣bourhood, the which having pulled down, he in the place thereof erect∣ed that large and stately Palace, now called Monte Cavallo, from the two Horses which are erected on a Pedestal before this Palace; in me∣mory of which Building on the Eastern side thereof there is this Inscri∣ption engraved, Paulus Quintus Pont. Max. Anno Salutis MDCXI. Pont. Sui VII. There was no Pope that was ever more magnificent in Building than this, or who delighted more in publick Works, which tended to the common benefit of the City, either for use or Ornament; for he en∣larged the ways on the Mount Quirinus leading to this Palace, which were before very narrow and inconvenient, and brought several Aque∣ducts to it with plentiful streams; many streets of the City which were before crooked, he made direct and streight with much Beauty and Ornament. All that part of the City which is situate on the other side of the Tybur called at present Frastevere, suffering much for want of Water, he refreshed with admirable Streams flowing in great abun∣dance, Ex Agro Braccianensi, which he brought by Aqueducts at thirty five miles distance, partly under ground, and part with arched Work; which was divided into four Fountains, or rather Rivers of Water, fal∣ling from the top of that Hill where is now a Church, and Monastery of Franiscan Friers: and there they shewed us a Chappel built over that place, where St. Peter, (as they said) was crucified, and the very
hole where his Cross was fixed. On the high Altar of this Church, was that excellent and famed Piece of our Saviour's Ascension made by Raphael Ʋrbin; he was himself so pleased with it, and so much admired it, that he ordered it should be carried next to his Coffin when he went to be buried. Besides all these, and many other publick Works which this Pope per∣formed, he was much to be commended for his charitable Gifts, and Alms to the Poor; amongst which it was none of his least acts of Cha∣rity; that he established a Revenue, out of which every month there was raised a convenient Portion whereby to bestow an honest and ver∣tuous Maid in Marriage. He was greatly pleased with Frescati, a Vil∣lage about ten miles distant from Rome, called anciently Villa Tusculana, where Cicero was much delighted, and made it the place of his retire∣ment and Studies; and for that reason this Pope enlarged the Papal Pa∣lace there, and brought it into great reputation with the Cardinals, and Nobles of Rome. During the Wars between the Emperour and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, which happened in the Reign of this Pope, he laid a Tax on all the Clergy towards the maintenance and support of the Catholick Cause: and a new Order of Knighthood was created under the patro∣nage of the Blessed Virgin, St. Michael, and St. Francis, who entered into a Vow to make War against the Hereticks, and extirpate them and the Heresies they professed: And about this time began that great Controversie between the Jesuits and the Dominicans concerning the immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, which was rather smo∣thered, than decided. Thus did this Pope Paul V. pass his time in Peace; for the quarrel he had with the Venetians, having given him some taste of the inquie∣tudes of War, he ever afterwards attended to a pacifick and reposed Life, which produced those excellent effects of Peace, such as great Structures, and munificence towards the Poor, which by unquiet Spi∣rits are always diverted by the expences of War: And thus having con∣sumed his days, he departed this life on the 24th. of January 1621. and in the seventieth year of his Age, having reigned fifteen years, eight months and thirteen days, he was buried for a while in the Church of St. Peter, but his Body was in a short time after removed from thence to his Chappel, which he had erected and added to the great Church of Santa Maria Maggiore. During his Reign he created sixty Cardinals. The Epitaph on his Monument is as followeth: Paulus V. Pont. Max. Patria Romanus, ex Burgesia Familia Cui perpetua Vitae innocentia & sectata Virtus; Bononiae Prolegato praefuit, mox à Gregorio XIV. Causarum Cam. Apost. Auditor Creatus, & à Clemente VIII. Ad Philippum II. Hispaniarum Regem de gravissimis rebus Legatus; In Amplissimum Ordinem cooptatus inter Generales Inquisitores Adscriptus, Et Ʋrbis Vicarius Electus, cum omnes tantorum Munerum Partes
Summa cum laude obivisset Ad Summum Pontificatum Leone XI. è Vivis Erepto Florens Adhuc Aetate Incredibili Patrum Consensu Evectus Est Cumque Vigili Solicitudini Securitatem Annonae Copiam Justitiam, Et Quietem Populis Ecclesiasticae Ditionis Concordiam Vero Et Pacem Ʋniverso Christiano Orbi Semper Praestitisset Religionem Summa Pietate Coluissit Ʋrbem Magnificentissimis Adificiis Ornasset Atque Gregoriis Omnium Virtutum Officiis Aditum Sibi Ad Immortalitatem Aperuisset E Mortalibus Raptus Grave Cunctis Sui Desiderium Reliquit. Sedit in Potificatu Annos XV. Menses VIII. Dies XIII. Obiit Anno Sal. MDCXXI. Die XXII. Januarii. GREGORY XV. THE Funeral Obsequies of Paul V. having been celebrated for the space of nine days according to the usual Form and Custom; the Cardinals on the tenth day being the eighth of February, entered the Conclave, to the number of fifty, to which two others were added, who arrived at Rome a few days after the death of the Pope, one of which was Cardinal Alexander Ludovisio, Arch-bishop of Bologna, who after many and various Factions, and diversity of Opinions in the Conclave, was chosen Pope: the first and most antient Party was that of Montalto, the second of Aldobrandino, the third of Borghese, the fourth was that of the Spanish Faction, the fifth was of the French, besides which were Bonti, Sforza, Farnese, Medici, and Este, all which stood on their own bottoms, and formed distinct Parties of their own. When the first Scrutiny was made Bellarmine had far the greater number of Votes, but falling short of two Thirds he was ex∣cluded, Campori made the greater bustle, and so also did Aquino, but great and strong Parties opposing against them vacated their Elections. At length Cardinal Borghese naming Ludovisio, was followed by a ge∣neral concurrence of almost all the Cardinals, almost we may say, be∣cause Campori upon the news thereof, turned pale and ready to fall into a swoon, Aldobrandino also and Aquino fell sick, and were carried out of the Conclave; and Aquino having now lost all hopes of being made Pope, took it so grievously to heart, that in two days he depart∣ed this life. Thus Ludovisio being elected, he was conducted into the Chappel Parlina, where he was vested in his Pontificalibus, and ac∣knowledged, and adored for Pope on the 21th. of February 1621. and took the name of Gregory XV. This Pope was born at Bologna on the third of January 1554. his Father was Count Pompeo Ludovisio, and his Mother Camilla Blanchina, he was in his youthful years educated in the Jesuits Colledg at Rome, where he was instructed in all sorts of Humane and Philosophical Learning: returning afterwards to Bologna he studied the Civil Law, in
which he arrived to the degree of Doctor, and thence again setling himself at Rome, he gained the friendship of three succeeding Popes: by Gregory XIII. he was chosen and created Principal Judg of the Ca∣pitol; by Clement VIII. he was made Referendary of both Signatures, and presided in all Civil Causes, in the place of Deputy to Cardinal Rusticuccio the Pope's Vicar; he was afterwards assumed into Commis∣sion with the Auditors of the Rota, which Office one of his Ancestors named Lodowick Ludovisio, had about one hundred and fifty years be∣fore, with great satisfaction, and prudence admitted. He was likewise by the same Clement VIII. adjoyned in Commission with Maffeo Bar∣barini Clerk of the Apostolical Chamber, (who afterwards was Pope) and sent to Beneventum to appease Tumults and Seditions arisen be∣tween the Officers of the Pope, and those of the King of Spain. And lastly Paul V. created him Arch-bishop of Bologna; upon promotion to which Prelacy, he wrote a Letter to his Diocesans full of Charity, and paternal affection, which was printed at Bologna, and is extant at this day. About this time a War was begun between Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, and Ferdinand Duke of Mantoua, grounded on certain diffe∣rences about some places in the Dutchy of Montferrat, which were the cause of great trouble in Milan, and other places of Italy, in re∣gard that Philip III. King of Spain took part with the Duke of Mantoua: to appease which disturbances, and compose which differences Pope Paul employed this Alexander Ludovisio, qualifying him with the Title of his Nuntio in those three Provinces to confer with the Ambassadours of France and Spain; in which negotiation he so well acquitted himself, and with such honour towards the Papal Sea, that Peace being conclu∣ded and all Disputes ended, the Pope in reward of the pains and pru∣dence of Ludovisio, on the 20th. of November 1616. promoted him to the degree of Cardinal, with which Title he resided in his Diocese, until news came of the death of Paul V; when he immediately re∣paired to Rome, and entred the Conclave, on the 8th. of February with the other Cardinal, and on the 21th. of that month was himself crea∣ted Pope. Some few days after which, being crowned in St. Peter's Church with the usual pomp, he took possession of the Sovereign Power of the Church in the Church of St. John de Lateran: which Ceremonies being past, he published Jubilies, and Pardons over all Christendom to all such, who should with sincere minds pray for the prosperity and happiness of his Reign. At this time a War began to be inflamed between the Inhabitants and Neighbours of the Valteline, in which the Kings of Spain, and France became involved, the causes and original of which doth not ap∣pertain to this History: Spain being desirous to interest Gregory in this Cause, offered to deposite the Forts of the Valteline in his hands, making great ostentations of their desires to Peace and quietness: but in Rome the Opinions and Counsels upon an offer of such importance were doubtful, and divided; for those who penetrated the most deeply into matters of Policy, were not willing that the Authority of the Church and Power of the Pope should be so far engaged, or that the professed neutrality, and mediation should run so much hazard, for that being once accepted by the Pope, the Conditions of Peace would
be rendered more difficult, and perhaps impossible: for if in case an agreement should happen between two Kings of restoring all things to their former estate; it would be difficult to conceive with what decency the Pope could restore into the hands of the Protestants, (whom he e∣steemed Hereticks) those places which were committed to his Guar∣dianship and custody. The Venetian Republick being of the same O∣pinion sent Soranzo Ambassadour Extraordinary to Rome to disuade the Pope from lending his Name, and Authority to the interests of Spain: but he yielding an Ear to his Nephews, who were overcome by Pen∣sions and Benefices from Spain, was possessed with an Opinion and be∣lief, that at the appearing of his Colours, all the Arms of the Enemy, would out of Veneration fall from their hands; upon which the glo∣rious memorial of Peace preserved, and Religion protected would re∣main as an Ornament to his Name, and a Crown upon his Sepulcre. But the French shewed themselves displeased, that Gregory had not ex∣pected the sence of that Crown upon the matter, before he resolved to accept the Deposite: howsoever in the French Councils the Opinion prevailed, that the Pope should accept of the Deposite with certain li∣mitations and reserves; and it was declared, that the Deposite should re∣main until the end of July (it being now the month of May) within which time, the Forts being demolished, and all restraints upon the Gri∣sons, and Armies removed which did oppress them, affairs should be re∣stored to their former State; which not being performed, the League should supplicate the Pope to join himself to their Arms, thereby to obtain the effect. In pursuance of these resolutions the Duke of Fiano the Pope's own Brother, a dull and sottish Man, was sent with fifteen thou∣sand Foot and five hundred Horse to take possession of the Towns to be deposited; but had been resisted in the Valley had not the Governour of Milan removed all obstacles, but these matters came to no maturity: for amidst these transactions the Pope departed this life. In the year 1622. Lewis XIII. of France was involved in great Wars against his Protestant Subjects, and rendered himself Master of the Pro∣vinces of Poictou, Xantonge, Gascony, Dauphino, and Languedoc. Phi∣lip IV. King of Spain was employed in Wars against the Hollanders: likewise the Emperour Ferdinand II. waged Wars with the Protestants in Germany, and with assistance of Marquis Spinola, and the Duke of Bavaria despoiled the Prince Palatine of the Rhine of his Dominions; and having the plunder of Heidelberg, the Duke of Bavaria sent the Library antiently belonging to the Princes Palatines to Rome, which by this Pope was transmitted into the Vatican with this Inscription: Sum De Bibliotheca Quam Heidelberga Capta Spolium Fecit, Et Pont. Max. Greg. XV. Trophaeum Misit, Maximilianus Ʋtriusque Bavariae Dux S.R. Imperii Archi-Dapifer Et Princeps Elector Anno M.DCXXIII. Be∣sides which, several Standards taken at the Battel of Prague were sent to Rome, and there by the Pope's order hanged up, in the Church of Sancta Maria de Victoria. The success of the Catholick Princes being to the great comfort of the Pope thus fortunate, he encouraged the Duke of Savoy to make War upon Geneva, and render himself Master of that place, whereby he would not only do justice to his own Right and Title, but also over∣throw the capital Seat of Heresie, and Calvinism. With the like zeal
did the Pope require of the four Venetian Ambassadours, sent according to custom to congratulate his promotion to the Papal Chair; that the Republick would again admit into their State those Religious People of the Society of Jesus, which had been banished from thence in the time of his Predecessor Paul V. But this request being repugnant to many Laws and formalities, and the indissoluble bonds of Government, could not be obtained; though it was pressed more home by the Marquis de Coevre, who passed from Rome to Venice in the name of his Master King Lewis III. and seconded with earnest importunity by the Bishop of Monte Fiascorie the Pope's Nuntio, and the powerful Letters of the Car∣dinal Ludovisio. For the Senate declared, that they could not depart from their first resolution, which being founded on Decrees, and solid considerations could in no wise be altered; and therefore Princes in A∣mity with them, ought not to press them unto that, which was neither permitted to them to grant, nor could they deny without doing a dis∣pleasure to themselves. An. 1622.In this year Osman the Emperour of the Turks invaded Poland with a powerful Army; but King Sigismond III. being assisted with Mony from the Pope, made a vigorous resistance, and gained a signal Victory against the Enemy. In this year also Antonius de Dominis, who was Arch-bishop of Spala∣to in Dalmatia, deserting his Bishoprick and all his Ecclesiastical Prefer∣ments for the sake of the Gospel, and the true Protestant Religion, went into England, where he wrote a Book against the Ecclesiastical State: but being unconstant, and wavering in his Principles, he return∣ed to Rome where he renounced all the Principles of the Protestant Faith; and yet afterwards in the year 1624. in the time of Ʋrban VIII. be∣ing troubled in Conscience for his Apostacy, and reassuming again the Profession he made in opposition to the Roman Church, he was impri∣soned in the Castle of St. Angelo, where he died; after which his Body was burn'd together with his Writings. The Congregation de Propaganda Fide was first instituted by this Gregory V. as appears by his Letters Patents for the same dated the 10th. of July 1622. and for maintenance thereof he setled a certain Revenue to support such, as employed themselves in that important work. In the same year also he canonized Ignatius Loyola first Founder of the Jesuits, who was formerly beatified; likewise Philip Neri Founder of the Oratorians, called in French, les Peres d' Oratoire, with Isidore a Spaniard, who had been a Husbandman, Teresia a Nun that reformed the Order of the Carmelites, and Francis Xaverius a Jesuit, whom they call Apostle of the Indies. Moreover, this Pope at the instance and desire of King Lewis XIII. advanced the Bishoprick of Paris to be an Arch-bishoprick. But what is more observable in his time, was a Diploma, which he made for the more orderly, and easie Election of Popes by way of secret Suffrages, which divers had attempted to perform, but could never be perfected until this Pope wrote and published the same, the which Rule was afterwards practised at the Election of Ʋrban VIII. the succeeding Pope. This Pope had created eleven Cardinals during the time of his Reign, which lasted only two years, five months and twenty nine days, he de∣parting
this life on the 8th. of July 1623. after which the Sea was va∣cant twenty eight days, his Body was carried to the Church of S. Peter, where it was deposited only for some time, and afterwards translated to the Roman College of Jesuits, where it was buried in a most magni∣ficent Chappel, erected by his Nephew Cardinal Ludovisio, with this Epitaph inscribed thereupon: Gregorius XV. Pontifex Ter Maximus Terrarum Orbis bene-merentissimus Multa brevi jaculatus Imperio Quot Mensium tot Lustrorum aequavit Annos, Immortali dignus Nomine Rebus praeclare Gestis Romae pro Româ; Pietatem auxit novo Cultu Religionis, Religioni Aras extruxit; Nova Sanctorum Apotheosi Inter quos Ignatium Societatis Jesu Fundatorem Franciscum Xaverium Antesignanum Gemellum Numen Coeli Albo Ʋtriusque Orbis gemellum veluti Castorem Festa Omnium Acclamatione intulit. Fecisset plura, ni Eato abreptus praepropero Objisset. Lugendus semper, quod imperasset parum. An. Sal. MDCXXIII. ƲRBAN VIII. GREGORY XV. being dead, and his Funeral Rites ac∣cording to Custom being performed; on the 19th. of July early in the morning the Cardinals to the number of fifty four entered the Conclave. It was the common Opinion of most people that the Election would be long, and take up much time before it were determined; because, that as the Rules and Methods pre∣scribed by the Bull of Gregory V. for Election of Popes (which as yet had not been put in practice) might increase the difficulty; so also, it was observed, that the Cardinals were much divided in their Opi∣nions, and Votes; there being many persons at that time, who for their Age, Vertues, and Services formerly rendered to the Ecclesiastical State, stood Candidates, and esteemed themselves worthy of the Papal Dignity, namely four Princes, viz. Farnese, Este, Savoy, and Medici, and four Nephews of Popes, Bourghese, Ludovisio, Buoncompagno, and Al∣dobrandino; howsoever contrary to common Opinion, and beyond ex∣pectation of all, the Cardinals agreed, and on the 6th. of August being
Sunday, and the day of the Festival observed in remembrance of the Transfiguration of Christ, they all concurred with common Voice in the Election of Maffeo Barberini, who was the fourth Pope, which the City of Florence had given to the Church, namely three of the House of Medicis, Aldobrandino, and this Barberini who was the fifth. This Pope was of the age of fifty six years when he was chosen; much to the wonder of the Electors themselves, who were amazed to have deceived their own hopes by promoting a Person, who for his complexion, and vigour might out live the greater part of them. This Family of Barberini had flourished for the space of five hundred years in the little Republick of Simi-Fontana, which was situated be∣tween Florence and Siena, and not above two miles distant from the Town of Barberini: but this Republick being afterwards destroyed by the Florentines, the Family of Barberini transplanted themselves to the City of Florence, where they lived with great honour and esteem, and being employed in honourable places of charge and trust, they rendred their House most illustrious by their faithfulness, and dexterous ma∣nagement of Affairs. But it will not be pertinent to our purpose to enumerate the ma∣ny great Men of this Family; we shall onely name Antonio Barbe∣rini, who was the first of this name, who setled his House at Rome, and was the Father of two Sons Francis and Antonio. This latter was the Father of our Maffeo who was born at Florence the fifth day of A∣pril 1568. he had five Brothers, three of which died in their youth, but two of them had the satisfaction to see Maffeo installed in the Papal Throne, one of which being a Capuchin, was called from his Cell to the College of Cardinals, and dignified by his Brother with the Title of St. Onufrio. But as to Maffeo, having been carefully educated in his youth, and having applied himself to all sorts of Learning, and Vertue; he was so greatly beloved, and admired by Sixtus V. that at the age of twenty one years, he was made Abreviator of the principal Tribunal of Justice, and Gregory XIV. conferred on him the Signet Office for Grants of fa∣vour and Grace. Clement V. sent him to Fano to be chief Governour of that City and of the Marches of Ancona, where by his modesty, and sweetness of his carriage he acquired the friendship, and good will of all the Inhabitants of those parts. Afterwards he was made one of the seven Pronotaries of the Records of Rome; in execution of which Of∣fice, he faithfully delivered in writing all the particular Acts, and Cere∣monies observed at the two illustrious Marriages celebrated at Ferrara between Philip III. King of Spain, and Margaret of Austria; as also be∣tween Albert Arch-Duke of Austria, and Isabella Clara Eugenia Infanta of Spain: and being made afterwards Clerk of the Apostolical Chamber▪ he was joyned in Commission with Alexander Ludovisio Auditor of the Rota; with whom it was his good fortune to compose the Differences which arose about the limits, and borders of the Ecclesiastical State, and the Dominions of the Kingdom of Naples, in determination of which, the Proposals, and offers of Maffeo were applauded, and accept∣ed to the great contentment and satisfaction of Pope Clement VIII. who afterwards sent him in quality of his Nuntio into France, to carry the Blessed Clouts to the Dauphin who was born in the year 1601. and suc∣ceeded
to his Father Henry IV. with the name of Lewis XIII. On this occasion Maffeo obtained the re-establishment of the Jesuits in France, who had been banished from thence in the year 1594. Having thus acquitted himself with great honour in France, he re∣turned again to Rome; from whence he was again sent into France with the character of Nuntio in Ordinary, Cardinal Bubalo (who had held that place formerly) being recalled from thence. Upon receiving this charge, Maffeo was farther dignified with the Title of Arch-bishop of Nazaret in the Kingdom of Naples; Clement VIII. being dead, as was also his Successour Leo XI. Maffeo was still continued by Paul V. in his Office of Nuntio; but in the year 1607. after the differences between that Pope, and the Venetians were composed, he was recalled to Rome, where he received the honour of the Cardinals Hat in October of the same year with Title of St. Peter de Monte Aureo, which he afterwards changed for that of S. Onufrio, and kept the same until the time that he was elected Pope, when he conferred it on his Brother, as we have before-mentioned. After he was Cardinal, he was constituted the Pope's Legat at Bologna where he resided for the space of three years; he was Protectour of the Scotch Nation; and having resigned his Arch-bishoprick of Nazareth, he was created Bishop of Spoleto, where he kept his residence, and ordered all matters according to the Orders, and Di∣rections of the Council of Trent: and to keep up the force of the Ec∣clesiastical Canons, he erected a Congregation of Casuists, by whom all difficult, and doubtful Cases were explicated, and determined. He was also a Man of that great Vertue, and Learning, that his House was a Musaeum, and the Asylum of vertuous and learned Men, and re∣ceived such Strangers with great humanity, who were Persons of parts and Learning. Wherefore Gregory XV. declared him Patron, and Pro∣tectour of the Greeks, and all the Oriental Nations, who coming to Rome represented their Causes and Conditions without the help, and interven∣tion of an Interpreter. And thus Maffeo Barberini having made many steps in the degrees of Honour, and prepared himself for the Pontifical Dignity by the many Services he had rendered to the Ecclesiastical State; his turn came to ascend unto the Popedom; for (as we have said) Gregory being deceased, this Barberini was on the sixth of August elected Pope, taking the name of Ʋrban VIII. with applause of the World by reason of the high conceit then had of his Learning, and Ability. The Pope soon after his Election fell sick of a violent Fever caused by the inconveniencies he had suffered in the Conclave, and the unhealth∣fulness of the Air, to the great grief, and fear of the People of Rome, who being extreamly rejoyced with his Election, were much dejected with the danger of his death; but being recovered again, he took this Motto: In Domino sperans non Infirmabor. He was of the age of fifty five years, when he was first elected; at which time before he would retire to cloath himself in his Pontifical Vestments, he prostrated himself before the Altar, and with tears did earnestly intreat of God, that in case ac∣cording to his Omniscient Providence, he foresaw that he were unequal for so great a charge, or should not prove an useful Instrument to the Church, that he would rather be pleased to strike him dead, than per∣mit him to go forth, and cloath himself with those hallowed Gar∣ments. After which, as if he would ascribe all to the glory of God,
he stamped this Motto on his Coyn: Facit mirabilia magna solus. The sickness of the Pope was the cause that his Coronation was de∣ferred until the 29th. of September, which was the Feast of St. Michael the Arch-Angel, whom the Popes commonly have taken for their Guar∣dian Angel. Alexander d' Este Prince of the Cardinal Deacons had the honour to plant the triple Crown upon his head, at which time the people made loud shouts, and acclamations. And now Ʋrban having a particular devotion for St. Michael, he erected the Image of that Angel in Brass upon the Altar of Sancta Petronella in St. Peter's Church, and his own person on his knees in an humble posture before him with these words: Te Mane, Te Vespere. And because it was the custom for Popes on the 19th. of November to go in Procession from the Vati∣can to St. John de Lateran, he performed that Custom with such Solem∣nity, beyond what was usual, that one Mascardus thought it worthy his description in a particular Treatise of that pompous Subject; in memory of which the People of Rome erected a Triumphal Arch in the Capitol with this Inscription on the one side thereof: Ʋrbano Octavo Barberino Pont. Max. Antiquae Gloriae Restitutori Authori Novae SPQR In Veteris Capitolii ruderibus Hoc qualecunque Recidivae Majestis specimen Ponit At the beginning of his Pontificate he confirmed the Decree of Pius V. against alienation of Church-Lands, as also of the Towns, Places and Demesnes belonging to the Church. And for imploring the blessing of God on his Rule and Government: He ordered Prayers of forty hours continuance to be held in the Churches of St. Peter, St. John of Late∣ran, and St. Mary ad praesepe, vulgarly called Santa Maria Maggiore, and in two other Churches in several quarters of the City. He instituted also a new Order of Militia with the Title of Knights of the Conception of our Lady, who took the Vow, and observed the Rules of St. Francis, under the protection of St. Michael, and St. Basil. This Order was first honoured by Charles Gonzaga, and Ʋladislaus IV. King of Poland, who took this Knighthood on occasion of a War against the Turks; and Gonzaga coming to Rome with a Noble Retinue, received the Cross, and Habit from the Pope. Of this Order were seventy Knights, whose Banner was a Red Cross, carrying a Flag fastned to it with a Golden Chain, in which was a bright Image of the Virgin with the Devil un∣der her feet with these words: Vince Hoc Insigni Vere Nostro. And further at the beginning of his Reign, he appointed a select number of religious, and grave Men to visit all the Monasteries both of Men, and Women, as also all Colleges, and Hospitals, and other pub∣lick places, to take an account, and knowledg of the abuses, and dis∣orders committed therein, and to give their Opinions and advices for
a redress of them: and of their proceedings herein, their Instructions were to render weekly an account unto the Pope. He exhorted also all Bishops to reside in their respective Dioceses: and not to excuse the Cardinls from the like Duty, and Obligation, he admonished them in a full Consistory to watch personally over their Flock and Charge, for default of which, and of strict Discipline, a de∣pravity of Manners, and loosness of life was spread amongst the people: Ʋt nostrae conscientiae consulamus, vos monitos esse volumus à caeteris Epi∣scopis in hâc parte, non differre Cardinales Episcopos, iisque non suffra gari, qod dicitur, Pontifex scit, & tolerat, quia in nobis nulla est tole∣rantia, nulla conniventia. But this earnestness of the Pope in this Point was believed to proceed from a desire he had to rid himself from some troublesom Cardinals, who were always projecting and forming matters for Intrigues in the Court. And now according to the Bull of Paul II. reducing the Jubilies to every twenty five years; the time was return'd in this year 1625.An. 1625. for a Jubily, the last having been held in the year 1600. under Clement VIII. To make a preparation hereunto, a Bull was issued under the date of the 29th. of April 1624. to advise the World that the following year was the holy year of Jubily, that so all those who were desirous to gain the benefit of Indulgences, might have timely notice so to dispose their Affairs, as with convenience to repair to the Holy City, and ob∣tain the fruits of the Holy year; and accordingly on the 24th. of De∣cember 1624. he opened the Holy Gate, in conformity to the Ceremo∣nies described in other places. But before the beginning of this Jubily the Republick of Venice, sent their Ambassadours to kiss the Pope's feet, and make tender of their Obedience to the Apostolical Sea, the like was performed by Ambassa∣dours from the Duke of Florence, the Republicks of Genoua, Luca, and other Princes of Italy: And when in the month of July 1625. the Ambassadours from the Catholick King came to perform their Obey∣sance, Don Bartolines de Castro uttered himself in this manner. By this Man (meaning the Duke of Alcala who was Ambassador in chief) who is chosen out of the principal Ministers of State, King Philip doth offer and present to you (most Holy Father) all that duty, and obedience, which may evidence the subjection, and reverence which he acknow∣ledges due to your Holiness, and the Apostolical Sea; and therewith subjects all his Kingdoms, Provinces, Islands, Seas and People, as a most obedient Son, and offers them at your holy Feet. Then Ʋrban▪ VIII. he adores on his knees: Thee he acknowledges to be the Vicar of Christ Our Lord, and the Successour of St. Peter. To Thee who art the Head of the Catholick Church and of all the Christian Com∣monwealth, he willingly and freely offers all obedience, promising, and vowing to lend all his Force, Riches and Strength both by Sea, and Land in defence of the Apostolical Sea, and Orthodox Religion, from which no Power or other consideration whatsoever shall be able to divert or separate his Resolutions. The year of Jubily passing with these Ceremonies, and acts of Devo∣tion, at the end thereof being the 24th. of December 1625. the Gate of the Church of St. John de Lateran was shut by Cardinal Levi Arch-deacon of that Church; that of Santa Maria Maggiore by Cardinal
Millin, the Arch deacon also of that Church, that of St. Paul by Cardi∣nal de Monte Dean of the Sacred College: and during the time that these three Cardinals were employed in these Ceremonies, the Pope as∣sisted at the Vespers in St. Peter's Church; which being ended, he him∣self shut the Gates of the Church of the Vatican with the ordinary So∣lemnity, in memory of which this Inscription was engraved: Ʋrbanus VIII. Pont. Max. Portam Sanctam reseravit, Et Clausit Anno M.DC. XXV. Howsoever, in favour to Pilgrims the Pope thought sit to continue the benefit, and priviledg of his Indulgences until the first day of the year 1626. And now the Pope, who at the beginning of his Pontificate had created Francis Barberino his Nephew Cardinal Deacon of St. Onufrio; was still designing greater honours for him; and in the year 1624. gave him the Title of Cardinal of St. Agatha, and made him Pretor of the Cities of Tiburtia, and Firmiana, Patron, and Protector of Aragon, Portugal, Eng∣land, Scotland, &c. Library-keeper of the Apostolical Sea, and Vice-Chancellour of the Holy Church of Rome; and farther to exalt him with higher honours, in the year 1625. he sent him into France with the character of Legat à Latere, and to make his reception more splen∣did, he dispatched Bernardino Mari a Patrician of Rome into France to intreat Lewis XIII. that he would be pleased to receive his Nephew un∣der that degree, and quality. At his departure from Rome the Pope de∣livered to him a Cross with his Benediction; and the Cardinals accom∣panied him to the gate of St. Angelo. At his arrival in the Suburbs of Paris, he was visited in the name of the King and Queen by the Duke of Nemours, and other chief Peers of France; and at his entry he was accompanied by the Duke of Orleans, the King's only Brother with a great train of Nobility of the first rank, and Order in that King∣dom. This Legat who was young and but lately admitted into the Order of Priesthood reserved his first Mass, wherewith to treat the King, and Queen, which he offered to them as the first fruits of his Sa∣rifices, celebrating it at Fontainbleau on the 15th. of August, which is the day of the Festival of the Assumption of our Lady. Being returned afterwards to Rome, his presence was desired by Phi∣lip III. King of Spain under the same quality, and character at his Court, to be Godfather in place of the Pope to the Daughter of the King, who was afterwards baptized with the name of Maria Clara Eugenia. But not to confer all the stock of honour on one single person of his Kinred, the Pope called Anthony Barberini his other Nephew, Son of ano∣ther Brother from his Capuchin's Cell, to rank him together with the Car∣dinals; it was he, who was called for a long time Cardinal Antonio, he was esteemed a very upright Man, and one who observed the rules of S. Francis, notwithstanding that his degree of Cardinal excused him in a great mea∣sure from the severity of them. During the absence of Francisco Bar∣berino in France, Antonio was Chief Minister with the Pope in his stead, which at his return, he did most voluntarily resign into the hands of Francisco; in the execution of which, it is reported of him, that he would never be present at the consultations of War, which at that time
infested Italy upon a Dispute concerning the Valteline, saying, that his Order obliged him to the exercise of Peace, and works of Charity, the affairs of War being incompatible with his Vow, and his Profession. In the year 1626. this Pope had the honour to consecrate the great Basilicon of St. Peter's Church, which having been created by Constan∣tine the Great, was afterwards enlarged and adorned by the munificence of many other Popes; and now being compleatly finished by this, he with great Pomp in presence, and with the assistance of twenty two Cardinals, of which three were Bishops, performed all the Ceremo∣nies, and rites of consecration; in memory of which this Inscription was engraven over the Walls: Ʋrbanus VIII. Pontif. Max. Vaticanam Basilicam A Constantino Magno Extructam A Beato Silvestro Dedicatam In Amplissimi Templi Formam Religiosâ multorum Pontificum Magnificentiâ Redactam Solemni ritu consecravit Sepulcrum Apostolicum Area Mole Decoravit O Deum, Aras Et Sacella Statuis Ac Multiplicibus Operibus Ornavit. And indeed that Area Moles, or the Corinthian Brass, with which he made the high Altar, was fetched from the roof of the Pantheon, called now the Rotunda from the form of it, built by Agrippina; the which Brass not only served for the high Altar, for out of the surplusage of it, there was founded a great Cannon, now in the Castle of St. Angelo, which gave occasion to that Libell, which was put into the hands of Pasquin: Quod non fecerunt Barbari fecerunt Barberini. And indeed it seems strange, that the Romans, who are so curious, should destroy such a piece of Antiquity; for as I remember I took off this Inscription from the Architrave of the Portico: M. Agrippa L.F. Cos. Tertium fecit. And undeneath in lesser Letters: Imp. Caes. L. Septimius Severius, Pius, Pertinax, Arabicus, Adiabenicus, Parthicus Maximus. Pont. Max. Trib. Pop. XI. Cos. III. P.P. PROCos. & Imp. Caes. M. Aurelius Antoninus Pius, Faelix Aug: Trib. Potest. V. Cos. PROCos. Pantheum vetustate corruptum cum omni cultu restituêrunt. This Temple formerly dedicated to all the Gods, was now dedicated to all Saints.
Now as to matters of political Government, and his management thereof: the Pope found himself much engaged by Gregory his Prede∣cessour, who, (as we have said in his life) had accepted the Valteline in Deposite; which bringing an unseasonable charge upon him, he com∣plained thereof, but found no way to get out, for Ludovisio had strong∣ly tied the knot, both of business, and decency. And though Ʋrban by reason of employments exercised in France, was judged inclinable, and in a manner partial to that Court, yet it was fit that he should appear serviceable, at least in name to the designs of Spain; and indeed he was so in reality; for though the Deposite of the Valteline was said to be in the hands of the Pope, yet Leopold continued in possession, and enjoyed the conveniencies and advantages, and the Grisons groaned under the burden, to remedy which the Pope proposed divers expe∣dients, but the preliminary to all, and his chief condition, was a reim∣bursement of the Money which he had expended, before he would quit or part with his Trust. The Confederates readily accepted the proffer, and willingly would have reimbursed the Pope, provided the Valley were put into their hands, and rendred to the first Owner when the Forts were razed, and Religion restored. But the Pope being fearful to offend Spain, proposed, that a strong body of Soldiery belonging to the Valteline should be razed, and united either to the Catholick Can∣tons of Helvetia, or as a fourth League to the three Cantons of the Grisons. But the Confederates proposing to themselves the end of re∣storing things to their former state, judged, that by these means, they should be wanting to the protection, which they had promised to the Grisons, and that the Spaniards should still enjoy the predominancy, and liberty of passage to the exclusion of all others: upon which conside∣rations, and several others, the Dispute still continued until the year 1627, when the Pope acquainted the Cardinals in a full Consistory, that the Disputes, and Wars arisen about the Valteline were composed, and ended, on the conditions, that the Fortifications of those places which were committed to his Trust, were by consent of the Kings of France, and Spain, to be ruined and demolished. To which he added these words: At length (said he) we have attained that which we much wished, and desired, for by mutual consent of both Kings, the Peace is concluded, and established; we have omitted nothing, which might conduce to the good of the Church, and it hath been our principal care that the Catholick Religion should suffer no detriment, the Kings themselves are witnesses hereof, and God himself knows, that we have always had his glory, and ho∣nour before our eyes. And now that the Grandeur of the Apostolical Chair be advanced, and the Consistory gratified and pleased; Ʋrban in the year 1631. be∣stowed the Title of Eminence upon the Cardinals, forbidding them to receive any other distinction of honour, and for establishment thereof a Decree was made and entred into the Records of the Congregation of Ceremonies that the Titles of Cardinals should be, the most Eminent and most Reverend; but as to the Order of the Knights of St. George instituted by Paul V. he wholly abolished it. The Illyrian Colledg founded at Loreto by Gregory XIII. but translated afterwards to Rome by Clement VIII. consisting in all but of twelve persons, he restored again to Loreto with augmentation of the Revenue, and of the Scholars
to the number of thirty six. And in regard his hand was now em∣ployed in giving, and taking away Honours, he was pleased to declare, that the Commonwealth of Venice was a crowned Head, and was to be treated with a Dignity equal to that of Kings. About this time great combustions, and terrible Wars threatned Italy; for the House of Gonzaga which reigned in Mantua, was now considered without issue male, and as a dead Corps without hopes of any branches springing from thence, neither could Ferdinand the elder Brother, nor Vincenzo the present Duke leave after them any other, than the young Princess Mary their Niece, who as a Woman was excluded from the In∣vestiture of the Dutchy, had yet some reason, though doubtful to pre∣tend to that of Montferrat. In her marriage therefore the pledges of Peace, or the seeds of great contention seeming to be lodged, many believed it expedient to marry her to Charles Duke of Rhetel, Son of the Duke of Nevers, the nearest and lawful Heir: for this Branch, though transplanted to a forein Soil, was sprung from the same Root, enjoying in France the revenue of three large Dukedoms, viz. Nevers, Rhetel, and Maine. The Spaniards who were jealous of this House, and above any thing apprehended this Succession, lest it should introduce the French into Italy, promised the pretensions of Ferrand Prince of Gua∣stalla, a branch also of the House of Gonzaga, but derived farther than that of Nevers; but by how much the Austrians favoured Guastalla with benefits, and declarations, by so much the more was France earnest to strengthen the rights of Nevers; with whom the Venetians also concur∣ring in Opinion, put the Duke in mind to establish the Succession in his life-time, and therewith confirm the Peace of Italy. Nor was Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy less attentive to his interest, and game, than the others, designing upon the death of Vincenzo, (now crazy, and in∣firm, not so much with age, as with riot, and luxurious living) to re∣vive his pretended title to Montferrat, and colour it with the marriage of Mary to his Son Maurice. To pervent which, Vincenzo with great secrecy called to him Rhetel, that he might marry him to the Princess, declaring him immediately upon his arrival Lieutenant General, and his Heir by solemn Testament: To perfect this Marriage nothing was now wanting, but the Pope's Dispensation in matter of consanguinity or near∣ness of kindred; which being obtained, the Bull seasonably arriv'd the night before that Duke Vincenzo died, so that the marriage was con∣summated, whilst the Corps were yet warm; and the day following, the Bridegroom, together with his mourning assumed the Title of Prince of Mantua, and having in his power the Garrison, and the Cittadel called Porto, required from the people an Oath of Fidelity in the name of his Father. Guastalla in the mean time published a Patent from the Emperour, empowering him to take possession of Mantua, until the right should be declared, and commanding the Governour of Milan to maintain this Decree by force, if need should require: Guastalla also had thoughts of going himself to Mantua, but the passage was already stop'd by the anticipations of Rhetel: wherefore he practised upon Ca∣sal, endeavouring to alienate the minds of that people from their new Prince; but all in vain, because the name of Nevers, was universally cryed up both at Casal, and in the Country of Montferrat.
The interest of Princes being now discovered, reason or justice were no longer debated in the cause of Mantua, but calculations made of Force, opportunity, and advantage. The Republick of Venice resol∣ved to joyn with Nevers, as the safest interest in which to maintain the liberty of Italy: howsoever being willing to decline the assistance of France, and other Strangers, they designed a middle party composed of a League with the Pope, and other Princes of Italy, by which they be∣lieved it easie to protect the Justice of Nevers by Negotiation, and de∣fend themselves on all occasions against violence. This Remonstrance of the Venetians Ʋrban approved, and offered his interposition with powerful Offices: But what, said he, can be promised from Reason with∣out Arms, in dealing with him who places Reason, and Justice in nothing but Arms? the excess of Power in Princes makes little account of the Pope's Prayers, and their Mediation is reduced to almost nothing else, but to adorn the Frontispiece of Treaties with his Name. The intentions of Ʋrban were in reality conformable to his expressions: for he desired to maintain Ne∣vers in the succession of Mantua, but abhorred to engage himself so far, as to be obliged to come to the extremity of taking up Arms. But whilest these things were in meditation and discourse between the Pope, and other the Friends of Rhetel; the Duke of Savoy taking the advan∣tage of the diversion, which the Arms of Lewis XIII. found against his Protestant Subjects in France, entered with his Army into Montferrat, and hoped to be speedily Master both of that Country, and of the strong Fortress of Casal which was besieged already by Marquis Spi∣nola Lieutenant General of the Spanish Forces in Italy; as was Mantua also at the same time by the Forces of the Emperour. At length on the 18th. of July 1630. in the Night the City of Mantua was by trea∣chery taken by the Germans, and for the space of three days committed to the pillage, and cruelty of the Soldiers, with all the outrages, which lust, impiety, and licence could suggest to merciless Conquerours: the Princess Mary retired into a Monastery, where being respected for her Sex and Quality, she obtained licence to be carried to the Empress, to whom she was nearly related; the Duke retired hastily into Porto, where the Ammunition for full accomplishment of the Treason taking fire, he was forced to surrender on condition, that he should be convoyed by two Companies of German Horse into the Country of Ferrara to remain at Melara, where the Duke was supplied with Mony for his mainte∣nance from the Venetians. The taking of Mantua in this terrible man∣ner increased the hopes of the Spaniards, who besieged Casal, that they should speedily become Masters of that important place, but their ex∣pectations were disappointed by the coming of the French Troops under the command of Mareschal Schomberg sent by Lewis XIII. for relief of his Ally the Duke of Mantua; Thoiras who was Governour of Casal de∣fended the place with great gallantry, which gave such discouragement to the Enemy, that upon approach of the French Troops the Siege was raised, and the Town conserved to its lawful Master. In this manner was France, Spain, and the Emperor engaged in a bloody War within the confines of Italy. But Pope Ʋrban, after various troubles and Ne∣gotiations established the Peace of Italy, and by the dexterous manage∣ment of Cardinal Mazarine then his Nuntio, appeased the differences between Spain and France, and therewith established an universal Peace.
In the life of Sixtus IV. we have shewed, how that that Pope mar∣ried John his Nephew, and Brother to Cardinal Julian, to Jane the Daugh∣ter of Frederick Duke of Ʋrbin, by whom he had one Son called Fran∣cisco Maria della Rovere, who succeeded in that Dukedom. And whereas for want of Heirs male, that Dutchy did of right devolve to the De∣mesnes of the Church; yet Sixtus to advance the honour of his own Family de la Rovere,An. 1632. was pleased still to continue that Fief in separation from the Church, the which remained in such condition until the year 1632. when Francisco Maria della Rovere, the last Duke of Ʋrbin dying, this Pope Ʋrban assumed the property, and without difficulty united it to the patrimony of the Church: for this Pope having an Eye thereun∣to in the life of the Duke, who was then grown very old, kept a Prè∣late in that Country, which assisted in all affairs; by which means after his death Taddeo Barberino the Pope's Nephew Prince of Palestrina, en∣tred peaceably with his Soldiers, and took such quiet possession thereof, as if the old Dominion had been continued, rather than a new one in∣troduced. The Pope expecting this accident, was already in Arms un∣der pretence of the commotions in Italy, so that in case amidst these confusions, any one should have designed to disturb his peaceable pos∣session he was in a condition to maintain his right with a puissant Force. But the Princes were so far from invading the Dutchy, that they univer∣sally concurred in the confirmation of his Title, advising him to invest one of his Nephews in the Principality. But the Pope considering the severe Bulls of his Predecessours against such alienations, feared that he might entail a patrimony of unquietness, and trouble to his po∣sterity; and therefore resolved to annex that Dominion to the Church against the persuasions of divers Princes, who were willing to see the Ecclesiastical State increase in Temporal Power: in memory of which Union of this Principality to the Church without Arms, or effusion of bloud, but only by prudence, and gentleness, these words are en∣graven in the Vatican. Civitates, & Ditiones Ducat us Ʋrbini Nomine comprehensae, quas à Ro∣manis Pontificibus Feltria prius, deinde Ruveria familia beneficia∣rio Jure possidebat in Francisco Maria II. extinctâ utriusque sobole, in liberam Apostolicae Sedis Dominationem concessere: Ʋrbano VIII. Pont. Max. Anno Salutis MDCXXXII. Regio autem Virorum tum Militari studio, tum insigni Opificio, & Doctrinae laude prae∣stantium multitudine celeberrima est. But that the Pope might not displease his Nephew Taddeo by this disappointment, he conferred upon him the Pretorship of Rome, which had long been enjoyed by the Family of Rovere. This Office, and Dignity which still retained the antient, and venerable Name of Praetor Praetorii, and in the times of the Caesars was in great esteem, and Au∣thority, conserved now little more, than an empty name without power; for which reason forein Ambassadours who were the Representatives of the Emperour, and Kings, refused to give precedency of place to this Prefect, or Governour, at such times, when at the most solemn Fun∣ctions, they assisted at the Chair of the Pope. The Barberins depend∣ing on the greatness of their Uncle, who was ever partial in the Cause
and Interest of his kinred, obstinately maintained their pretended Right, by which the Controversie arose so high, that the Ambassadours by Or∣der of their respective Princes abstained from the Churches, and from all solemn Meetings, at which they might be present with the Prefect. From this common distast of Princes, arose an other of a private na∣ture, between the Cavalier Giovanni Pesari Ambassadour for the Repub∣lick of Venice, and Taddeo the Prefect; the occasion was this: the Pre∣fect casually meeting in the street with Pesari, caused his Coach to stop; (as the custom is always in Rome, that when the Coaches of Cardinals, Ambassadours and other Great Men meet, they always stop, and send Messages of Complement one to the other) but Pesari not observing it by reason that it was in the dusk of the Evening, drove on without no∣tice of the Prefect; which though Pesari sent afterwards expresly to ex∣cuse, yet the Prefect was so offended, that he purposely designed to meet him an other time; and that he might requite the late neglect, he corrupted the Ambassadours Coachman to stay his Horses, feigning that his Hat was fallen off; and so in the mean time, the Prefect passed without notice of the Ambassadour. Pesari intended to have chastised his Servant for this piece of treachery, but that he was rescued by some armed Men from the punishment he deserved. The Court of Rome which is always talkative, and figuring a strange kind of effects from such shadows, and appearances made great account of these Formalities, discoursing of them with the same direful appre∣hensions, as Men in other parts use to conclude from bloudy Battels, and important Conquests. But the Senate of Venice having notice hereof, was well assured, that by support of the Uncle, the party of the Bar∣berins would be too strong in Rome; ordered their Ambassadour Pesari, that for evidence of a publick Resentment, he should immediately leave the City without taking the least notice either of the Pope, or his Ne∣phews; and in the mean time at Venice the Nuntio was suspended from Audience. To this disgust an other quarrel was annexed, occasioned by a Bull made the last year by Ʋrban, whereby he Decreed to Cardi∣nals, the Ecclesiastical Electors, and the Great Master of Malta, the Title of Eminence, forbidding them to receive any other, unless from Kings. The Republick of Venice, which have always adhered to their antient Forms, and Stile, and will upon no occasion whatsoever be induced to alter, and change their Customs, would never give other Title to them, than of Reverendissimo, & Illustrissimo, which gave great disgust, and mortification to the Pope, and served to increase the former discontent. To these were added other sharp contests between those of Loreo, Sub∣jects to the Venetians and those of Ferrara, where Cardinal Palotta the Pope's Legat, encroached on the undoubted confines of the Venetians, and imprisoning the Venetian Subjects, shewed an intention to attempt greater Novelties; and by erecting, and changing the High▪ways, di∣verted the course of the Waters in such manner, as made the River Po almost useless. The Venetians provoked by these mischiefs, laboured to repair themselves with like returns: for Luca Pesaro Captain of the Gulf, entring into the Sacca di Goro with some Gallies, and armed Barks, stopped the Ships, which with Victuals, and Merchandise passed by Sea towards Ferrara: He destroyed also the works, which were lately made in the River to divert its course. The Troops also encreased on both
sides; and the Pope raised on his Confines a Fort called della Bocchette, to which the Venetians opposed another calling it della Donzella; so all things looked turbulent, as if they would have proceeded farther than words. But to give a stop to the heat of Arms the French Ministers interpo∣sed, and both the Pope, and the Republick giving their promise to King Lewis not to offend each other in a hostile manner, there remained a large field for Treaty. The Pope assured the French Ambassadour Mon∣sieur Brisac, that of what had hapned at Rome to Pesar, he had had no information until afterwards, much less that his Nephew had been con∣cerned in the rescue of the Coachman, and was a stranger to both mat∣ters; expressing himself much discontented for what had hapned, and that for evidence hereof he had punished the Offenders with banish∣ment. That as to the Title given to Cardinals of Illustrissimo by the Republick, he was well satisfied, nor did he require them to alter their Stile, for that the Republick having always been connumerated with crowned Heads, they were comprehended with Kings in exception of the Title of Eminence, and so commanded the Cardinals to receive Let∣ters from the State of Venice in the usual Form; with which the Senate being satisfied, admitted the Nuntio to Audience. But the Dispute about the Confines being of more Antient date, ad∣mitted of greater difficulties: For the Pope came to lay claim to certain Lands which the Po, and the Sea had left, called Alluvioni: the con∣test seemed of no great value; but the Parties, especially the Venetians judged it of great importance, because it carried with it the rights, and jurisdiction of the Sea. The business at last was brought into Venice by the mediation of the French Ministers, and the Treaty continued part of the year following; at length the Venetians declaring themselves ready to accept any Conditions, which were consistent with the jurisdiction of the Sea, to which also the mouths of Rivers and the Sacca di Goro did appertain, preserved the antient Covenants with those of Ferrara, and the Power to divert the prejudices of Ports, and Channels, which are the Veins, and life of the Capital City. Yet still the differences con∣tinued, and though they broke not forth into acts of violence, and War, yet the Dispute was not determined. In the year 1633. one Centini a Cardinals Nephew, hoping that if Ʋrban were dead, his Uncle would be chosen into his place, contrived the Pope's death by Witchcraft, and Negromancy; for having fashion∣ed the Pope's Image in Wax, he wounded it with Pins and Needles, af∣ter the antient manner of Witchcraft, In jecur urget acus, but the Villany being discovered, Centini and a Frier his associate, were punished ac∣cording to their demerit. But we must not omit to mention, in the great Hall of the Vatican, where the Embassies of Kings, (termed the Embassies of Obedience) are received by the Pope; there is that famous Picture, representing the Hi∣story of Alexander III. and under it was written an Elogy in honour of the Venetian Commonwealth, by whose assistance the Pope prevailed over the Emperour Frederick Barbarossa; which Elogy, this Pope Ʋrban caused to be blotted out, and defaced. Rome it self was amazed at such a Novelty, because the Inscriptions, by which the Picture in the Hall of the most memorable Actions of Christendom were explained, had been
chosen and selected in the time of Pope Pius IV. and had been appro∣ved by a Consultation of Cardinals, and other learned Persons, and that in particular had been extracted out of the most Antient proofs, the consent of Authors, Inscriptions, Pictures, Marbles, and out of Au∣thentick, and infinite Memorials: and though in these later times Car∣dinal Baronius, (who would justifie the Pope, and the Church in all things, which either they would say, or act) hath called the truth there∣of in question, yet the credit of the History remains, and the praise of that Republick never to be forgotten. Now in regard this Pope Ʋrban had defaced, and blotted out the Elogium, he seemed to deny the mat∣ter of Fact, and suppress the fame of that Victory which the Venetians had gained, and deprive them of that merit, and gratitude which was owing to them from the Church, abolishing out of the World the me∣morials, and as much as he was able, cancelling the glory of their An∣cestors, to which his Predecessours had not disdained to confess them∣selves obliged. The advice hereof greatly disturbed matters at Venice, and gave an interruption to the Negotiation about the Confines which in the year 1635.An. 1635. was again reassumed by the French Ambassadour Mon∣sieur de la Thuillerie at Venice, and by Nani, and Soranzo deputed by the Senate; the Treaty was far advanced, it being agreed to draw a line, which should terminate the Land; so that there remained no diffi∣culty concerning the change which the Po should make in its Chan∣nels, for that if the Po should change its course and pass the line to the Donzella, then it should be esteemed to belong to the Ecclesiastical State, but if contrariwise, it should pass to the Goro, then it should belong to the Venetians: but this, and all other Negotiations were bro∣ken off by defacing the Elogium, which was so hainously resented at Venice, that the Senate immediately commanded their Ambassadour Rossi from Rome, with Orders neither to take leave of the Pope, nor of his Nephews, nor Cardinals, and that Audience also should be denied to the Pope's Nuntio at Venice: for all confessed, that the Republick could no more send Ambassadours to venerate in that Hall (as was customary) the Vicars of Christ, so long as their Illustrious Memorials were suspended, if not condemned: wherefore the Republick would maintain no other Minister at Rome, than onely Girolamo Bono, with Title of Secretary. Whilest these matters were acting in Italy, all other Countries of Christendom were for the most part engaged in War; for composing of which, and in performing acts of mediation tending to Peace, the Pope was engaged; until towards the year 1640. the War, and troubles came nearer home, caused by Contests, and resentments between him and Edward Duke of Parma, the beginning, and end whereof we shall here relate. An. 1640.Ʋrban being much impaired with age, and weakened in the vigour of his Authority, and Power, the Barberins his Nephews, took upon them to manage all matters with an excess of Arbitrary Command: He that possessed most of the Pope's favour, and affection was Cardinal Francisco, who was deep in his Designs, conceited of his own Coun∣sels, and eager and violent in the prosecution of what he affected. On the other side, Edward Duke of Parma was of a high and active Spirit, apt to resentments, but yet being adorned with Arts both Civil and
Military, might have been esteemed a most admirable Prince, had either fortune given him an Empire and Power equal to his mind, or prudence equalled his mind to his power and fortune. Many secret piques, and disgusts had for some time passed between him and the Barberins, which were concealed, and covered; until at length in the year 1639. Duke Edward going to Rome, the antient discontents brake forth more open∣ly: for in the first place the Duke thought he was not treated with that Ceremony, and respect which was due to his condition and quality; then that his Brother Prince Francisco Maria was not created Cardinal, as was promised: but what was most important of all, was the disap∣pointment of many favours, and concessions expected from the Pope; and particularly an abatement of half per cent. on the revenue which the Duke paid to Monti, which is an Annual rent antiently assigned by the Farnesi Dukes of Parma upon the revenues of Castro, a Dukedom they held in Fief of the Church: for though the Pope had made this Grant, and had not recalled it, yet is was crossed by the Nephews, and with sundry delays, difficulties, and excuses prolonged and diminished. The Duke resenting these neglects, and unkindnesses, departed angrily from Rome, without taking leave either of the Pope or Nephews, inveighing violently against Cardinal Francisco, and his Government. The Car∣dinal to requite the Duke, persuaded the Pope to recal the Grant he had given for exportation of Corn out of the Ecclesiastical State into the Country of Castro, by which the people were not onely ready to be famished, but the best revenues of Castro ceased; for the Duke having farmed the Exportation of Corn to certain Merchants for ninety seven thousand Crowns per annum; the Exportation being forbidden, the Merchants renounced the agreement: whereupon the sum failing to pay the Montists, they complained to the Courts of Justice, and obtain∣ed, that the Duke being a Vassal, and subject to the Church should be juridically cited. The Duke imputed all to the malice and covetous∣ness of the Barberins to despoil him of his Country, and believing that he should be overborn by his Enemies, who were both Judges and Parties, resolved to fortifie himself against force, and accordingly di∣spatched a Gentleman of Montferrat to be Governour with a Garrison to Castro, causing Half-moons, and Redoubts to be cast up about the place. This being judged a Crime by the Barberins, and a rebellion against his Sovereign, a Monitory was published by the Auditor of the Chamber, limiting unto the Duke thirty days to demolish the fortifica∣tions of Castro, and disband the Garrison, and otherwise declared him to have incurred Rebellion, and Excommunication. The quarrel being thus begun, the Barbarins raised six thousand Foot and five hundred Horse with all speed under the command of Taddeo, the Prefect of Rome, appointing their Rendezvouz at Viterbo, where they fortified their Camp with a train of Artillery, and provided it with all sorts of Victuals, and Ammunition. These preparations administred occasions of various Discourse, and reflections to the people, who at∣tributed the blame of all to the pride, and ambition of the Nephews; for the World would not be induced to believe, that the Pope, who, when he was young cultivated peace in all parts, and was naturally of a quiet Spirit, must needs be affected with strange thoughts, and de∣signs, if now in the extremity of his age, he should be persuaded to di∣sturb
it; and so much the more in a conjuncture, when all Christen∣dom was torn in pieces with War and Dissension, and stood rather in need of his paternal mediation to produce Concord amongst Princes, than to see him the Author and contriver of War in Italy. The Viceroy of Naples seemed above all jealous of the event of this War, believing that the Barberins had engaged the French in the De∣sign. Ferdinand the Grand Duke of Tuscany was also displeased to see the Pope armed on his Confines with intention to make new Conquests. Wherefore both the Viceroy and the Grand Duke interposed in the Of∣fices of mediation; to which the Pope making some short replies, that his resolution was onely to humble his Vassal, and make himself obey∣ed, gave no place or opportunity for Treaty. The Senate of Venice kept themselves silent for a while, which the Barberins interpreted, (as indeed it was) an effect of their discontent, rather than a token of their satisfaction: but being at length sollicited much by the Duke of Parma to interess themselves in the quarrel, af∣ter various Debates, it was resolved with general consent, to intreat the Pope, that he would yield to the instances and common satisfaction of the Princes, who with unanimous desires interposed themselves for the Peace, by giving time and expedients for a Treaty. To the Duke they gave Counsel of moderation, and to humble himself in such decent sort to the Pope, as might pacifie him, and bring him honourably off from his Engagements and Enterprise. But in the mean time the Barberins, that they might prevent the importunities of Princes, hastned their march towards Castro, upon an Opinion, that having once taken the place, the fervour, with which the Mediators interposed for a Peace, would be abated, and matters reduced to such intricacies, as that in the end the glory of the Counsels, and the merit of the Enterprise would fall out to their advantage. Howsoever, to make the matter more plausible, another Bull was published in which the time prescribed to Prince Edward was prolonged for fifteen days; and yet at the same time on the 27th. of September 1641.An. 1641. the Pope's Army entered the the territories of Castro, and appearing before Rocca Montalto which is towards the Sea, the Guard consisting of fifty Soldiers abandoned the place; and soon after Castro it self surrendered, upon conditions of life, and enjoyment of goods to the Soldiers and Inhabitants; and so the Gar∣rison being two hundred and fifty in number marched forth, on the se∣venth day after the Siege was laid: which news much troubled the Duke, coming to him just at the time that he in person, and Count Palmia by permission of the Grand Duke, was conducting Forces, through Tuscany for relief of the place. Duke Edward being thus foiled, made new applications to the Senate of Venice, fearing lest he should be attacqued in his Dominions of Par∣ma and Piacenza: and in the mean time to keep himself from those pre∣judices, which in the way of Judicature, the Acts which had past might bring upon him, he caused a Protest to be presented to the Au∣ditor della Camera, wherein he declared, that the Barberins being his Enemies, he had no other Judg left him, but Force, nor hope of favour, but from his Friends. But the Barberins being flattered by all upon these successes, and elated with vanity and pride, denied to give admittance to any Treaty; the
Pope seemed to hear with trouble the Offices brought to him by Order of the Senate of Venice, scorning to admit Mediators betwixt Sovereign, and Vassal. Nor were the French either silent, or unactive upon this occasion; but laying hold on this turbulent conjuncture of Affairs, proffered the Pope the powerful Forces of their Crown to drive the Spaniards out of Italy; and raising his thoughts to a more noble Design, than that of Castro, proffered to leave the disposal of the Conquests to his own plea∣sure, and the Crown of Naples to his Nephews. But Ʋrban looking on these Propositions, as more specious than easie, absolutely refused them; and in despight of all the applications and ad∣dresses made by several Princes in favour of Parma, the Duke was de∣clared to have incurred the greater Excommunication, and in vertue thereof to be deprived of his Dominions, and Fiefs, and of the Dignity he held of the Holy Sea, and condemned in all charges, done, or to be done: in pursuance of which Sentence, his Palaces, and Goods in Rome were exposed to sale, and Castro taken into the possession of the Camera, though not annexed to the Popedom by vertue of the rigorous Bull or∣dained by Pius Quintus, which forbids all alienations of Lands, or Goods, which were once united to the Papal Chair. The Princes were highly moved, to find all their intercessions, and instances so little esteemed by the Barberins; and much more alarm'd when they understood, that the Pope demanded passage for his Army through the Dominions of Modena, against Parma, and Piacenza, which being places unprovided for War,An. 1642. and the Duke of Modena not having force to resist the powerful Army of the Pope consisting of eighteen or nineteen thousand Men, consented to grant a passage; provided, That there should be six days before the Army moved, and that in other four it should have passed his Confines. The Venetians, and the Grand Duke, who were averse to Arms, and not inclined to use them, but as their last remedy: yet not being wil∣ling that the Duke should perish, or the Barberins be accustomed to the happy issue of their Counsels, sent a supply of seventy thousand Crowns to Parma, which gave courage to the Soldiery and credit to the cause amongst the Subjects, who thence conceived some hopes of greater succours. In the mean time all the Offices, and warm instances imaginable of mediation, were employed at Rome by the Ministers of Venice, and Flo∣rence, which produced nothing but uncertain, and ambiguous answers, and to the Ambassadour of France it was plainly declared, that a suspen∣sion of Arms should be granted, when promises, and assurances should be given by the Duke's Friends, that he should testifie due respect, and obedience to the Ecclesiastical State; and that no words, or instances should be made for the restitution of Castro, which by reason of the Debt to the Montists and the charge of the War, was already forfeited to the Camera, and condemned thereby. But such Answers as these not satisfying the Princes; the Venetians resolved to send three thousand Foot and three hundred Horse, to joyn with two thousand Men sent by the Grand Duke, to oppose the march of the Pope's Army into the State of Parma. The news of these Forces, and their march, and the rumour of Treaties, and Leagues forming
in favour of Parma greatly perplexed the Barberins; because that their Army, which was composed of new Men, and which expected to enter the Country of Parma; as to an easie, and secure Triumph, was so terrified with the noise of an Enemy, marching to oppose them that they ran away in full Troops, so that their numbers were very much di∣minished in a short time. Ʋrban growing sensible of the opposition which was making against the farther progress of his Arms by the Neighbouring Princes, did vo∣luntarily, and of his own accord offer to the French Ambassadour a su∣spension of Arms for fifteen days. During this cessation the Venetians, the Grand Duke, and the Duke of Modena entered into a League to assist, and give succours to the Duke of Parma, as occasion should re∣quire; who being encouraged by such Seconds, entered boldly into the Eccleastcal State with three thousand Horse, without Foot, or Cannon, or other preparations for defence of his Camp; which was looked upon, as so rash, and inconsiderate an attempt, that the other Confederates gave those Troops over for lost, and destroyed. But Duke Edward entering resolutely into the Bolognese, strook such terrour into the people, and the Army of the Pope, that all was in a moment seen in confusion, and disorder: for the Prefect retired flying into Ferrara, the Soldiers quit¦ted their Quarters, the Authority, threats, or intreaties of the Officers prevailing nothing against their cowardise, and fears. Thus without bloud, and without a Battel Edward prevailed, and became Master of the Field, which is a passage the more memorable, because that in an Enemies Country, nothing could have been more done by an Army ne∣ver so powerful. For Bologna it self a great and populous City sent Letters to him full of respect; the Governour of Smola sent the Keyes▪ of the Town to meet him. Faenza opened its Gates, and the Governour descended from the Walls to meet, and pacifie him. Furli seemed as if it would make some resistance; but soon surrendred at discretion; where he lodged only for one whole day to refresh his Soldiers wearied with their march, and incommoded with the Rains. Upon these successes, the fear, and terrour which possessed the minds of the people at Rome, is not to be expressed; for that City being com∣posed of a cowardly sort of Inhabitants, such as Priests who are unac∣customed to danger, and Strangers who are pleased with Reports, and Novelties, seemed distracted by various affectations: for some feared plunder, others desired disorder, and all reproached the Government. During these troubles, and distractions, Guards were placed in the streets, and the command of them given to several Prelates, Soldiers were le∣vied in all places, and the Coach-Horses in Rome seised to mount the Soldiers. The Prefect also was recalled to Court, and great murmurings against him for having shewn as much baseness in danger as he exer∣cised Avarice in the Government: in his place Cardinal Antonio was sent, but Cardinal Francisco attended to the Arts of Negotiation, in∣tending with hopes of Peace to amuse the Duke, and frustrate the League. Cardinal Antonio made his head quarters at Viterbo, whilest the Duke of Parma was at Aqua Pendente: and the Cardinal having put considerable Garrisons into the Towns, advanced with seven thousand Foot and two thousand Horse to Montefiascone, intending to streighten
the Duke in his quarters, and obstruct his passage into the State of Ca∣stro: But the Duke mounting on Horseback, and making a shew as if he would advance towards him, though much inferiour to the Enemy in force; yet the Cardinal retired, and would not stand the shock, chu∣sing rather to overcome with Prudence, than run the hazard of For∣tune. So that now the month of October being come, and the Rains having fallen in great abundance, the approach of the Winter seemed a season more proper for Treaty than for War. In the management of which Cardinal Barberino laying more stress on tricks, and delusions, than on the substantial points of solid Reason in Treaties, dispatched the Abbat de Bagni to the Great Duke at Florence with Proposals. That absolution of the Censures should be given to Edward with the forms contained in the Ceremonial. The investiture of his Dominions should be given to his eldest Son, with restitution of all that was past, except Castro and Montalto, with so much of the Country round about as was within Cannon shot. These Propositions being transmitted from the Great Duke to the Ve∣netians, were by common consent rejected,An. 1643. seeming unreasonable to be offered to the Duke of Parma, and dishonourable to the League; where∣fore the Treaties at Venice were more closely confirmed between Gondi the Great Duke's Secretary, the Duke of Modena and the Senate, being resolved not to abandom their first intentions of protecting the Duke of Parma. But amidst these Negotiations Duke Edward moved by the fury, and impatience of his disposition, dispeeded three thousand Foot to cross the Appenines, with design to embark them on some Tartanes, and other Vessels, which were laid ready to receive them at that place, where the River Magra falls into the Mediterranean Sea; that so sur∣prising the Rock of Montalto they might easily make themselves Masters also of the City of Castro: but not only the Snows on the Mountains hindred the passage of the Soldiers so long, that the design was disco∣vered at Rome, and provisions made against it: but also the Soldiers being embarked were encountred with such a storm of contrary Winds as drove them to Genoua, and Porto fino, where being unprovided of Vi∣ctuals, and Mony, part of them perished, and the remainder was recei∣ved into pay by the Spanish Ambassadour, who seasonably sent them to strengthen the Governour of Milan, who besieged Fortona. Duke Ed∣ward angred with this ill success, designed to enter the Country of Fer∣rara, which beyond the Po confines with the Republick; but being dis∣appointed herein, he demanded passage through Tuscany to go with one thousand five hundred Horse, and a few Foot for recovery of Castro: but the Great Duke denied it, until matters were agreed, and better or∣dered on more solid, and more probable grounds at Venice; because that he going forth with weak Forces, and often foiled, his unhappy success diminished the vigour, and reputation of the Arms of the Confederates equally with his own. Thus the minds of Men being on all sides irritated, the War proceeded: and the hot Spirit of Duke Edward not being capable of restraint, he with six weak Regiments of Foot, and as many of Horse, composed of several Nations, and one of Dragoons entered the Country of Ferrara, and came to Bondeno, defended by Mauriconi a Neapolitan with five hundred Foot, and four hundred Horse; but he no sooner heard a Volley of the Duke's
Men, which in the duskiness of the Evening approached his Fort, but he immediately abandoned his Post, and ran away to Ferrara, where he was followed by his Garrison: then the Duke attaqued la Stella∣ta, which making some small resistance, afterwards surrendred. But Cardinal Antonio that he might hinder the Duke's farther progress, en∣camped at Osteria Nuova, a convenient place between Ferrara and Bo∣logna. Wherefore the Confederates hastned the result of all their Coun∣sels, thinking they had no time to lose, but to close with this conjun∣cture, before the people were delivered from their present fears, or that Cardinal Antonio should have defeated, or made the Duke of Parma to retire. Wherefore it was agreed: That their Forces should be encrea∣sed to eighteen thousand Foot, and two thousand six hundred Horse: These were to be divided into two Bodies, one in Toscany, and the o∣ther in the Dominions of Modena, and in both, the colours of the League were to be displayed: What was taken was to be held in the name of all, until the Duke of Parma was restored to his own Dominions. It was also farther agreed, That the Venetians should seize the Banks of the Po, and when there was occasion of taking the Field, the Troops in Modena with those of Parma, if they could joyn, should at the same time second the Enterprise. From Venice, and Florence the Nuntios were to be discharged, and the Revenues of the Barberins were to be sequestred. And now several feats of Arms passed with various successes: for Cardinal Antonio had removed his Camp to Cento, where he so well fortified himself, that he equally defended the territories of Ferrara, and Bologna: The Confederates to make some advance desired to dis∣lodg him; but the Cardinal being better fortified than was imagined, gave some demur unto their Counsels in what manner to act. But in the mean time the Venetians employed part of their Forces at Sea, infesting the Coast with six Gallies, and some armed Barks even to the City of Ancona; they took also the Tower of Premiero, which being recovered afterwards by the Ecclesiasticks was demolished: the Prove∣ditor Delfino surprised also in the Night that small Fort, called delle Bo∣chette, which the Pope, (as we have said) had lately built. The Towers likewise of del Abbate, and di Goro were rendered; as was Arriano a great Town, which in a fear drove out their Garrison, and yielded to Del∣fino. Cardinal Antonio on the other side intending to carry the War into Modena, took in Spilimberto, Vignivola, and St. Cesario open places of the Ftontier: but the Duke, with the Proveditor Corraro follow∣ed him with all their Army, desirous to draw him to a Battel: and to provoke him thereunto they resolved to invest Crevalcuore (a good Town in the Country of Ferrara, but not strong) in the view, and sight of the Cardinal: but this Exploit being put into execution with one thousand Foot and four hundred Horse, only the Cardinal opposing them with a great Force, constrained them to retire in disorder, leaving one of their Cannon sticking in the mire. The Great Duke of Toscany in the mean time coming in person as far as St. Casciano, had put the Army into the Field under the command of Prince Mathias, but with direction of Alexander del Borro a valiant and experienced Soldier: Cardinal Antonio sent a Body of five or six thousand Men against them commanded by the Duke of Savelli; not∣withstanding
which the Florentines advanced into the Ecclesiastical State, and having taken the strong Pass of Buterone, attacked the City della Pieve, where a Garrison of one thousand five hundred Men without force of Cannon, soon capitulated and surrendered on conditions, that they might march forth with their Swords only; From thence Borri with two thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse made an Incursion as far as Orvieto, forcing Savelli to retire farther into the Country. Howsoever not long after, the Cardinal sent Valanze to enter Toscany with three thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse; which he did with such expedition that he attacked Pistoia before the Great Duke could supply it with such succours as it required, yet the courage of the In∣habitants, and Soldiers was such, that they repulsed the Enemy, and preserved their City: Howsoever the news hereof strook a terrour into the hearts of the people of Florence, who for a long time had not been accustomed to so near an approach of the Enemy: but the news of the success soon quieted their minds; and the Great Duke to shew a con∣fidence in his people, put Arms into their hands, which had not been accustomary for many years past. Thus did matters pass with various successes, but most commonly in favour of the Confederates, until the season proper for action ended; when the Winter approaching, the Treaties interrupted by the War, were again reassumed: And indeed Ʋrban discovered not only an incli∣nation, but a desire of Peace; for being burthened with years, and weary of the cares which War carries with it, was desirous to end his days in calmness, and quiet: and though his Nephews endeavoured to disguise matters which were the most tragical, and sad, yet the cla∣mours of the people, which had suffered under the devastations, and pressures of War had come to his Ears: wherefore he consented to a Treaty with the restitution of Castro, entreating the Cardinal Bichi, who was sent by the Court of France for the Office of Mediation, to hasten the Peace, that the short residue of his life might terminate in quiet∣ness: The Congregation of State erected purposely for direction of the Military Affairs concurred in their desires with the Pope, to which Car∣dinal Barberin, though much against his will, was forced to conde∣scend, knowing that with the restitution of Castro a dishonourable Peace was to be the consequence of an unhappy War. With these dispositions towards a Peace, Cardinal Bichi departed from Rome, and in his way to Venice passed through Florence, where in Discourse he understood from the Great Duke, that saving his own Rights, and Interests the Confede∣rates would be satisfied with the full restoration of the Duke of Parma. The Cardinal being arrived at Venice was followed by the Dukes of Modena, and Parma; Gondi, and Testi were already there, debating with Nani, and Gussoni, whom the Senate had deputed for that purpose. It was now the beginning of the year 1644.An. 1644. when the Cardinal Bichi proposed, That Absolution and Pardon should be demanded by France for Duke Edward, and that Castro should be restored to him, and that the rights of the Montists should remain, as before: and that the Confederates should restore that which they possessed belonging to the Church: And to take off the diffidence which the Confederates conceived of non-performance of Articles by the Barberins he proposed the word of France for Guarantie, upon declaration and promise, that
their Arms should be employed against him, that should fail in execu∣tion of the Agreement. Ʋrban falling extreamly sick, whilst matters were in Treaty, Bichi hastned the conclusion, considering, that his death would cause great alteration in the Treaty: and as a preparation thereunto proposed a cessation of Arms; to which the Confederates assented, being sensible that such an accident could not happen without great revolutions in the Dominions of the Church; and that with the death of the Pope, the Authority of the Nephews ceasing, those motives would vanish, which had been the Original and cause of the War: but the Pope's re∣covery altered all those Counsels which were contrived in case of his death; and induced them to hasten a conclusion of the Peace. The Articles therefore proposed by the Cardinal being debated in several Assemblies, were at last concluded, and agreed; and subscribed at Ve∣nice by Cardinal Bichi for France, by Giovanni Nani for Venice, by Bat∣tista Gondi for the Great Duke, and by the Marquis Fassoni for Modena: and though the Duke of Parma refused to subscribe upon certain diffi∣culties he made; yet being over-ruled by the Confederates he was forced to concur. The Cardinal with this Agreement posted in all hast to Rome, being entertained in all places of the Ecclesiastical State, with the Acclamations, and Prayers of the People longing for Peace. The Articles subscribed by the Confederates began with a Preamble, and Declaration; That they had entered into this War with no other Design than for the restoration of Prince Edward, reserving in all o∣ther matters their most constant Obedience to the Pope, and the Holy See: That all acts of Hostility be suspended, and that the Confederate Princes withdraw their Forces into their own Dominions. That all Fortifications raised during this present War shall be demolished on one side and the other. To the Persons and Places which had served, or rendred themselves to any other Party, Pardon was granted: Priso∣ners were set at liberty, the Religious Persons who had withdrawn themselves were permitted to return, and the Sequestration was taken off from the Rents of the Knights of Malta, and all Rights were clear∣ly reserved to the Parties as aforesaid. For execution of all which Ho∣stages were given to the French King, and the King for satisfaction of both Parties, declared, that he having become Guarantie for the Peace, his Arms should be employed against those, who observed not the Articles, and in favour of those, who executed the Accord. Thus Castro was rendered, and the Accord on all sides executed, and Peace ensued to the satisfaction of the Pope, and quiet of Italy; but Ʋrban did not long enjoy the happiness of this Peace; for being en∣tered into the seventy seventh year of his age, he died on the 29th. of July in the year 1644. having reigned twenty one years, wanting eight days. He was certainly a Person of high prudence, generosity, and fit for Business; in his youth he was esteemed a great Poet; and ex∣cellently well versed in all the Books of Antient Poesie. He was very munificent in his publick Buildings: and in his own private Con∣cernments he was no less splendid, having in his life-time erected a state∣ly Monument for himself in a corner of St. Peter's Church near the Sepulchre of Paul III. and adorned it with pillars of Marbles according to the contrivance, and direction of Cavalier Bernini, with this Inscription.
Ʋrbani VIII. Barberini Florent. Pont. Max. In Vaticano Tumulum Excitavit & Ornavit Johannes Laurentius Berninus Eques. His greatest fault was Nepotisme, or too great a fondness for his Ne∣phews, and indulgence to his whole Family, which he was resolved to make Rich, and Great; and indeed he had opportunity so to do in the long time of his Pontificate, having reigned almost twenty one years, during which at nine several Creations he made seventy four Cardinals, of which number of seventy four, three were his own Nephews, viz. Francisco Barberino, Antonio Barberino the Capuchin, commonly known by the name of Cardinal Barberino to distinguish him from the other Cardinal Antonio, the younger Brother of Cardinal Francisco, who was Prior of the Order of Jerusalem, and a Knight of the Great Cross of Malta, and made General of the Ecclesiastical Army in the place of Taddeo Barberino the Prefect, who for his cowardise, and ill success was recalled from that Charge. INNOCENT X. URBAN VIII. having,An. 1644. (as is said) breathed his last on the 29th. of July; the Cardinals then residing in Rome to the number of thirty nine assembled at a Congregation, in order to dispose, and settle matters for the more quiet and regular management of Affairs during the vacancy of the Papal Chair. The day following being the second day Cardinal Montalto acquainted the Congregation, that he had received Orders from the Grand Duke to let them know, that Cardinal de Medicis could not judg himself safe at Rome, whilst the Power of the City and of the Militia remained in the hands of Taddeo Barberin his mortal Enemy; and therefore he desired, that either an other General of the Forces of the Church might be nominated, or else that he might have license to enter Rome with his own Guards of Soldiers for defence and security of his Person; and that otherwise in case of refusal he protested against the legality of the Conclave, as not free, nor secure to those Members who resorted to it. After mature consideration of this Point, the whole Congregation of Cardinals (excepting some few) agreed, that it was not fit to remove Taddeo either from one, or the other Office; but in regard the Spanish Faction, who were close Adherers to the House of Medicis, were of Opinion, that some satisfaction ought to be given to the Grand Duke herein, it was concluded, and agreed; That the Sa∣cred Colledg of Cardinals should by a Writing subscribed with their own hands, give Security, and Assurance to Cardinal de Medecis that nothing should be attempted in Rome against his Person. Secondly, That two other Cardinals should be joined in Commission with Taddeo the Prefect in the Government of the City: And thirdly, That a
Lieutenant General should be created, Independent of the Prefect with absolute Power over the Soldiery. These Expedients having given satisfaction to Cardinal de Medicis, and the Funeral Rites of Ʋrban being performed, the Cardinals to the number of fifty five entered the Conclave. The Persons which seemed to stand most fair for the Election were the Cardinals Pamphilio and Sachetti, one of which Cardinal Barberin was desirous to promote though he was most inclined to the first: for though Sachetti was esteemed for a great Lover, and Friend of the Family of the Barberins in general, yet Pamfilio was reputed to be more intimate with Cardinal Barberin, and one who entertained a particular affection for his Person. Howsoever Sachetti was the first in nomination, but wanting the num∣ber of Votes required in the Scrutiny; the Conclave proceeded to o∣thers, all which by the contrariety of Factions, and Interests were re∣jected. But at length Pamfilio to whom Cardinal Barberin had passed some Promises, and assurances of favour before the beginning of the Conclave, was after a contest of six weeks by a general concurrence of all the Cardinals (five only excepted) assumed to the Pontifical Dig∣nity, to which the Power, and Interest of the Barberins did much con∣tribute, who by the long Reign, and Government of Ʋrban their Uncle had contracted great friendships, as well as enmities. Cardinal Pam∣filio, whose title was St. Eusebius, was born at Rome, his Father was Camillo Pamfilio, his Mother Flaminia del Bufalo, both antient Families of Rome. His younger years were employed in profitable Studies, in which he became so great a Proficient, that at the years of twenty he took his De∣gree of Doctor of the Civil Law, by vertue of which he was made one of the Advocates of the Consistory, and thence promoted by Cle∣ment VIII. to be Auditor of the Rota: by Gregory XV. he was sent Nuntio to Naples: by Ʋrban VIII. he was sent with Cardinal Francisco his Nephew in quality of the first Minister of the Legation, or Embassy into France, and at his return was created Patriarch of Antioch. After∣wards he was sent with Cardinal Francisco when he went Legate into Spain, and bore the same Office, and quality of the first Minister of the Legation, as he had done in France; in discharge of which, he gave such testimonies of his Abilities and faithfulness; that the Legate being in∣tirely satisfied with his management and conduct of Affairs left him at his departure in the Residency of Nuntio in Ordinary for the Court of Rome. In which Office, he so well acquitted himself to the satisfaction of the Pope, and contentment of his Catholick Majesty, that in the year 1627. he was created Cardinal; though by reason of his continuance in the Court of Spain, his promotion was not published until the year 1629. And being returned to Rome in the year 1630. he received the Cardinals Hat in a full Consistory. After which he was made Prefect of the Ecclesiastical Immunities, and lastly Supreme Judg of the In∣quisition,An. 1644. and Protectour of the Kingdom of Poland: And having risen by such degrees, and steps of Honour, he was at length elected Pope on the 15th. of September 1644. calling himself by the name of Inno∣cent X. in honour to the memory of Pope Innocent, his Uncle by the Mothers side. The Cardinals then present at the Conclave having after this Election performed according to the usual custom their acts of A∣doration to the person of the Pope; Francisco Barberino took the Cross,
and carried it before the Pope, though that Office properly belonged to Cardinal de Medicis, the Chief Deacon, who perhaps for some dis∣like of the Choice, and for want of concurrence in any thing pleasing to the Barberins, had excused or absented himself. And thus Cardinal Barberin carrying the Cross conducted the Pope before the High Altar of St. Peter, where with a loud Voice he uttered these words:An. 1644. An∣nuncio vobis gaudium magnum, habemus Papam Eminentissimum, & Reve∣rendissimum Joannem Baptistam Pamphilium, qui sibi nomen imposuit In∣nocentius Decimus. On the 4th. of October Cardinal de Medicis set the tripple Crown on his Head, with great applause, and acclamations of the People: for though this Cardinal had excused himself from carrying the Cross be∣fore him after his Election, as his Office of Arch-Deacon did require, upon imagnations perhaps, that the Pope would become a favourer of the Barberins his mortal Enemies; as his gratitude to that Family might require: yet having in that Interval of time which was between his E∣lection, and Coronation discovered, that his inclinations were otherwise disposed (as we shall hereafter make appear) he then altered his Affe∣ctions to the Pope, and became willing to plant the Crown upon his head. On this occasion some Medals were stamped with the Image of our Lady with this Inscription, Ʋnde venit Auxilium mihi. But his own Motto was: Da Servo Tuo Cor Docile, ut Populum Tuum judicare possit. And now all the Ceremonies of his Inauguration being past, he be∣gan to apply his mind to the Government of Church and State; and in the first place he ordained a Congregation to inspect and state the ac∣counts of the Church, and contrive some ways, and means for payment of Debts: and then according to the custom of former Popes, he provi∣ded for a cheap year, and to make Bread, and other Victuals plentiful in the City; than which nothing can be more acceptable to the People of Rome, who always labour under the scarcity of Bread, unless supplied from Sicily, or other parts. The Barberins did now believe, that this Pope being sensible of the many Obligations he had to their Uncle Ʋrban VIII. whose Creature he had been; and to themselves for his advancement to the Papal Dig∣nity, would have protected and defended the greatness, and Riches they had gained during the long Pontificate of Ʋrban: but his respects to them being changed with his condition, made it soon appear, that Services to Princes are acceptable, when they can be requited; but when the Obligations grow immense, and the Debt too great, the sense of inability to make due returns, changes kindness into hatred; Beneficia eousque lae dum videntur exsolvi posse, ubi multum ante venêre pro gratiâ odium redditur. Tacitus lib. For so it fared with the Barberins: For whilest matters were prepa∣ring for Coronation of the Pope, the Ambassadours from Christian Kings demanded the place of precedency at that Ceremony before Tad∣deo Barberini Prefect of Rome; for though in the time of Ʋrban that place was granted to him in quality of a Prince, for the relation he had to the Pope his Uncle; which now expiring, the sole Office of Prefect could not entitle him to a precedency before Ambassadours. The Mar∣quis of St. Chamont Ambassadour of France appeared most vigorously against the Prefect, and was seconded by the Emperour's and the King
of Spains Ambassadours, who by several memorials given to the Pope, did protest that they would be present at the Solemnity of the Corona∣tion, and possess their due rank and place which belonged to them; and if his Holiness should think fit to restrain them by force from gi∣ving their attendance there, they would counsel their Masters to recal them, and never send others to perform the Embassies of Obedience. For answer hereunto the Pope made no great matter of hesitation, or doubt, but immediately determined in favour of the Ambassa∣dours. Though this indifference, and coldness of the Pope to the Barberins was a great mortification to them; yet they were more sensibly touched, so soon as Cardinal Antonio was informed by the French Ambassadour, how ill his matter was satisfied with the late actions of his Family; in resentment of which, he had Orders to require from him the Commis∣sion, which constituted him Protectour of the French Nation, and con∣sequently to take down the Arms of France from the Portal of his Gate; declaring that his unfaithfulness to his Majesty was the cause of his displeasure, for that in the late Conclave he had been an active Instru∣ment in the promotion of Pamfilio to the Papal Dignity, whom he knew to be an Enemy to him, and entirely dedicated to the interest of Spain. The two Cardinals Barberins finding themselves thus abando∣ned by France, made their supplications to the Ambassadours of Spain for protection; but here also they found their way obstructed by the Cardinal de Medicis, who gave the Cardinal Albornos, and the Spanish Ambassadour to understand, that both he, and his Nephew the Grand Duke should be forced to abandon the Interest, and Service of Spain, in case they should think fit to espouse the quarrel of the Barberins, and receive them into the protection of the Catholick King. And thus being forsaken by these two powerful Crowns, they were desirous to cast themselves into the Arms of the Pope, as their last refuge and Sanctua∣ry: to gain which, they proposed a Marriage between the Daughter of the Prefect, and Don Camillo the Son of Donna Olympia; offering to give her in Dowry all the Lands of Montelibreto, which they had purchased from the Ʋrsini for a million of Livers, together with a Revenue of thirty thousand Crowns of yearly Pension to be raised out of the Benefices which they held from the Church, besides such a sum of ready Money as his Holiness should reasonably require. And though Donna Olympia was well enough pleased with these Propositions, yet the Project was crossed by the French Ambassadour, who having represented unto the Pope the ill satisfaction his Master would receive from this Alliance, quite broke off the Match; the Pope declaring, that he had too much consideration for his Majesty to be overborn by any Interest which might be displeasing, or inconsistent with that of France: and farther to take of all suspition, and jealousies of this Match, and to put it almost into a state of impossibility, he created Don Camillo Cardinal, to the great trouble, and disappointment of the Barberins; who being now without Friends, or protection, remained exposed to the scorn, and in∣jury of the People; and to the covetous desires of the Pope, who now casting off all considerations to the Family of the Barberins, in despight of the Obligations he had to them, sought for a pretence, or colour to seize thr Estates, and enrich his own Family.
The Barberins esteeming their condition desperate, unless they could regain the Protection, and favour of France, adventured to try their antient Friend Cardinal Mazarine, to whom they dispatched a Courier Express with a Letter, representing their case to the Court of France; The Cardinal who was a dexterous Minister, and soon hit that point of Interest which concerned his Master, did with a most quick and piercing judgment consider that the Court of Rome was then for the most part composed of a Faction entirely devoted to the House of Au∣stria, and the Grand Duke, and of which the Pope himself was Chief: and that to counterpoise so prevailing a Party, it might be adviseable to support, and make use of the Barberins, who having still some Confi∣dents, and Adherenrs of their own, might be able upon the credit of France, to keep the Cardinal Pamfilio, (formerly Don Camillo) the Spa∣niards, and Florentines within some tolerable terms of modesty, and moderation. This Proposal being debated in the Council of France, was judged reasonable, and agreed, that the Barberins should be recei∣ved into Protection, and favour, provided, that as pledges of their fu∣ture Fidelity, they should oblige themselves to purchase Lands, and De∣mesnes within the Dominions of France. The unexpected news of the restoration of the Barberins to the favour of the French King, was strangely surprizing at Rome, and much changed the Scene of Affairs; for the Commonalty converting their hatred into com∣passion, did much lament the persecutions, which the Barberins undeser∣vedly sustained; but the Pope, and his Party being highly incensed against Cardinal Mazarine, by whose sole contrivance a Pardon was granted to the Barberins, laboured underhand with the Duke of Orleans against him, moving him by a thousand ill suggestions to destroy the Cardinal, and for his encouragement and reward, promised to advance his Confi∣dent the Abbat de la Riviere to the degree of Cardinal; but all these Artifices produced little effect, for Cardinal Antonio without taking leave of the Pope secretly departing from Rome; arrived at Paris, where casting himself at the feet of the King was upon his submission received to Pardon, and favour. And now the restoration of the Barberins to the protection of France, being no longer a secret, both the Prefect, and Cardinal Francisco with that whole Family loudly professed themselves Servants to his most Christian Majesty, and in testimony thereof re∣placed the Arms of France again over their Gates. The reception also of the Barberins to favour was signified by the King in a Letter to the Pope,An. 1645. which was delivered by the hand of Car∣dinal Grimaldi, who was at that time employed in the Affairs of France; but this Letter operated little of good, but served rather to irritate the mind of the Pope: for within three days afterwards he erected a Congrega∣tion of five Cardinals, all Enemies to the Barberins to inspect the Af∣fairs of that Family, and to proceed by the methods of Law against them: so that Cardinal Francisco, who was esteemed innocent, and un∣blameable in his Conversation, and had not as yet been attacked by any, was cited to make his personal appearance before this Court, where an Act was intimated unto him, which annulled, and made void the Di∣spensation which his Uncle Ʋrban had made to indemnifie his Nephews, and exempt them from rendering an account of the publick Moneys which had passed through their hands: and in pursuance hereof Taddeo
the Prefect was enjoyned to bring in all the Accounts of Expences and Moneys which had issued out of the Chamber during the time of his Uncle, though the Books and Receipts were in the hands and Office of the Paymasters. And in regard that Cardinal Antonio was absent in France, a Brief was sent him to appear personally at Rome within the space of two months under pain of Excommunication, and forfeiture of all his Estate, Revenues, and Benefices which he held of the Church; and in the mean time Cardinal Francisco, and the Prefect were obliged in a Bond of thirty thousand Crowns to advertise Cardinal Antonio of these proceedings, and not to remove any of their Goods, Housholdstuff, Jew∣els, &c. out of their Houses at Rome, or any other place, sequestring also the whole revenue of Cardinal Antonio. And whereas Cardinal Francisco had been superintendent over the Revenues of the Church, he was or∣dered not only to give an account of the Moneys, but of all other ma∣nagements, and transactions during the Government of his Uncle. These violent, and severe proceedings against the Nephews of a for∣mer Pope, seemed a Policy disagreeable to the inclinations and designs of Innocent, who intended to advance his Nephew Cardinal Pamfilio, and was as passionate towards his Relations as ever Ʋrban had been, and more perhaps than he; for being wholly guided by the directions of Donna Olympia Mildachini, a Woman of untamed Pride and unsatiable Avarice; it was not to be imagined, that the Revenues of the Church should be better employed, or used with more moderation than they were in the times of the late Ʋrban. This Donna Olympia was but of an ordinary extraction in Rome, but being married to Signior Pamfilio Brother to this Pope, made the off∣spring which came from her to be illustrious; and for governing one, who governed the Church hath made herself famous in all the Histories of Italy, and the Ecclestastical State. She was a Woman which natu∣rally affected Rule and Dominion; and therefore, because her Husband crossed her desires, and would subject her to Obedience, she had a quarrel to him, and held him in abhorrence and detestation, though his person was comely and handsom enough to be beloved: on the other side, none was more pleasing, and acceptable to her than her Husband's Brother, first Abbat, and then Cardinal Pamfilio; for though he was one of the most ugly, and ill-favoured persons in the World, yet be∣cause he never entered on any Affair either publick or private, before he first consulted his Sister-in-law, making her his Oracle, and present∣ing her with the entire disposal of his Will, she became perfectly ena∣moured of his Person, and Soul, and would never be separated from his company. After he was created Pope, she then took upon herself the State and Garb of a Princess, and seizing with absolute Dominion, and Authority on the person of the Pope, exerted her Power to such a de∣gree, that she made the whole Court of Rome subservient to her Beck, and obsequious to her Commands. The greediness of the Barberins in amassing Money was the most exorbitant, that ever had been known before in Rome: but when this Woman came, she swept with both hands, making the rapine, and extortion which had been used before, seem to be attempered with some qualifications of modesty, and mercy. For no Judg of criminal Causes being made without her recommenda∣tions, they all received their Instructions from her, which she gave with
such Rules and Methods, as conduced to her Avarice. She ordered them to bleed the Purse, rather than the Veins of Malefactors; that all the Fines, and redemptions of the Guilty should be sent to her, that she might employ them to the use and benefit of the Poor; by which means, and to satisfie the Judges, who would always have their share in the Booty the Fines were raised beyond all the measures of Justice, and though complaints hereof were made unto the Pope, yet neither were the oppressed relieved, nor the Judges punished. We have said before, that the Pope had created his Nephew Don Camillo Cardinal, who was the Son of Donna Olympia, and at her insti∣gation was declared Cardinal Patron, being a Title commonly confer∣red on the Pope's nearest Relation; the which was done, to disappoint the match between Camillo, and the Daughter of the Prefect. But this young Gallant being of a gay and light temper, and uncapable of se∣rious thoughts, and business, was weary of his Cardinal's Hat, which against the consent and without the knowledg of the Pope, and his Mo∣ther, he laid aside to marry the Princess Rossana, who by the death of her Husband the Prince was become a Widow. The news of this Wed∣ding was strangely surprising to all Rome, but more especially to the Pope and his Sister, who after a conference of two hours together in private, resolved that Prince Camillo, and his Lady should be banished from Rome. The disgrace of these two personages, was as surprising to the World as was the Marriage; for there was in reality no Objection to the match, especially since he was the onely branch of the House of Pam∣filio, whose noble change to joyn himself with a Lady of Beauty, Qua∣lity, Riches, and Understanding, was conducing to that common desire of mankind, which is to keep up, and perpetuate their Families: where∣fore there being no just reason why the Pope should be displeased at the match; the cause of banishing the new married couple was attributed solely to Donna Olympia, who being jealous of having the Princess Part∣ner, or Corrival with her in the Government, thought fit to keep her at a distance from the Court. But the World in the mean time, could not but remain astonished at this passage: for, it was wonderful to see a Pope so sensless, as to punish his Nephew for having directed his love to a Princess of equal quality with himself; whilest he himself was so besotted as to be given up to the extravagancy of an aspiring Woman; permitting her to govern his Person, Church, State, and Court with an Imperious hand; and yet at the same time not to indulge his Nephew the love of a young, Noble, and beautiful Lady, who brought a con∣siderable Patrimony to the House of Pamfilio. Nor was Donna Olympia more kind, or less jealous of Nicolo Ludovisio Prince of Piombino, who was married to her second Daughter, on hopes that as Nephew to the Pope, he should enter into Offices, and Affairs: for this Prince having been Nephew to Gregory XV. and Brother to that Cardinal Patron, who since the time of his Uncle absolutely disposed of all the Affairs of the Church, did now hope to find the same fortune, and reap the same benefit under this Innocent X. But Donna Olympia was too wise to admit a Nephew into the privacies of the Pope, or a Partner with her in business: for she entirely bestowed all Benefices, whether great or small; the Officers of the Datary being charged to keep them
in hand, till she had fully informed herself of the value: whatsoever Bishoprick fell void, they that pretended to it, were to address them∣selves to her; Abbeys, Canons, and all other Dignities and Govern∣ments, Ecclesiastical or Civil, were all conferred at the pleasure, and command of Donna Olympia: there was no appearing with empty hands before her. The Rates of all Places were set, an Office of one thousand Crowns a year for three years was valued at one years Revenue, and for six years at double; and so proportionably: if for life, then it was valued at twelve years, and the moiety thereof to be paid in hand. Cardinal Panzirolo who was then the great Favourite of the Pope and who transacted all Affairs, durst yet act nothing without the consent of this Lady, for such an absolute Ascendant she had over the Pope, that his Soul seemed to be animated with hers, and his Will subservient to her dictates; and strange it was to see her sit in Council with the Pope with bundles of Memorials in her hands, to receive his Assent for formally onely unto that which she had already determined: so that it is believed, she had charmed him with some strange diaboli∣cal Arts, Histories having never given us an Example of the like nature. And now to give farther instances, and miracles of her Power, she introduced into the place of Cardinal Pamfilio, (who had laid aside his Scarlet to marry with the Princess Rosana) a certain Nephew of hers Son to her Brother, a youth of about eighteen years of age; who was afterwards called Cardinal Maldochino: Olympia intended once to have made him Cardinal Patron, but he was so great a Sot, and so stupid a Fool, that he was uncapable of Business, abhorred by the Pope, and a shame to the College and Dignity of Cardinals. The Office of Cardinal Patron was ever esteemed of great Honour, and importance, and when managed by a Wise and dexterous Person, was of great ease, and relief to him who sate in the Papal Chair: for if the Pope were sick, or ab∣sent, he gave Audience to Ambassadours, and presided in the Council; subscribed Letters to the Nuntios, Legats, and Governours of Provinces. But this help being as yet wanting to Innocent, for want of a Cardinal Nephew endued with some tolerable understanding; Olympia contri∣ved to adopt Camillo Astalli Brother of Marquis Astalli, who had mar∣ried her Niece into the Family of the Pope; with whom she so pre∣vailed, that he created him Cardinal Patron, and gave him the name of Pamfilio, though not of the bloud, nor allied to his Family. It was wonderful to the Court, to see a young Man of twenty seven years of age, raised on a sudden to so important a preferment. 'Twas true, he was endued with a gentile behaviour, and good address, and with qua∣lities of mind sufficient to make himself acceptable; but yet neither his years, nor his practice in Affairs enabled him to support the great burden of Church, and State. In making of this Creature, as well Panzirolo, as Olympia was believed to concur; she with a design to advance the Bro∣ther of him that had married her Niece; but he, to have an influence over all his actions, being well assured, that this young Man would act nothing without his direction. But whilest Olympia thus governed all Affairs, the Court of Rome became scandalous, nothing but libellous Jests to the disparagement of the Pope were daily put into the hands
of Pasquin at Rome; In the Courts of the Emperour, of France, and Spain, the Nuntios seemed to lose much of that Reverence, which was formerly given them; and when any of those Princes were refused the de∣mands they made, and expected from the Pope; it was often said with raillery, That if Donna Olympia had made the request, it would readily have been granted. It was the common Discourse in the Pulpits of Ge∣neva, that a Woman was Head of the Church, and the Universal Bi∣shop, and that now the mystery of the Whore of Babylon was plainly discovered. In the Protestant Countries, the Comedies, and Farces re∣presented the Loves, and Intrigues of Innocent X. and Donna Olympia upon the Stage: all which the young Cardinal Patron, at the instiga∣tion of Panzirolo made known to the Pope, who being conscious of the truth thereof, and inwardly ashamed, resolved often to forbid O∣lympia the Court, and all concernment, or intermedling in Affairs; but knowing not how to come out with it, his inward grief suppressed his words: but at length taking courage and resolution, he burst out into tears, and therewith into words Interdicting Olympia all farther communication with the Court. After this, Cardinal Astalli, I should have said Pamfilio, gained ground in the affections of the Pope, and being guided by Panzirolo took daily deeper root in his esteem; Panzirolo likewise himself kept in great credit, and unshaken by his Adversaries; but being tired with the burden of business, and continual watches, until after midnight in consultations with the Pope, he fell sick and died, Nature effecting that which his Enemies endeavoured. The Cardinal Patron above all lamented his loss, presaging thereby the mischief, which afterwards ensued: for now Donna Olympia began, though Incognita, to frequent the Court, and by degrees to repossess her first Station. But we shall for a while leave this Lady weaving her Webbs, and managing Intrigues, and return again to the Barberins, whose Cause was taken into the defence and protection of France. In the month therefore of January 1746. Cardinal Barberin,An. 1646. and Taddeo the Prefect, in compliance with the Pope's Brief presented their accounts, having had but fifteen days time allotted to bring them in; and in failure thereof were to forfeit five hundred Crowns a day for every day, until they were delivered. The Accounts being given, the Pope cast his eyes upon them with much indignation and prejudice, not allowing them for true and legal, excepting against the sum with which they had charged themselves, which the Auditors would have to be eight Millions; But Counsel pleading in behalf of the Barberins, desired for justification of them, it might be permitted to examine the Books of Accounts which were remaining in the Apostolical Chamber, to which for their own discharge they referred themselves. But this Demand gave no satisfaction or stop to the proceedings of Court, whereby in an extraordinary manner, and without form of Law, the Estate belonging to the Barberins in the Monte, was sequestred with all the other Rents belonging to them within the City of Rome, or any other place within the Ecclesiastical Dominions: wherefore the Barberins being apprehen∣sive of farther proceedings against their Persons, (after consideration held with their Friends) both Cardinal Francisco, and Taddeo the Prefect retired from Rome, and other parts within the Dominions of the
Church to places of Sanctuary, and Refuge. In the mean time proceed∣ings of Court against them were carried on with greater rigour, and severity; so that the news of their arrival in France was the common Discourse of all Rome, and their resolution therein greatly applauded by all indifferent persons, to be prudent and agreeable to their present circumstances, considering that the French King had espoused their quar∣rel, and taken them into his care, and protection. But the little e∣steem and great neglect which the Pope seemed to shew to those in∣stances which the King made in behalf of the Barberins were so highly resented by his Majesty; that both the Senate of Venice, and the Great Duke (though an Enemy to them) greatly fearing that this Cause might introduce the French Arms into Italy, interceded with the Pope to moderate the anger he had conceived against the Barberins, and to allow of some Conditions, and expedients of Reconciliation; but all their good Offices were not able to give any stop, or arrest of judgment, seisure being made of their Estates, and Revenue, without any other reason, than quia hic placet. The news hereof being extreamly ill resented at the Court of France; it was judged fit to send the Bishop of Angiers to Rome to confer with Cardinal Grimaldi upon this matter, that so a greater Authority might be given to his Negotiations. The Ambassadour of Venice being recal∣led from Rome by the Senate, before his departure thence, consulted with Cardinal Grimaldi, and the Bishop of Angiers in what manner to govern his Discourse at his last Audience; and having taken his dire∣ctions from them, he warmly applied himself to the Pope, representing the danger of a War with France, and that it was not prudent for the Cause of a private Family, and to gratifie some particular grudges, to engage the Church, and all Italy in publick calamities: but the Pope seeming regardless of all those considerations, replied, That it became not his greatness to capitulate with his Subjects; but in case the Barbe∣rins would voluntarily come in, and throw themselves at the feet of his mercy, he would shew them such favour, as the World might take no∣tice, how much the instances of his most Christian Majesty, and the Republick of Venice in their behalf had prevailed upon him. But these general terms and uncertain expressions giving no satisfa∣ction to the French Court, the King wrote to his Ambassadours at Mun∣ster, where the general Peace of Christendom was then in Treaty, Or∣dering them to give that Assembly to understand the Passion he concei∣ved for the Cause of the Barberins, was such as would obstruct all pro∣ceedings, unless some Expedients were contrived, and some Conditions provided for their security, and restoration: by which the Pope was made sensible that the King resolved to carry these matters to the highest extremity. The Abbot of St. Nicolas having now for some time remained at Rome, and informed himself of the true state of the Controversie with the Barberins, he demanded Audience, and being thereunto admitted, he presented his Letters of Credence, which the Pope received with many obliging expressions; letting fall a few tears from his Eyes, when he declared how much he loved the French Interest, and how affectio∣nate he had shewed himself thereunto, even to a Passion; of which his Christian Majesty was so sensible, that had the whole Power of the Con∣clave
been in the King, he was persuaded, he would have created him Pope, in exclusion of all others in the World. But the Abbat was little surprised with those tears, esteeming them no indications of his mind, but his usual preparations to important Treaties; proceeded to discourse in favour of the Barberins, whom he beseeched to receive again into his grace, and good will; which though his Master might expect from him, as a point of Justice, yet he would take it as an act of kindness, and Obligation to himself. That the Barberins should make their submission in such humble terms, as he should require, and direct; and all things ordered to the greater reputation, and glory of his Holiness; that the refusal hereof would disturb the quiet of Christendom, obstruct the general Peace in Treaty at Munster, and hinder the succours, which were then preparing to give the Catholicks in England; and in fine, would be the cause of great confusion and disturbance in Europe. In answer hereun∣to, the Pope desired the Abbat to represent unto the Queen Regent how much the Barberins had ruined the Church by the expence of more than twenty Millions, which they had charged upon the People by un∣supportable Impositions, to maintain a War against the Duke of Parma, for which no justifiable account could be given; that they had so abu∣sed the Authority and Government of the Church in the last years of their Uncle's Pontificate, that all the World cryed out for justice and vengeance against them: and if now after all these mischiefs they should find refuge, and protection for their crimes in France, the Nephews of Popes would for the future become licentious, and not fear what they acted, or designed, when after the example of the Barberins, they might hope to find a Sanctuary and impunity for their crimes, if not in France, yet at least in Spain, or Germany, or some other Prince, where they were able to make an Interest, or a friendship. That the Avarice, and ambition of the Barberins, was beyond all example; having pur∣chased a Revenue of above two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns a year, besides their many Benefices and immense Riches, which they had concealed, and the magnificent furniture of their Palaces, which out of respect to their Majesties of France he had suffered to remain without seisure or confiscation. With these and the like Arguments was the cause of the Barberins debated between the Pope, and the Abbat with∣out any effect, and the Audience ending without satisfaction to either side; the Cardinals of the French Interest concluded, that nothing would be done until such time, as that the success of the Siege of Orbetello were known, and the Fate of that place determined. For now the Faction of the Barberins,An. 1646. and particularly Cardinal Gri∣maldi, being sensible that nothing would operate so easily with the Pope, as the near approach of the French Arms to the Dominions of the Church, prevailed with Cardinal Mazarine to send a Fleet to the Siege of Orbetello. In pursuance of this design (which was kept with great secrecy) the French Fleet commanded by the Duke de Breze, and as∣sisted with some Troopes by Prince Thomas of Savoy, landed their Forces at the Port of St. Steffano, of which they easily made themselves Ma∣sters, as also of the Lands of Talamone, which the Spaniard had guarded with a very inconsiderable Garrison; and afterwards the Duke de Breze came to an Anchor before the Port of Orbetello.
The news of the French Arms before Orbetello alarm'd the City of Rome with great terrour; and so sensibly affrighted the Pope himself, that he evidently discovered a mind much more flexible to the Cause of the Barberins than formerly, moderating his Sentence, and granting many things in their favour, which he had lately refused. The other Princes also of Italy, who were their implacable Enemies, growing sen∣sible of the near approach of danger, became earnest Intercessours with the Pope to give all the satisfaction he was able to the Crown of France; to which the Pope lending a gentle Ear, was contented that the surren∣der which Cardinal Antonio should make of himself at his City of Avig∣non, should be esteemed as a point of submission; and from thence re∣ceiving Letters from him, he ordered the Commissioners of the Cham∣ber to take off the Sequestrations which were laid on their Revenue, and Estate; for which first step of Grace Cardinal Grimaldi returned thanks to the Pope in a full Consistory. But no sooner was Orbe∣tello succoured by the Marquis of Torrecuso, who was dispeeded with a considerable body of Men by the Vice-King of Naples; and the French forced to raise their Siege and return to Tolon, with the loss of the Duke of Breze their Admiral; but the Pope reassuming again his antient displeasure and hatred against the Barberins, retracted all the favours, and concessions he had lately granted to them, and inveighing against Cardinal Mazarine with bitter words, called him a Betrayer of his Country, and unworthy the Purple with which the Church had cloathed him; having for the sake of his own ambitious desires, and envy to the flourishing Estate of the House of Pamfilio, endeavoured to involve Italy in a most ruinous, and dangerous War. An. 1647.But these invectives which the Papal party used against the Cardi∣nal served to no other end than to provoke his choler, and whet his de∣sires of revenge: so that having fitted out another Fleet not inferiour in number, and strength to the former, commanded by the Mareschals de Milliarey, and Plessis Praslin, they quitted the design against Orbe∣tello, and Portohercole, and sailed to Piombino, and Portolongone in the Island of Elba; the first being a place bordering on Tuscany, and open∣ing a passage into the Dominions of the Pope, was esteemed convenient and advantageous against the Princes of Italy, and such as might curb the Pope, and render him more respectful to the Interest of France; the other being situate between Naples, and Milan was judged of great importance for intercepting succours, and correspondencies between one and the other Territory. The first attempt therefore was made upon Piombino, which being defended by some few Troops of Spanish Horse, and a weak Garrison within, upon appearance of a Battery of five Pieces of Cannon raised against it, capitulated, and surrendered itself. The success of Piombino strook a terrour into the Defendants of Portolongone; which notwithstanding was for some time defended by the Garrison; but the French having prepared some Mines, and being ready to make a general storm the Defendants demanded a Parly, and surrendered up∣on honourable Conditions; the which places the French looked upon, as so considerable, as might be worth the labour, and charge of stronger Fortifications. The news hereof being brought to Rome, did immediately silence the Party opposite to Mazarine, and again mollifie the mind of the Pope in
such manner, that he began to give favourable Audiences to the French Ministers, and to hearken again with some gentleness to those Proposals, which were made in behalf of the Barberins; howsoever, he could not frame his mind to the promotion of Frier Michael Mazarin to the de∣gree of Cardinal, for his heart was so full of distance against his Bro∣ther the Chief Minister of France, that he could not contain his resent∣ments, but ever vented them, so often, as he had occasion to discourse with any of the French Nation. It happened at that time that the Duke of Guise being at Rome, was admitted to Audience with the Pope, and received with all the expres∣sions of joy, and tenderness imaginable, it being the custom of Inno∣cent to abound in his excessive demonstrations of love towards that Nation, which he inwardly abhorred and detested. The Duke having this opportunity took the liberty to lay before Innocent the present State of all Europe, and particularly that of France, which was now governed entirely by Cardinal Mazarin, a Person so wedded to the In∣terest of that Crown, that it were injustice to separate one from the other, and that indeed he was so riveted in the favour of the Queen Regent, and of all the great Men of that Court, (some few persons only excepted) that his Holiness could not exercise effects of his dis∣pleasure against the person of the Cardinal without disobliging the noble Court, and Nation of France. That the Cardinal desired nothing more than the favour of his Holiness, and to live in peace and amity with the Court of Rome, on which condition and upon the least demonstration of kindness, the Cardinal would be ready to yield all obsequious submis∣sion to his most Holy Person, and would adore, and reverence him with highest esteem. But to make the first step herein he told him, that it was necessary to call Frier Mazarin from Aix where he was Arch-bishop, unto Rome, and freely and generously to confer upon him the Dignity of Cardinal; for that by this means obliging the Arch-bishop, and de∣taining him by preferments near his Person, he would easily become his Creature, and probably so influence his Brother, that all misunderstand∣ings, and disgusts between the Courts of France, and Rome being recon∣ciled, a happy correspondence, and peace would ensue for the future. The Pope approving this Discourse, and proposal of the Duke, imme∣diately gave order to call Frier Mazarin then residing at his Arch-bisho∣prick of Aix, unto Rome, with promises of advancement; of which the Duke gave advice to Cardinal Mazarin his Brother; but this Expedient was so little satisfactory to the Cardinal, who was ever suspicious of the Pope's good inclinations to himself and Family, that he endeavoured to dissuade his Brother from the danger of an affront, being perhaps unwil∣ling to receive any Obligations from the Pope, whom he believed, could never be heartily reconciled to his Person, and Interest: but the Arch-bishop was so ambitious of the Scarlet, that contrary to the persuasions of his Brother, he posted to Rome, where after some few months, he was created Cardinal, to the great satisfaction, and joy of the Duke of Guise, and of all the French Party, who expected from thence the happy fruits of Peace, and of a perfect understanding between France and the Papal Sea. Howsoever the mind of the Pope was not yet quieted,An. 1648. nor could he forget his quarrel to the Barberins, though he seemed to be so far ap∣peased,
as to admit of the return of Cardinal Barberin to Rome, which grant was obtained by the Marquis de Fontena, who succeeded the Ab∣bat of St. Nicholas in the Agency for France; but howsoever he could not so far prevail, as to obtain the like favour for Cardinal Antonio, whom the Pope detested, and would not hear of his admission, until he had given in his Accounts, and answered the Crimes of which he was legally accused, as his Brother had already performed. Nor would the Pope admit the Son of Taddeo the Prefect, a youth of about eighteen years of age, to execute that Office, during the absence of his Father, retired (as we have said) to the Court of France; though pressed with the most warm instances imaginable, by the Marquis de Fontena, the Pope positively refusing it as a judged case already by the College of Cardinals in the time of Sixtus IV. when the Son of Antonio Colonna, though in joint commission with his Brother, was declared uncapable to exercise that charge in the time of his Minority. For indeed the Pope did not much consider the applications made from France in any Affair, nor was he greatly concerned to satisfie their Ministers, knowing that the Civil Wars at that time, had so employed the hearts and hands of that Kingdom that no mischief could be derived from thence. Nor did Innocent shew himself much more favourable to any Nation, for the Emperour could obtain no other help in his Wars against Sweden, than a few Indulgences, so that he was forced to patch up a Peace to the disadvantage of the Empire, and the Roman Religion. The Spaniards received nothing but flat denials to all demands, as the Conte d' Ognate, and the Duke dell' Infantado who were then Ambassa∣dours did often complain. The French required nothing besides the re∣storation of the Barberins, for if the Spaniards could obtain nothing, who had been chief Instruments in the Pope's Election, what could the French expect who remained as out-lawed people, and as Enemies to himself, and party. Nor did Innocent after the Example of other Popes interest, and concern himself much in the quarrels between the Christian Princes: or like those who esteeming themselves the universal Fathers, interposed by their Agents in the Offices of Peace, and Mediation; but Innocent casting off those cares, and by the advice, and counsel of Donna Olympia being desirous to excuse the charge, and expence of Nuntios in forein Courts, as useless and unnecessary, took up new Maxims, and grounds of State: having an Opinion, that the intercessions of Popes a∣vailed little with Princes, until their own conveniences, and pressures by War inclined them to a Peace. It is reported, that Innocent looking out one day at his Window saw two Porters at Fifty-cuffs; some that were standers by, would have part∣ed them, but the Pope forbad it, giving Order that they should fight it out: They, after half an hours scuffle, being weary, and out of breath, gave over of themselves, and without other mediation parted: which when the Pope saw, he turned to Panirolo (who was then living) So, (said he) will the French, and Spaniards do; for when they are well wea∣ried with beating one another they will part, and agree of themselves with∣out the mediation of others. But Innocent was not so wholly averse from sending Nuntios into forein parts, but that with concurrence and approbation of his Olympia, he was ready to spend Money in Negotiations, which were judged be∣neficial,
and necessary for the welfare of the Ecclesiastical State: in pur∣suance of which aim, considering it of absolute necessity to have a Mini∣ster at the Treaty of Munster, where the general peace of Christendom was in debate; he appointed Fabio Chigi a Senese to be present at that Meeting, who with Aloisio Contareni a Senator of Venice, and both Men of experience, were by general consent admitted Mediators: The Em∣perour's Commissioners were Lodowick Count of Nassau, and Isaac Vol∣mar Doctor of the Civil Law, to them afterwards Count Trotmansdorff a person of extraordinary Abilites was superadded. Avossie and Ser∣vient appeared in behalf of France. Count Pignoranda, and one An∣tonio â Sequanis, who with his two Pages in a slashed Suit, and a tat∣tered Coach, was of greater importance to the Work, than half the Meeting besides, were Commissioners for the Spaniard; and Count Oxen∣sterne, and John Sauge Osnabrugge for the Swede; who being Protestants had a Seat appointed for them apart, that they might not mingle with the Catholicks. Paw of Amsterdam, and Knute the Zelander, Commis∣sioners for Holland, were of greater eminency than those from the o∣ther Provinces: to Avossie and Servient, Longueville of the bloud Royal of France, was afterwards added, entering Munster with a train like an Emperour. These were the chief Ministers which graced the Meeting at Munster, besides several Accessories sent by their respective Princes. Fabio Chigi being of a mild, and patient temper, did diligently remove all such things, as he judged might obstruct, or retard the business of Peace; but Contareni, though a Man of able parts, yet being pas∣sionate, did sometimes proceed with more violence, than wariness. It will not be pertinent to this History, to relate the particulars of this Treaty, what jugling, and what Sophistry was practised. How much Money; how much time was idly thrown away; how many Letters were written in Ciphers, and how many deciphered; what in∣sisting upon Punctilios; never did an Assembly more gloriously play the Mad-men, as if this Serious Meeting had been held about the place of Princes, not for the peace of Christendom. In short therefore as to what concerns our purpose, The Hollanders impatient for a peace, look∣ing on the French successes with a jealous Eye, resolved to improve the present opportunity, and without the advice, and consent of the French, to strike up a perpetual Peace with Spain. The French resenting this manner of proceeding by the Hollanders, sent to the Hague to com∣plain, but without any effect, that people after their usual custom, pre∣ferring their quiet, and ease from War, before the Leagues, and faith, and promises made with, and given to their Allies. And thus this As∣sembly the most famous next to that of Trent, for the resort of divers Nations, was dissolved without any effect. Chigi the Pope's Nuntio, labouring much toward the general Peace, had still in his Eye the design of conserving the Revenue, and immuni∣ties of the Church free, and entire; but finding that by the Articles of this hasty Peace, a great part of the Ecclesiastical Revenue was remit∣ted, and many Benefices of the Church abandoned to the disposal and possession of Enemies to the Roman Sea, did in a solemn manner pro∣test against this Peace, remonstrating all the damages, and losses, which did thereby accrue to the Apostolical Chair: And so well, and with such Art did Chigi manage this, and other Affairs, that at his return
to Rome, he was promoted by this Pope to the degree of Cardinal; and afterwards had the good fortune to succeed him in the Papal Throne. At Osnaburgh almost at the same time, was the agreement of the Ger∣man Peace concluded, without the intervention of the Spaniards; by which means the Swedes gained the French Assent to the Capitulations, but the Princes, and Free-States of the Empire having little to ask besides the exercise of their Religion, rested satisfied with the enjoyment thereof, and liberty of Conscience to serve God after their own fashion, which so an∣gred Chigi the Nuntio, that he tore the papers about the Peace, resol∣ving never more to interpose therein. During these transactions abroad, the Pope continued in his persecu∣tions against the Barberins to the utmost severity, and yet being in con∣versation with Cardinal Barberin, he would with much tenderness weep, and lament the unhappy fate of their House, terming his tears effects of compassion (which he had always ready to vent) which others cal∣led tears of joy, to see the poor Cardinal at his feet, reduced by him to the utmost extremity of Fortune. All which ill treatment was against the former pretensions and Promises of the Pope, who had given faith∣ful assurances to the Marquis de Fontenay Ambassadour of France; that in case this Cardinal would return to Rome, so as that he might have one hours discourse with him, he would forget and pardon all the late quarrels, and would enter into as strict Friendship with him, and his Family, as he had ever entertained with them before he was Pope; but contrary to this faith given, the Cardinal was entertained with all the contempt and scorn imaginable, notwithstanding that France had decla∣red it self engaged in the quarrel, and resented all the Affronts given to that House in the same manner, as offered to their own natural Sub∣jects, or to any Family of highest quality, and esteem with that Court. Notwithstanding which, it had been the ultimate consummation of all the joys which could have happened to the Pope, could he have onely allured the Cardinal Antonio by promises, and persuasions to Rome; for then in despight of all his Vows, and Engagements, he would have sa∣crificed his Family, his Reputation, and his very triple Crown in sa∣tisfaction of his Revenge, and for destruction of that person whom, (Cardinal Mazarine excepted) he hated above all things in the World. An. 1651.Never was the Interest of France in that low ebb in Rome as it was in this year, when the Civil Wars and distractions of that Kingdom ren∣dered its Power less formidable abroad. And so the Pope presuming on the ill state of those Affairs, little esteemed the character of Ambassadour which the Bailly of Valency maintained at Rome for the Crown of France, suffering him to receive many Affronts from his Soldiers without re∣dress, or satisfaction; for which cause the Ambassadour retired to Tivo∣li, whilest the Pope contrived to dispossess him of the Palace of the Barberins, which he inhabited at Rome: telling the Ambassadour of Venice, that whensoever a reconciliation should be made between him and France, the first Article should be, that the French Ambassadour should quit that Palace. The Bailly of Valency being sensible of all these matters made his complaints to the King his Master; upon which he received Orders to expose, and lay before the Pope, all the ill usage,
and scornful treatment, which his Majesty had received from him since his assumption to the Papal Chair; and accordingly being admitted to Audience, he represented, That all those Cardinals, whom Lewis XIII. his Father of glorious memory had gained to his Party, and allied by his friendship, were now become the only mortal Enemies of his Holi∣ness, some of which he had exiled from Rome, and others, whom he had permitted to remain in the City, he had rendered so uneasie in their Habitations, that banishment was much more desireable, than the liberty he gave them to reside and breath within the precincts and air of his Court. Witness the Cardinals, Brichi, Grimaldi, Antonio, and Mazarine, all which received such daily affronts, and discountenances, for devoting themselves to the Crown of France, that it was a capital crime so much, as to own a concernment for that Party. That he had made Medicis the Protectour of Spain, but Barberin retained no more than a shadow of it, for France. In short, he omitted no instances whereby he might make known the injustices done to the House of Barberin: and the Affronts offered to the King, and particularly by the succours given to Naples, and Portolongone to the prejudice of France. But the Pope returned no solid Answer hereunto; but broke out into passion and a hundred exclamations, which after his manner he accom∣panied with tears, and in fine complained of the Cardinals devoted to the French Interest to be persons in whom he could not confide, nor re∣ceive satisfaction in their Society or correspondence. The Pope being in this manner disturbed, and tormented with the continual importunities of the French in behalf of the Barberins, enter∣ed into consultation with his most intimate Confidents of the Spanish Faction concerning the means, whereby he might ease himself, and throw off these daily vexations. This matter being considered, an Ex∣pedient was projected, to draw off the Barberins totally from the French Interest; and having joined them by the Pamfilian, and Spanish Party, the Faction of France would be inconsiderable in the Conclave; and to give a beginning hereunto the Pope would often smile, and cast a gra∣tious Eye on Cardinal Barberin, so often as he saw him in the Consi∣story, seeming as it were to entertain some thoughts of entire reconci∣liation with his Family. The Spaniards also to instil this Opinion, and make it to be swallowed more glibly down, offered some advantageous Propositions of Marriage for the Princess Palestrina with a considerable Person of their Country; not that the Spaniards had any such real in∣tentions, but onely by this Overture to give occasion unto Barberin, to write unto Cardinal Mazarine, and Cardinal Antonio, giving them to understand, that since the Spaniards had offered a convenient Match for his Niece; it was not reasonable to neglect that Proposal, unless they resolved to provide more honourably for her in France, where she was deposited as a Pawn for the fidelity of her Family with the Queen Regent. The Ambassadour at Rome observing by these passages, that Barberin was staggering in his adherence to the French Interest, signified his thoughts thereupon to the Count de Brienne principal Secretary; ad∣vising it as absolutely necessary for confirmation of the Barberins in their engagements to France, that the Queen should match the Princess with one of the most illustrious Families of the Kingdom; not that any Por∣tion
was required from her Majesty; for that this Lady had sufficient of her own Estate bestowed by her Uncle Ʋrban VIII. to make her ac∣ceptable to the greatest Peer of France; onely that she would be pleased as a Jewel from her Cabinet, and with other obliging circumstances to bestow her on some great Lord, that was most devoted to the Interest of her Majesty. And farther the Ambassadour pressed, that it was ne∣cessary to give the Cardinal Barberin some speedy answer hereunto, lest despairing of any substantial benefit from France, he should close with the Spaniards, who had promised to restore him forty thousand Crowns a year, which he held in Abbies within the Dominions of his Catho∣lick Majesty, so soon, as he had given testimony of his detachment from the French Interest. That the Cardinal apprehended, that Maza¦rine had no real kindness for him, and would never assent to the mar∣riage of the Princess Palestrina with any considerable Match, which he reserved for one of his own Nieces. The substance of the Ambassadour's Letter being well considered; it was judged necessary to gratifie the Barberins with some thing more than words; and accordingly Cardinal Barberin was made Grand Al∣moner of France, and Cardinal Antonio created Bishop of Poictiers, which the French Ambassadour signified to the Pope with such formality, as gave matter of discourse to all the Court. But notwithstanding all these evidences of favour the constancy of the Barberins was not able to withstand the favourable conjuncture which offered it self for an entire reconciliation with the Pope: for none was more ready to embrace this offer than Cardinal Antonio, who now having been al∣most eight years an Exile from Rome and State, and living in forein parts at the expence of some Millions, besides the sequestration of his Re∣venue from the Church, was infinitely desirous to close with any reaso∣nable Propositions which might restore him to favour, and his Estate. The design hereof was projected by Donna Olympia, who made this Proposition to Cardinal Francisco: that in case he would assent to the mar∣riage of the Son of Taddeo the Prefect with the Daughter of her Daugh∣ter by Prince Justiniani, she would restore the Barberins to all their Offices, Revenues, and intimate favour with the Pope; provided that this Recon∣ciliation should be valued the price of her Portion. The Barberins looking on this unexpected Offer as a blessing from Heaven, made this speedy and short Answer, That they should esteem themselves much honoured, and happy in such an Alliance; for having been for almost eight years under a Cloud, and a great part of their Revenue seized; they began to fear, that if Innocent should die, his Suc∣cessour would detain their Revenues, and confer them on his own Rela∣tions. Donna Olympia had contrived to have the match with the eldest Son of Don Taddeo; but the Barberini, though very earnest to have the matter concluded, yet pretended, that the eldest resolving to be a Car∣dinal, had relinquished his Birthright to his youngest Brother, who in recompence thereof had made a resignation of his Abby to him, that was the elder. This was a subtle Masterpiece of their Art, for by this means being restored, they got another Red Cap, a thing not known of before, to have three Cardinals at the same time of the same name and Family.
These resolutions being carried on with great secrecy, advices thereof were dispeeded in Characters to Cardinal Antonio; who wearied with the promises, and expectations of France, and with the delays of Cardinal Mazarine, who, (as he was persuaded) designed no good to his Family; joyfully embraced the Proposition, and immediately with privacy con∣veyed his Niece the Princess Palestrina unto Padoua: the unexpected news whereof, and the strange change of Affairs in the Court of Rome surprised the whole World, but more especially the Queen Regent of France, and Cardinal Mazarine the chief Minister, who now began too late to consider of the cold entertainment given the Barberins, and that more substantial preferments should have been bestowed on them, to con∣firm, and ever oblige them to the Interest of France: for indeed they were were grown very high in their own imaginations, and could not stoop to a mean, or to an indifferent way of living; for when they considered of the long Rgn of twenty years of their Uncle; during which they had missed of the Dukedom of Ʋrbin, which devolved to the Church in the year 1631. by the decease of that Duke, who died without Heirs; and when they farther considered how they were defeated of their project designed upon the Republick of Lucca; and succeeded not in their War against the Duke of Parma, whom they intended with all the Farnesi to drive out of Castro, and all their Principality by force of Arms; when I say, they considered these matters; they could not with patience read the Histories of Sixtus IV. Alexander VI. Clement VII. Paul III. who had not reigned half the time of Ʋrban VIII. and yet were able to make their Nephews free Princes; they could not, but much reproach their own fortune, and conduct; to repair which, they resolved to close with this present favourable opportunity, breaking through all their ties, and promises, and engagements to France. And now Cardinal Antonio being returned to Rome,An. 1653. the Scene was miraculously changed; for not only was Charles the eldest Son of Taddeo created Cardinal, and their Niece married to the Duke of Modena, a Prince of a noble descent, but Cardinal Barberin was admitted to the Cabinet-Counsel which was composed of the Pope, Donna Olympia, the Cardinal-Patron, and Monsignor Azzolini, who was Guard of the Briefs a place of great care, and trust: they now governed with Donna Olympia all the important Affairs of the Church; and were in such high esteem with the Pope, who denied them no favours, that being Men well practised in the Government, and in the manner of Popes Favou∣rites they so well managed their own affairs, that in the two last years of Innocent's Reign, they licked themselves whole, and repaired the losses, which their eight years absence, and disgrace had brought upon their Estates. Nor is it to be wondred, that the Pope should add an other Cardinal to this Family, though there were two already of great esteem therein, since there was this justice, and reason for it. It hath been an antient and common custom, for Popes to bestow their own Cardi∣nals Hat on the kindred of that Pope, from whom he had received his: so that Innocent, who was created Cardinal by Ʋrban VIII, and being obliged to relinquish his Red Hat, so soon as he was created Pope, was also obliged to bestow it on one of the Barberins at their instance; but they being under a cloud of his disfavour, could not ob∣tain this just request, until after their reconciliation, when, it was not farther to be delayed, or refused to them.
So soon as the Barberins were fully restored, and received into inti∣mate favour with the Pope, the Power of the Cardinal Patron began to decline, being seldom, or never admitted to secret Consultations: so that Ambassadours to make the shorter work, omitting the usual ad∣dress by way of the Cardinal Patron, applied themselves to the Barbe∣rins, to whom the Pope began to disclose all the secrets of his heart, being confident of success by the reputation they had gained in the management of Affairs for the space of twenty two years of their Uncle's Reign; so that there remained but a shadow of Power to the adopted Nephew. For as the Authority and Interest of the Barberins encreased, so that of the Cardinal Patron abated: at first the Pope seemed very cold, and neglective of him, but at length burst out into storms of rage, and indignation against him: he forbad him his presence, banished him the Court, deprived him of the title of Cardinal Patron, disclaimed the Adoption to be his Nephew, with express Order, that he should no longer be called Pamfilio, but Astalli: all his Revenues, Offices, and Preferments were sequestred, and at length was banished from Rome, and not permitted to carry any of his moveables with him. These ex∣travagant changes, and sports of fortune made most Men laugh, none being able to assign the Cause or Original thereof. For they could not attribute it to his Avarice or his unjust gains: for besides his ordinary Emoluments, which might be worth to him about fifty thousand Crowns a year, attended with a great expence, he had not laid up one farthing: the poor Man had once made a little Money of a vacant Benefice, which so soon as Donna Olympia had smelt out, she ran with open mouth to the Pope, and complained, and caused him to refund all into her Apron. Azzolini by exclusion of Astalli being created Cardinal was admitted into the Cabal, where deep designs, and plots were hatching; the Bar∣berins suggested the conquering of the Kingdom of Naples, blaming the Pope, for not making his advantage of the Insurrection of Masinello in the year 1647. Howsoever in this declining Estate of the Spaniards, the design upon Naples seemed very feasible. The Barberins promised to maintain an Army of ten thousand Men at their own cost, until they had reduced that Kingdom to the Dominion of the Church: provided that the principality of Salerno might remain to their Family, independant of any other Prince: and with such fancies, and projects as these, did they tire, and torment the decaying carcass of the dying Pope. But as the Pope daily languished, so Donna Olympia was ever more industrious, taking bribes with both hands, bestowing Benefices, and Livings in all parts of Italy; having in the Marca onely which is but a small Province, disposed of three hundred thirty six Benefices, which were commonly known, besides what had passed underhand: and at that time the Sin of Simony was become so scandalous, and common, that People began to abhor Churchmen, and hate their Ministery, to which they had at∣tained by abominable practices. These transactions at Rome were equally displeasing to the Courts both of France, and Spain; who now considering that the two Parties and Families of Pamfilio, and Barberin were united in one, they imagi∣ned them able to stand on their own bottoms, and to have power suffi∣cient to elect a Pope, in despight of those two Kingdoms, or opposition
of the Medices; The Spaniards were most of all vexed at this Conjun∣ction, entertaining an inveterate hatred against the Barberins, to whom they attributed all the Affronts, and neglects passed upon them, in the time of their Uncle, and judged the loss of Piombino, and Portolongone to proceed from them, and on score of their quarrel with the Pope: the French also though angry enough with the person of Cardinal Barberin, whom they considered as unconstant, faithless, and wedded to his own Interest; yet entertained more gentle thoughts of Cardinal Antonio, whom having obliged with the honour of Grand Almoner of France with the Bishoprick of Poictiers, and the Order of the Holy Ghost, they ima∣gined, that the impressions they had made upon him, by such obliging favours could never be defaced by time, or altered by a new Conversa∣tion: Nor did they wholly lose all hopes of conserving this Interest, which was the cause, that when the French Ambassadour at Rome made his Complement to young Barberin Son of the Prefect on his promo∣tion to the degree of a Cardinal: he put him in mind of the good cor∣respondence which had passed between his Uncle Ʋrban VIII. and the Court of France; what affection that good Pope demonstrated to Hen∣ry IV. and after him to Lewis XIII. and afterwards to his present Ma∣jesty now reigning; the memory of which was so grateful to him, and the Queen Regent, that they could not but rejoice in all the good for∣tune of their Family, wishing it might still advance, and be exalted to a greater height of grandeur, and glory. And now all the Art was, and great labour used by the Pope, Donna Olympia, and Cardinal Barberin to draw off Cardinal Antonio from his patiality, and con∣cernment which he had a thousand times vowed in the Interest of France, the which abated much of their confidence in him, and gave a stop to many of their great designs: the French Ambassadour endea∣voured to keep him firm by many obliging favours; the Pope persuaded him to a neutrality, which was most agreeable to a good Italian, and a religious Cardinal: his Brother urged him to cast off the blue Ribbon of his Order, as incompatible with the great Cross of Malta, and to entertain no intimate communication with the French Ambassadour, nor to affix the Arms of France over the gate of his Palace: but Antonio giving no ear to any of these insinuations, Francisco plainly told the Pope, that the onely way to reclaim his Brother from the French, was to shew his displeasure by refusing to restore to him the Offices and Places of Trust which Ʋrban VIII. had conferred upon him, and to be∣stow that of Great Chamberlain on his Nephew Charles lately made Cardinal: but this course seemed too violent both to the Pope, and Donna Olympia, they took a contrary way, and caused a Brief to be carried to Cardinal Antonio for restitution of all his Offices and Places; the which was delivered him by the Prince of Palestrina his Nephew, that so he might seem to have gained these favours from the Pamfilians; and not from the French: After which Cardinal Antonio with all liber∣ty avowed his concernment for France; which appeared much more generous to the Pope, than the dissimulations of Cardinal Barberin, in whom the Pope could never retain a perfect confidence, nor an entire affection; that it is believed, had the Pope lived but some years lon∣ger he would have been as weary of the Barberins, as he had declared himself satisfied in them, after some few months experience of their con∣duct
the misfortune of this Pope was, that he never knew how to make choice of a wise Chief, or Directour of his own Party. Cardinal Pam∣filio was ever esteemed as a Partisan of Spain, and of the Medices. His whole Family, Mother, Children, Daughters, Sons in law and Daugh∣ters in law were engaged in mortal Feuds one against another. The Faction of the Barberins was not well united: for the greatest part of the Creatures of Ʋrban VIII. entertained a secret rancour, and venom against Cardinal Francis Barberin, who after having vowed himself a thousand times to the Interest of the Pope, of Donna Olympia, and that Family, turned his Coat, and endeavoured with all obsequious diligence to be received into the Service and friendship of Spain. Thus having continued the History of the Barberins with almost an uninterrupted course, or mixture of other Affairs, we must return a little back to other passages of moment which intervened in the Reign of this present Pope. After the death of Edward Duke of Parma, which happened in the year 1649. the Montists wanting the usual payments agreed by the Duke in the time of Ʋrban VIII. and afterwards confirmed by him at the con∣clusion of the late Peace, made their complaints to the present Pope; upon which license was obtained, and Briefs were issued from the Ca∣mera to proceed against the Lands, and Estate possessed by that Duke in the state of Castro. The prosecution of this matter was more violently carried on by the persuasions of Donna Olympia, because she was dissa∣tisfied with that Duke for not selling to her his Naboth's Vineyard, which was a certain Castle in the Dominion of Castro; and because, as she supposed, he had been instrumental in persuading the Princess of Rossano, who was his kinswoman to take Sanctuary under the protection of France, from the Wiles, and Plots of her Step-mother; The Officers and Soldiers of the Duke made resistance against the Commissioners of the Camera, who came to make seisures for payment of the Montists; which greatly enraged the Pope, who was impatient, and frowned at the least opposition made to his Commands; but the Great Duke of Toscany apprehensive, that the consequences hereof might be an engage∣ment to a second War, he endeavoured by means of Cardinal Albornozzi to compose the differences, making divers propositions to facilitate the payments, and satisfie the Montists: but whilest these matters were de∣pending, it unfortunately happened that the Bishop of Castro was mur∣dered by certain Assassinates, who attended his passage on the confines of the Ecelesiastical State. The Pope being furiously enraged by the perpetration of this impious fact, which he attributed to the machina∣tions of the Duke of Parma; immediately dispeeded certain Troops un∣der the command of David Vidman, and Girolamo Gabriel to lay Siege unto the City of Castro. At that time the French being Masters of Piombino, and Portolongone, and having an Army in Lombardy under the command of the Duke of Modena, and Mareschal du Plessis Praslin, kept the Spaniards in awe, and gave countenance to the designs of the Duke of Parma, in mainte∣nance of his right invaded by the Pope: the Duke encouraged by hopes given him by the French, and with an opinion that the Pope, who was aged, and loved ease and quietness would gladly compound upon reaso∣nable terms, so soon as he found himself pressed by any vigorous oppo∣sition:
he therefore imitating the example of his Father raised a consi∣derable Army, which he committed to the conduct of Marquis Gaufrid with Orders to march directly into the Dominions of the Pope; and lest in their passage thither they should commit Violences, or acts of Ho∣stility, or burden the people, he furnished Money sufficient to defray all the charges necessary for maintenance of the Army; whereby he might make appear the caution he used to give no offence, and that his War was onely defensive, and designed to no other end, than to pro∣tect and maintain his own Subjects and Estate. This tenderness of doing hurt to any, had been well accepted, and interpreted, if the suc∣cess had answered the hopes and expectations of the Duke: but the contrary happened out; for so soon as Gaufrid was entered into the Dominions of the Church, he was encountred by the Marquis Mattei a knowing, and an experienced Captain, to whom the Pope had commit∣ted the charge, and defence of those Countries; and being strengthened by a considerable force, and with many Gentlemen Voluntiers, who came from Ferrara and Bologna to signalize their Valour; he gave Battel to the Enemy, and soon routed and defeated the Army of Parma; the General Gaufrid shamefully flying, fell under the heavy displeasure and disgrace of his Prince; and being accused by his Enemies of many enor∣mous Crimes, and miscarriages, and of not having observed the Orders of his Master, he was with much ignominy put to death; whereby he gave a new Example to the World of the mutability of fortune, which from an obscure beginning and birth being raised on a sudden to the highest degree of reputation and esteem with his Master, was with as swift a turn tumbled, and precipitated down to an abyss of shame and dishonour. The Garrison of Castro losing all hopes of relief and succours by this defeat, surrendered the Town upon Articles into the hands of the Pope; who being enraged for the murder committed on the Bishop, command∣ed for expiation of that Offence, that the City should be demolished; and accordingly it was so entirely ruined, that not one stone remained upon another. The Duke in the mean time being terrified with these acts of severity, and with the victorious Arms of the Pamfilians, who threatned the other Dominions of Parma; and finding that neither French, nor Spaniards, nor other Princes did much take his cause and sufferings to heart, he resolved to compound with the Pope by a sale of the Duke∣dom of Castro and Ronciglione with all the Territories and dependences thereunto belonging, with Power howsoever of Redemption within the space of eight years. And thus ended these differences for the present, which several years afterwards broke out into new troubles; and will ever remain an occasion of quarrel and scandal, until such time as equal expedients and proportionate to justice are given for mutual satisfaction. After the City was thus destroyed, the Pope set up a Pillar with this Inscription: Here was CASTRO; and several Crosses in the places, where Churches had been with the same Motto: The Bishoprick of Castro with all the Benefices, and emoluments thereof was afterwards annexed to the neighbouring Metropolis of Aquapendente. It is very certain, that this Pope was extreamly rigorous in doing justice, well vers'd in business, and might have deserved the character of a skilful, and an understanding Person, had he not blemished his
Reign with his unpardonable weakness towards a rapatious Woman: and therefore we shall as well repeat his good actions, as his bad, and give the Reader some instances of his Vertues, as well, as of his Vices. He was a severe lover of Justice in his Officers, and would punish those Crimes in them which savoured of partiality, or corruption, Ex∣amples hereof we have in many kinds: and particularly it is not to be forgotten, that a certain Nobleman of Rome having been guilty of many enormous Crimes, could not be protected from his Justice by the Power and Interest of his Friends, and Relations; for having threatned one of the Judges to be revenged one day upon him, in the vacancy of the Sea; he was apprehended, and accused upon those words; which though they would bear no action in rigour, yet they were so severely inter∣preted against him, being aggravated by his former Offences, that he was condemned to die, and accordingly suffered in the publick face of all the City. Another instance we have of his fortitude in the punish∣ment of a Judg of the Court for Bribery, whom he committed to Pri∣son, and afterwards condemned to the Gallies. With the like impar∣tiality, and resolution, he punished the people of Firma, for having in a Mutiny, and Sedition killed Viscount Ʋbert their Governour: in pro∣secution of which justice, he sent Count Vidman his chief Captain with some Troops against the City, that those, who were the principal leaders in this Sedition might without fear, or favour be brought to condign punishment: and accordingly some were imprisoned, others banished, others fined, or sent to the Gallies, or put to death; and that he might attemper in some measure Clemency with his Justice, he enclined a fa∣vourable Ear to the submissive petitions of that People, and received them into his gracious favour, and mercy. Nor was his justice less e∣minent in the punishment of Mascambruno, who was Sub▪datary of the Apostolical Chamber, in which Office having behaved himself without regard to the faith, and integrity required; he forged many false Wri∣tings, affixing the Pope's Seal to them, and counterfeited his Hand, be∣sides many other accusations of bribery, and corruption; all which be∣ing proved against him, he was devested of his Office, and dignity of Priesthood, and publickly executed in the face of the whole City. It is also farther to be added in commendation of this Pope, that he restored the Elogy, which Alexander III had inscribed in the great Hall of the Vatican in memory of the assistances, which the Venetians had given to the Church; and which Ʋrban VIII. without any just cause, or reason had blotted out, and defaced. He was also munificent in publick Buildings, and adornments of the City, and according to the generous temper of his nature had been much more, had not his Moneys been intercepted by Olympia. Howsoever he enlarged the common Prisons of the City, and built others, which were before so narrow, and streight as to be noisom, and unhealthy to the Prisoners. He also finished the Walls of the City on the other side of the Tyber, which were begun by his Predecessour Ʋrban VIII. He farther repaired, and adorned the Church of St. John Lateran, being much decayed since the time of Constantine the Great, who had built it for a Chappel to his Palace, and had been neglected by former Popes. But more especially munificent was he towards the great Church of St.
Peter; for that a Memorial might remain of his Beneficence amongst o∣ther Popes, to that place he added many and various Works, and beau∣tified those places which wanted Ornament; but what the particulars were will best appear by this following Inscription, which was engraven over the great Gate of this Church. Basilicam Principis Apostolorum In hanc molis Amplitudinem Multiplici Romanorum Pontificum Aedificatione perductam Innocentius X. Pont. Max. Novo Caelaturae Opere Ornatis Sacellis Interjectis in utraque Templi Ala Marmoreis Columnis Strato è Vario lapide Pavimento Magnificentius Terminavit. Besides all which publick Works, many others are recorded of him by Ciconius, in the life of this Pope to whom the Reader may be re∣ferred. In the beginning of 1649. the year of Jubily approaching, he caused great provisions to be made for entertainment of Pilgrims, and that there should be no want of Bread, and Wine in the City, he sent Of∣cers, and Purveyors into all the neighbouring Countries to buy up the Corn, and fill up the granaries of the City; and lest in so general a concourse of people who flocked to enjoy the Indulgences, and Par∣dons granted at that season, Provisions should be raised to excessive Rates, care was taken to moderate the prices, and render every thing cheap and commodious for Pilgrims. On the 24th. of December 1649. the year of Jubily began, when the Pope in presence of all the Car∣dinals, Ambassadours, and Magistrates of the City opened the Holy Gate, which being again shut by him at the end of the following year, this Inscription was engraven upon a Cross of stone over the portal of the Gate: Innocentius X. Pont. Max. Portam Hanc Sanctam Reseratam, & Clausam AB Ʋrbano VIII. Pont. Max. Anno Jubilei MDCXXV. Aperuit & Clausit Anno Jubilei MD.C.L. About this time a Book was published in France, written by an un∣known Author, which aimed to subvert the Pope's Authority, by pro∣ving that there was an equality in Order, and Government between the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul; or that the Authority of St. Paul was not subordinate to that of St. Peter. This Book falling under the exa∣mination, and scrutiny of the Inquisition was condemned as heretical;
and the same Censure was passed thereupon by the Pope, who caused a Brief against it to be affixed in all publick places of Rome. But the Opinions of Jansenius Bishop of Ypres more successfully pre∣vailed in France, and Flanders; for prevention whereof, and to give a stop to the farther spreading of those Tenents which were five in num∣ber, a Congregation composed of Cardinals, and Divines was appointed by Innocent to examine the several Articles, and to give their Opinion upon the same. And to quicken the Pope, and make him more zealous in the Work; both the King of France, and Queen Regent sent their Letters to the Pope, desiring him in a matter of such importance (the determination whereof would tend to the settlement and quiet of Mens minds, and Consciences) to interpose with the final Sentence of his In∣fallibility, and Apostolical Doctrine. In like manner most of the Bishops of France desired the Pope's distinct determination of every one of those five Propositions: for though Ʋrban VIII. of happy memory had in general terms published a Bull against the Book of Jansenius, and had confirmed the Decrees of Pius V. and Gregory XIII. against Michael Baius, whose Doctrines concurred with those of Jansenius; yet were not convincing to the multitude for want of a distinct explication, and particular Sentence against every one of those five Propositions: where∣fore the Pope after discussion of all those Points by the aforesaid Con∣gregation, at which he was for the most part personally present; he pro∣mulged these his determinations thereupon, and affixed these distinct Notes, and Censures to every Proposition; which we have thought fit to deliver in Latin in such manner, as they are set down by Ciacconius: in vitâ Innocentii X. Primam praedictarum Propositionum scilicet, Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus & conantibus secun∣dum praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia; deest quoque illis gra∣tia, quâ possibilia fiant. Temerariam, impiam, blasphemam, Anathemate damnatam, & haereticam declaramus, & uti talem damnamus. Secundam, Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur: Haereticam declaramus, & uti talem damnamus. Tertiam, Ad merendum, & demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non re∣quiritur in homine libertas à necessitate, sed sufficit libertas à coactione: Haereticam declaramus, & uti talem damnamus. Quartam, Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris ne∣cessitatem ad singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei, & in hoc erant haere∣tici, quod vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas re∣sistere, vel obtemperare. Falsam & Haereticam declaramus, & uti talem damnamus. Quintam, Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino mortuum esse, aut sanguinem fudisse. Falsam, temerariam, scandalosam: & intellectam eo sensu, ut Christus pro salute duntaxat Praedestinatorum mortuus sit; impiam, blasphemam, contumeliosam, Divinae pietati dero∣gantem, & Haereticam declaramus, & uti talem damnamus. But notwithstanding this infallible determination the Jansenists keep up their Party in France, and will not be run down unless confuted by more convincing Arguments.
Towards the end of this Pope's Reign Francis Piccolomini General of the Jesuits Order signified to Innocent the intentions of Christina Queen of Sweden to relinquish her Kingdom, and embrace the Roman Catholick Faith, which that she might profess in greater liberty, and more to her Christian Edification, she resolved to make the Holy City of Rome the place of her habitation, where she resolved to spend the remainder of her days. This news was received with great joy at Rome, but more especially by the Pope, who finding his strength decaying and languish∣ing, was much troubled, that his life would not last until he could see the Queen of Sweden, and a general peace restored amongst Christian Princes. This Pope at ten promotions created thirty nine Cardinals accord∣ing to Livello, but Ciconius enumerates forty; of which two of them were afterwards Popes; namely Fabio Ghigi, who was Alexander VII. and Benedetto Odescalchi, who is Innocent XI. now at present reigning. After the month of September 1654. the Pope began to decline past all hopes of recovery; and though he were nursed by Donna Olympia with all tenderness and care, yet old age was such an incurable Disease, that there was no Herb, or Medicine in Nature to cure it: and yet this good Lady did what she could to prolong his life, she kept him from the disturbances of Business, not admitting any Person to discourse at his Bed-side, unless in her presence, and then she would mind them of the Pope's weakness, and interrupt Ambassadours in the midst of their Au∣dience, desiring them to defer their Business until a time that he might be in a more strong and able disposition of health. It is said, that the Pope continued ten days without any use of Reason, in which time Donna Olympia got at least half a Million; for she made use of her time setting every thing at low and mean Rates, so that she did not want Chapmen for all vacant Benefices, and Ecclesiastical preferments. At length on the 7th. of January 1655. Innocent died at his Palace of Monte Cavallo, which is Mons Quirinalis, after he had governed ten years, and three months and twenty three days, being aged eighty years and eight months. His Body was interred for some time in St. Peter's Church, but was afterwards removed by Prince Pamfilio to the Church of St. Agnes, where he erected a stately Monument in memory of his Uncle Innocent X. The death of the Pope was no sooner divulged through the City, but all People began to rejoice; the Cardinals were pleased in expectation and hope of their own promotions: the Clergy were pleased because the Church was freed from the Simony, and scandal of Donna Olympia; and the Commonalty rejoiced for the enjoyment of that liberty, which is commonly indulged at the vacancy of the Sea; and every one ex∣pected that Donna Olympia would be torn in pieces by the multitude, who had long since threatned her, being the person whom they perfect∣ly hated. Howsoever nothing happened, for as they say in Rome, When the Dog is dead, all the malice dies with him. And so it fared with Donna Olympia; who being allied to many great Families was pro∣tected by them, none daring to offer her any injury, lest it should be revenged by her more powerful Relations.
ALEXANDER VII. INNOCENT X. being dead, and the eight or nine days past, which are, according to custom, appointed, for the solemn celebration of the Funeral Rites of the deceased Pope: The Cardinals after having sung the Mass, which they call de Spiritu Sancto, or the Mass invoking the Di∣vine Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, to assist them in the election of the Pope, and having heard a Sermon to that purpose, preached by Abbat Rospigliosi, they entered the Conclave on the 18th. of January 1655. It would require much time to set down all the passages of this Con∣clave; for indeed the Intrigues were so many, and so various, that they daily twisted and streightned the knot of difficulties, in such manner, that little less than three months time was required to unty it; and then also it was rather cut than unloosed when the Cardinals were wearied with their own divisions, factions, and contrivances. For be∣sides the usual factions of Spain, and France, there arose a third, called the Flying Squadron, which consisted of the new Colledg of such Car∣dinals as had been created by Innocent X. and consequently the friends of Donna Olympia, who resolved if possible to continue an Oar in the Boat of St. Peter, stickled very hard to have the Election fall on some of the new Colledg, under whom she hoped to find good quarter, and to enjoy the ill-gotten Goods, and Riches she had amassed by Simony, and other Villanies; to effect this, and to manage this Party to best advantage, she proposed to put this Flying Squadron under one Head, which she nominated to be John Carlo de Medicis, who for his Noble Birth and Seniority, having been the first Cardinal that was created by the late Pope, might deserve to be the Chief Directour of that Interest; but the Squadron refused that formality, saying, That each of them had a Head of his own, and feet to walk upon; nor would Maldachini, who was Nephew to Donna Olympia be persuaded into this Combination; but rather declared himself openly to be her Enemy; howsoever his Power was little in the Conclave, though he made more noise than all the rest, which his Aunt termed the braying of an Ass, whose Voice never reached to Heaven. To prolong the length of this Conclave, there were twenty two Pre∣tenders, most of them having considerable Interest, and all of them high expectations. The wise and antient Cardinals, such as Sachetti, Barberino, and Chigi, resolved to suffer the fury of the Conclave to vent it self, by divers Exclusions, before they were offered to the Scru∣tiny. So Maculano and Palotta otherwise called Cardinal of St. Cle∣ment was excluded, with Gualtieri, Cherubino, Corrado, and others: At length Sachetti was nominated, but was excluded by the Spanish Party, who for the sake of the Conde Duca Olivarez, with whom he had maintained a quarrel ever since the time he had been Nuntio in Spain, bore a perfect hatred to him: and though by means of the Flying Squa∣dron thirty three Voices appeared for him, yet Spain was stronger, by
the addition of other Cardinals to the Conclave, namely the Arch bishops of Naples, Prague, Genoua, and others, all which were united to the interest of Spain: Cardinal Barberino was the next that was put to the Scrutiny, in favour of whom appeared so great a number, as affrighted Cardinal de Medices the inveterate Enemy of that Family. It was once alledged against him, that his Uncle had been lately Pope, and there∣fore that it was scarce practicable to have the triple Crown planted on the head of the Uncle, and so soon after on the head of the Nephew: for though Paul II. succeeded his Uncle Eugenius VI. yet it was after seve∣ral intermediate successions of other Popes, in like manner Alexander VI. succeeded Calixtus III. so did Pius III. to Pius II. and Julius II. to Sixtus IV. and Clement VII. to Leo X. But for Barberino to succeed so soon after to his Uncle Ʋrban VIII. only with the interposition of one single Pope, would have been an action without Example, and unknown to former Ages. At length the Cardinals weary of a three months imprisonment, resolved to come to a conclusion; and the rather because that the People would not longer endure to be without a Governour: there having been such Villanies committed during the vacancy of the Sea, that none desired the prolongation thereof, but dissolute Persons, whilest Men of honesty, and substance lived in danger, and without protection: wherefore, I say, they were resolved to make an end by the Election of one, who should be grateful and acceptable to all Parties, and this was Fabio Chigi, who afterwards called himself by the name of Alexander VII. This Chigi was one of the new Colledg, being created Cardinal by Innocent X. and therefore it was not probable that he would prove an Enemy to the House of Pamfilio, nor consequently to Donna Olympia, if he were endued with a Soul inclined to gratitude. On the other side, the Enemies to that Lady, were so well assured of the justice, zeal and vertue of Chigi, that he would never suffer such Scandals and Villanies offered to the Church to remain unpunished, that they could not appre∣hend he would ever favour the cause of that Woman. The Medici fearing lest Sachetti should at last be elected, concurred in Chigi. The Spaniards always esteemed him of their Party, and partial to their In∣terest; Barberino likewise desirous to do something which might put a Complement, or an Obligation on Spain concurred with the others: the only difficulty was that of France, to overcome which, Cardinal Bi∣chi, who was extreamly active in this Election undertook to deal with Sachetti, who was one of the Leaders of the French Party, and to per∣suade him to a concurrence: in management of which, he highly exalt∣ed the Wisdom, Religion, and Vertue of Chigi, to be in every respect qualified for this eminent Dignity; that being every way fitted to do service to God and his Church, it would be a blemish to Religion, and the Catholick profession to have such a Person laid aside, from a mere punctilio of distast, or unreasonable dis-satisfaction: With these and such like Arguments he prevailed with Sachetti to write a Letter to Cardinal Mazarine to encline him to a good Opinion and esteem of Chigi; whom Sachetti represented so effectually, that Mazarine gave his assent, and approbation. So that all difficulties being overcome, Chigi was with the common Votes of the whole Conclave elected on the 7th. of April 1655. in which they were so unanimous that there was not one dissenting Voice found in the Scrutiny, which seldom hap∣pens;
and Rosetti himself, who once swore, that he would cut his hand off before it should contribute to Ghigi's Election, gave his Vote also in the end. Fabius Chigi was born at Siena in the year 1599. his Father Flavio Ghigi, and his Mother Laura Marsilia both of Patrician Families, but by misfortunes of the World and other accidents were much declined from their antient splendour: his Father dying when he was young, his education was committed to his Mother, who took care to have him instructed by the best Masters in Grammar, Philosophy, Divinity and studies of the Civil Law. Being arrived at the age of eighteen years, his Brother Augustine persuaded him to try his fortune in Rome, which is commonly the place which raises Men of parts and industry to highest preferments: his Estate was indeed very low and mean, the Patrimony of his Father being divided amongst a numerous issue of Bro∣thers and Sisters: wherefore to help his fortune Augustino procured him Letters of recommendation to Marquis Sfortia Pallavicinio, a Gentle∣man of great Wit and Parts, then living at Rome, who discovering more than ordinary ingenuity, and vertue in Chigi, introduced him to acquain∣tance with Pope Ʋrban VIII. who soon took a great liking to him for his faculty in Poesie, and particularly for being an Admirer of Horace; in imitation of whom he composed many Odes, which were extreamly delightful to Ʋrban who himself was an excellent Poet, and in his youthful days had wrote many Poems with much Elegancy. By these means Chigi became a chief Favourite of the Pope, who discovering in him a mind capable of higher matters than a strain of Poesie, recom∣mended him with much affection to his Nephew Francisco Barberino. Chigi being of a gentle and tractable disposition, and extreamly mo∣dest, comported himself towards Barberino with a behaviour free from affectation and flattery; and yet in such a sincere and pleasing manner, that Barberino preferred him to the Charge and Office of Inquisitor Ge∣neral, in which capacity he was sent to Malta, where he so well ac∣quitted himself to the satisfaction of those Knights, that having finished the time allotted him by his Commission; he returned to Rome with Letters, and testimonials from the Grand Master applauding his actions, and comportment during the whole time of his residence; and with this particular character, That Malta had never before been made happy with any Person equal to him in merit. And having given this first Essay of his abilities, the Pope constituted him his Vice-Legat in Ferrara, where he also so well demeaned himself, that in the space of three years, there was not any who complained against his justice; but was esteem∣ed by all for a just, and an impartial Judg. Being returned to Rome, it was not long before he was dispatched to Cologn in quality of Nuntio: which employment may serve for an evi∣dent proof of the great esteem which the Court of Rome conceived of him; when in that conjuncture of affairs, all the World being disunited and at variance, there required a Minister of more than ordinary conduct, and dexterity to manage the difficulty of Treaties then in action; for having to deal between the Catholicks, and Protestants, he could not act with due Equity towards the latter, without giving scandal to the former, and granting that which was detrimental, and derogatory to the Power of the Roman Church. And though the Negotiations of
Chigi for the Interest, and in favour of his Master the Pope were such, as rather obstructed than forwarded the conclusion of the Treaty; yet the Emperour and King of Spain, Hollanders, and French growing weary with the troubles of a bloudy War, agreed of themselves without being obliged to the Pope for his Offices of Mediation: for on the contrary the Articles agreed were so detrimental to the Ecclesiastical State; that the Pope was so far from having a hand in the making of them, that he wholly disowned and protested against them, by his Nuntio Ghigi; who in that dexterous, and discreet manner so well represented his Master's complaints to the Imperial and Spanish Ministers, that they could not but allow the resentments of the Pope to be just for which they had no excuse, but the unhappy state, and urgency of their affairs: but as to the person of Ghigi, and his conduct, every one remained satisfied, giving him the character of a prudent, wise, and an able Minister. These Negotiations at Cologne rendered him more capable to serve the Papal Interest at Munster, in quality of the Pope's Legat, in which he behaved himself with such equality of mind and good temper towards the Protestants without offence to the opposite party, that with general satisfaction he acquitted himself in this great charge: all which being observed and known to Innocent X. he was in reward of his many Ser∣vices promoted to the degree of Cardinal; and afterwards was made Secretary in the place of Cardinal Panzirolo deceased, a person of that judgment, and quickness of parts fit for business; that his equal per∣haps was not again to be found in any part of the World. And yet Ghigi pleased the Pope as well, or perhaps better than Panzirolo; for In∣nocent being on his death-bed, where Men commonly put off all dis∣guises of dissimulation, declared, that of all the Cardinals, there was none more fit to succeed him, than Chigi. Howsoever in the Conclave there was scarce any task, or discourse of Chigi for the first three months; until at length being named, the whole Colledg concurred with unani∣mous Votes in his Election; the news of which was received in the City of Rome with extraordinary joy and satisfaction of the People. The first ten days after his promotion he spent in ordering the state of his publick and private Affairs, giving Audience to Ambassadours, and receiving Visits, and Complements from Cardinals and Civil Magi∣strates: And on the 18th. of April he was Crowned after the manner of other Popes, in the great Portico of St. Peter's Church; after which Ceremony was ended he was publickly heard to use this saying, Vivo Ego, jam non Ego, vivit verò in me Christus: I live, but not I, but Christ who liveth in me, which was the Motto he commonly inscribed over the Chambers of his private retirements. In the next place, he wrote his Letters to the Kings of France and Spain, acquainting them with his promotion to the Apostolical Chair; and having given them the paternal Benediction, he persuaded them to Peace, and Concord amongst themselves, and so turn their Forces a∣gainst the Turks, for assistance of the Venetians who were a match une∣qual to contend with so mighty an Emperour. But before we proceed farther, it is to be expected that we should make an end of the Story of Donna Olympia, who remained all this while between hope, and fear, in what manner Alexander would deal with her. Prince Pamfilio was one of the first who went to congratulate
with him: and her Ladyship that she might not be the last, to express her joy, sent her Maggiordomo or Steward to pay her Respects, declaring the great joy she conceived to see one created Pope, to whom her Kins∣man had opened the way by making him Cardinal, and her joys were consummate, in that she had always represented him to Innocent as a Person of extraordinary Abilities, so that she could not but share with him in the advance of his fortunes. The Pope answered little and in ambi∣guous terms; so that to discover his more deep, and real thoughts, Car∣dinal Azzolini was employed, who making great professions in her behalf endeavoured to draw from the Pope something of his intentions to∣wards her. But Alexander who professed always to do things leisurely, was not very open in declaring himself, which gave Olympia the first occasion of distrust: and indeed she had very much reason, for every day made new discoveries of the corruptions and abuses she had exer∣cised both in Civil, and Ecclesiastical matters. The Datary was wholly corrupted by the Simonies she had introduced, all Places sold, no Treasure left, besides a thousand other Villanies, and mischiefs she had committed. There was not a day passed, but the Pope had his hands filled with Memorials against her; so that his zeal for the Church could not with∣out scandal fit still, and let slip such horrid Crimes without Punish∣ment. At the report hereof the Lady trembling with fear sent Cardinal Barberino to discourse the Pope before matters were gone too far: but the Pope was too zealous, and wife to hearken to any smooth and elo∣quent Speeches in her behalf: and therefore positive in his resolutions sent his express Commands to Olympia to leave Rome in three days, and in eight to be at Orvieto, which is a City about thirty miles distant from Rome, from whence she was not to remove without new Orders from the Pope. There was no opposing these positive Commands, which were neither to be questioned nor delayed; so that her Ladyship privately departed the City, for fear of being affronted by the Rabble, who every where made Songs, and Jests of her; the same day that her Ladyship quitted Rome, the Pope began to take the examination of Wit∣nesses for drawing up the Process, but the work was too tedious to be speedily finished; for so many several Charges, and Impeachments came daily against her that there was no end, nor could the Books be shut up though swelled to incredible Volumes. Wherefore to make short work, the Pope commanded ten of the most material Points to be filed against her, to which she was in the first place to give answer, before a subse∣quent Charge was to be formed: and in the mean time, it was the dis∣course of the Town, that the Pope resolved to sequester her Estate, and imprison her Person. But whilst Affairs went on in this manner a dreadful Visitation of Pestilence in the year 1656. fell upon Rome, which so afflicted the City, that not onely Trade and Commerce was interrupted, but the common Courts of Justice were shut up, so that the farther prosecution of Donna Olympia ceased: but the Justice of God took up the Cause against her, and the divine Vengeance reached this guilty Wretch by a stroak of the Plague, of which she died at Orvieto some few months after her persecution.
It was computed that she left more than two millions of Crowns in ready Money, besides Land, and moveables inestimable, and what she had already bestowed on her kinred. After her death there was no∣thing more done, and not much more talk'd of her, for the Prince Pam∣filio as Heir to her Estate quietly possessed himself of all, taking his Ha∣bitation in her Palace in the Piazza of Navona, which is the fairest in all Rome: onely it is said, she left some few Legacies amongst her other kindred, which did not exceed three hundred thousand Crowns. When Alexander came first to the Papal Chair he publickly declared against Nepotism, and with some direful asseverations that he would never rule by his Kinred, nor enrich his Family with the spoils of the Church: whilst he continued in this humour he prosecuted Donna O∣lympia with as much severity and rigour, as the methods, and course of Law would allow; so that after her death, it was believed, he would have confiscated all her Estate to the use of St. Peter: but it seems, the detestation of her Crimes, and his anger for all her evils, died, and va∣nished with her person; only 'tis said, that he drew away about a mil∣lion of Crowns from Prince Pamfilio her Heir, to bestow on his own Kin∣dred (robbing Peter, as we say, to pay Paul) But this sturdy humour against his Kindred continued not long, be∣fore he suffered himself to be overcome by the yerning of his own bowels towards them, and by the persuasion of some Cardinals his Confidents, who observing a desire in him to break his late protestation met his wishes with their arguments of love towards his own Bloud, and Rela∣tions; for why should he be singular, and less kind to himself, and Fa∣mily than other Popes? or why should the House of Chigi remain onely obscure, and mean? whilest the Barberini, and Pamfilii were opulent, and exalted, and all the Princes of Rome derived their Riches, and great∣ness from the favour and benefice of Popes, who had been their Pre∣decessours. These considerations melted the tender heart of Alexander in such manner, that towards the end of the first year of his Pontificate, he cal∣led his Brother Don Mario with his Son Flavio, and Don Augustino the Son of his Brother Augusto, unto the Court; and being now provided with a Brother, and two Nephews he used them with as much indul∣gence, as other Popes had shewn to their kindred; giving the World to understand, how little Men are acquainted with their own hearts, and how easily they change their resolutions, and affections with the alte∣ration of their fortunes, and encrease of their honours: but lest it should seem strange to the World, that after such solemn protestations against Nepotism, he should without other methods introduce his Nephews in∣to Offices, and the principal benefits, and profits of the Church, he with much formality in a publick Consistory demanded the Opinion of the Cardinals, whether the admittance of such faithful friends, as his Bro∣ther and Nephews might not rather be useful, than detrimental to the Church? The Cardinals who are always civil to the Pope and ready to concur with his desires; every one entertaning an expectancy of be∣ing Pope himself, when it might be his own case and might feel the like warm inclinations towards his own bloud; would not be so rude as to exclude his Family from their share in the Government; but rather en∣couraged him to indulg his own Family, and be as kind to his, as his
Predecessours had been to their Relations: and lest the World should by this admittance of a new Nepotism, imagine, or suspect that the Re∣venues of the Church should be employed to the raising of the Family of Chigi, and that the times of Ʋrban VIII. and Innocent X. were re∣turned; he ordered Briefs to be issued against Simony, and other cor∣ruptions with more severe terms, and under other more execrable male∣dictions than had formerly been used: He renewed also antient Decrees against Pensions and Gifts: and farther Ordained, that several vacant Benefices should not be supplied, but that the Revenue of them being re∣ceived into the Apostolical Chamber, should be employed towards ex∣tinguishing the vast Debts of the Church. And that he might farther engage, and insinuate himself into the minds and good will of the People, who conceived high thoughts of him, and demonstrated unusual expressions of joy at the beginning of his Inauguration; he exercised his paternal Love, and Charity towards them in three several calamities which befel the people of Rome, and followed one, as it were, on the neck of the other. In the year 1656. the City (as we have said) was visited with such a raging Pestilence, which continued for two years, as rendered it al∣most desolate; during which time the Famine had been as destructive, and made an end of those which the Plague had left, had not the Poor been relieved and comforted by the generous care, and pious charity of this Pope. No sooner was the Pestilence ceased, but the Tyber swel∣ling with inordinate Rains, surpassed its banks with such a deluge, as drowned all the Campagne, and lower Villages of Rome: but those which were seated on higher elevations of Hills, were environed so with the Waters on all sides, that for the space of fifteen days, they could have no communication with their Neighbours for relief, and sustenance; onely the Pope taking compassion on his People, employed great num∣bers of flat-bottomed Boats, laden with Provisions to pass from one Village to another, for the succour, and sustenance of the Inhabitants; after which, he took all the courses, and expedients possible to mode∣rate the price of Wheat, that the People might be supported, and not die with Famine. After two such extream Calamities many of those who escaped the Pestilence, and the Deluge, perished by a fatal Earth∣quake, which overturned almost all the Villages in the Country of Romagne; to repair which and rebuild their Towns, the Pope like a common Father, was highly liberal, and bountiful in his Contribu∣tions. Soon after the enstalment of Pope Alexander, the Christian Princes sent their respective Ambassadours to Rome after the usual custom, to pay (as they call it) their Acts of Obedience, and homage to the Pope. Those who were most conspicuous, and eminent were the Duke de Cre∣qui sent from the Crown of France, and the Cardinal of Aragon from his Catholick Majesty: they were both received with great honour and respect at the Court of Rome; but if either of them had acquired a greater esteem than the other, it was the Duke of Crequi, a person ex∣treamly handsom, and well fashioned, of a most antient and illustrious Family, first Gentleman of the King's Bed-Chamber, and in all things so well accomplished, that the Court of Rome esteemed it self highly ho∣noured by the presence, and administration of so noble a Personage:
his onely fault was, that he was haughty, and of an humour so fierce, as became a Camp better than the more polite, and gentle comportments of an Italian Court, or the conversation of Ecclesiastical Persons. Howsoever, his deportment was pleasing enough to the Pope and Cardinals, so long as Don Mario and the Nephews comported them∣selves, (as they did at first) within the limits of some reasonable mo∣desty; but so soon as they began to pass those terms, and become inso∣lent, this Ambassadour could not long sustain their pride, before their resentments broke forth into outragious violences: as we shall have oc∣casion to discourse when we come to the year 1662. In the year 1655.An. 1656. Christina Queen of Sweden renounced the Pro∣testant Religion in which she had been educated, and with it her Crown, which she resigned to her kinsman Charles Gustavus, conserving to her∣self a Rent of one hundred thousand Crowns a year out of the Duke∣dom of Pomerania: and making publick profession of the Roman Ca∣tholick Religion, she resolved to spend her days at Rome, where she might enjoy it in the most pompous and triumphant manner; and where she might not onely delight herself in conversation with grave Cardi∣nals, and the most learned Men in the World, (of whom she was a great Admirer) but also being favoured by the Pope, could on all occasions have recourse to him for Pardons, Indulgences, and his paternal Bene∣diction. Wherefore leaving her Kingdom, she apparrelled herself in the habit of a Man; in which disguise passing through Denmark, and the lower Germany, she came by way of Holland to Brussels, where in the Privy-Chamber of the Arch-Duke Leopold at that time Governour of the Low-Countries, and in presence of him and all his Nobles on the Eve of Christmas, she solemnly abjured the Heresies of Luther, and made profession of the Roman Catholick Faith. The Plague raging that year at Rome, she deferred her journey thither, until health was restored to that City, and Country; at which time Alexander VII. being crea∣ted Pope, she prosecuted her design of setling her Habitation in Rome, which she having signified to the Pope, and received his license, she made at his desire an other solemn abjuration of Lutherism at Inspruck, which might dispose and prepare her more solemn reception into Italy. When the Queen was in Germany the Pope dispatched Luke Holsten a Hamburgher by Nation, who was keeper of the Vatican Library to make her Majesty a Complement in his name; the which Person was the more acceptable to her in respect of the fame, and reputation he had acquired of being the most learned Man of that age. When she ap∣proached near unto Rome, he sent four Nuntios to meet her, viz. the Arch-bishop of Thebes, the Arch-bishop of Ravenna, with the Dean, and Clerk of the Apostolical Chamber, where attendance was truly Royal and magnificent: at her entrance into the City, she was met by two Le∣gats à Latere, namely, Cardinal John Charles de Medices Brother to the great Duke of Toscany, and Cardinal Frederick Brother of the Lantgrave of Hessen, who with a pompous train conducted her to the Vatican Palace, where she was lodged with all the Royalty appertaining to a Queen. Many and various were the Ceremonies which passed at the reception of this great Person; after which on Christmas day she was confirmed by the Pope in St. Peter's Church, who superadded the name of Alexandra to that of Christina.
In the year 1657.An. 1657. the Venetians were hardly pressed by the formi∣dable Power of the Ottoman Arms; and being unable by their own force to wage a War against that potent Enemy; the Senate omitted no appli∣cations, or addresses to persuade forein Princes to yield them succour either by Men, or Money. But Wars raging in all parts of Christen∣dom administred trouble, and care sufficient for every Prince to consult and provide for his own affairs and safety. The Czar of Moscovy, to whom the Venetians sent their Ambassadour, promised fair, and gave good words, but with little other effect; it being difficult to concert matters, or engage affections, or reconcile the Interest of Princes so re∣mote. Thus the Venetians becoming destitute of all succours from forein Powers, addressed themselves to the Pope, as their ultimate re∣fuge in all their distresses, beseeching his Holiness to grant them such sums of Mony as might supply their present occasions. But alas, Rome being but newly recovered from a languishing state of Pestilence and from other calamities before mentioned, during which immense sums had been issued from the publick Treasury to sustain the Commonalty in their scarcity and want; the Pope alledged just Causes to excuse the disbursment of Money from his Treasury, which had of late years been miserably exhausted by the Avarice of those who had had the management of it: Howsoever though the Pope pretended himself not able to issue out Money from his own Exchequer; yet he hearkened to some Propo∣sals and expedients for raising it, by the sale of certain Lands, and Rents belonging to the two Orders of the Crociferi, and of the Santo Spirito; which the Pope's Authority, and the cause for which they were sold, being for maintenance of a War against Infidels, and of the Christian Cause against Turks; was sufficient to warrant and hallow the sale, and give a lawful Title to any Purchaser. The Order of the Crociferi was very ancient, and possessed several Monasteries dispersed in all parts of Italy; but that of the Spirito Santo consisted of three Mona∣steries onely, and all within the Dominion of the Republick, by which they had been endowed under the protection and government of the Council of Ten: howsoever the desolation of these Monasteries could not pass without the severe Censures and reflections of the World: and though the Friers of those Orders were much fallen from the inte∣grity of their antient institution, and become corrupt and debauched in their lives, and manners, yet their clamours could not be suppressed, nor the calumnies which they daily uttered against the Pope, and the Republick be quieted. Howsoever a Bull being passed, and a Decree of the Senate for sale of the Lands, together with those of some o∣ther smaller Monasteries; the Pope's Nuntio with three Senators were commissionated to sell, and pass the Title to the Purchasers, whereby the Senate raised above a million of Ducats, which were all employed to carry forward a War against the Turk. Whilest this good corres∣pondence passed between the Pope and the Republick, and that the Venetians had daily need of succours, and assistances from the Church; it was thought a convenient season in the heat of these Negotiations, for the Pope to propose the restoration of the Jesuits to their possessions on the Dominions of Venice, from whence they had been banished on occasion of the differences between Paul V. and the Venetians. Carlo Carafa Bishop of Antwerp, then Nuntio at Venice represented the Pope's
desires herein at a full Senate, laying before them the conveniences they might expect, and benefits they might reap, by closing with the Pope's demands in this Case, which seemed to be much changed, since the first Original Decree, and bando against them; for that those Jesuits who had fomented the divisions, and Sedition were already dead; and that those who were to supply their places would be more cautious, and careful for the future in what manner they incurred the displeasure of the Republick: these considerations being seconded by warm instances of the French Ambassadour to the same purpose, the matter was carried in the Senate for restoration of the Jesuits, and though the antient Decrees of the Senate in this case were positive, and rigorous to the contrary, and that Cavalier Soranzo greatly opposed the admission; yet the pressure of Affairs, and the necessity of gratifying the Pope was such, that the former Decrees were repealed, and the Laws against the Jesuits made void; and in this manner and on this occasion in the year 1657. they again restored to their possessions within the Venetian Dominions, the Church of the Crociferi being conferred upon them in the City of Venice. The whole Court of Rome being gratified by this concession; not onely the Pope, but the Cardinals also concurred in their liberal contri∣butions towards maintenance of the War against the Turk: of which five especially were signally bountiful, and munificent above the others; namely, Antonio Barberino, who gave one hundred thousand Ducats in Gold; Cardinal Mazarine gave two hundred thousand; Francisco Bar∣berino, and Flavio Ghigi agreed to maintain three Gallies at their own expence; and lastly Cardinal Nicholas who was a Count of the Bath, not having sufficient Estate in ready Money to make such a contribu∣tion as he desired, sold his Palace and Houshold-stuff, and Vineyards, that he might be registred amongst the Benefactors to this War. At this time also the Ottoman Arms prevailed against the Emperour in the upper parts of Hungary, so that Varadin was taken, and the Turks became very formidable: Wherefore that Pope Alexander might not seem less sollicitous for conservation of the Emperour than he was for the Venetians; he issued considerable sums out of his Treasury, and laid a Decimation on the Revenue of the Clergy over all Italy, where∣with to assist the Imperial Arms: and farther wrote Letters to the Kings of France, and Spain then busily employed in a Treaty at the Pyre∣neans, that having concluded a Peace amongst themselves, and confirm∣ed, and strengthned the Alliance by the ties, and Obligations of a Mar∣riage, they would have respect to the Wars in Hungary, which were carried on by the Turk to the destruction, and ruin of the Christian Cause. But we are not here to omit, that this Treaty of the Pyreneans which was held in the Island of Pheasants, where the Marriage was concluded between the present King Lewis XIV. and Maria Teresa Infanta of Spain, was acted and carried on between Cardinal Mazarini, and Don Luis d' Haro, without the mediation and concurrence of this Pope Alexander: which seems the more strange, in regard that this very Pope was Nuntio at Munster, and once managed that Treaty there in behalf of Innocent X. with great applause, and proof of his abilities and integrity, and was personally known to the Cardinal; many therefore and various were
the reflections on this Point by the Politicians of those times; and many Writers on this Subject have assigned divers Causes, and reasons for it. Some would have it, that during the time that Cardinal Mazarine, and the Pope, then in quality of Nuntio were together in Germany, several differences had arisen between them, not then reconciled; and that the Nuntio had always shewn some partiality towards the Court of Spain; for which cause Mazarine had opposed the election of him to be Pope; and though afterwards he had been sweetned by the character, and commendations which Sachetti had given of him; yet still some acrimo∣ny remained on the spirits of the Pope, because he observed an aver∣sion in the Cardinal to treat the Peace in any part, where the Pope did reside; he also observed with what indignity to the Papal Sea he had treated the Cardinal of Retz: and with what neglect, and almost con∣tempt he comported himself towards his Nuntio at Paris. Moreover, the Pope was not a little displeased to observe what backwardness, and delay was used by the Court of France, no onely in sending the Extra∣ordinary Embassy of Obedience to Rome, but the Ordinary also of Re∣sidency; nor was the Pope ignorant of those slight, and contemptible expressions, which both the Cardinal, and his Favourite the Bishop of Omodei publickly uttered with ill reflections on his Person. On the other side the Cardinal complained of the Pope's Ingratitude; for that after he had so freely concurred in his Election, he always evidenced an aversness to comply with him in the most reasonable Demands, and ever favoured that Party which interfered with the Interest of France; so that the Cardinal would often say, that the Pope offered him frequent∣ly injuries, that so, if at any time, he did him right, it might seem to proceed from favour rather than from the motives of Justice. These matters, and the like occasioning coldness of correspondence, it is no wonder, that Writers should attribute the reason of the Pope's exclusion from this Treaty of Peace to the preceding Causes; Whenas the most reasonable Obstacle might be, the Pope's incapacity to moderate, and concur in the terms of this Peace: for whereas the foundation of this Peace between the two Crowns, was established on the Articles conclu∣ded and agreed at the Treaty of Munster; which the Pope having con∣demned, disanulled, and protested against, it could not be expected, that the Pope should be called, and made a Party to that Treaty, un∣less they had resolved to raise difficulties, by that opposition, and ob∣structions which would have been made by the Pope, and his Mi∣nisters. In short, the Marriage being celebrated between the most Christian King; and the Infanta Maria Teresa, the onely cause, and Object of the Peace; was afterwards the original of many quarrels, and disorders in Christendom. For the Spaniards not having been so strict, and wary as the importance of the matter required, did not take care to pen the Instrument of Renuntiation which the Infanta signed to the Dominions of her Father, and all her Paternal Inheritance with such strict terms, but that there was still a Gate open to pretensions: nor was the form of the Oath so strict, and expressive, but that there was place left for evasions, as the ambition of Men, and their desire of Dominion should govern and transport them; from whence great confusions, and bloudy Wars have arisen, as the Annals of our times are able to attest.
In the beginning of this year a quarrel arose at Rome between the Contestabile Colonna, and the Cavalier Chiaia,An. 1660. Captain of the Pope's Guards, caused by a Dispute they had for a Bank or Seat at a Comedy. An other quarrel this Colonna maintained with the Ambassadour of Tos∣cany, for not resigning to him the principal place at a Visit which they made to the Princess Farnese: An other quarrel he created not long af∣ter at Milan with the Prince of Avellino, on occasion of a Dispute about the Title of Excellency; all which had proceeded farther than to words, had they been to be managed by other measures, than those of wise and cautious Italians. About this time the Duke of Bracciano, Father of the Cardinal of that name, dying at Rome, the Duke of Nerula his Brother, a Person of great parts and abilities, succeeded to the Estate, and to the Inheri∣tance; taking on himself the Title of Highness; which he caused his Subjects to inscribe in all the Memorials, and Writings they made to him. Howsoever, such as were Foreiners, and independent to the Duke, refused to give him other Title than that of Excellency; until the Cardinal de Retz was persuaded to pass that Complement upon him; and then the Prince Pamfilio, and all the Princes of Rome, who were in any wise considerable for Birth, Riches, or Power, began to assume the honour of Highness: to prevent which and the many Controversies which might arise from these beginnings, the Pope gave Order, that Title of Highness should be given to no Prince, who was Vassal or Feu∣datary of the Church, unless to the Duke of Parma onely, and as to all the Families descended from Popes, as also to all the Roman Barons, they were not to pretend to a Title above that of Colonna, and Orsina, which was no other than that of Excellency. In the year 1661.An. 1661. one Francis Borri born at Milan vented strange and unheard of Heresies and Enthusiastical Doctrines at Rome, drawing unto himself many followers and Disciples, by a feigned Hypocrisie and disimulation, tending to sublime Notions, and elevations of a spiri∣tual Life. The Doctrines he taught, which he pretended to have re∣ceived from Divine Inspiration were: That the Blessed Virgin was really a Goddess; because she was Mother of the Word Eternal which was God. And to express this Mystery to his Disciples, he maintained, that the Blessed Virgin was the Holy Ghost Incarnate in the Womb of St. Anne. And for this reason, he stiled the Blessed Virgin, most Holy Goddess, and onely Daughter of the Most High. He taught farther: That in the Holy Eucharist, there was not only the Natural Body of Christ, but that of the Virgin Mary joined with it. That besides Hell, and Purgatory, and Limbo, there was a fourth place appointed for the receptacle of Infidels. That the Book of Ecclesiastes wrote by Solomon was not Scripture, but a Treatise full of Errours com∣posed by him, at the time, when he remained in Original Sin. And that it was not necessary to make confession of secret sins in the Ear of a Priest. These, and many other wild Fancies being figments formed in the hot and disturbed brain of Borri; the Inquisition had no sooner notice of, but they sent out Warrants to take him, of which he having notice, fled first to Inspruck: howsoever his Heresies were examined, and condemn∣ed by the Inquisition, and he who was the Author of them was burnt
in Effigie: of which when Borri had notice, he went to Strasbourg, where to be revenged of the Pope, he burn'd him also in Effigie. Thence pas∣sing through Holland, he vented a thousand chimerical Opinions at Ro∣terdam. Thence he went to Coppenhagen in Denmark, where he made profession of Chymistry, and wherein ha was so excellent an Operator, that he created a real belief in King Frederick III. that he had the Phi∣losopher's Stone, by which he was able to turn any metal into Gold: but that King dying, his Son Christian V. was far from such a belief, and discovering him to be an Impostor, gave him five hundred Crowns, and a Passport, and so dismissed him from his Dominions. Borri after∣wards designing to travel into Turky, was in Moravia, on his way thi∣ther seised by the Emperour's command, and sent to Rome, where being sentenced by the Inquisition, he was in the year 1670. condemned to perpetual imprisonment. The which Story I the more willingly men∣tion, because I remember in the year 1678. to have seen him at Rome, a Prisoner in the Castle of St. Angelo. An. 1662.The Duke of Crequi, who (as we have said) resided at Rome with character of Ambassadour Extraordinary from his most Christian Majesty, was at first received, and caressed with all the ceremony, and respect, which that Court was able to express; but afterwards the Duke in the greatness of his Spirit, not being able to support the pride, and disdain which he observed to be lodged in the breast of Don Mario the Brother, and the Cardinal Ghigi, Nephew to the Pope, he retired, to evidence the little esteem he had for them, by preferring other Cardinals before them in his Visits. The Pope highly resenting this neglect, and want of due respect, received the Ambassadour at all his Audiences with much cold∣ness and indifferency, refusing to grant him any thing which he demand∣ed of favour to the King his Master, or his Subjects. The Pope also plainly told the Ambassadour, that he had deferred to make the Com∣plement which he owed to the Ambassadress his Lady, until first he had done him right, in performance of that honour, which was due to his Kindred and Relations. Whilest this ill correspondence continued between the Pope and the Ambassadour, it happened, that a quarrel arose between two French men, and three Corsi, who were of the Pope's Guard (which had lately been recruited with one hundred and fifty Soldiers of the same Country of Corsica.) The cause of which was this, Two French Men to shew their bravery undertook to disarm the Night Petrol of three Corsi, which they easily effected, because the Officer which was with them com∣manded them, not to fire their Carbines, or make resistance, for which default, he was cashiered the Service, and declared uncapable of farther Office; and the Soldiers also were punished for cowardise and neglect of their duty. It is reported also, that Don Mario upbraided the Corsi with ignominious terms; saying, that they knew not how to make use of their Arms; and that upon any other default of this nature, he would shave their heads, and send them to the Gallies. The Corsi to excuse themselves laid some fault on Cardinal Imperiale the Governour, who to acquit himself, and recover his honour; ordered the Bailiffs, and Of∣ficers, which he had employed to make search for some persons in a House adjoyning to the Palace of Farnese where the French Ambassa∣dour lodged, to make farther search for them into the very House
of his Excellency, during the time that he was at Mass in his Chappel. The Ambassadour had just reason to resent this Affront, and indig∣nity offered to his Sanctuary, (the Houses of forein Ministers being so esteemed at Rome) but the quarrel was higher enflamed by a certain French Man, who that Evening, as he passed through the quarters of the Corsi, uttered some indiscreet words of scorn, and contempt against them, for which they pursued him as far as the Ambassadour's Stables; who hearing a noise, sent some of his Servants to appease the tumult: but his endeavours rather enflamed, than quieted the disturbance, for the Corsi being gathered in great numbers began to fire their Carbines at the Ambassadour himself, whilst he looked out at his Windows, killing some of his Lacquies with three or four more, who casually happened to be then present with the Ambassadour. And not content with this outrage put themselves into a Body, and in Military order with their Colours flying, and Drums beating, came and presented themselves a∣gain before the Palace Farnese; on which appearance the Ambassadour caused the Gates to be shut: During this tumult, it happened that the Lady Ambassadress returned home, whom when the Corsi espied, these barbarous beasts fired a Volley of shot into her Coach, and killed a Page, who attended at the Boot; with which unexpected accident the Lady being affrighted, fled for refuge into the Palace of Cardinal d' Este; who soon afterwards, with a Guard of two hundred Men convoyed her safe to the Duke her Husband, though Cardinal Imperiale the Gover∣nour had ordered the Captain of the Corsi to obstruct the passage of Cardinal d' Este; but when this Cardinal sent Imperiale word, that he should answer the least disorder, which should happen hereupon, with the loss of his life, he considered better upon it, and desisted from giving farther interruption. The Duke of Crequi passed all the Night following in consultation with the Ambassadours of Spain, Venice, Malta; and with others whom he esteemed well affected to the Crown of France; all which agreed that the Dignity and Character of sacred Embassies was wounded and violated by this outrage. On the other side, the Cardinal Impe∣riale, Don Mario, and others of that faction held long conferences con∣cerning the management of this Affair: for to justifie it, the matter was too foul, and barbarous to admit of any plea, or excuse: and therefore it was resolved to give it the name of a Riot, and tumult raised by in∣solence of the Soldiery; and that all the Family of the Ghigi both Men and Women should make their Visits of Condolence to the Ambassa∣dour and his Lady, expressing abundance of sorrow and trouble for the late misfortune, which they solely attributed to the insolence and fury of Soldiers, and not to any design, or premeditated Act of the Com∣manders. But this Wound was too fresh, and sore to be salved with a remedy of such vain excuses; considering that the Gates of Rome were by express Order left open all the Night, to afford means, and op∣portunity for the Corsi to retire, and make their escape. The news of what had passed at Rome, was brought to the King whilst he was performing the Ceremonies of his Birth-day at St. Ger∣mains; which though it disturbed his Majesty, and took much off from the Revels and jollity of the day; yet no sudden resolution was taken until some days after. In the mean time Letters arrived both from the
Pope, and the Queen of Sweden, representing the matter, as a mere ac∣cident caused by a sudden, and an unreasonable outrage of the Soldiery, for which neither the Pope, nor his Kinred, nor the Commanders could be accountable; and with this account the King began to be so well sa∣tisfied, that he had once thoughts to pass it by, and shew no farther re∣sentments of it. But whilest this was meditating, Letters came from the Duke of Crequi, advising, that by reason of the ill treatment he re∣ceived from the Court of Rome, the common provisions for the support of his House were in a great measure restrained; so that he should be forced with his Family to leave Rome, and to retire into the Dominions of the Duke of Toscany. This Advice and new matter of Affront so en∣raged the mind of the King, that he immediately commanded the Nuntio to depart his Dominions, which was executed so effectually, that he was conducted by a Guard to the confines of Savoy. In the mean time the Pope being desirous to excuse, and protect Cardi∣nal Imperiale, was contented to take the blame upon himself; and to mannage the matter, he constituted a select Congregation of Cardinals, viz. Rospigliosi, Chigi, Borromeo, Imperiale, Pio, Sachetti, Corrado, and Farnese, to examine, and discourse the matters in Dispute in a Political manner, and to give their Opinions by what ways and means, things might best admit of an Accommodation. The Cardinal Chigi also ob∣tained licence to be admitted to a Visit with the French Ambassadour: but it signified little, for the Ambassadour appeared sullen, and reserved; saying, that he had no quarrel with the Corsi, nor had he reason to blame them for executing onely the commands of their Masters. On the first of September Crequi departed from Rome, in company with the Duke of Cesarini, who having shewed some concernment, and partiality for the French Party, lay under the displeasure and indigna∣tion of the Pope. So soon as the Ambassadour was gone, discontents slew yet higher than before; for it was not onely advised to commit Cardinal d' Este into the Prison of St. Angelo, but also to deprive both him, and Mancini of the degree and dignity of Cardinals. But howsoever, it was thought necessary to appease the King by some pleasing Lenitives, and by means which might pacifie his just Anger and displeasure: To which end, the Pope dispatched divers affectionate Let∣ters to him, full of sorrow, and resentment for the late unhappy mis∣chiefs: divers Proposals were also dispatched to the Duke of Crequi tending to an Accommodation: and Edicts published against the Corsi, who were criminals in this Action, desiring all Princes into whose Do∣minions they were fled, not to allow, or grant them protection. And farther in detestation of this late fact, a Company of the Corsi, which were not concerned in the Riot, were disbanded, and cashiered from ser∣vice of the Pope. In the mean time, Crequi remained at Radocofani (which is within the Dominions of the Great Duke) expecting Orders from the King in what manner he was to behave and govern himself: which being come with the forms of adjustment, and some private instructions in favour of the Dukes of Parma, and Modena; the Abbat Rospigliosi (Nephew of the Cardinal of that name) was dispatched to the Ambassadour with Instructions, and Proposals: but this Treaty taking no effect, Rasponi was employed: but then the Duke proposed two Alternatives, the one
was totally excluded, and the other admitted of so many exceptions; that Crequi despairing of any reconciliation, went to Luca, and thence to Ligorne, from whence passing into France, he added more fuel to the Fire, encreasing the differences which were as yet too fresh, and new to be reconciled. The two Alternatives were as follow: That Castro and Rociglione should be restored to the Duke of Par∣ma, and the Valley of Comachio to the Duke of Modena: the most Christian King requiring no other satisfaction for the late injuries he received, than that he might be able to do justice to the two Princes his Allies and Friends, who had resigned themselves to his defence, and protection. And to the end that Ambassadours from his Majesty and other Princes might for the future live quietly at Rome with their Families, and enjoy the priviledges and immunities which appertain to them according to the Law of Nations; no Design should be en∣terprised against them, without the consent, and knowledg of the Sacred Colledg. That the Processes at Law against the Duke Cesarini should be su∣perseded; and reparations made him for all detriment done to his E∣state, and disparagement to his Honour. And that likewise proceed∣ings at Law, whether Civil, or criminal against any Person on this oc∣casion should cease, after the twentieth of August. That all Corps of Guard after that time, and quarters of Soldiers be removed out of Rome; and after this, That the manner, how the Duke Cesarini is to be re∣ceived into Rome, be treated, and agreed with himself. But in case the Pope did not judg fit to assent, and agree to these Pro∣posals, then this Alternative was offered: That Don Mario be banished to Siena for five years. That Car∣dinal Ghigi be sent Legat into France, to make the Pope's excuse at his first Audience, upon the matters which lately happened in Rome. That at his second Audience, he shall supplicate his Majesties Par∣don both for himself and his whole Family; and that the form, and circumstances of this Address, shall be ordered and concerted with the Ambassadour Crequi. That Cardinal Imperiale be degraded, and deprived of his Hat. That the Captain of the Guards be ca∣shiered, and for ever banished. That a Pyramid be erected amidst the late quarters of the Corsi at Rome, with an Inscription specifying the Crime for which they were banished, and for which they were rendered uncapable for ever more to serve, or bear Arms in Rome. These were the first draughts of those Proposals which France offered in order to an Accommodation; which being brought to Rome did greatly trouble the mind of the Pope, with many melancholly and distracted thoughts; of which he eased himself in a full Consistory, complaining of the hard terms exacted from him by the King of France: For reply where∣unto some of the Cardinals, and particularly Azzolino, spake loudly against the Proposals, encouraging the Pope to a fortitude of mind, and to stand stiff upon his terms, rather demanding satisfaction from the King, than yielding to terms derogatory to his Honour. Howsoever the Pope being streightned in his thoughts, and being divided between the ap∣prehensions he conceived of a War against the Church, and the tender∣ness he had for his Relations, his own Honour, and the reputation of
the Sacred Colledg, which he esteemed wounded in the person of Car∣dinal Imperiale; he inclined rather to the second Alternative, than to the first: and accordingly he designed to send Cardinal Chigi his Legat into France: and Imperiale was to be removed from his Government in Rome, and sent Legat into the Marca. But because this change appeared to the King rather a promotion, than a punishment, he was sent to Ge∣noua, there to reside, until he could contrive means to reconcile himself to the King: but because the Brief did not denote this dismission under the term of Banishment, exceptions were made thereunto as dissenta∣neous from the pleasure of his Majesty: but as to Don Mario the Pope seemed to grant whatsoever was desired, and to sacrifice him, and all his Relations, for the quietness and peace of the Church; but this was only a flourish, and an excess of words as afterwards appeared in the sequel, when matters came to be put in execution. As to the Corsi, whatsoever was demanded, was condescended unto. But things being in this imperfect manner agreed; this year ended with fears, and apprehensions of an ensuing War. And in the mean time Avignon revolting from the Pope, the Inhabitants pulled down the Arms of the Church, and expelled the Papal Officers from the City: the People crying aloud for France, and their return to that Dominion, from whence they had been unjustly alienated by connivance, or indulgence of former Kings: and now they erected the Arms of France in all publick places; and restored, or renewed the Antient Inscriptions, which vindicated, and attested the Right which the Kings of France held unto that City. To augment all these difficulties, Spain seemed inclining to the con∣cernments of France; for which reason the Venetians appeared the most proper Instruments to be employed in the Offices of Mediation; and accordingly the Ambassadour of that Republick residing at Paris called Luigi Grimani received Instructions to treat in favour of the Pope; and indeed the way of Treaty was the onely remedy which Rome could propose; for the King of Spain, to the great admiration of the World, had granted leave for the French Troops to march through Milan into the Ecclesiastical State. The Duke of Savoy adhered to the French In∣terest; Genoua being weak, and unable to resist, durst not deny a com∣pliance; the Duke of Parma, and Modena for their own convenience, and hopes of benefit, became parties in combination against the Pope. So that France nourishing vast Designs by this conjuncture of Affairs, kept up their dissatisfactions in the Court of Rome, which they pretended to have been augmented, and enflamed by that honourable treatment and reception, which the Pope had given to Charles Duke of Loraine, who was fled from France, and shrouded himself under the protection of the Church. An. 1663.About the beginning of this year Cardinal d' Este, and the Duke of Crequi arrived at Paris, where they gave a full relation of all matters which had lately passed in that Outrage, committed by the Corsi; with all the particulars of the Treaty which had been acted at St. Quirico: But they represented things in such severe terms, as greatly exasperated the mind of h Majesty, and caused him to reject all the Briefs, Papers, and Letters which were sent from the Pope, and Cardinals for their : so that nothing was now discoursed of at Paris but War,
and the manner how to carry, and manage the French Arms in Italy; which were so feared and apprehended at Rome, that all the consulta∣tions of the Consistory were to facilitate the Negotiations, and give such satisfaction, as might prevent a War. In the mean time Aloisé Grimani Ambassadour for the Republick of Venice, then residing at Paris, used all means possible to bring matters to a reasonable understanding: in which he so well succeeded, that he procured a new Deputation for Plenipotentiaries to be nominated, and appointed by both sides, and the place for Treaty to be Lions: So on the twentieth of February an Instrument was signed by the Ambassa∣dour Grimani, and the Duke of Crequi, and subscribed also by Monsieur Tellier Secretary of State, and War; whereby it was concerted, and a∣greed to enter upon a Treaty at the place aforesaid, and that Plenipo∣tentiaries should be sent thither with Commissions from his Majesty. Thus for some time whilest the troubles were a little appeased, and quieted; the Court of France passed the Carneval with their usual jol∣lity; and entertained it self with celebration of the marriage, between Madmoiselle de Valois, and the Duke of Savoy, the Count de Soissons re∣presenting the person of the Duke at the ceremony of Espousals. The which few days after was followed by the marriage of Madmoiselle Ma∣riana Mancini Niece of Cardinal Mazarini, with the Duke of Buglion great Chamberlain of France. And now the Plenipotentiaries preparing for their meeting at Lions: Aloisé Sagredo arrived at Paris in quality of Ambassadour for the Vene∣tians, and to succeed in the place of Grimani, who was to be assisting in the Office of Mediation at Lions; Grimani, and Monsignor Rasponi Ple∣nipotentiary from the Pope met at the time, and place appointed; but the Duke of Crequi on pretence of the Queen Mother's sickness, or ra∣ther because he desired to be waited, and attended for, came not to Lions till towards the middle of May: where entering on their Confe∣rence, matters were proceeded to a hopeful condition of agreement; when on a sudden they were unhappily interrupted, by the Title which the Pope sent to Rasponi to be his Nuntio Extraordinary to all Christian Princes: for whereas the French King had absolutely determined, not to receive any person from the Pope with Title of Nuntio until the diffe∣rences were accommodated between himself and Rome; the Treaty was by Order of the King broken off upon that punctilio; but afterwards was by Order renewed again at Bonvicino, a place situate on the Fron∣tiers of Savoy; the Parochial Church of which is in the Dominions of France; and on the other side of the Bridg, (which is the Territory of Savoy) is an antient, and famous Monastery of Carmelite Friers; thither as we have said the Treaty was transferred, where besides Crequi, Ra∣sponi, and Grimani, there were present the Agents for Modena, and Par∣ma, and the twelve Consuls of Avigion; Rasponi took his quarters on the side of Savoy, and the other on that of France. Here the particulars were again debated; and the Pope was persuaded to condescend to all the pretensions of France, excepting onely to the re∣stitution of Castro; on which the King peremptorily insisted, because he had engaged his Honour and Authority therein, by the Articles of Peace made at the Pyreneans. The Pope on the other side insisted. That it was not in his Power to pass an Act so prejudicial to the Apostolical
Chair, and contrary to the many Bulls of his Predecessours. And thus whilest both sides insisted resolutely on this Point with many delays and punctilios, which obstructed a conclusion, the King dispatched an express to Rome, to know the ultimate resolution of the Pope on that Point: and when answer was returned, that by reason of the Sentences passed by the Tribunals of Justice, and that Castro was in the Camera annexed to the triple Crown, and incorporated into the Dominions of the Church; he could not assent to have it dismembred from St. Peter's Patrimony: so soon, I say, as this news came, the Treaty broke off, every one returning to his Place and Country. During this Treaty at Buonvicinio, great preparations were making at Rome for a War; and when it broke up without agreement, then con∣trary to all expectation the Troops were disbanded, and the Officers Re∣formed; though in the mean time the French Troops began to march into Italy, which was the occasion of a witty saying: That at Rome they armed, when they knew not with whom they were to have War, and disarmed, when they knew not with whom they should have Peace. And yet it is probable, and by most believed, that there was never any real design of Rupture by either side; but that the pretensions, and prepa∣rations for this War, were onely in appearance, and made subservient to other Projects: though to make it appear real, the Duke of Beaufort was sent with a Fleet of Ships on the Coast of Italy, the approach of which gave an Allarm at the very Gates of Rome; but afterwards disappeared, and stood off again into the Sea, pretending to be driven to Calari in Sardinia by Tempests and contrary Winds. And though neither the Pope, nor King (as was believed) were in earnest in matter of a War; yet the ill correspondence between them was judged prejudicial to Christendom, and obstructive to those suc∣cours which were intended against the Turk, who had then lately made himself Master of Newhausell, and was triumphant in Hungary. Where∣fore the Venetians with more warm instances than ever, laboured to renew the Treaty; in which Office the Spaniards also judged themselves obliged to join, because they desired to keep the Arms of France distant from Italy: and both one and the other used their endeavours so effe∣ctually with the Pope and the King; that they both consented to enter into another Treaty: and accordingly the French King constituted Monsignore Bourlemont then at Florence to be his Plenipotentiary, and the Pope ordained Rasponi with a like Power from him; Pisa being the place appointed for the Treaty: where after some few days of debate, all matters came to be concluded, and agreed in form, and manner fol∣lowing: That his Holiness to please the most Christian King, had assented to dismember Castro from the Patrimony of the Church: conditionally that the Duke of Parma within the space of eight years pay the sum of eight millions six hundred and nineteen Crowns to the Camera: Of which sum having paid one half, he shall be invested, and restored into one half of the Principality. And in case that any dispute shall arise touching the division of the moiety, the same shall be determined by two Arbitrators indifferently chosen, and they not agreeing, the difference shall be referred to the Umpirage of a third Person. Or otherwise the Camera making the division, the Duke shall have Power to chuse;
or otherwise if the Duke makes the division, then the choice shall be in the Power of the Camera. That the Duke of Modena shall renounce all his pretensions to Co∣macchio. And the Pope at the instance of the King shall in lieu there∣of give and surrender unto the said Duke Mount d' Este, which was valued at two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns or thereabouts; and shall remit to him the Interest which he owes to the Montists, which was estimated at fifty thousand Crowns; together with a donative of forty thousand Crowns, or in lieu thereof some Palace in Rome to the Duke's satisfaction. And that the Pope shall give a Bull of Jus Patronatus Perpetui to the House of Este of the Abby of Pomposa; and Bondeno, to which the Popes shall never pretend Right or Title. That the Cardinal Nephew shall be sent Legat into France, where at his first publick Audience with the King, he shall repeat these very words: That his Holiness is extreamly sorry for the late barbarous outrage committed against the Person of the Duke of Crequi his Maje∣sties Ambassadour; in which matter he prays his Majesty to believe, that neither he, nor any of his Family was concerned, or was culpable, the truth of which he shall Attest unto his Majesty with all the assu∣rances of respect, and reverence for the Person of his Majesty. That Cardinal Imperiale be dispeeded into France to justifie himself; in re∣gard his Majesty is pleased to grant him liberty so to do, and will ac∣cept of his submission. That his Holiness shall restore Cardinal Maldachino to his pristine State and condition, and free him of all damage and interest: and for better security shall send a Brief to the King of such Tenour. That so soon as the Ratification of this Treaty shall arrive at Rome, Don Mario shall immediately depart from thence, and shall by a Writing under his hand, and upon the faith of a Gentleman declare, that he was no ways concerned in the late Riot of the Corsi; the which shall be confirmed by a Brief of the Pope avouching, and giving assu∣rance of his innocence of that Fact: And that he shall not return to Rome until such time, that his justification being carried to the King by the hand of the Legate, his Majesty shall declare his pleasure therein. That Don Augustino shall upon approach of the Duke of Crequi to Rome, go forth to meet him as far as St. Quirico in case he comes by way of Toscany: if by Sea, then he shall meet him at Civita-vecchia; if by Romagna, then at Narni; and shall there make known to him the great trouble, which the Pope hath conceived for the late accident. That Donna Beronice, and the Princess Farnese, shall go and meet the Lady Ambassadress, as far as Ponte Molle, where they shall both testifie the extraordinary sorrow they conceived for the late misfortune which caused her departure, and the joy they have for her return, and happy understanding of all matters. That his Holiness shall in a most effectual manner instruct his Mini∣sters to make known unto the Ambassadour, the high esteem he hath for a personage of his Quality who represents the Person of so great a King, who is eldest Son of the Church. That the Duke of Cesarini shall be restored to the possession and en¦joyment of his Goods, and Estate.
That the like shall be observed, and practised towards all Persons who have had any concernment in the late matter. That the whole Nation of the Corsi shall be declared uncapable to serve not onely in Rome, but in any other part of the Ecclesiastical State. And that the Captain of the Guards in Rome shall be cashiered from his Office. That a Pyramid shall be erected in Rome over against the place where the Corsi held their Corps of Guard, with an Inscription de∣claring the Crime for which they were banished from the Ecclesiastical State. That so soon as the Cardinal-Legat should arrive at Paris, and the former particulars were accomplished, that then the King would again restore Avignon to the Pope: It being agreed that neither any of the Inhabitants, Strangers, or Sojourners there living, shall be troubled, or questioned for any thing they said or acted in in the revolt of that City, which happened on the twentieth of August 1662. or for any thing which passed on this occasion from that time, until the day that his Majesty restored it to the Pope. These Particulars thus agreed, and signed by the Plenipotentiaries were sent to Rome and Paris to be ratified and confirmed; and in the mean time the Pope laboured to excuse the banishment of Don Mario, and the sending of Cardinal Chigi in quality of his Legat into France; but neither the one nor the other would be dispensed with. Wherefore Don Mario retired to Sora in the Kingdom of Naples; and Cardinal Chigi began his Journey with a noble Equipage and Attendance of Prelates and Gentlemen, amongst which was Monsignor Colonna, appointed to reside at Avignon in quality of Legat for the Pope. The Cardinal be∣ing entered into France, was received in all places with great honour, and splendid entertainment; and being conducted to Fontainbleau, where the Court then resided, he had his first Audience with the King; all things passing to the mutual satisfaction of both Parties. Some days after, Cardinal Imperiale arrived at Paris, to accomplish another Ar∣ticle of the Treaty; where having justified himself according to agree∣ment, the King accepted his submission, and returned him with testi∣monials, signifying the entire satisfaction he received by his Address. The other Points in the Articles being to be executed at Rome by the Duke of Crequi, the Cardinals d' Este and Maldachino arrived there, and were received by the Pope, and the Court according to the forma∣lities agreed. And the Duke being likewise mollified by the Addresses which the Queen of Sweden made to him, as also by the Application made to him by the Cardinals Corrado, and Azzolino, who always spake loud and boldly against the French; all Animosities were appeased, and these troubles ended, which had administred great vexation and unquiet∣ness to the spirit of the Pope, during three years that they had conti∣nued. The Controversies of France being thus happily composed, Don Ma∣rio had licence to return again to Rome; and the Pope had time to in∣spect the turbulencies in Spain, which were growing into dangerous con∣sequences, upon Disputes raised concerning the Immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin. The Dominicans violently maintained the con∣trary Tenent, in opposition to the Jesuits; in which the Disciples of
both sides became so concerned, that what could not be determined by a Moderator in the Schools, was in danger to be decided in the Fields, or Streets by the Sword. To prevent which, the King sent the Bishop of Piacenza to the Pope, desiring his Sentence and determination of the question, as being the Oracle to whom they were to have recourse for solution in all difficulties of this nature. The Pope who was a great Favourer of the Jesuits and their Doctrines, consulted the question with such, who were inclined to that Opinion; and after some days con∣sideration, he determined for the Immaculate Conception: which though he would not enter, or enumerate amongst the Doctrines of Faith; yet he published a Bull, denouncing several Penalties, and Cen∣sures against those, who should either publickly or privately maintain the contrary. And in the same year, he canonized Francis Sales Bishop,An. 1665. and Prince of Geneva; who by his Treatise called an Introduction to a Holy Life, hath given sufficient testimony of a devout, and spiri∣tual Soul. This year also the Sorbonists at Paris undertook to censure and con∣demn two Books, the one of James Vernant, who asserts the Pope's Power, and Infallibility of the Pope in derogation of Councils, Kings, and Bishops, and the other of Amadeus Guimenius, who defends the Morals of the Jesuits: the Pope being displeased with this confidence of the Sor∣bonists, who being but a Colledg only, should presume to determine Cases of such high nature, complained to the King, who in compliance with his Holiness, assembled a Congregation of Bishops at Pontoise; the which being met, passed a Censure on the Sorbonists; not condemn∣ing their Opinion, but their presumption for that being but a private Colledg, they should usurp a Power which appertained to the Congre∣gation, and not unto them. The Pope not satisfied with these imperfect proceedings, amends them at Rome, and by a Bull condemns the Opi∣nions of the Sorbonists under penalty of Excommunication. But this Doctrine of the Pope's could not be digested by the Parliament of Paris, who appeared Favourers of the Sorbonists; howsoever lest these que∣stions should engender discords, and cause great trouble in the State, they were silenced, and by the King's Authority suppressed, every one being under severe penalties forbidden to dispute, or handle questions of this dangerous consequence. Wherefore these Points being laid asleep, rather than eradicated are sometimes revived, and suffered to be started, whensoever they are seasonable, and judged commodious for the wel∣fare of the State. The same year likewise the Pope condemned the five Propositions of Cornelius Jansenius Bishop of Ypres concerning Grace, and Free-Will; and confirmed the Edict, which Innocent X. had made against them. Not∣withstanding which, so little regard was had thereunto, that those Opi∣nions are still maintained and defended both by words and Writings. But now to proceed to his Acts and publick Works. That Alexander VII. might not appear less splendid in his publick Monuments, than other Popes: he repaired many Ruins, enlarged and adorned many Streets, much to the Ornament of the City, and conve∣nience of the Inhabitants.
The Pantheon which was a famous Temple of Old Rome, built by M. A∣grippa; and afterwards by Boniface IV. dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, he repaired, and altered with much advantage: for whereas formerly they descended unto it by steps, he filled the low places with rubbish, so that an entrance was made thereunto upon a level; and having raised the Pillars which were almost buried in the Earth, he therewith erected a stately Portico, making it a magnificent structure, which before was filled up with dirt and rubbish cast thereunto by the neighbouring Market. The Forum or Market-place, where the Columna Antoniana stands, he cleansed, and removed all rubbish from it, and so beautified it on all sides, that it is now a pleasant, and convenient part of the City. The Archigymnasium Romanum which was begun by Leo X. he finish∣ed, and adorned with a sumptuous Library; the Chamber for which, he erected at his own charge, and supplied it with excellent Books, for the common use of learned Men. He also designed to build a Colledg, wherein to entertain the most learned and famous Men of the Age, invited thereunto from all parts of the World. So that where any one was esteemed excellent and famous in any Science, and especially if he were learned, and an acute Dispu∣tant in Divinity; he might be here entertained with a convenient subsi∣stence: to support which, and make a Revenue for this Colledg, he designed the desolation of some Monasteries, which having formerly been ordained with holy Discipline, and to a good end, were now fal∣len from their original, and primary Institution: but whilest he was contemplating, and contriving this design, he became infirm, and afflicted with a Chronical Distemper, which abated the heat of his proceedings, which afterwards ended, and were wholly laid aside by his death. He erected a noble, and magnificent Hall adjoyning to the Vatican, which he called an Archivium, or a place to lodge all Papers and Wri∣tings relating to the Apostolical Sea; that is, all Papers rendering an ac∣count of the Negotiations of Nuntios in the Courts of forein Princes: Likewise the Letters written to Popes from the Governours, and Mini∣sters of Provinces belonging to the Church; such Letters also as had been written concerning the Rights and Priviledges of the Papal Chair: for which there having formerly been no certain place allotted, wherein to conserve them, they were dispersed, and scattered in divers places, and many of them in the hands of such, whose Uncles, or Relations had been Popes. The Vatican Library he encreased with an addition of all the Books of the Dukes of Ʋrbin, both Manuscripts, and Books printed; And lest whilest he was intent to the adornment of Rome, he should seem for∣getful of his own City, he beautified the Cathedral Church of Siena, which by demolishing the Houses which stood near it, he made a large, and open Area to it, removing all impediments which obscured, or obstructed the Prospect. The barbarous Latin which is written about the outside of this Church is very observable, the words are these:
Omnis centenus Romae semper est Jubilenus Crimina laxantur, cui paenitet ista donantur, Et confirmavit Bonifacius, & roboravit. Whilest Alexander was employed in these, and other greater Works, he was esteemed to have neglected those assistances which former Popes have usually given and contributed for support of those Princes, which have been borderers, and in War with the Turk, who is the grand Ene∣my of Christendom. Wherefore that he might give some instances to the contrary, in the year 1666.An. 1666. he equipped his Fleet of Gallies un∣der command of Bichi, and having joined them with the Gallies of Malta (which by their Institution are obliged to serve under the Stan∣dard of the Church,) they entered the Archipelago, and committed some spoils on the Maritime Towns, or places under Dominion of the Turk; in which having passed that Summer without any action very me∣morable, they returned towards the end of the year to their Winter quarters: and this year the Pope recruited the Regiment which he main∣tained in Dalmatia with two hundred Soldiers. During the twelve years of this Pope's Reign he created thirty eight Cardinals, of which eight were made in the last year of his life; name∣ly Roberti his Nuntio in France, Visconti his Nuntio in Spain, Julio Spi∣nola his Nuntio to the Emperour, Caracciolo Auditor of the Camera; likewise John Dolfino Patriarch of Aquileia was made Cardinal at the instance of the Venetians, Ghidobald de Thun Arch-bishop of Saltzburg at the desire of the Emperour, the Duke of Vendosme in compliance with France, and the Duke of Montalto to please Spain. And farther to exalt and dignifie the degree of Cardinals, he appointed a Congrega∣tion of the Sacred Colledg to consider, and direct some Formulary, or Rules which might serve to augment the Prerogatives of Cardinals in opposition to the pretences of the Roman Barons: one amongst which was, that the little Bell, which was carried and sounded before the Car∣dinals, should be no more in use; for that the lustre of their Purple was so evident, as needed no such mean Signal to make them known. In fine, Pope Alexander having reigned twelve years with frequent fits and agonies of the Stone; at length being worn out with business, and extremity of his Disease, he died on the twelfth day of May 1667. in the sixty ninth year of his Age, having reigned twelve years, one month, and sixteen days. Some time before his departure out of this World, he made a short Discourse to the Cardinals concerning the frail∣ties of humane life, from which the greatness of Popes was not exempt∣ed: and which was more demonstrable in him, by reason of the Chro∣nical distemper under which he had for many years laboured; conclu∣ding at the last with exhortations to elect such a Pope, who might cor∣rect, and make amends for those Infirmities to which he had been subject. This Pope was naturally of a good habit of body, but much weak∣ned by a dissection which was made for the stone in his Bladder, when he was at Colen; he was lean, and not very robust in his limbs, but how∣soever had such strength in the gripe of his hands, that scarce any one could quit himself from him, whom he had seized. He was of a middle
stature, of a pleasant Air in his Countenance, and of excellent grace in Elocution, which was not much altered by the loss of his teeth, which were loosened, and falled out by a continual defluxion of rheum upon his gums. He was very facetious and pleasant in his Conversation, and delighted himself very much in reading the antient Latin Poets: Where∣fore when the Cardinals came to congratulate his Election to the Ponti∣ficate, he made use of that Verse out of Virgil, —Dies, quem semper acerbum Semper honoratum (sic vos voluistis) habebo. This Pope was endued with natural parts in an extraordinary man∣ner; and was very polite in his dress, and in his way of living: how∣sover in the course of his years he gave an instance, and example to the World what difference there is in those qualifications which are re∣quired to make up the virtues of a Prince, and of a private Person, or of a Pope, and a Prelate. For whilest he onely wore the Purple of a Cardinal, he governed himself in such a mean between the defects bla∣med in the Pope that Reigned, and the Virtues desired and expected in a Successour, that he appeared the onely desireable Person in the World, to whom with most confidence the Keys of St. Peter might be delivered. But being arrived at the top, and summary point of his Ambition, of his desires and designs, he lived with much less caution and industry than before, and giving way to that vanity of Genius, which he had for∣merly suppressed or disguised; he so amused himself in the ostentation of Buildings, that he neglected both the concernments of Princes and the care of his People: And whilest he laboured to exalt and enrich his Nephews and Kindred, he died unlamented, and much abated in that reputation, with which he entered into the Papal Chair. CLEMENT IX. THE Funeral Rites of Alexander VII. being performed accord∣ing to the solemn customs of former Popes, and the Cardi∣nals having held several Congregations, at which Audience was given to the Ambassadours of forein Princes; and the Chigi with other Officers of the Church and City being confirmed in their several places, the Cardinals entered the Conclave on the second day of June 1667. But first, and before they entered, a great Dispute arose concerning the place where the Conclave was to be held; for that the Vatican being seated in a bad Air, was at that season of the year reputed almost contagious, at least so incommodious by reason of the excessive heats of the Summer, that it was judged pernicious to the health of all the Colledg; and therefore Monte Cavallo was proposed, as a situation more secure, and which with the expence of two thousand Crowns might be rendered as commodious as the Vatican: The Persons appointed to oversee this Work, were the Cardinals Barberino, Orsino, and Este; who having considered thereof, made their report, that the
House of Monte Cavallo was not capable of being made convenient to receive the Conclave in such form, as in the Vatican; where after the manner of Conclaves, the Cells of the Cardinals are all on the same floor; the which, and many other inconveniencies rendered that, and all other places in Rome uncapable to receive the Conclave in such form, as was ever practised at the Vatican; and therefore it was the place chosen and appointed as formerly. Notwithstanding the badness of the Air, and the heat of the season, which served to hasten the Election; for though the Cardinals were divided into many Parties, and adhered to their several Interests; yet being wise Men, they knew to prefer health, and long life before other considerations whatsoever. Wherefore the Cardinals entering the Vatican; the third of June was the first day of the Conclave, which was divided into five several Par∣ties or Factions: the first was that of the Chigi, which was the most numerous of any, consisting of thirty four Votes; the second was that of the Barberini, composed of sixteen; the Spaniards of nine, and the French of seven; and lastly the Flying Squadron made up of the Pamfi∣lians, and other male-contents, formed a party of about ten Voices: of which Imperiale, and Azzolini were the chief, who joyning themselves to the Spanish Cardinals opposed at the first Scrutiny the election of Far∣nese in such manner, that he seemed excluded from all possibility of being Pope: howsoever his Party had certainly prevailed, had not Bar∣berino with his Associates opposed the Choice: for though Farnese was a Person qualified with all the knowledg of Political Laws, and Ecclesia∣stical Canons; yet the memory of what had passed, between his Uncle Ʋrban and the Dukes of Parma, was too fresh to be in a few years so well reconciled, as to engage the Barberini to that Interest. Wherefore Barbarino casting his Eye on an other Person, assembled all the Creatures of his Uncle Ʋrban VIII. to favour the Election which he designed. And having hereunto joined the Cardinals of the Flying Squadron, with several others; he went to the Apartment of Cardinal Chigi, to whom in the name of his Party, he gave him to understand, that they were sufficiently sensible, that the Power of his Enemy in the Conclave was such; that none was in a possibility of being created Pope, without his assent and concurrence; and therefore they were come to know which of his Creatures he judged worthy of his suffrage. To which Chigi, after having returned thanks to Barberino, made this Re∣ply, That all his Friends were beloved, and esteemed by him with that equality of affection, that he knew not how to prefer one before ano∣ther; or by the nomination of one to disoblige others. Whereunto Bar∣berino made Answer, That since his Eminence was not pleased to name any, he would propose Rospigliosi, which Chigi seemed readily to accept; but in reality his mind was contrary, as appeared by the Scrutiny, in which his Vote was otherwise disposed. And indeed Chigi had no great affection for the person of Rospigliosi; having not only taken some disgust against him in the time that he served in quality of Secretary to his Uncle Alexander VII. but also had discovered the bad inclination which many others of the Chigian Party had to him: at which Barbarino did not openly demonstrate any great resentment, hoping that by such de∣lays and Controversies, he might spin a Clue so fine, as would lead and conduct him to the heighth of his desires; and indeed he had improved
his interest so well, that he had attained to nineteen Votes. In the mean time endeavours were made for the Cardinals Brancacci, Spinola, Elci, and others which prolonged the issue of Affairs, which every Cardinal by reason of the heats, and ill Air desired to conclude, that so they might be enlarged from their confinement, which began to be so un∣healthful that many of the Cardinals fell sick, as also their Conclavists who attended them, and Cardinal Sforsa Palavicino died: the which gave such an allarm to the whole Conclave, that the Cardinals resolved on a dispatch, which in all probability appeared most easie in the Person of Rospigliosi. The interest which most opposed it, was that of Chigi; a∣gainst which the other Cardinals uniting their Power, induced Chigi to concur, lest a Pope should be chosen in despight of his opposition, and against his consent; wherefore Chigi and Barbarino agreeing upon the matter concerted with the factions of France and Spain, though the Cardinal Vandorme was not well pleased with the Choise. In fine, all Parties agreeing, the Cardinals hastned into the Chappel; where Barbarino and Azzolino, having procured thirty one Votes for Rospigliosi; Chigi and his Party came in, and concurred with the rest, so that of sixty four Cardinals then in the Conclave, Rospigliosi was elected, and created Pope by sixty one. Thus after eighteen days that this Conclave had continued, Rospigliosi was on the twentieth of June proclaimed Pope by Cardinal d' Este with these words, which are according to the usual form: Annuncio vobis Gaudium magnum. Habemus Eminentissimum, & Re∣verendissimum Dominum Cardinalem Julium Rospigliosum in Summum Pontificem, qui vocatur Clemens Nonus. After which the usual Adoration followed which was performed by the Cardinals, and the Pope being habited in his Pontifical Vestments, was carried in procession with attendance of all the Cardinals to St. Pe∣ter's Church. And on the 26th. of June he was there Crowned, ac∣cording to all the Rites and Ceremonies of Popes. Julio Rospigliosi was born at Pistoia, a City in the Dominions of the Great Duke of Toscany; his Family was Noble, and much more illustrated by his own Vertues and Fortune. For being naturally of a quick and live∣ly understanding, he plentifully answered the expectation of his Parents, rendering abundant fruits in return of that care, and expence they had employed in his Education: and being arrived at some maturity of age, Ʋrban VIII. then reigning, observed a genius in him fit and pro∣per for business; so that the first step he made to preferment was by the favour of Ʋrban, who made him Auditor to his Nephew Cardinal Bar∣berin, when he sent him in a solemn manner with the Character of his Legat into France, and then into Spain with Instructions to compose the differences about the Valteline, and establish a happy Peace between the two Kings: in which Employment he so well discharged and acquitted himself, that Ʋrban made him his Nuntio in Ordinary to the Court of Spain; the which Office, though commonly conferred but for three years, yet Rospigliosi made himself so pleasing unto and esteemed by his Catholick Majesty, and so useful to the Interest of Rome, that his Commission was continued for the full space of eleven years, to the in∣tire and plenary satisfaction both of the Pope, and the King.
After the death of Ʋrban VIII. those who had taken the Govern∣ment into their hands under Innocent X. beholding Rospigliosi with an Eye of envy, and emulation, caused him to be recalled from his resi∣dence of Nuntio, to make room for some other Favourite. After which returning to Rome, he lived in a private manner without other prefer∣ment, than of one of the Canons of Santa Maria Maggiore, until the death of this Pope, when during the vacancy of the Sea, he was by the unanimous consent of the Colledg of Cardinals constituted Governour of Rome; which at that time is always so licentious, that it requires a sober, severe, and vigilant Officer to restrain the abuses and outrages which are daily committed in the City. Afterwards Alexander VII. being elected Pope, to whom the Abili∣ties and Vertues of Rospigliosi were sufficiently known, he chose him for his Secretary of State; and to render him the more considerable in that Office, he conferred on him the honour of the Cardinals Hat; in which employment he gave such testimonies of his abilities and inte∣grity, that Alexander would usually say, That he was served by a Secre∣tary after his own heart, on whom he could confidently rely, and repose all his cares. And indeed his Services were not onely pleasing to his Ma∣ster, but in such manner conspicuous to the whole Colledg of Cardinals, and to all Rome, as served him for a step to that high promotion to which he succeeded. And now Rospigliosi being Elected, Crowned, and established in the Papal Chair (as we have said) under the name of Clement IX. he in the first place rendered thanks to every Cardinal in particular, for the suffrage he had given him, and then to them all in general in a full Consistory; where he delivered himself with such eloquent expressions, and with such excellency of Speech, as gave sufficient proof of the gift of Rhetorick, with which he was naturally endued, and which with an admirable elocution adorned all the Speeches which he made in pub∣lick. It hath been the custom of Popes to perform some Act after their Co∣ronation, which may reconcile the minds of the people to them; and ac∣cordingly this Pope, that he might give some Essay of his liberal and generous inclinations towards the Publick; he in the first place took care, that Provisions might be cheap and plentiful at Rome, and eased the People of some Taxes with which they were burdened; and on this occasion he caused certain Medals of Gold and Silver to be stamped, with the impression of a Pelican, and with this Motto: Non sibi, sed aliis Clemens. Moreover, To give some indications of his Mind to the World con∣cerning those resolutions, which he had taken to govern with Prudence, Wisdom, and severe adherence to Righteousness and Judgment, he stamped this Motto on the first Money he coined: Constantia Silverii ad imitandum proposita. For he himself being elected Pope on Silverius, or St. Sylvesters's day, who was a Pope firm and steady to his resolu∣tions, and unmoveable in matters which related to the welfare of the Church, he took this Omen for an Admonition, obliging him to go∣vern with the same Spirit, which animated his Predecessour Sylverius.
Wherefore, attending to the welfare of his Subjects, and to the ad∣vancement of the Christian Cause, he eased (as we have said) his People of several Taxes, and in lieu thereof charged himself with a Debt of a million of Crowns: to extinguish which, and to make that provision which the Venetians required against the Turk, who that year hardly pressed the City of Candia, he assented to the dissolution of certain Re∣ligious Houses, which seemed superfluous and of little benefit, or con∣cernment to the Church; namely, the Canons of St. George in Alga, the Gesuati, the Jeronimites of Fiesole; which being places remote, and of no great use, were formerly under the consideration of Innocent X. and Alexander VII. and by both marked out with design to be re∣duced, when the emergent pressures of the Republick should require a supply. And now that time being come: for the Vizier Kuperlee had for above the space of a whole year besieged the City of Candia, had strongly intrenched himself, and being daily re inforced with new sup∣plies, was in a probable and fair way to gain the Town, and therewith to become Master of all the Island of Candia. Wherefore the Pope is∣sued his Bull, granting licence to the Venetian Republick to sell the Lands and Revenues belonging to those places afore-mentioned within their Dominions, and to make use of the Money to carry on their War, and expel the Turks from the Kingdom of Candia. In this conjun∣cture the Pope intended to avail himself of the urgencies, and necessi∣ties of the Republick; and to induce them thereby to consent to the abolition of certain Laws, which were, and had been very derogatory to the Power of the Court of Rome: but the wise Republick adhering to the same principles which influenced them in the time of Paul V. declared their unshaken constancy, and resolution to admit no innova∣tion of such a nature as was demanded: of which the Pope being well advised, relinquished his pretensions; it seeming unseasonable to take an advantage on the present emergencies of the Republick, to obtain that from them, which could not be granted without unhinging the whole frame of the publick Liberty. And though the suppression of these Convents proceeded currently within the Dominions of the Republick; yet on this occasion great dif∣ficulties and Disputes arose between the Court of Rome, and the Go∣vernments of Milan and Naples. For at Milan they pretended that these Convents being of Royal foundation could not be dissolved without the King's consent; and at Naples they refused to admit, that the Money arising from the dissolved Convents, should be disposed according to the will and pleasure of the Court of Rome; denying all Power to the Arch∣bishop to intermeddle therein, as Delegate to the Pope, by vertue of his Ecclesiastical Authority: and this Controversie was maintained with that heat, that the Provost of Naples opposed the Arch bishop with arm∣ed Bands, when he came to execute the Decrees of Rome; on which the Pope made use of his thundering Excommunications: howsoever they availed little; for the heats were blown into a flame, and the mat∣ters become so intriguesom, as not to be composed, until the time of Clement X. the succeeding Pope. Howsoever, this Pope being in an extraordinary manner zealous for the success of the Christian Cause against the Turk, and sollicitous for the preservation of Candia, omitted no means which might conduce to the
safety of it. And therefore after the example of his Predecessours, he laboured to engage the Christian Princes in a holy League against the Turk: but in regard that it could not possibly be performed, until such time as a Peace was concluded between France and Spain: the Pope re∣called his Nephew Cardinal Rospigliosi from Bruxels, where for the space of three years he had resided in quality of Internuntio, by Commission from Alexander VII. ordering him in his return home to pass through Paris, and in a private manner to complement the King, endeavouring to discover the inclinations of his Majesty to a Peace with Spain, and how he was disposed to yield those succours, which were necessarily re∣quired for the preservation of Candia. In pursuance hereof Rospigliosi performed the Offices enjoined him by his Uncle so well, that he incli∣ned the mind of his Majesty to succour Candia, which was languishing and almost ready to expire, and to yield itself to the prevailing Arms of the Turk: and hence it was, that Count S. Paul, the Duke of Beaufort, and Monsieur la Fenillade, with many other Cavaliers adventuring them∣selves in this generous Enterprise, at least prolonged the fate, though not able to divert it, or rescue Candia from the subjection of it's un∣christian Enemies. Moreover, Rospigliosi made those impressions of kindness, and good correspondence between the King and the Pope, as continued during the whole term of his Uncle's Reign: and as an evi∣dence of this friendship, the Pope upon return of his Nephew at Rome, dispatched the Arch-bishop of Thebes in quality of Legat in Extraordi∣nary into France, and Frederick Borromeo with a like Character into Spain; which Legats finding a disposition in both Kings towards a Peace so well negotiated in behalf of the interest of Rome, that Lewis XIV. of France, and the Queen Regent of Spain (her Son being in his mino∣rity) appointed Aquisgrane for the place to treat a Peace, of which the Pope was by mutual consent of both Kings ordained the sole Umpire and Moderator. The zeal which affected the Pope for the succour, and relief of Candia was so great, that he laboured with all his Power to bring the Peace between the two Crowns to a speedy issue; but the French King proceeding in a prosperous course of his Arms, concluded that his successes did merit, and require the grant of such conditions from his Catholick Majesty, as were not consistent with the honour and welfare of that Crown, and therefore resolved to make an entire Con∣quest of the Franch Compte, before he entered into farther Treaties, or restrain himself within any narrower bounds or limits than those he designed. Whereupon the Prince of Conde being declared General for this Expe∣dition, in the beginning of the year 1668.An. 1668. he marched to Digion in Bur∣gundy to prepare military Affairs in a readiness to begin early the en∣suing Campaign: the King also, notwithstanding the inconvenience of the Winter season, thought fit to be there present in Person, which gave that life to action; that neither cold, or rains, or shortness of the days in∣terrupted the progress of the War; the Officers and Soldiers issuing from their Winter quarters, with the same chearfulness as in the Summer, readily invested the most considerable places of the Franch Compte, which in a few days surrendred themselves to the victorious Arms of the French; leaving the World to wonder at those effects of fear, which a sudden sur¦prize had produced; for those Cities and Fortresses which in other times
had valiantly stood out for many months against the Sieges and storms of their Enemies; did now shamefully yield so soon as they discovered the French Banners displayed before their Walls. To this success the surprise of the action did much contribute; for had the King deferred this enterprise until the Summer, 'tis more than probable, that he might have encountred a greater opposition by the union of the German Princes, who in a season fit for Armies to take the Field, would scarce have suf∣fered so considerable a part as the Franch Compte to be lopped off, and dismembred from the Body of the Empire. This sudden and unexpected success begat a jealousie in the neigh∣bouring Princes; and was the first moving Cause which gave beginning to the Triple League between England, the Ʋnited Provinces, and Sweden, leaving a door open to other Princes to be comprehended (as they should see cause) in the same Agreement. This Sacred Alliance became the common discourse of all Europe, and many happy effects were expected as consequences thereof. In which conjuncture our Clement IX. renewing his former sollicitations for Peace, procured a suspension of Arms; and though he desired that Rome, or Ve∣nice should be the places appointed for this Treaty: yet Aquisgrane be∣ing esteemed a place more convenient for the Electoral Princes, who were much concerned in this Accommodation, it was by common consent or∣dained for the onely place of Treaty. And now France at the instant pressures of so many powerful Princes inclining to hearken unto Propositions of Peace; and the King calling to remembrance his Articles with the King of Portugal, not to make a Peace with Spain in exclusion of him; he immediately sent his Advices to Lisbon, advising that King to dispatch his Plenipotentiary to Aquisgrane which was appointed for the place of Treaty. This intimation being given to the Court of Portugal; the Count Olivarez Son of the late Favourite, being then a Prisoner at Lisbon, taken at the Battel of Canal, began to propose several Conditions in order to a Peace; for which afterwards receiving a Commission from Madrid; a Treaty was separately set on foot without concerning France in it. At this time the Earl of Sandwich resided at the Court of Spain in qua∣lity of Ambassadour from his Majesty of Great Britain, a Person so well affected by both Courts, that by mutual consent of both Parties he was in the place of the King his Master, chosen Umpire of the Peace be∣tween the two Kingdoms. This Overture being acceptable to our gra∣tious King, he sent his Orders and Instructions to the Earl of Sandwich to remove from Madrid to Lisbon; there to be Arbitrator of the Peace, and in order thereunto to perform all the good Offices of Mediation. The Plenipotentiaries being accordingly assembled at Lisbon; after some few Conferences between the Earl of Sandwich, and Count Olivarez a Peace was concluded, and published in the month of March, without any respect or consideration to the agreement contracted the year be∣fore with France, or the endeavours of the Abbat of St. Romain to the contrary. And indeed the People were grown so weary of a War, which had continued for the space of twenty eight years, that they were ready to have broken out into a common mutiny, had the least interruption been given thereunto, the Commonalty scarce tempering their rage a∣gainst the French Minister, for labouring to disappoint that happiness they had so long desired.
Some few days after the Peace was proclaimed: a Sentence of Di∣vorce, declaring the Marriage void between the King Alphonso and the Queen was published, grounded on the suppos'd impotency of the King her Husband, whereby the Matrimonial knot was dissolved, and both Parties freed, and stated in a lawful separation with power to dispose of their own Persons. The confirmation of this act of Divorce was a subject of serious consideration to the Pope, but afterwards when it was to extend so far, as to make the Prince lawful possessour of his Brother's Wife and Dominions, it was so much the more weighty and worthy consideration: but at length reasons of State, and conveniences of that Kingdom overswayed the strict Rules and Canons of the Church. But in the first place, we must understand that this Divorce was the consequence of a general revolt of the People from their King; for they being guided by a prevailing Party in opposition to the Conde de Cassel Meglior Chief Minister of State, murmured against the Government, and perhaps not without some cause; for the King himself being given to Wine, practised such extravagancies as were intolerable, and which did not pass without some reflections on the Favourite, though as to himself he managed all things with prudence and good conduct: Moreover, the Conde opposing the Peace with Castile, on other terms, than such as were agreeable to the method, and Articles concluded with France, became so displeasing to the People, that he was displaced from his Office, and the Prince admitted to the sole management and dire∣ction of Affairs. But the Conspiracy stopped not its course at this period: for the Queen hereupon retiring into a Monastery, and de∣claring the dissatisfaction she had to the King her Husband, demanded the justice of the Country (upon the causes given) to dissolve the Ma∣trimonial knot by a sentence of lawful Divorce. The People at this news were stirred with great commotions, and being naturally enclined to Novelty joined with the Prince's Party to chuse him Governour of the Kingdom, committing the Person of the King to safe custody, until the States of Portugal should otherwise provide in cases of this great emer∣gency. The States being assembled about the beginning of the year, approved the reasons for deposing the King, and confirmed the Regency on the Prince: and upon hearing the Cause between the King and Queen. the Marriage was found void, and null; and accordingly an Instrument of Divorce was formed and published, and license given to the Prince to take the Queen for his Wife, on supposition that she was still a Virgin, and unknown to his Brother. The case though strange to scrupulous Ears, and Consciences was not yet without former examples. For in Poland John Casimiro succeeded to the Crown, and to the Wife of his Brother Ʋladislaus. And in former Histories of Portugal, it is recorded, that the Nobility desired John III. to match with the Queen Fora, relict of King Emanuel his Father: and therefore this case was not with∣out a Precedent, which after dissolution of the Marriage, and publication of the Queen's divorce from Alfonso VI. might confirm, and make law∣ful the espousals with the Prince his Brother. A particular account of all these Occurrences being given at Paris, by the Sicur Verius who then resided at Lisbon for the Crown of France. The Cardinal Vandosme then Legat à Latere from the Pope to the most Christian King, immediately dispatched a Brief of dispensation into
Portugal, in the name and by the Authority of Pope Clement IX. con∣firming the former Sentence given by the States, and Justitiaries of that Kingdom; leaving this example to the World, that there may be a Case wherein a younger Brother may lawfully usurp the Dominion of his El∣der; and righteously possess himself of his Wife, and of his Crown. But the Prince Don Pedro not satisfied with the single dispensation of the Cardinal Vandosme, who for the space of two months only was commis∣sionated to be Legat à Latere at Paris, to assist at the Baptism of the Dolfin in behalf of the Pope: did for better assurance dispatch Father Villa a Jesuit the Queens Confessour unto Rome to procure a more au∣thentick dispensation from the Pope himself. The Case being new, and strange and difficult to find a way, how to make this matter with its present circumstances to become legal: the Pope troubled within him∣self proposed the case in publick Consistory, where after long debates on both sides, the question still remained dubious and undecided; until it was averred, that the Queen was several months gone with Child: the which circumstance altered the case, and then the convenience of the Marriage was not farther alledged, but the necessity thereof urged, both for the reputation of the Queen and safety of that Kingdom, which could not otherwise be setled but by the Pope's definitive Sentence, con∣firming the legality of the Divorce; and though the Pope hereupon granted his Bull, dispensing both with the Marriage and translation of the Power, yet the minds of the contrary Party were not so quieted, but that several Conspiracies were contrived against the life of the Prince; and particularly a certain Priest was apprehended with a Dagger in his Pocket, and confessed, that he designed therewith to stab the Prince, judging it an action meritorious and pleasing to God, to destroy a person guilty of Rebellion, and Incest, who had usurped the Kingdom, and ra∣vished away the Wife of his Brother. Wherefore the Prince was in a manner constrained for his own security, and for settlement of himself in the Administration of Affairs to remove the King from the Eyes of the people, and accordingly he was transported into the Islands of Teraeras. The French (as we have said) having gained their point by the Con∣quest of the Franch Comte, the Spaniards having concluded a Peace with Portugal; and the triple League being well formed and concluded, the conjuncture of Affairs seemed propitious, and tending towards the calm of Peace; to improve which, the Pope laboured with incessant sollicitations between both Kings to commence that Treaty which was once proposed to be held at Aquisgrana; and now more instantly desired by him, not only in relation to his Office of Mediator between Christian Princes: but in zeal to the Christian Cause which then suffered in the City of Candia, which with the whole Island was then in danger, and ready to yield to the Arms of the Turks; hoping that upon conclusion of the Peace, the force of Christendom would be converted from itself, and employed against the common Enemy (as we may believe.) But the Intercession and good Offices of the Pope did not so effectually operate towards the con∣clusion of Peace as the Negotiations of the triple League were avail∣able: by means of which the Peace was projected first on the 15th. of April at St. Germans, and afterwards concluded between both Crowns on the 27th. of April at Aquisgrana, otherwise called by the French Aux la Chappelle in form following:
That for the future, and ever hereafter, a good, firm, and inviolable Peace and a perpetual League, and mutual friendship shall be established between the two Kings, their Heirs, and Successours: and that as good Brothers, they shall mutually to the utmost of their Power be assisting unto the welfare, honour and reputation of each other; and shall faith∣fully, as far as is possible, avoid every thing, which may tend to the hurt, loss, or damage of each other. That so soon as the Articles of this Treaty shall be exchanged, and ratified, the Peace shall be published, and then all Acts of War and ho∣stility shall cease; and both Parties shall attend to the performance of the Covenants, by surrender of Towns and Fortresses, and release of Prisoners without delay, Ransom, or any charges whatsoever. That the most Christian King and his Successours, shall for ever hereafter remain lawfully possessed, and Masters of Charles Stadt, Binch, Aeth, Doway, Scarp Fort, Tornay, Audemont, Lille, Armentiers, Cotray, Berguen, Fuernes, with all the Royalties, Guards, Castles, Territories, dependencies, and Subjects, with all the rights, and im∣munities both Ecclesiastical, and secular thereunto appertaining, in the same form, Title, and plenary possession as they were formerly en∣joyed, claimed, and possessed by his Catholick Majesty. On the other side the most Christian King, shall speedily after publi∣cation of the Peace, withdraw all his Forces from the French Comte, and shall really, effectually, entirely, and faithfully restore, and surrender to his Catholick Majesty all that Country, without delay, and with∣out reserving any part or parcel thereof unto himself. That all other places taken, or to be taken, until publication of the Peace, shall in like manner be mutually restored, and surrendred. That the Treaty of the Pyreneans shall remain in its full force, and Virtue, (excepting that part onely, so far as concerns the Kingdom of Portugal, with which Spain hath already concluded a Peace) but as to all other matters and things nor expressed in this Treaty, reference shall be had to the Pyrenean Peace. That those Kings and Princes who are desirous to enter into the Guarantie for the Peace, may respectively give their Instruments of Pro∣mise, and Obligation to each King, for maintenance, and execution of whatsoever is contained, and agreed in the aforesaid Treaty. That this Treaty agreed, and covenanted by the Plenipotentiaries, shall be ratified by their Majesties respectively, and registred in the Councils, and Chambers or Courts of Justice, in such manner as was observed in the Pyrenean Treaty: and that Orders be accordingly is∣sued within the space of three months after publication of this pre∣sent Peace. This was the substance of matters agreed at Aix la Chappelle, so cal∣led by the French: but antiently Aquisgrana, from Grano (as some think) the Brother of Nero; who for the convenience of some hot Waters, ari∣sing near thereunto, built a Town and a Fortress; to which he gave his own name, with the adjunction of Aqua in reference to the Waters: it is now an Imperial Town situate between the Mosel and the Rhine, fa∣mous for being the place where the Roman Emperours were first Crown∣ed and Inaugurated; and where Charles the Great was interred, whose Monument is there to be seen.
But now having touched on the Treaty concluded at this place, so far as concerned Clement IX. who was a promoter thereof, it will be imper∣tinent to this History to recount the Councils, the successes, and pro∣ceedings which issued thereupon. Nor will it be to our purpose to re∣hearse the Instrument by which the Triple League was established be∣tween the King of Great Britain, the King of Sweden, and the States of the Ʋnited Provinces, with the various Acts, and successes thereupon. Nor is it to our purpose to declare the disturbances given to this Peace by the pretensions which the French made to the dependencies, which were so comprehensive, as took in almost all the Dominions belonging to the Spaniards in the Low Countries; for the better interpretation, understanding and limitation of which word (Dependencies) a meeting was appointed at Lisle, at which the Commissioners for both Crowns were to be present, and debate the Controversie. Wherefore to return now to the Affairs of Italy, and the actions of Clement IX. we find him after the conclu∣sion of this Peace extreamly intent and zealous for the relief of Candia, and urgent both with France and Spain to send succours thereunto. In pursuance of which, his endeavours in France, (as we have said) were very successful, great succours being sent to Candia as we have related in our History of the Turks; and indeed the correspondence was so good between his Christian Majesty and this Pope during the whole time of his Reign; that nothing seemed to be denied which was requested by either: for the Pope at the King's desire granted a Bull, allowing him to nominate, and constitute such persons as he should judg fit, in all Churches, Benefices and Monasteries, and in all Bishopricks and Arch-bishopricks within his own Dominions. In return of which kindness, and as a signal of this good correspondence, the French King allowed the Pope to demolish the Pillar, which was erected at Rome in the time of Alexander VII. for a memorial of the banishment of the Corsi, and to deface the Inscription engraven thereon; In like manner the Pope gave license to the French to take away and demolish the Cross which was erected at Rome over against the Church of St. Anthony in the time of Clement VIII. in memory of the conversion of Henry IV. to the Ro∣man Faith. So that now the other particulars concluded at the Treaty of Pisa not as yet executed began to wear out, and to be forgotten, and the late warm interposition of France in behalf of the Duke of Parma, for what related to Castro, became cold and remiss. For though in the days of Alexander VII. the Duke had provided his Money according to the time allotted him by the Treaty, upon payment of which Castro was to have been redeemed; yet the Pope found out ways to avoid the re∣ceiving thereof; pretending that other Creditors were ready to attach and sequester the Money, so soon as it should be brought within the Walls of the City: but this being only an excuse, and an artificial pre∣tence of the Pope, the Duke of Parma resolved to expect the arrival of the Duke of Chaunes at Rome, then coming in quality of Ambassadour from France, to whom making his complaint, he might most properly by his means challenge a performance of that part of the Treaty, which was in his favour concluded and agreed at Pisa. But this Expedient failing, and the Ambassadour taking this matter a little to heart: the Duke supplied his Money at Rome by Letters of Credit, and Bills of Exchange, which though refused by the Court notwithstanding the ma∣ny
addresses, Processes made according to the Methods and formali∣ties of Law; yet all proved ineffectual, and little regarded by the In∣terest of France, even to the very time of this present Pope; of which coldness, and unconcernment of his Christian Majesty in this matter, wherein he once shewed so much zeal and affection, various causes have been assigned; of which none seems to be more probable, than the en∣gagements of France in the Low Countries, during the time of Alexan∣der VII. and afterwards the kind correspondence held with this Cle∣ment IX. of which the Crown of France being entirely satisfied, was unwilling to be importunate, or disturb the quiet of the Church for the sake of a forein Prince, whose interest had no influence, or concernment at that time with the welfare and conveniencies of France. As the Pope was instant with his most Christian Majesty to send Forces into Candia; and obtained by his sollicitations a strong Fleet un∣der the command of the Duke of Beaufort, which carried the Banner of the Church: so also he was not remiss, or backward to send and en∣gage his own Fleet of Gallies, under the conduct and command of his Nephew Vincenzo Rospigliosi, which with the Gallies of France and Malta made up the number of twenty nine. Nor was Clement less urgent with Spain, than with other Princes to enter, and engage in this com∣mon cause of Christianity; so that having occasion to send the Abbat Arroldi who was Bishop of Milan in quality of his Internuntio to Bruxels, he gave him particular Instructions to sollicite the Catholick Princes of Germany to concur with the rest in contribution towards the relief of Candia: in which Act the Internuntio so well succeeded, that the Ele∣ctour of Bavaria, the Bishop of Argentina, or Strasburg, and several o∣ther Princes of the Rhine administred effectual succours to the pre∣sent necessity of that languishing place. But the successes of this War and the fate of Candia have been our Subject, and Theme in an other History. In the mean time whilst these Affairs were in agitation, the Cardinals Palotta, and Farnese, two of the chief Ornaments of the College de∣parted this life: in place of whom the Pope promoted Prince Leopold of Toscany to the dignity of Cardinal; a Person though of excellent quali∣fications of mind, and of unblameable conversation in the days of his youth, yet reasons of State had prevented his just advancement, and Title to the Purple, until the time of his old Age. After which he pro∣moted Portocarrero with seven others to the same degree of Cardinals, viz. Altieri who was Master of the Camera, Nerli, who was Secretary of the Briefs, Pallavicino Dean of the Clerks of the Camera, Certi Dean of the Ruota, Bonaccorsi Treasurer General, Acciaoli Auditor General of the Camera, and Father Buona Abbat of St. Bernard in Piedmont, besides which he created James Rospigliosi his Brother's Son, and Emanuel Theodosio, who draws his pedigree from the Dukes of Aquitaine, so that during his Reign at three promotions he created twelve Cardinals, and not more. The most important Affair during the Reign of this Pope, was the Siege of Candia, which (as we have said) so affected him, that he employed all his thoughts and endeavours towards the relief thereof; Nicholas the fifth was not so much troubled for the loss of Constantinople, nor Ha∣drian VI. for the subjection of Rhodes, nor Pius Quintus for the surren∣der
of Cyprus, as our Clement IX. for the ill success and conclusion of the Cretian War; in which the Duke of Beaufort being lost with many French Cavaliers, and other generous Heroes from divers parts of Chri∣stendom, the City was delivered into the hands of the Turks: the fatal news of which being brought to him by the Venetian Ambassadour; the Pope (as is reported) was so affected therewith, that grief taking a deep impression in his heart, he suddenly fell into a species of Apoplexy, from which first Fit, though he at present revived, yet melancholy sup∣pressed his spirits in such manner, that in the space of one month fol∣lowing, he on the ninth of December 1669. expired his last breath, ha∣ving lived seventy one years or thereabouts, and governed the Pontifi∣cate two years, five months and eighteen days. He was universally la∣mented, being a Man of a publick Spirit, and great generosity, so that his Family was rather impoverished than enriched by his advancement to the Papal Authority. He was a Person not ambitious or desirous of the vain glory of this World, of which that he might give a testimony at his death, he forbad his Relations to raise any magnificent Monu∣ment in recommendation of him to posterity, leaving behind him some few words for a short Epitaph to be inscribed on the Marble, which was to cover him; which were scarce sufficient to denote the Character by which he was to be known and recommended to Posterity: to supply which his Successour Clement X. at the desire of the Publick, and in gratitude to the memory of his deceased Friend and Benefactor inscri∣bed on the pedestal of a Pillar (which Clement IX. at the foot of the Bridg Aelius had repaired at his own charge) a brief Narrative of his life; and having likewise erected a stately Monument with his Statue thereupon in the Church of S. Peter, he adorned it with this Inscription: Clementis IX. Aeternae memoriae Pontificis Magni Cineres Ne absque ullo Sepulchri Honore Sicut Ipse jusserat Humi laterent, Clemens X. Pont. Max. Benefactori Suo, Et ob Spectatum Fidei Zelum, Ob Egregiam Erga Omnes Beneficentiam Et Charitatem De Re Christiana Optime Merito Grati Animi Monumentum Posuit Anno Domini MDCLXXI. This Pope being dead was generally lamented by all People of what Degree, or Nation, or Quality soever: for he was of a most gentle and easie temper, delightful and pleasant in his Conversation, and studied sin∣cerely the welfare of the Church, without much regard to the advance∣ment of his Family: in his Diet he was very abstemious, and lived much after the fashion of the Primitive Christians. He was ever zealous of a good correspondence with Kings and Princes subjected to the Papal Sea, and always endeavoured to reconcile them one to the other; as appears by
his endeavours at Aix la Chapelle, where a Peace was concluded between the two Crowns of Spain and France. And when the difference arose between the Queen Regent, and Don John of Austria, he interposed in such manner by his Nuntio Cardinal Borromeo, that with much success he reconciled matters, and diverted a storm which might have engaged Spain in ruinous troubles. Though this Pope from the humility of his Spirit, was not very for∣ward to raise Columns of his own praise, or engraven Inscriptions like other Popes on every fair Marble, that was erected in the most publick and conspicuous places of the City: yet the People of Rome did volun∣tarily, and of their own accord supply several Euloges to the honour of his memory, of which we shall add this one, which is worthy to be re∣hearsed; for being engraven in the Area of the Capitol on the Trium∣phal Arch of Septimius Severus being a comparison of this Pope with that Emperour in these words: Triumphale Septimii Severi Caesaris Nomen, ne quaeras Lector. Ad O∣rientem Clementis IX. P.O.M. Majestatem obscuratur: Quid pro∣deat, Severus? Ʋbi Clemens elucet, Legationem ille Gallicam suâ ferociâ funestavit. Hispanicam iste munificentiâ beavit, suâ sibi purpuram ille cruore tinxit. Hic sudore, manu ille, hic mente fir∣mavit Imperium, bellorum ille flammas accendit; hic conatur extin∣guere Tributa, ille auxit; hic levavit; uterque rei frumentariae Amplificandae studiosus, sed ille Ambitionis Ingenio, hic Genio Chari∣tatis. Supra Caesarem in cunctis Pontifex. Spectacula ille Pop. Rom. dedit, hic unum se Gentibus Omnibus adorandum Spectaculum fecit. CLEMENT X. CLEMENT the Ninth dying, (as we have said) on the ninth of December 1669. his Funeral Obsequies were celebra∣ted with the usual Rites, and Ceremonies practised in honour to deceased Popes. After which the Cardinals entered the Conclave to make election of an other Successour to S. Peter; but such were the difficulties which arose thereupon, by reason of the many Candidates which appeared to the number of no les than twenty two; all which both for years, gravity, wisdom, and Auhority seemed wor∣thy of the Papal Dignity; that until the end of four months and twenty days the different Interests could not agree, and be reconciled; and at length concurred in the Election rather out of weariness, than satisfa∣faction in their Choice. Cardinal Chigi was then at Florence, when he received the first news of the death of Clement IX. where entering into a private Cabal with the Great Duke, and Cardinal Medici; and with some other Associates of the Spanish Interest, they pitched upon one of these four, namely Elci, Celsi, Bonvisi, and Vidoni, but with especial regard to the exclusion of Bar∣berino; but as this was an account made up without their Hoast, so it had a success accordingly, and they forced to an other reckoning.
Chigi to strengthen his Party made his addresses to the French, pre∣tending great services for that Crown; and in the mean time despised the interest of the Flying Squadron: but the Duke of Scion, being then arrived from France in quality of Ambassadour, made scorn of the ap∣plications of Chigi, so soon as he discovered his practices with the Spa∣niards: and indeed his double dealing abated much of his reputation in the Conclave, where he might have formed a strong Party, had not his ambition to become sole Arbitrator weakened his Interest, and brought all his words, and actions under a suspition. This Opinion of Chigi gave a beginning to a Combination between Barberino, Rospigliosi, and the Flying Squadron; which strong Parties standing in opposition each to other, fifty days were passed without any effect, and so resolved were Chigi, and Barberino, that one said, He would eat Cherries, and the other Figs in the Conclave; with which sayings, all Parties growing warm, Cardinal Este declared openly with exclusion against Chigi, Retz against Medici, and the French King against Elci; with which Medici growing angry replied, that if France excluded Elci, that Spain should do the like by Vidoni. Thus Factions daily increasing, and new difficulties arising, Chigi and Medici the two great sticklers in the Conclave grew more calm, and less concerned for those, whom they had once designed to promote; and to make appear how disinterested they were, put every Person, that was qualified, into some hopes of being chosen. Amongst the rest they com∣plemented Crpegna one of the Spanish Faction, and a favourite of the Great Duke. From him they passed to Cardinal Pio; and then to Odescal∣chi, against which last were not many exceptions, only that the French Party esteemed him too much inclined to the Spanish Interest: and though the reputation of Odescalchi was high, and his merits great, yet his time being not yet come, all endeavours for him vanished into Air, he also himself beseeched Chigi, as it were upon his knees, to desist from farther actions in his favour: howsoever the Conclave being impatient of farther delay seemed generally inclined to make choice of Odescal∣chi; yet some esteemed him too young, others too morose, and austere; and Chigi himself freely discoursing with Celsi taxed him for want of practice in business, and that having addicted himself much to speculation and study, imagined that he would prove unpleasant in his humour; and that Abbat Marc Antonio being his Brother, it was more than probable he would be created Cardinal and Favourite; who also being a Person of an austere life, and severe Vertue, might concur with the Pope in designs to reform the Vices and luxury of the Clergy. Which considerations being weighty, and prevalent with the Conclave, his exclusion was pub∣lickly declared. After which every one was at a stand, and in expectation of what time and the power of Barberino, and others would produce. Chigi had laboured to the utmost of his power to advance one of his Friends; but all proving ineffectual, he gave them at least the satisfaction, that no∣thing had been wanting on his part. Medici was well contented with the exclusion of Nerli, who was a Creature of Rospigliosi, because Altieri, who was under the same notion of a Friend, and dependant on that Fa∣mily, was still in nomination.
In the mean time the aged Cardinals zealous for the honour, and sanctity of the Conclave, exclaimed against the delatory proceedings, which gave scandal to the World, and cause of complaint to the People, who by reason thereof were impoverished by a deadness of Trade, and oppressed by the extortions of the Mons Pietatis, which during the vacancy of the Sea, exacted four times more from indigent Persons, than the known rates allowed by Law, and the justice of the Popes. The Ambassadour of Spain more concerned than any other for these delays, having Audience in the Conclave, requested the Cardinals in the name of his Master to agree in their Election: for whereas they had an Authority free and independent of temporal Crowns, and secular con∣siderations, they were obliged to proceed in the speedy choice of a Suc∣cessour to St. Peter, and of a Pastor to the Universal Church, and not suffer the same to become subservient to Intrigues and private Interests; which as they were daily more scandalous, they gave occasion to the World of discourse, as if the inspirations of the Holy Ghost were ba∣nished the Conclave, the divine Illuminations damped, and eclipsed by the interposition of Secular designs. It was strange to observe, how on a sudden after this discourse, the hu∣mour of the Conclave was altered: the old Cardinals weary of their re∣straint would yield to the Election of any, provided, they might gain their liberty; and the young Men were ready to give their suffrages for whomsoever the Leaders of their Party, and Interest should direct: so that now merit, and Vertue, and experience in Government were laid aside and a Pope chosen by those who were most obstinate, and tena∣cious of their Opinion, and could hold out longest. Thus different Interests began to agree; and Chigi and Medici to enter∣tain discourse with Barberino, proposing to pitch upon the Creature, or favourite of the House of Rospigliosi, to which both these leading Fa∣ctions were well inclined: the Person nominated was Cardinal Emilio Altieri generally grateful to the whole Conclave, for his great Age, having passed the years of eighty: Chigi took occasion hereupon to complement Barberino, declaring, that rather by divine Inspiration, than humane fansie, he had fixed on the sole Person of the World, whom he had reserved in his breast as the most worthy of this Dignity, for that he was a Man who never concerned himself in embroils, and Intrigues of different Parties; never was a Pensioner of France, or Spain, or depend∣ed on the favour of Italian Princes, or was obliged by any of the Roman Families. Barberino on the other side, vowed, that the nomination he had made of Altieri, was rather an effect of his good wishes towards Chigi, than to his own Family: for that he was not ignorant of the great Obligations, which Cardinal Paluzzi the Creature of Emilio Altieri had unto him, by whose means onely he was first preferred to be Auditor of the Camera, then to be a Prelate, and lastly to be a Cardinal; all which were such good Offices, as would certainly oblige Altieri in case that to the preceding kindnesses which he had performed towards his Favourite he should add, that also of being an Instrument to advance himself unto the Papacy. In the mean time great Interests were made for Odescalchi, and his Party was so earnest thereupon, that they designed secretly to elect him by Accession, as a more ready way than by Treaties, or making Parties.
But Barberino was zealous for Altieri, and instant to have his Election passed without other dispute, or consideration. Howsoever Chigi was a little wavering, because he doubted, whither Paluzzi would prove constant to him, and bear him the same respect in the time of his pro∣sperity, and under the circumstances of the Pope's favour as he had te∣stified to him in his former condition of fortune: wherefore that he might secure him the better, he addressed himself to Paluzzi, persuading him to believe, that his endeavours for the promotion of Altieri, were in a great measure founded on that friendship, and good will which he owed to him; and for that reason before he would engage his Party and Interest in his Election, he would be assured that Altieri should pro∣mise to adopt Paluzzi, and create him Cardinal Nephew, than which no∣thing could be more just and due to a Person of his Wisdom, and Talents, and practised in all Affairs of the Court of Rome. Having said thus much, Chigi conducted Paluzzi to Medici, and they together with Bug∣lion, and Barberino went to the lodging of Altieri; to whom the Dean Cardinal Barberino with a loud Voice, and profound reverence made the same Complements, as were accustomary to Popes elect: with which Al∣tieri being surpriz'd, made Answer with tears in his Eyes, That he was unfit for the performance of so great a function, which might more easily be sustained by any of their Eminencies than by himself, and pointing to Cardinal Brancacci: Behold, said he, the Man, whose Virtues, Godliness, and Abilities have rendered worthy of this high Exaltation. By this time the Cell, or Lodging was filled with Cardinals, who with one Voice, (two onely excepted) proclaimed Altieri Pope on the twenty eighth day of April,An. 1670. and having performed the usual Ceremonies of Adoration, and other matters practised at the Election of Popes; he took the name of Clement X. to the great joy and satisfaction of the People of Rome; who praised God for having given them a Prince chosen from the number of their own Patricians, who was of a gentle and placid nature and temper, and grateful to all the Princes of Rome and Italy. This Pope now Clement X. was born at Rome, in the Reign of Sixtus V. and in the time of Paul V. was first admited into Ecclesiastical Orders. Gregory XV. testified a high esteem for his Person, and recommending him to his Nephew Ʋrban VIII. dispeeded him into Poland with the charge of Auditor to the Nuntio; and after his return constituted him Governour of Loretto, and of all the Marca, and lastly of Ravenna, to which he added the Bishoprick of Camerino. Innocent X. sent him his Nuntio unto Naples, where he resided, at the time when Masanello made an insurrection of the People. Whilst the Sea was vacant by the death of Innocent X. the College of Cardinals gave him a Commission to treat with the Duke of Parma, and with the Governour of Milan. Alexan∣der VII. so soon as he was promoted to the Papal Dignity, made him Secretary of the sacred Congregation of Bishops and Regulars; and had therewith conferred on him the dignity of Cardinal, had not some Per∣sons who were emulous of his worth, prevented the good intentions of the Pope towards him. But Clement IX. having received sufficient te∣stimony of his Abilities by a long course of Services to the Church, made him Chief of his Bed-Chamber, and on the 29th. of November 1669. promoted him to the dignity of Cardinal.
The first action performed by this Pope, after his Election was to de∣clare Cardinal Paluzzi his Nephew by Adoption, obliging him to take the name of Altieri, and the Arms of his Family; which were six Stars Argent in an Azure Field; the which he performed in so much haste, that before he descended from the stairs of the Vatican, he embraced his new Nephew, and published his Title before all the College; he also declared Signior Carpegna a Roman to be Datario then already Auditor of the Rota, and Frederick Borromeo to be Secretary of State; the which are the three greatest Offices, and preferments in the Court of Rome. But nothing occasioned so much discourse in Rome, as the choice and adoption of Paluzzi into the Family of Altieri; to which he had no other Relation, than that his Nephew Don Gasparo Paluzzi was married to Don∣na Laura Altieri Niece to the Pope. The Politicians, and speculative Men of Rome, who undertake to prognosticate strange events of things from small and inconsiderable matters, formed diverse Judgments on this new Adoption. Some reflecting on the poverty of the House of Pa∣luzzi, which was greatly indebted; and on the humour of the Cardinal who had employed his whole Estate in purchasing Offices, and was co∣vetous in his nature; (as most Romans are) did conclude, that the Court would be inclined to a sordid Parsimony, the Officers mercenary, and all Benefices set to sale in a manner as scandalously Simoniacal, as they were in the time of Innocent X. But others framing a more charitable Opinion of Paluzzi, believed, that he considering himself no other than as an adopted Nephew, from whom the World expects a gentle com∣portment, would contain himself within narrower terms of modesty than Nephews of the natural bloud to whom Men with less envy allow more freedom, and licentiousness in their actions; and that calling to mind the fate of Cardinal Astalli adopted into the Family of Pamfilio, would serve himself of that Example, to govern in all the exercises of his Power. On the other side, some reflecting on the old Age of the Pope, who was entered into a Station of Life, which inclined to repose, and freedom from turbulent thoughts, imagined, that the Pope would cast all his cares, and troubles into the hands of his supposed Nephew, who considering the life of this Clement, which according to the course of Nature could not be of long continuance, would make use of his time and amass Riches after the Example of the Ludivisi, who were of the Kindred of Gregory XV. and had in the space of two years so well impro∣ved their fortunes, that besides immense sums of ready Money, which they had accumulated and heaped up, they had also erected many sum∣ptuous Palaces, and purchased Lands, Mannors and Seignories, by means of evil Arts well known to the World. Thus every one framed his Predictions of the event of matters ac∣cording to his own conceit and fansie; the truth of which was soon il∣lustrated by the Negotiations of Paluzzi, (whom for the future, we in∣tend to call by the name of Cardinal Altieri) for now to give the first Essay of his Power and management, it was observed, that when the Pope (as is usual at the time of Coronation) received Memorials, and granted Favours, and Benefices to several Petitioners, such graces seem∣ed freely given, and accepted with a thankful mind; until the Grants coming to be executed, Altieri gave an unexpected stop to them, denying them to pass the Seal; on pretence, that the Pope was surprized
and ill informed, or had passed them to others before for want of me∣mory, incident to old Age; by which Artifice this good Cardinal dispo∣sed of all Offices, Benefices, and places of Trust, according to his own pleasure, which was always regulated by the rules of greatest Profit. Though this early manner of Negotiation made a noise, and caused great murmuring at Court; yet Altieri continuing firm to his Principles, and to the method which he had chalked out unto himself, gave express Orders to the Master of the Pope's Chamber, and to all the Attendants near his Person, not to admit of any Addresses, or suffer Petitions to be presented to the Pope without his knowledg and permission; so that the Pope seemed to be (as it were) besieged in the Vatican, and serve onely for a Cipher, or a property to Altieri, and remain as a Statue without Eyes, or Ears. This manner of dealing gave occasion to many witty Men at Rome (according to their custom) to publish Pasquils (which we call Libels) one of which was affixed on the Pope's Picture, hanging over the door of his Bed-Chamber, and was this, Qui slô, per Insegna, that is, I am here for a Sign; alluding to the person of the Pope, who served onely for a shadow, whilest Altieri governed all with a de∣spotical Power. In like manner they affixed a Paper at the door of Altie∣ri with this Inscription: To the most Eminent Cardinal Signor Paluzzi Al∣tieri, by title Cardinal Patron, but in reality Pope himself. Another of like nature was affixed at the Pope's Chamber door: To His Holiness Cle∣ment X. our Lord, and Prince, living under the tuition of Cardinal Altieri. On the eleventh of May after his Election, he was Crown'd in S. Pe∣ter's Church with the usual Ceremonies; three days after which, he held a private Consistory, whereat he returned thanks individually to every Cardinal for his good will, and suffrage at his Election: and ac∣cording to the Politicks of former Popes, he made some Laws, and Or∣ders for regulation of the Markets, and for supplies of the City with Victuals, and Provisions, that the People might at the beginning of his Government, find Peace and plenty. But these plausible, and specious appearances which cost little to the Pope, great discontents arose in the Court of Rome, by reason of the exorbitant Power of the Cardinal Nephew; who assuming all matters into his own hands, suffered no applications to be made unto the Pope but by his means, and intercession: nor would he suffer the Seals to pass for any Livings, or Benefices without a payment of Mony for and in con∣sideration thereof unto himself, in which he was so strict, that a Living of ten Crowns a year did not escape him without some acknowledg∣ment. And for better management of this Simonaical Traffick, he ap∣pointed Brokers in the Palace to set up an Office, and there publickly to profess and without shame, to bargain, and contract for Offices and Be∣nefices. This scandalous manner of dealing discouraged all Men of Virtue and Merit, from hopes of obtaining Employments, for since Money, and not Desert, was the step to all preferments, good Men for the greatest part were excluded, and none but a sort of progging, and traffiquing Clergymen advanced to Benefices and Places of Trust. Thus did this adopted Nephew play his part, when a great swarm of Kindred appeared at Court, pretending to be allied either by bloud, or alliance to the Pope: for though when he was onely a simple Prelat, and had no great matter to dispose of, few or none would own his Rela∣tion;
but being now advanced to the Pontifical Chair every Citizen of Rome would be his Kinsman, and frame a Scheme, or Tree of his Pedi∣gree, deducing their linage by one Branch, or other from the Family of Altieri: all which finding an adopted Nephew surreptitiously crept in∣to the favour of their Kinsman, and themselves excluded, openly mur∣mured against Paluzzi, and complained of the injustice and ill fortune: but he little regarded their clamours, suffering none of them to approach the Pope, or challenge kindred, unless the Family of the Massimi, of which he advanced some to Places of Trust and Profit. The College of Cardinals, though much divided in their inclinations, yet the greatest part of them could not support the despotical Govern∣ment of Altieri; who though he could not absolutely restrain the Car∣dinals from access to the Pope; yet he made their Audiences difficult to be obtained, and often caused them (upon I know not what excuses) to be deferred until other days, and times, when he contrived to be always present, that he might be a witness of their discourses, and prevent that freedom, which they designed with the Pope. This design of Cardinal Altieri was greatly promoted by the retire∣ment of Persons powerful for their Riches and Interest from Rome: for soon after the Election of the Pope; the Ambassadour of the most Chri∣stian King, and the Cardinals of Retz and Boglion were returned into France, and Cardinal de Este, whose Power was sufficient to shake the mightiest Favourite, was gone into his own Country: Cardinal Antonio was sick, and languishing in his Bed; and the Flying Squadron whose pre∣tences were onely pure zeal for the universal good of the Church, were contented to let matters pass according to the humour of Altieri, hoping that the Pope by reason of his age could not hold out long; and that therefore it were better to employ their time in forming Parties against the next Conclave, than to contrive means and Artifices to defeat and ruin the Power of Altieri; but they were much deceived in their mea∣sures, for the good old Man was so lusty and hearty, living without much care, that he was likely to out-live the youngest of the Squadron. Nor was the Marquis of Astorgas Ambassadour for Spain much more concerned than others, for he having other designs of gaining the good will and favour of the Citizens of Rome, little cared in what nanner the Intrigues and Affairs of the Court succeeded. Wherefore the onely dangerous, and formidable Enemy was the Dean Cardinal Barberino, a person of that Reputation, and Wit as was only capable to stand in competition with the Power of Altieri. But neither his Policy, Art, nor Interest could be available against this Car∣dinal Nephew, who exercised a more absolute Power than any other Favourite had enjoyed in the Place before him; the continuance of which being very uncertain, he cast about him divers ways, whereby to advance and establish the greatness of his Family, which under the happy circumstances of his present flourishing condition, was not difficult to pro∣cure. For in Rome there are many Noble and rich Families, which aspire to an alliance with the kindred of the Pope's Regnant; which though it be an honour of no long continuance, yet they have commonly had the opportunity to accumulate Riches during the life of the Pope, and afterwards remained with the priviledg of being numbred amongst the Princes after his death.
The Prince Carbognano, who was a principal branch of the House of Colonna (which for its Power, Riches, and Nobility yields to none in Rome) had two Sons, the eldest of which was called the Duke of Basa∣nello, and the second Duke of Anticoli, the first was married to the Sister of the Contestable Colonna; but having no Children, or Heirs, the Riches, and opulency of all that Family was to devolve by right of In∣heritance to the Duke of Anticoli; of which Cardinal Altieri having well considered, treated of a marriage between him, and Donna Tarquinia Great Niece to the Pope, esteeming it the best and most advantageous Match in all Rome. Prince Carbognano, the Father, who was of an open and easie temper, gave ear to the Proposal with much satisfaction; but the Duke of Basanello, not suffering his younger Brother to be advanced by these means to a degree above himself, refused to give his assent unto the Match, unless he also might be received into en equal rank with his Brother, and enjoy the honour of those prerogatives, which appertain to Nephews, and Princes allied to the Papal Throne. Altieri declining all rubs, and difficulties which might obstruct the Match entertained Basanel∣lo with hopes and expectations of the conditions he desired: but so soon as the Marriage was celebrated and consummated; he then excused himself, saying, that upon better thoughts, he found, that such an instance could not be given without drawing many ill consequences with it; howsoever, that the Pope would think upon it, and do what was possible; but in rea∣lity such words gave no satisfaction, being interpreted for a flat and for∣mat denial. Hence at first arose some coldness, which afterwards proceeded to an open quarrel, and defiance between Basanello on the one side, and Altieri, and Anticoli on the other: so that both parties exercised their thoughts in ways of revenge upon each other. The genius of Italians, which is naturally ready in such contrivances, prompted Basanello to a matter wherein he might most sensibly wound Altieri; for knowing that the expectation of Riches was the sole aim and desire of the Cardinal; he laboured to disappoint his hopes, by defeating his Brother Anticoli of all that Estate which descended to him by the death of the Prince Galli∣cano, which amounted unto three thousand Pistols a year besides Plate, Jewels and other Riches; and were bequeathed to Basanello, and at his absolute disposal, without regard to any descendency: but that so much Riches might not be lost, or be alienated from the Family of Colonna, he settled them upon the Duke of Sonnino Brother of his Wife, and of the Constable Colonna. This unexpected defeat to the prejudice of Anticoli, touched Altieri in the most sensible part, which was his own interest and honour; in re∣turn of which he contrived a Revenge spun with a like thread, and of the same nature with the former; in which because most of the Roman Princes, and forein Ministers were concerned, it may not be imperti∣nent to this History to make a short relation thereof. Prince Cesarini lately deceased, had left immense Riches to his Family; but wanting Heirs male, and leaving only two Daughters, the Inheri∣tance descended to Monsignor Cesarini Brother to the Prince, who was Clerk of the Camera; which to enjoy with so many Seignories, Baronies, and Lordships thereunto belonging this good Prelat made no scruple to abandon his Offices, and the expectations of a Cardinals Cap to enter
into a fair Revenue of above sixteen thousand Pistols per annum; but ha∣ving wasted his body by the sins of his youth, he found himself not fit to marry and consequently without hopes of legitimate Heirs: for which reason, these Riches descending to the two Daughters, the Prince their Father left in his Will and Testament, that such, as should have the fortune to marry his Daughters, should be persons devoted, and sin∣cerely adhering to the party, and interest of France. The Duke of Sonnino formerly called Abbat of Colonna, and Brother of the Constable had forsaken his Ecclesiastical preferment to marry with the second Daughter, on condition that the eldest, engaging herself by promise to be a Nun, should renounce all right and title to the moiety of the Estate with her younger Sister. The condition of this Affair being known to Altieri, he took his ad∣vantage to reek his revenge on the House of Colonna, judging it a pro∣per means to pay them off in the same coin; for as the Duke of Bassa∣nello had formerly defeated Anticoli of the Estate of Prince Gallicano; so now he contrived to deprive Sonnino of the Inheritance belonging to the Princess Cesarini, and which should inevitably have devolved unto him, in case the Princess had remained constant to her resolution, and had re∣nounced the World, within the inclosures of a Nunnery. But Altieri suggesting to the young Lady the pleasures, and conveniencies of mar∣riage made easie impression into her frail heart, causing her to waver and stagger in her late resolutions: and whereas the Vow she had made of perpetual chastity, was the chief scruple which obstructed the change of her Will; that knot was easily untied by the solution of her spiritual Father and Confessor, and other Priests, and Friers, who were made the Instruments of this design; and in case there should still remain any scruple of Conscience, the infallible power of the Pope himself was at hand to clear the doubts, and dispense with all the Engagements, Vows and Pro∣mises to God, or Man, by which she supposed herself bound and obliged, and to make all this good, the Pope proffered to take her into his pro∣tection. The Princess Cesarini being thus overcome, and resolved to marry, the Cardinal provided her with a Husband, giving her the opportunity to see Don Frederico Sforza his Nephew, who was a brisk young Gallant, and capable to make impression in the tender heart of a Lady disposed towards the thoughts of marriage. The Constable of Colonna on the other side despairing of all hopes to persuade the Princess to the con∣tinuance of her Vow, concurred with the other party in his assent to her marriage, provided she would accept of Don Lelio Orsini. This Proposal much alarm'd the Cardinal, as also the Duke of Gravina, who though he was one branch of the House of Orsini, yet having married one of the Pope's Nieces with a considerable Portion in ready Mony, and with assurances of a Cardinal's Cap for his Brother, (who was a Domini∣can Frier) was easily persuaded to concur with Altieri in the advance∣ment of the Pope's Family. The Intrigues of this Affair were various, and admitted of more particulars than are required in this History; but in short, the power of Altieri was not onely superiour to that of Co¦lonna, and his plots more subtle, and his labours more indefatigable; (for he was the most assiduous Man in the World to promote his own interest) but also he had a greater Ascendant over the affections of
the Princess, in the person of Sforza, who was young, gentle, and of good address, whereas Don Lelio was a Man in years, and of a weak and in∣firm complexion, and so given over and inclined to devotion, that they gave him the name of Mangia Santi, or the Saint-Eater, wholly and in∣tirely applying his mind to gain Indulgences, and Jubilies, and Pardons: howsoever upon the proposals of this Marriage, he strained his humour into the Mode of a Gallant, feigning a brisk and aiery behaviour, which being forced, and affected became him so ill, that it seemed al∣most ridiculous, and could stand in no competition with the more natu∣ral garb and comeliness of Don Frederico. Howsoever the Interest which was made in behalf of Don Lelio by importunity of the Mother, and the persuasion of other Friends, was so prevalent that the young Lady remained in a doubtful condition, which of the offers she should embrace. This indifferency much troubled Altie∣ri; and therefore to secure his point against all attempts and affaults of the Mother, and others; he removed the Princess from the Monastery of St. Katharine of Siena, wherein she resided, to that of S. Anne on the other side of the Tiber, where Sforza had an Aunt that lived a profess'd Nun: and for better security from secret practices, Guards were set by express Or∣der from the Pope to hinder all communication with the Princess. But not onely was it thought necessary to prevent all private suggestions; but the affection of the Lady towards Sforza was to be kept up by some lively representations of Love, which were constantly to be instilled into her mind by some able and proper Instrument: to perform this Office, none seemed more able, nor better qualified than Monsignor Altoviti the Patri∣arch of Alexandria; who was highly esteemed in the City, and of great reputation for the devotion and sanctity of his life, and for the experience he had in the affairs of the Court of Rome: moreover, he was super∣intendent over this Convent of St. Anne, and lived in hopes of being a Cardinal, and of other promotions in the Ecclesiastical State, so that no person could be more proper for this Employment, than this good Prelat. Whilst the Princess thus remained closely watched, and besieged with∣in the Convent; the Family of Colonna murmured, and talked loud a∣gainst the Cardinal, complaining of his injustice and insolent violence which was intolerable to Princes of Rome: but say what they could, Altieri was resolved to hold his prey fast, and improve his Interest with her by means of the good Prelat Altoviti; who having the care and protection of that Convent committed to his care and Trust, had the op∣portunity without much suspition to make frequent Visits to the Lady, and to carry Billiets from her to the Cardinal, declaring her resolution to be entirely governed by him and his Holiness. But this daily cor∣respondence, and intercourse of Letters had not long continued, before the Spies of Colonna had discovered the Intrigues, which were managed by this Prelat, and the Aunt of Don Frederico, who also was as subtle as any Woman, and the more cunning for being a Nun. The Constable of Colonna and others of that Family being well informed of these pro∣ceedings and of all these affairs, dissembled them by a more than ordina∣ry respect to the person of Altoviti, whom, whensoever they met, they saluted with such profound reverence, as if he had been Pope, professing more than ordinary respect to his person, and sanctity of his life.
The good Prelat believing these demonstrations of kindness to be all real, openly passed over the Bridg of Saint Sisto without fear, or suspi∣tion, in the sight and view of the Lords of Colonna; when some bold Ruf∣fians, or Assassinates assaulted him in his Coach firing two Carbines up∣on him, one of which shot him with a Bullet, which passed his Neck, and came out under his shoulder: the poor Prelat finding himself thus mortally wounded cryed out for help; at which lamentable Voice many Priests and Friers came about him, to prepare him for death; but Chi∣rurgions coming in, and finding that the wound was not mortal, he took courage, and in a few weeks his wound was perfectly cured. This ac∣cident afforded matter of discourse to the whole Town, and Libels or Pasquils were scattered, and affixed in all publick places: others wrote Verses and Elegies on Altoviti, as if he had been already dead; of which we shall only repeat this Distick: Barbare! quid violas violento tingere tentas Sanguine? quas tingi Murice Roma dabat. This violent attempt on the sacred person of a Prelat was scandalous to all the World; and every one believed that the Pope would have so highly resented it, as in despight of the Family of Colonna, and of their greatness, have revenged an Act so infamous, as this, by just punish∣ment of the Offenders: but contrary to all expectation, when the Go∣vernour of Rome went to the Pope's Palace to receive Orders, in what manner to govern himself in this important Affair; the Cardinal Altieri seemed very cold and remiss, giving little or no encouragement, or dire∣ction to the Magistrates to examine, or enquire into the matter, saying, That Officers of Justice ought as well to be Politicians, as Judges. In the mean time the Constable Colonna seemed little concerned, and neither gave outward demonstrations of joy, nor affected a dissembled sorrow; but reserving himself in a moderate mean, appeared publickly at Exer∣cises, Operaes, and other divertisements, as usual; nourishing a secret contentment, that he had revenged himself on his Adversary, and that his power, and greatness had seated him above the reach of the Cardinal. On the other side, the Cardinal rejoyced to hear Colonna evil spoken of, and that he had incurred the Odium, or hatred of all the good and ver∣tuous Men of Rome, and especially of the Clergy; and farther to dilate and heap an infamy of this detestable Act on a Family which he abhor∣red; he caused a Narrative thereof to be wrote and sent unto all Courts, and Countries, by such Pens as he had chosen and caused to be dipped in the most bitter Ink of Invectives. This was all the satisfaction that Altoviti could obtain, notwithstand∣ing the sacredness of his Person, being a Prelat, and Patriarch, and one that had sacrificed his reputation and life for service of the Court. And though the Nephews of other Popes have on occasions less injurious and dishonourable to the Papal Sea, hazarded the quiet and safety of the Ec∣clesiastical State; yet Aliteri, scorning to insist on such low, and trivial punctillios delighted himself with the thoughts, that in despight of all the power and contrivances of Colonna, he should gain his point and suffici∣ently mortifie that Family by the marriage of Sforza with the Princess Cesarini.
And indeed the matter succeeded accordingly; for after all these, and many other particulars, which caused disturbance; the French Ambassa∣dour who was the Duke de Estreé, and the Duke Cesarini Uncle of the two Ladies interposed between both parties, and in fine made this agree∣ment: That both Sisters with their Husbands should live under the protection of France (as determined by the Will of their Father) and ever more profess and adhere to that Interest. That their Uncle Cesarini who was infirm, and impotent in his Bed without hopes of posterity, should leave the Inheritance of his Estate to his two Nieces, to be equal∣ly divided between them; Which terms of Accommodation being in∣dented and subscribed reciprocally by both Parties: the Cardinal ob∣tained his ends, and the rage of Colonna appeased, and Prince Sonnino satisfied, who had married the younger Sister upon the Promises, and Vows which the Elder had given to renounce the World, and the Inhe∣ritance, and live within the retirement of a Convent. Thus ended the embroils of this Intrigue, injurious to none, but poor Altoviti; which having been acted in other parts, might have produced many Tragical Effects; but in regard the Scene was at Rome, where love and justice give way to Policy, and to designs for conservation of Fami∣lies; Arms and passion were overcome by Plots and subtil Contrivances. Whatsoever matter occurred in the time of this Pope, we must attri∣bute to the person, passion and conduct of Altieri; for Clement being an old Dotard, and not desirous to be troubled with business, was served by a Nephew, which fitted his humour, and only made use of his name and Authority to govern with an absolute, and despotical Will. The first movement which regulated all his Actions was a passion, and an exor∣bitant desire to agrandize his own Name and Family; and in order there∣unto, as he was naturally partial to the Spanish Faction, so he believed a constant adherence to that Interest to be most corresponding to those designs. In the year 1671. four Cardinals died at Rome, of which Antonio Barberino was one. At Genoua new differences arose concerning the Inquisition, which were afterwards composed to the mutual satisfaction both of the Pope, and that Republick. This year being the year fol∣lowing after the Inauguration of the Pope, Don Pedro d' Aragon Vice-King of Naples appeared at Rome with a splendid Retinue, to perform the Embassy of Obedience (as they call it) which is done by the yearly pre∣sent of a white Genet; this Ceremony was at other times performed by the Ambassadour of Spain residing at Rome, but to shew a greater ho∣nour perhaps to the Pope, the Vice-King was qualified with the Title of Ambassadour Extraordinary; after whose return into Spain the Mar∣quis of Astorgas was constituted Vice King of Naples, and Father Nitardo Inquisitor-General of Spain was dignified with the Character of Ambas∣sadour; and because that honour is inconsistent with the simple condi∣tion of a religious person, the Pope adorned him with the Title of Arch∣bishop of Edessa: who the year following with several others was pro∣moted to the dignity of Cardinal. An. 1672.This year also Pope Pius Quintus who was a Dominican, or of the Or∣der of Preachers, was canonized, being a hundred years after his decease. There also happened a dispute concerning Precedency, between Don Ga∣sparo Altieri one of the Pope's Nephews, and General of the Pope's
Forces, and commandator Bichi Ambassadour of Tuscany, which diffe∣rence was determined in favour of the latter. In the mean time violent disturbances arose in Poland, on occasion, that King Michael had removed the Primate of that Kingdom, and the Great General Sobieski from their places, and Offices of Trust, which afterwards were accommodated by the Pope's Nuntio Monsignor Bonvisi on terms more necessary than convenient, or rather by the approach of the Turks who with a formidable force had taken the strong fortress of Keminiec, and were entered into the bowels of Poland as far as Leo∣polis; the news hereof made a great noise at Rome, but little disturbed Cardinal Altieri, who being intent to other designs, did not much trouble his head with the thoughts of sending Nuntio's to the Christian Princes, whose business was to incite them to administer help and succour to the afflicted Poland, oppressed, and almost over run with Mahometan Arms; for his Opinion was (as they say) that the intercession of the Pope's Ministers in matters of that nature, were only formalities, and such as conduced little to real effects, for that Princes well disposed, and zealous for the Christian Cause, or such as were united in the same com∣mon Interest, which was to expel and drive an Enemy so powerful and dangerous far from them, would move on the principles of their own safety, without any other incitements, or motives from their common Father the Pope: and indeed Altieri searching for the nature of man∣kind within himself, did conclude, that not Religion, but interest of State onely governed the World. Howsoever that he might afford some testimonies of his care, and affection towards Poland; he raised the sum of three hundred thousand Crowns, by impositions on Ecclesiastical Benefices in Italy, of which he sent fifty thousand into Poland, and the remainder he invested in buildings, furniture and moveables for his own service. Soon after which King Michael dying, the confusions of that Kingdom increased, and so other Seditions and Controversies amongst them, was added that grand point of dispute concerning a Successour to the Crown; for conservation of which, though Altieri was not so libe∣ral as to contribute great sums of Money; yet to please and gratifie the Spaniards, he was desirous to have a hand in the preferment of a King to them, naming Prince Charles of Lorain as a person qualified with all Royal abilities, and endowments required in a King: and indeed though none was more worthy of a Crown, than that generous Prince: yet the Nobles of that Kingdom informed of the Pope's endeavours, reflected thereon, as prejudicial to their right of Election, having never received Kings at the nomination, or recommendation of Rome; and therefore proceeded to the election of John Sobieski, a person capable to sustain a Crown to the benefit and glory of that Kingdom, which being invaded by the formidable Arms of the Turk, could never be rescued from ruine, and destruction, but by the valour and fortune of Sobieski, whom God raised not onely for the protection of Poland, but for the defence of Germany; having by his Heroick march from his own Country in the year 1683. to raise the Siege of Vienna, signalized his Valour and prowess, to such a degree as Romances describe Heroes, and the generous Actions and atchievements of mighty Princes.
It hath been a priviledg granted by the See of Rome to the Kings of Poland; immediately after their Election to bestow a Cardinal's Cap on any Person whom they should propose; according to which Power, the new King nominated the Bishop of Marseglia for that Person, to whom he designed that honour. It was indifferent to Altieri whether the Scar∣let were bestowed on him, or any other, had not the Spaniards, to whose Interest he was extreamly partial, suggested the contrary; pretending that the King ought to nominate a Subject of his own, and not of a fo∣rein and stranger Prince; for that in regard the French King was able to insinuate into all Courts, by flattery and bribery he might easily obtain a nomination for one, or other, who should either by Nation, or Interest be ingaged in that Faction; and so in time the whole Conclave become French, and entirely dedicated to the devotion of that King. And whereas it might be objected, that the refusal of the King of Polands desire, would much disoblige him and the whole Nation, which stood much on their points and Prerogatives: The Spaniards answered, That the Election of the Great Marshal Sobieski to the Crown of Poland, having not been performed according to the usual Rules and Methods observed in that Kingdom, could not continue, or be confirmed; for that the Nobles of Lituania had not given their Votes, or suffrages thereunto: that the greatest part of that Republick desired an unmarried Prince, who might espouse the Widow of the deceased King; and in fine, that all the No∣bility of Poland remained unsatisfied with this Election; and being greatly divided in their Opinions, some alteration might speedily be ex∣pected. Altieri suffering himself to be thus misguided with these sugge∣stions of the Spaniards, wrote to the King of Poland in the name of the Pope, desiring his Majesty to fix on some other person of a more indif∣ferent temper, and who was a Neuter, and less engaged to either of the Crowns: by which he would perform so signal a kindness to his Holiness, as would ever oblige him to prefer the Interest of his Kingdom in mat∣ters of greater moment. The King highly resented this manner of proceeding of the Court of Rome, being astonished to find, that those, who had used all endeavours to disappoint him of his Election, should now have the boldness to de∣mand such a favour from him, as he could not grant without dishonour to the Crown which he had lately received, and therefore testified his re∣solutions to persist in the nomination he had made; to which Altieri not judging fit to condescend remained firm in his denial; and therein being resolved until the death of this Pope, an ill correspondence passed between Poland and Rome during the Reign of this Clement X. An. 1673.Though all these difficulties were made in exception to the person of the Bishop of Marseille, yet Altieri was more easie, and favourable to the Family of the late Pope; and accordingly about the beginning of the year 1673. Felice Rospigliosi was advanced to the degree of Cardinal, whereby the Pope in gratitude to Clement IX. returned the Hat he had received from him, to a person of the same name and Family: at the same time also, he promoted Peter Basadonna Knight, and Procurator of St. Mark for the Republick of Venice to the same degree, together with Monsignor Nerli a Florentine, and then Nuntio at Paris: this year also the College of Cardinals lost four of their number, three of which were principal Members, and Persons great in their worth, and Offices, viz.
Frederick Borromeo Secretary of State, Imperiali à bury, and an active Cardinal, as also Cualtieri and Roberti. In this year the most Christian King designed to reform the Order of St. Lazarus, and cast it into some other model; for that this Order be∣ing almost worn out, and the constitutions of it, either abrogated or out of use; his Majesty judged it more convenient to renew it again, and esta∣blish it upon some other foundation; and in pursuance of this resolution a new Chief, or General was appointed for this Order. This right of Re∣galia or Jus Patronatus which his Majesty had on this occasion exercised in the Gallican Church greatly offended Cardinal Altieri, who to vindicate the Papal Authority, in opposition to the King's usurped pretences, per∣suaded a certain Gascon, who was come to seek preferment at Rome, to accept the honour of Abbat of the Order of St. Lazarus, and to qualifie him for this dignity, the Title of Abbat of Colombiere was conferred up∣on him. This simple Gascon, for no other would be so vain, as to ac∣cept of an Employment so intriguesom and difficult as this, not having the Talent, or capacity to manage an Affair of this weight and moment, signed and dispatched away the Orders requisite for regulation of his Abby; and though his friends and acquaintance dissuaded him from an Enterprise so offensive to the King; yet this bold Gascon persisted in his folly, being therein encouraged by the Creatures of Altieri. The Duke d' Estreé then Ambassadour for France at Rome highly re∣sented this pretence of the Pope in derogation to the Right of his Master, but more especially was offended with the Gascon who had conspired with the Cardinal to deprive the King of his Right and Prerogative. Wherefore the Duke being highly incensed, seized the Scrivener who had drawn up the Abbat's Memorial to the Pope, and after severe words, and Reproofs caused him to be imprisoned: the Abbat in the mean time fearing the like treatment, retired into a priviledged place within the jurisdiction of the Pope's Palace, and under the protection of the Cardi∣nal, who allowed him a Pension for his necessary maintenance. At length the Abbat instigated by his Friends, and encouraged by Altieri departed from Rome, and passed the Alps into France, where so soon as he was arrived, he was seiz'd by the King's command, and committed to Prison, where we shall leave him to the Law, and the disposal of the Order of St. Lazarus to the pleasure of his Majesty. This, and other discontents encreased the ill correspondence between the Duke d' Estreé Ambassadour of France, and the Cardinal; which Altieri though an Italian could not conceal, or dissemble; for being passionately affected to the Interest of Spain, received the news of the French Con∣quests, and successes against Holland with regret, and displeasure; either disapproving the intelligence as false, or otherwise relating it with such circumstances, as much abated, and eclipsed the glory of those Victo∣ries: all which served to inflame the differences between the Duke and the Cardinal. But none was of greater consequence, than that which intervened be∣tween the Cardinal, and all the Ambassadours and Representatives for forein Princes residing in the Court of Rome: the occasion and matter whereof was this.
It being now the year 1674.An. 1674. immediately preceding the year of Jubily, when more than ordinary provisions are made for entertainment and sustenance of Pilgrims, who croud in great numbers to obtain the Indulgences, Pardons, and Dispensations which are granted at that holy time: It happened, that the Farmers and Collectors of the Customs, and Impositions which are laid on all sorts of Victuals and Provisions, made complaints of the great damage which the Pope suffered in that branch of his Revenue from the abuses and frauds of forein Ministers; who having all provisions for their Families allowed to them free from Taxes, and Impost, did under that pretence, colour the goods, and pro∣visions of others, and thereby raised considerable sums of Money to their own advantage, which belonged and appertained to the Aposto∣lical Chamber. The Farmers had often complained of these abuses in the times of other Popes, and though many remedies, and expedients were proposed for prevention of the Cheat; yet they produced no∣thing besides Affronts, and blows to the Officers. At length Altieri who esteemed himself more politick, and powerful than all the Nephews of preceding Popes; resolved on occasion of the approaching Jubily to raise the Farm on provisions to a more exor∣bitant price, than ever was known: and to obviate the complaints of the Customers; he published an Edict, That all Ambassadours and Cardi∣dinals should for the future pay the Taxes, and Impositions on their Do∣mestick provisions, in such manner as all other persons, not exempted by priviledges were obliged to pay. This Edict being published, greatly surprized, not only the Ministers from forein Princes, but the whole College of Cardinals, who finding themselves hereby deprived of their chief benefit and priviledg, mur∣mured, and talked loud against the arbitrary and irregular Government of Cardinal Altieri; who little regarding the empty air of words, re∣turned no other answer: than that the Pope was Master of his own Fa∣mily, and Dominions. The Ambassadours then residing at Rome were the Cardinal Land∣grave of Hesse for the Emperour, the Duke d' Estreé for France, Cardinal Nitardo for Spain, besides the Representatives of Venice, the Grand Duke, Genoua, and other lesser Princes, all these being disobliged, and sensibly touched by the loss, or suspension of their priviledg, entered into consultation together of the method, whereby to proceed; when after some debate they agreed to go together to the Palace of Monte Cavallo, where the Pope was then lodged; and there without any previous Ce∣remony, or notice taken of the Cardinal Nephew to demand Audience immediately of the Pope. Accordingly these forein Ministers being on their way thither, which made a great noise, and combustion in the City of Rome; the Cardinal at the alarm roused up himself, and in∣stantly commanded the Chains of the City to be drawn, the Gates of the Palace to be shut, and Guards placed at all Avenues, to hinder and obstruct the passage of the Ambassadours: who being in this manner disappointed of their Audience returned home full of anger and indig∣nation, resolving in revenge of this Affront never more to acknowledg the Cardinal for Nephew of the Pope or treat with him under those circum∣stances, or give him the name of Altieri, but of Paluzzi; and in the mean time they caused a relation and state of the whole matter to be drawn up
in writing, subscribed by the hands of all the Ambassadours and forein Ministers, the which was dispatched by every one of them to his re∣spective Prince. Notwithstanding the late Obstructions given them by Altieri, the Ambassadours found a way to obtain Audience of the Pope, to whom having gained admittance, they represented, That the cause and subject of their discontent was the exorbitant and irregular Government of his Nephew, who to the prejudice of their honour had laid those imposi∣tions upon them, from which they were exempted by the priviledg of their Character; and though both their Masters, and themselves were well-affected and zealous towards the Apostolical Sea, yet they could not but make a great difference between the duty they owed to his Holiness, and their submission to the Cardinal Altieri in all his indirect proceedings. For Answer hereunto, the Pope, who was of a mild and gentle temper replied with his usual softness, in justification of his Edict, that the Debts which lay on the Apostolical Chamber were vast, a∣mounting to many Millions of Gold; for ease of which, he was enforced to intrench for a short time on their priviledges; which should not longer continue, than until the end of the Jubily, which would be ter∣minated at the expiration of the following year; during which, the Chamber being obliged to more than ordinary charges, and expence, was enforced to exercise unusual means for its reimbursments: and there∣fore he hoped, that they would become such charitable Benefactors to the Church, as for its better support, and subsistence to part with some∣thing of their own rights for advancement of so great a good; especially considering, that during the time of his Pontificate, the Ecclesiastical State had not been charged with any new Taxes, or Impositions. These and the like discourses used by the Pope in favour of his Ne∣phew, and his proceedings, gave no satisfaction to the forein Ministers; who therewith displeased, returned immediately from their Audience to their own dwellings, without the least notice taken of the Cardinal Nephew; which neglect was intended as an affront to him, it being the custom for Ambassadours after they came from Audience with the Pope, to visit the Nephew, and communicate their Affairs to him, craving his assistance and furtherance in their business; but now the Ambassa∣dours to evidence their farther resentments, judged it not only fit to dis∣own Altieri by omission of this Ceremony, but even (as far as they were able) to divest him of his Adoption, vouchsafing no other name to him, than that of Paluzzi. This neglect, and ill correspondence with Altieri, continued for the space of several months, which much abated the respect of the people towards the Cardinal, and caused him to fall low in the esteem of the Court; and as a consequence thereof Kings and Princes returned no Answer to his Letters, though accompanied with the Pope's Briefs, and worded with all the terms of submission, and humility, that could be ex∣pressed. Altieri considering the circumstances of his condition, and the age of the Pope, (who according to the course of Nature could not last long) endeavoured by all means possible to procure a good understand∣ing between himself, and the Ambassadours, and especially to set him∣self right with France: in order hereunto a Congregation of Cardinals was deputed, consisting (as was believed) of Men disinteressed, and
unbiassed by any faction, whose incumbence it was to propose, and con∣trive middle, and indifferent terms towards an accommodation. In like cases, as well as in this, it hath been the practice, to ordain a Con∣gregation of this nature; which being composed for the most part of aged, and unactive Men, such as had given over the World, moved slowly in all their determinations, and with that phlegm, that their Consults, and Proposals commonly concluded in nothing: the like suc∣cess this Deputation found, the meeting, and debates of the Cardinals being delayed from day to day without other issue, or effect, and in the mean time the execution of the Edict seemed to be suspended, or to die of it self; the Customers, and Collectors of the Taxes not daring to exercise their power in virtue of this Edict. Altieri also had given them some intimation not to insist with too much resolution and rigour thereupon, with promises of abatements on their Farm, supposing that time would compose the differences, and allay the indignation which the Ambassadours had conceived against him: but finding to the con∣trary, that their anger was kept alive with scorn, and disrespect to his Person and Office: and that though the Kings of France and Spain were engaged in Wars one against the other, and that their Ambassadours at Rome were on that score at odds and unfriendly one with the other: yet they agreed, and entertained a good understanding together in what concerned the quadruple knot which they had sealed against him. Al∣tieri fearing the consequences of these matters, resolved to cast himself into the hands of France, but the Duke d' Estreé refused to accept of any terms, or Conditions with him; wherefore he applied himself to the other Ambassadours with design to break the Combination; but en∣countring the same difficulties he applied himself to the Court of Spain, where the Counsels and considerations being of a different nature, re∣garding the quiet of Italy, rather than animosity to the person of Al∣tieri, Orders were dispatched to Cardinal Nitardi to close with him, and to enter again into a good correspondence with the Court of Rome. The Emperour taking the same measures, gave Orders to the Cardinal Landgrave to acknowledg Altieri as formerly for the Pope's Nephew, and to retain a good correspondence with him: the Senate of Venice fol∣lowing the example of these two great Monarchs, ordered their Mini∣ster also to accept terms of reconciliation; by which means Altieri stood fair again with all the Ambassadours excepting onely the Duke d' E∣streé, who had other scores to reckon with him. When the news came to Rome, that the Court of Spain had given Order to their Ambassadour to reconcile himself with Altieri: those who in that City have little more to do, than to discourse of the Poli∣ticks, and make their reflections on the Acts of Princes; were of Opi∣nion, that Altieri had made some offers to assist the Spaniards in re∣gaining the City of Messina from the French; which the Duke d' Estreé having discovered, adjoined that quarrel to other matters of discontent: but such conjectures as these could have no foundation, nor gain belief amongst those, who understand the constitution of Rome, and the na∣ture of the Cardinal, who was more inclined to heap up for himself, than sow for others. But the more probable Opinion was, that Spain was desirous to stand fair with the Pope, because France was at odds with him, giving thereby a testimony to the World of the unquietness of that
Nation, which is contentedy with nothing of moderation; and in fine, that their behaviour towards all is insolent, and insupportable. The year 1675.An. 1675. which was the Jubily, or holy year, being enter∣ed, the City of Rome was after the usual manner filled with multitudes of Pilgrims and Strangers, who crowded to obtain the benefit of Pardons and Indulgences which are plentifully issued, and bestowed at that time. That year six Cardinals were created, namely, Alexander Crescentio a Roman, Marescotti of Bologna, Rocci a Roman, Albritii a Neapolitan, Spada a Roman, and Philip Howard of the Illustrious Family of Norfolk, who was a Dominican, having been Great Almoner to the Queen of England; this advancement was much facilitated by her Majesties recommendations The which promotions the French King would not own, because the Bi∣shop of Marseglia whom the King of Poland had recommended, (as we have related at the beginning of this Pope's Reign) was rejected to please the humour of the Spaniards. And indeed herein his most Christian Ma∣jesty seemed to have just cause of discontent: for though in the year 1671. Cesar d' Estreé Brother of the Duke of that name and called Bishop of Laon was created Cardinal; yet that honour being conferredat the nomi∣nation of the King of Portugal, in recompence of some services rendered to that Crown; and united onely to the bare recommendations of France; it was not esteemed as a favour done to that King, but to Por∣tugal onely, of which Kingdom d' Estreé was made Protectour. How∣soever Altieri would not understand it for other, than a favour done to France, without which and the interest of the Duke d' Estreé his Bro∣ther, then Ambassadour at Rome, it had scarce been obtained: for that Duke amongst other Commissions brought from Rome, had particular instructions to demand of the Pope the restitution of Castro and Ron∣ciglione to the Duke of Parma, according to the Treaty of Pisa; but that being a morsel not easily digested by the Pope, Monsieur d' Estreé made his way thereupon to gain the Cardinal's Cap for his Brother, by a relaxation of that demand. About the beginning of the year 1676.An. 1676. there arose a Controversie between the Pope and the Vice-King of Naples concerning the seizure of certain Banditi within the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical State, by Officers from the Vice-King; upon which Dispute the Son of the Duke of Sora was banished from Rome, upon pain of death in case he should return. This Pope Canonized Cajetan Tienne founder of the Order of Regu∣lar Clarks, Francis Borgia General of the Jesuits, Philip Beniti restorer of the Order of the Servillians, Lewis Bertran, and Rose of St. Mary both of the Dominican Order. Under these Circumstances Altieri remained with France, when Pope Clement the 10th. died; some few hours before whose death Altieri pressed him to fill up the four vacant places of Cardinals, and though the Queen of Sweden, and Cardinal Barbarino joyned with him in the same request; yet the Pope would not hearken to them, nor grant their desire. And when at last, Altieri became more importunate with him than before, designing to supply the four vacant places with Creatures of his own, who might be able to fortifie his Interest against the next Conclave: the good Pope turned to him, and with some Anger said: You may well con∣tent your self, that you have been Pope for six years, Suffer me now to follow my own inclinations, and be Pope for six hours onely.
It was now generally concluded, and believed, that Altieri was so fallen into disreputation with the whole College of Cardinals, and with the People of Rome, and so hated by all the Prelates, that immediately after the Pope's death, he would be removed from all his Offices, and deprived of his Suffrage in the ensuing Conclave. But Altieri had so well feathered his Nest during his Reign under his reputed Uncle, that his Riches procured him Friends, and reconciled the minds of those who were most estranged from him; so that he conserved his Office of Chamberlain with other honourable Charges; and obtained a confir∣mation for his Nephew Don Gasparo in his place of General, and after∣wards entered triumphant into the Conclave: onely his main task was in what manner to reconcile himself to the favour of the most Christian King; in regard the Cardinals of that Party declared, that they would neither act nor treat with Altieri, until he had first given satisfaction to his Majesty. INNOCENT XI. SO soon as Clement X. had expired his last breath, Altieri who was Cardinal Chamberlain gave notice thereof to all the Officers of the Houshold; upon which news, all the Prelates and Grooms of the Bedchamber in decent, and mourning Habits repaired to the Palace of Monte-Cavallo, where they found the Body of the Pope laid out on a Pallet covered with Crimson Velvet; and there in presence of them all, Altieri, whose Office it was, brake the Sigillum Piscatorium, or the Pope's Seal in pieces; and the Notaries of the Camera took an Inventory of all the Goods found in the Palace. After which the body of the Pope was de∣divered to those who were to embalm it, and then the Bell of the Capitol was rung out, to give notice of the death of the Pope to all the City. And now Cardinal Altieri, having nothing more to do at Monte-Cavallo, repaired to his own new Palace near the Jesu, attended with a numerous train, where he received the Visits of Cardinals, Princes, Ambassadours, Prelates, and Nobles who came to condole with him for the death of his Uncle. During the time that the Funeral Obsequies were solemnizing, the Cardinals were busied in forming Parties against the time of Election: the first day of which was the second of August, when a considerable number of Cardinals being assembled in St. Peter's, entered in form of Procession two by two with gravity and Order into the Conclave; the next day some others were added to them, in all to the number of fifty two; so on the third day of August the Conclave was shut and Guards set by the Prince Savelli, to whose Office it appertained, as Marshal of the Conclave. On the 4th instant the Mass of Veni Creator, being sung, the Cardinals began the Choice by way of Scrutiny. The Persons no∣minated were Vidone, Barberigo, Odescalchi, Spinola, and Cerri, all which had almost an equality of Votes: Odescalchi had eleven; but pro∣ceeding towards the Evening by way of Accession, seven Votes only ap∣peared for him.
On the sixth day in the Morning, Scrutiny being made, twenty seven Votes were given for Cardinal Corsini; but in the Evening fourteen onely appeared at the Accession. Howsoever things were so promising and favourable, that Chigi who chiefly managed this Affair in the be∣half of Corsini, certainly believed, that he had gained his point, but Car∣dinal Nitardo Ambassadour for Spain opposing the Election drew off all the Spanish party, which being followed by the faction of the Grand Duke Corsini was wholly abandoned, and but one Vote left him at the Evening when Accession was made. Chigi not discouraged with this ill success was still plotting to bring in the French party to his assistance; but was countermined by Altieri and the Flying Squadron. During which, another party was set up cal∣led the New Squadron consisting of certain Cardinals, who pretended great Zeal, and to be solely moved from a sincere and godly principle to promote a Person to the Chair of St. Peter, who was eminent for his Religion, and Wisdom without any regard to worldly or secular interest. The Chief, or Head of these Professours was Cardinal Gravina, who having from his first entrance into the Conclave fixed his Eyes on Car∣dinal Odescalchi, could never by any opposition, or difficulty to the con∣trary be removed from his design of promoting (as he judged) the most worthy person of all the Conclave. On this occasion Gravina ex∣ercising all his interest and art, Scrutiny was again made, and then thirty six Votes appeared in favour of Odescalchi; which number being great, and sufficient to secure the Pope's Election; a rumour was imme∣diately spread, that the Pope was chosen, which drew such a concourse of people to the gates of the Vatican, that the Guards were doubled, to keep off the throng from crowding into the precincts of the Conclave. Notwithstanding which, at the Accession some of the aforesaid number sell off; for Altieri, and Chigi had laboured under hand, seducing seve∣ral with vain hopes to promote some Creature of their respective Par∣ties; and the Spaniards on farther considerations span out the time with delays, expecting first to receive directions from the Court of Spain, before they proceeded to a final resolution. The French Cardinals inclined chiefly to the election of Rospigliosi, but in case his interest should fail, they approved of none so well as of Odescal∣chi; for though he was a subject of Spain, yet his Vertues, and the sin∣cere intentions of his mind towards the welfare of the Church, reconci∣led him to all Parties, and Interests. The Cardinals which composed this New Squadron were sixteen in number, the Chief of which was Gra∣vina, who ever remained immoveable, and would never nominate, or propose other than Odescalchi; the other Cardinals were Cibo, Barberigo, Litta, Buonvisi, Caraffa, Howard of Norfolk, Rospigliosi, Acciaioli, Homo∣dei, Albici, Nitardo, Rosetti, Pio, Vidone, and Odescalchi: the which Party with their Adherents was so strong, as to balance at any time the Election, and to exclude any whom they were pleased to reject. Howsoever the party of Odescalchi was not so strong, but that it ad∣mitted of another balance; for Barberino, and Chigi began a negotia∣tion in favour of Fachenetti, which was in so probable a way to succeed that Srutiny being made in the Morning, twenty two Votes appeared for him, and at the Evening eleven onely upon the Accession.
Whereupon Gravina and the zealous Cardinals renewed the Scrutiny again for Odescalchi, by which twenty nine were given in his favour; which number with the former favourable Scrutinies did clearly manifest, that the Conclave was generally inclined to this Person: which occasio∣ned a common rumour through all the Town that the Pope was made and that Odescalchi was chosen; which was so confidently reported, that the people began to assemble, with intention to rifle and plunder the Palace of that Cardinal, had it not been defended by a Guard of Soldiers. And indeed the Conclave had then really proceeded to have compleated their Choice, and by Accession created him Pope, had not Cardinal d' Estreé suspended the proceedings, by a Request he made; that their Eminencies would be pleased for some short time to defer the ultimate point which determines their Election, until the arrival of some French Cardinals, who by order of the King were now on their journey to∣wards the Conclave: which he proposed (as he said) not to thwart, or alter the Choice they had made of so worthy a Person, in which he also concurred; but that his most Christian Majesty might have opporunity thereby to join with them in such a sacred Election by the consent and approbation which he was ready to yield thereunto. In the mean time not to remain idle, several Designs were put in practice in behalf of divers Cardinals: Conti was one that was set up, and his interest promoted by Cardinal Azzolino; but this person failing, the next in nomination was Piccolomini supported by Chigi and Azzo∣lino, and founded on the interest of Spain, and the Great Duke; who to allure Altieri to a concurrence with them, they engaged that Piccolomini being elected Pope, he should advance Bichi (who was the intimate Friend of Altieri) to the degree, and dignity of Cardinal Ne∣phew: but this offer prevailed not upon Altieri, who had other designs and intentions in his prospect. Chigi failing herein resolved to try the fortune of Cardinal Spinola, who though a Genoese, was yet a person of great worth, and learning, and well practised in publick Affairs, having resided for some time with the Emperour in Germany, in quality of Nuntio from the Pope; but this would not do neither, for being put to the Scrutiny, no more than seven Votes were presented for him. Then Cardinal Crescentio was proposed, and offered to the Spaniards, and to the Faction of Pamfilio: but this interest being manifestly opposite to the Crown of France, and to the Duke d' Estreé Ambassadour for that King, and by consequence to all the French party; there remained little hopes of success for him, or his Promoters. Then new Scrutinies being again made: Odescalchi had fourteen Votes, Alberici nine, old Carpegna had seven, Albici five, Gastaldi nine, and Crescentio three. Thus did the Conclave trifle away their time until the thirtieth of August, when the Cardinals Retz, Buglion, Bonsi, and Maldachino, arrived at Rome; so that it was expected, that very speedily an Election would follow, and that according to common Opinion, the person would be no other than Odescalchi, though at the same time Albritio by the dexterous management of Altieri, Carpegna, and Colonna, was put into a fair course of promotion: but his hopes were soon dashed by opposite par∣ties, and the different interests became so embroiled, and intriguesome, that in all probability the Election was not likely to succeed in several months.
On the first of September the Cardinals Retz, Buglion, Bonsi, and Muldachino entered the Conclave, accompanied with a numerous train, and a concourse of people, crying out after them for a speedy Election, and for a Rospigliosi, or an Odescalchi. Thus were the people as well without, as the Cardinals within inclined generally to the election of Odescalchi; with whom also the French Cardinals agreed, and by addi∣tional Votes strengthened his Party: but in regard his most Christian Majesty carried at that time a mighty stroak in the Conclave, as he did in all the Councils of Europe, it was judged convenient not to conclude on this important matter without the assent, and approbation of his Majesty. To this end Corriers or Posts were expresly dispatched with advices, and informations from the French Cardinals; and in the mean time, (as is very observable, and never before practised) the whole Con∣clave fixed their Eyes on Odescalchi as the person designed, and marked out for this eminent employment; and from that very time paid him the same honour, duty and reverence, as if he had been already promo∣ted to the Papal Throne. And now the Cardinals had little more to do than to quarrel amongst themselves; Colonna and Maldachino had a Dispute with very sharp words, reviling each other, with Fool, and Beast; but the most consi∣derable was that between Cardinal Howard of Norfolk, and the Cardi∣nal Buglion; for that the latter had not returned the Visit, which the former had made to him; in excuse for which Buglion freely declared, that it was his King's positive Command to him, not to acknowledg the Cardinals of the last promotion, either by Ceremony, or Comple∣ment, or any Treaty, or Negotiation whatsoever. But the Cardinal of Norfolk would not allow of this Excuse, insisting on the King's good will, and gracious favours towards his Person; when in his journey, and passage through France from London to Rome, he was pleased to ho∣nour him with his own Coaches, and to give Orders to the Governours of all Cities, through which he was to pass to treat him with a respect due to the Character of a Cardinal, and to the dignity of his Illustrious Family; the which favours his Majesty would never have bestowed in that gracious manner had his intentions been different, and not incli∣clined to allow him for a Cardinal, under which notion he was treated, and received in all parts of France. But this was not the private, or single case of the Cardinal of Norfolk, for all that promotion was con∣cerned in the quarrel, which the Conclave considering as dangerous, and such, as might cause great disorder and confusion, they immediately di∣spatched a Letter to his Majesty subscribed also by the French Cardinals, beseeching his Majesty that he would be pleased to order his Ambassa∣dour the Duke de Estreé, the French Cardinals, and all his other Of∣ficers and Ministers at Rome, to own, and visit the six Cardinals of the last promotion, created by the late Pope Clement X. which would avoid many inconveniences, and disturbances in the Conclave to the great pre∣judice, and hindrance of that important Affair now incumbent upon them until answers were returned to the foregoing dispatches. The Con∣clave not to be idle, employed themselves upon several Scrutinies, in favour of Massimi, Cerri, Fachinetti, and others, but none of them ari∣sing to that number of Votes, which on all occasions appeared for Odes∣calchi, all other trials became faint, and insignificant. So that the gene∣ral
inclination of the Conclave seemed in despight of Altieri, and the endeavours of his Adherents to the contrary, to be entirely fixed, and setled on the person of Odescalchi; to whose promotion nothing was now wanting, but the concurrence and approbation of his most Christian Majesty. In short, on the 19th of September the Corrier returned from France, of which secret intelligence was given to the French Cardinals in the Conclave, and that the answers were highly in favour of Odescalchi, as a Person grateful, and in every kind acceptable to his Majesty. On the twentieth the Duke d' Estreé Ambassadour of France was introduced into the Conclave, where he presented the Letters from his most Chri∣stian Majesty to the College of Cardinals in answer to those lately sent by them: and then in a most eloquent Speech he represented unto them the necessity there was to proceed to the speedy election of a Pope, whose Government was now more than necessary to the Christian World. That in the College of Cardinals there was so many persons of Vertue, that they had an ample Field for their Election; yet consi∣dering, that the Vicar of Christ was to be of the number of those, who did transcend in all the Vertues, and Graces of Religion, and such as would reform the abuses, and corruptions, which to the scandal of the Christian Church, were crept into the Court of Rome: he would recom∣mend unto them one who was of a publick Spirit, sincere, and disin∣terested, deciphering unto them thereby, though without naming, the very person of Odescalchi: and having praised and applauded Cardinal Barberino, and giving God thanks for the great piety and zeal of that Man, he retired, leaving the Conclave to their free Election, in which now there appeared no farther difficulty, in regard the major part had received a plenary inspiration from France. And here on this occasion it would be no impertinent Query, whether the Court at Paris was not as much concerned in the choice of a Pope, as the Conclave was at Rome. But this will not be strange, or new; for Ha∣drian the first, and Leo the 3d. gave a power to approve, or disallow the election of the Pope unto Charles the Great; and Leo the 8th, confirmed the same priviledg to Otho: And when the Church hath been powerful it hath made Emperours; and when Emperours have been victorious, and prosperous, they have made Popes. But to proceed, that Evening a great number of Cardinals went to the Cell of Odescalchi, and kissed his hand, which was the irretractable as∣surance, and engagement of their Votes for him: but the good man shewed some unwillingness and reluctance thereunto, desiring them with tears in his Eyes to chuse some other Subject more able to support the great load and burden of so mighty a weight. Howsoever being at length overcome by the Arguments, and persuasions of his Friends, he consented thereunto, upon condition, that they would assent unto, and subscribe certain Articles for reformation of the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment which he then proposed to them; which the Cardinals approving, a great part of them subscribed that Night and swore to maintain them, as did the others in like manner the day following. And now Altieri finding that it was to no purpose to struggle, and contend longer; and fearing lest the Election should be made without him, he became the most forward of any to make the Scrutiny, being followed by all his
Creatures, who were nineteen in number; so then the Choice was im∣mediately determined by the Access; and on the 21th. of September 1676. the whole Conclave with one Voice and Mind declared Odescalchi to be the Pope of Rome, the Vicar of Christ, and the true and undoubted Succes∣sour of St. Peter: and then Cardinal Barberino who was Dean of the College, was the first by the duty of his place to lead the others to A∣doration; and was afterwards followed by all one after the other ac∣cording to their Offices, and Seniority. The Adoration being performed, he was vested in his Pontifical Habit, taking the name of Innocent XI. in remembrance of his Benefactor, who had assumed him into the Degree, and Order of Cardinals; after which he was conducted into the Chappel with the accustomed Ceremonies, and being placed by the Altar, he there received the second Adoration, which being finished the Master of Ceremonies demanded, whether it was the pleasure of His Holiness that the Nobility then attending with∣out, desirous to kiss his feet, should be admitted in, to pay the duty, and devotion which they owed to the Successour of St. Peter, which being granted the Queen of Sweden was the first introduced to perform that Complement; after her followed the Ambassadours and Ministers of the crowned Heads, after whom came the Princes, Prelates and Nobles, all which having kissed the feet of the Pope, testified the excess of joy they conceived for the promotion of a Person so worthy of all honour unto the Papal Chair. After which a Door was opened over the Great Portico of St. Peter's Church, into which the Master of the Ceremonies led the way carrying a Cross before the Pope and Cardinals, which the people with great reverence adored at a distance, and the Cardinal Maldachino, who was first Deacon, presenting the Pope before them, pronounced with a loud Voice these following words after the accustomed manner, Annuncio Vobis gaudium magnum: habemus Pontificem Eminentissimum, & Reverendissimum Dominum, Cardinalem Benedictum Odescalcum, qui sibi Nomen imposuit Inno∣centius XI. It is not to be expressed with what joy the common people, and the City entertained the news of this Pope's advancement; the Bells were rung, and all the Cannon of the City were fired, and the Soldiers discharged many Vollies of their Musquets with sounds of Drums and Trumpets; and seized on the Coach and Horses, and the very Coach∣man's Cloak, which they challenged to themselves for their fees. Du∣ring which Solemnity, and whilest Te Deum was sung, no alteration appeared in the countenance of the Pope, unless it were a more than usual pensiveness and mortification, not discovering the least vanity, or loftiness in his looks which other Popes were never able to conceal; but blessed, and crossed the People with a floud of tears which fell from his Eyes. Some persons may weep for joy, but tears from what passion soever they proceed are always the Indications of a soft, and gentle temper, when men of a more hardy nature, evidence the swel∣lings, and elations of their Heart by a proud and a supercilious coun∣tenance. Benedictus Odescalchi was born at Como a City in the Dukedom of Milan in the year of our Lord 1611. hi Father was called Livio, and his Mother Paula Castella, and both of Noble, and Patrician Families in Como, with a Revenue of thirty thousand Crowns a year, belonging to
the House of Odescalchi. In his youth he was educated by the Jesuits, and by them instructed in Grammar, and humane learning. He aftewards studied the Civil and the Canon Laws, partly at Rome, and partly at Naples; and though he was never esteemed for a Polemical Divine, yet he had the reputation of one who knew the World well, and pra∣ctised in the nature of Mankind, and the Art of Government. In the time of Ʋrban VIII. he was made one of the Prothonotaries of the Apo∣stolical Chamber, and afterwards was created President of the same: he was also made Chief Commissary for gathering the Taxes, and Duties arising in the Province of Marchio which were laid on the people at the time of Wars in Italy. After this business was over, he was constitu∣ted Governour of Macerata, and the Province thereunto adjoyning. By Innocent X. he was made one of the Clarks of his Chamber, and not long after in the year 1645. he was assumed into the College of Cardinals having the Deaconry bestowed on him of the Saints Cosma, and Damianus: and being afterwards translated into the Order of Priests, he had the Title conferred on him of St. Onuphrius, and by the same In∣nocent sent to Ferrara with the Title of Legat: in which Office having acquitted himself with great honour, he was made Bishop of Novarese, where he resided for some years, but afterwards was removed from thence at his own desire, by reason of the heaviness of the Air in that place, which did not well agree with the constitution of his body. Being at Rome he was employed in many Affairs of the Church, and called to serve in diverse Congregations of Cardinals: on which occa∣sion he was made Protectour of several Colleges and Monasteries; and in all he behaved himself with singular prudence, modesty and vertue, until he was assumed into the Supreme degree of the Papal Throne: to which having (as we have said) been elected on the 21th of Septem∣ber, he was Crowned with the usual Ceremonies on the 4th of October following. After the Election and Coronation of the Pope were finished, the French Cardinals prepared for their return to France; but before their departure they paid their Visits to the Cardinals of the last promotion, who had not hitherto been acknowledged by the King, for the reasons before mentioned. But those quarrels being now vanished by the change of Affairs in the Court of Rome, the Visits were returned, and a good correspondence again renewed, and established. So soon as this Pope had taken the Government of Affairs into his own hands, he began a reformation in several particulars: and in the first place considering that Nepotism, or the advancement of Nephews both in Riches, and Power was odious to the People, and of great da∣mage to the Church; of which examples had been given by those Popes, who having been over tender, and indulgent to their own Families, had suffered their Nephews to blemish the honour of the Church by Simo∣niacal corruptions, and by their Avarice and Ambition to exhaust the Treasure of the Apostolical Chamber; this Pope therefore (as we say) considering these matters, resolved to give the first Example hereof in his own Family; and accordingly refused to receive his Nephew Don Livio into any part of the Government, forbidding him to receive, or return Visits under the Notion of Nephew to the Pope. But that this Nephew might not complain of the severity of his Uncle, or judge his
Estate nothing improved by this fortune of his Family, he relinquished unto him all his Temporal Estate amounting unto thirty thousand Crowns of yearly Revenue. But in regard that Princes are not able to support the whole burthen of their Government on their own shoulders: the Pope not having re∣spect to his own Relations, but to such as were fit, and adequate to these great undertakings; made choice of Cardinal Cibo for his Secretary of State, being a person endued with a great and generous Soul, and a clear understanding, zealous for the welfare of the Church, and dexterous in the management of politick Affairs. This beginning gave encourage∣ment to good and wise Men who conceived hopes by an instance of this nature that Vertue and wisdom would return again into use, and fashion: and the Court of Rome in general rejoyced to find themselves freed from the pride, insolence, and covetousness of Nephews. Howsoever the Family of Altieri was continued in their Military Employments, and others confirmed in their respective Offices: but because War was ex∣trinsecal and not the Trade, or profession of the Church which was now in peace with all the World, he retrenched the pay, or Pension belong∣ing to the Officers of the Papal Army; causing them to remain satisfied with the Name, and Dignity, without the benefit, or profits of their respective Commands; which proved of great ease to the Apostolical Chamber. Howsoever knowing that Authority is not to be maintained without Power, and force; and resolving to become Master of Rome, he encreased the number of his Archers; in the listing of which, he took not every fellow that came to offer his service, but such onely as were sober Men, not given to quarrels, or to commit such insolences as the Corsi, who were the cause of great disturbance to Alexander VII. How∣soever on the other side not to receive insults from Ambassadours or other Representatives of Kings, or Nobles and Princes of Rome: in pre∣judice to Justice, and the rules of severe Government, he absolutely de∣nied to them the priviledg to protect Miscreants, and Criminals within the Precincts, or certain limits assigned by themselves to be Sanctuaries for all Villains and Murtherers, that should fly for refuge to those quar∣ters: and in pursuance of this resolution, he seized a certain famous Bandito at Riccia, where the Prince, and Princess Chigi have a Seat, and possession; the which was admitted without any opposition made thereunto. Farther, the Pope confirmed the seventeen Articles which were signed (as we have said) in the Conclave by all the Cardinals; being such as for the most part tended to a Reformation of manners, and to an amend∣ment of those abuses which were crept into the Church. And far∣ther, to demonstrate his great zeal for the welfare and reputation of the Papal See, he openly reproved the vanity of those Cardinals, who pleased themselves with fine Coaches, and rich Liveries, giving them to understand the incongruity there was between those worldly Gayeties, and the profession of those, who had devoted themselves to that sober, and serious life which becomes the gravity of a good and a holy Prelat. And in regard that in times of preceding Popes, many unworthy per∣sons by the force of Money, and Simonaical dealings were arisen to Episcopal Dignities: the Pope appointed four Cardinals, and four other Clergymen, to examine the lives, and manners of such, who aspired to
the degree of Bishops; ordering them to admit none thereunto, suspe∣cted, or in the least blemished with an ill fame, or taxed of ignorance, as well as of a debauched conversation. And in order to a thorough reformation the Pope drove out all the Courtesans, and Strumpets from Rome, and persons openly scandalous and dissolute in their manners; and amongst others he banished a Gentleman of quality into Germany, for having made a violent attempt on the chastity of a Lady of appro∣ved modesty: All Houses of Play, or gaming for Money were put down, and all leud and unlawful Assemblies were fobridden. And in regard the Barons of Rome had by the priviledg of their Nobility, raised themselves above the reach of their Creditors. The Pope ordered Car∣dinal Cibo to make a narrow inspection thereinto, and to pay the Debts of the Barons out of the Money of the Chamber; by which means these Debts being assigned over to the Chamber, a payment of the same might more easily be forced by vigour of that Law, which enforces the proceedings of the Exchequer. To these Acts of Justice the Pope added one of great generosity to∣wards Christina Queen of Sweden, who having by the late Wars lost the greatest part of her Revenue in Sweden; in recompence thereof he allow∣ed unto her a Pension of twelve thousand Crowns a year. And having laid these first foundations, and beginnings of good Government: the Pope's next work was to labour in the promotion of a Peace between the two Crowns, and all other Christian Princes; that laying aside all differences, and quarrels amongst themselves they might unite their forces for the good and welfare of Christendom against the common Enemy the Turk: to this effect he wrote Letters to the Emperour, and to the Kings of France, and Spain, exhorting them to Peace and Concord, of which he offered himself to be the Mediator, and to be assistant thereunto in Person, provided that the place appointed for the Treaty, were assigned in some City of the Catholick Religion: On the other side he animated the King of Poland to continue his War against the Turk, and not to lay down his Arms until he had recovered Kaminiec, and revenged himself of the Affront put upon him by the late Visier Kuperlee, who had taken Contribution under the notion of Tribute from his City of Leopolis; and to enable and encourage him thereunto, he re∣mitted to him the sum of fifty thousand Crowns. An. 1677.But whilst the Pope laboured for Peace abroad, he was not able to keep himself, nor his Court free from disturbances at home: for the Marquis del Carpio who resided at Rome in quality of Ambassadour for his Catholick Majesty, being informed of the great want his Master had of Soldiers to send into Sicily, adventured to make some levies of men in Rome, pretending that the French on some occasions had practised the like; but the People not being ignorant of the bad pay, and ill treat∣ment of the Spaniards came very slowly to enroll their names: and moreover a report was rumoured abroad, that many people were want∣ing, who were hid in Cellars by the Spaniards, till an opportunity pre∣sented to transport them into Sicily. This report, whether it were true, or false, yet served the turn of such who delighted in troubles and Seditions; for being entertained with some malice in the minds of the people, they conceived such an abhorrence of the Spanish Nation, that they affronted them in all places, which sometimes proceeded to fight∣ings,
and scuffles, in which several were killed and wounded; but the Spa∣niards being few in number and the weaker side, were at last forced to keep within their quarters, for fear of the multitude. The Pope to suppress these tumults, and prevent disorders, punished several persons, who were guilty of the Riots, with just severity; but the Spanish Ambassadour not contented herewith pretended some higher and more exemplary satisfa∣ction; at which the Pope grew angry, declaring that the Ambassadour was in arrear to him, and obliged rather to give than to demand satisfaction: upon which the Ambassadour to shew his resentment, refused to appear at Court, and at the same time the Vice-King of Naples without any cause, or reason denied Audience to the Pope's Nuntio at that City. This manner of proceeding was highly displeasing to Innocent, whose anger was the more encreased on the score of other abuses introduced into Rome by pretended priviledges of forein Ministers; who assumed to themselves a jurisdiction, (as we have said) within certain limits, which they chalked out to themselves, to make a Sanctuary, or place of refuge for Criminals, and out-lawed persons. And considering by how much more the Franchises, and priviledges of publick Representatives encreased in Rome, by so much was the Pope's Authority diminished and abated, he therefore grievously took occasion to complain in the Consi∣story of the ill use, which Ambassadours and other Ministers made of their priviledges to the great scandal and reproach of the Government; that he had long expected that the Princes themselves should have re∣nounced such irregular pretences, and out of love to justice have become instrumental to bring wicked men to punishment, rather than to be Protectours of Assassinates and out-lawed persons; but seeing that his expectations, and patience was all in vain; he was now resolved for discharge of his Duty and Conscience to provide for the security of his own People. Howsoever he could not without some sad reflections on the indiscreet, and unreasonable importunities of some forein Ministers, find himself constrained to take such measures in his Affairs, as would prove displeasing to them; for that it was unreasonable, whilst his mind was employed in cares and contrivances for the propagation of the faith, for reformation of the Ecclesiastical Discipline, for the establish∣ment of Peace and Concord between Christian Princes, and other mat∣ters conducing to the good and benefit of the Commonweal of all Christendom; he should be disturbed and interrupted in these proceed∣ings by the very Ministers of those Princes, for whose welfare, and for the peace of whose People, he was in continual care and labour; where∣fore not being able longer to support such impertinences; he was re∣solved to become Master in Rome, as other Princes were in their own Dominions; and in pursuance thereof he published an Edict, forbidding all persons whatsoever to affix the Arms of any great personage over his Shop; it being a mark, that that Family had renounced the Autho∣rity of their Prince the Pope, and put themselves under the protection of that Ambassadour, or Prince, or Nobleman, whose Arms they had affixed over the Portal of the House, or entrance to the Shop. This resolute Act much surprized the minds of those whom it concerned, and especially the Spaniards, who made a false judgment of the temper of Odescalchi; conceiving him to be so wary and cautious in his actions, that he would never engulf himself in the same circumstances of Affairs,
which had given a disturbance to his Predecessour, during the whole course of his Pontificate. Howsoever the Pope continuing firm and con∣stant in his resolution, the Spaniards remitted something of the stiffness of their pride; for considering that the circumstances of their present Affairs would not admit of a disunion with Rome, the Ambassadour de∣sired to have Audience of the Pope; the which was refused to him, until the Nuntio had received Audience at Naples; and that the King of Spain by special Letters under his own hand, had desired that his Ambassadour might be heard on some emergencies, and urgent occa∣sions; upon which, and at the persuasions of the Cardinals Barberino, and Cibo, the Ambassadour was admitted to Audience; which having produced a true and right understanding between both Parties, the Am∣bassadour departed with ample satisfaction acquiescing in the late pro∣ceedings of the Court. The Thorns which have ever been most prickly and pungent in the sides of Popes, were their Contests with Kings, or crowned Heads, or when the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Authority contended with the Tem∣poral, as may appear by that notable Controversie between Paul V. and the Republick of Venice, and in other matters of smaller moment be∣tween Kings, and Popes, both before and since that time. The point of the Regalia hath been an antient Dispute for many Ages in France; the which was in some sort determined in the year 1431. by the Council of Basil, where it was ordained that Cathedral Churches and others should have a freedom of Elections: This afterwards was con∣firmed by a great Assembly of French Clergy gathered at Bourges, and addressed to the King Charles the 7th. desiring him to undertake the protection of that Council: At that time, the Council of Basil sent to the King an abstract of their Decrees consisting of thirty seven Articles, by which Decennial Councils, and the Authority of Councils above the Pope was established, &c. together with an abstract of the Decree they had made concerning Elections. All which were considered at that Assembly, where the Dauphin and the chief Nobility of France were present, and by their advice the famous Pragmatick Sanction was made in confirmation of those Articles; which was observed during the Reign of Charles the 7th. but Lewis the eleventh esteeming it the Interest of France to maintain a good correspondence with the Papacy, was incli∣nable to wave the advantage of this Sanction. An. 1478.In the beginning of the Reign of Charles the 8th. an Assembly of States being called at Tours, the third Estate petitioned, that the Prag∣matick Sanction might be again renewed, and confirmed; calling those who were preferred by the Court to be Court-Bishops; so it was again put into force and practice, much to the displeasure of the Pope; not∣withstanding which, Lewis the 12th. made a perpetual Edict in confir∣mation of it. Francis the first succeeding to the Crown, and having vast designs in Italy, thought it not his interest to stand at a distance with the Pope;An. 1515. and therefore was willing to treat with him about the aboli∣tion of the Pragmatick Sanction on such terms, as might reconcile his own prerogative with the Pope's Authority. This design occasioned an Interview between the King and the Pope at Bologna, and thence the Concordat was produced, which was afterwards put into the form of a Bull, and confirmed by the Council at Lateran. The sum of which
was this: the King and the Pope agreed to divide the Promotions to all Pre∣lacies between them; for the King was to nominate the Person within six months after a vacancy, and the Pope was to confirm him if no lawful ex∣ception did lie against him. All which is so fully and learnedly treated by Dr. Burnet in his History of the Regale or Rights of Princes in dispo∣sing of Ecclesiastical Benefices, and Church Lands, and deduced down to this present time; that there is no place left for our enlargement thereupon, unless we add some few, and short remarks on the behaviour of this Innocent XI. towards his most Christian Majesty on this occasion. It is manifest by History, that when the Emperours flourished with great Power, and Riches, they created Popes, or at least they had the con∣firmation of them: and when Emperours were low, and were oppressed by adverse Fortune, the Popes forced them to be beholding to the ex∣tensive reach of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which by some side-wind, or far-fetched notion of Spiritual Concernment, reduced almost every thing under cognisance of the Church. According to this natural course of worldly affairs: Lewis the 14th. the most Christian King being high,Dr. Burnet. and prosperous in his for∣tune, resolved to put a period to the process for the Regale which had continued near thirty years, and at last in the year 1673. came to a conclusion, and Declaration was made: That the King had Right of Regale in all his Dominions without distinction, except onely in those Sees, that had purchased their exemption from it: And therefore all Bishops who had not yet registred their Oaths of Fidelity in the Chambers of Accounts, were required to do it, and to take out a Writ upon it for closing the Regale, otherwise rheir Bishopricks were still to be looked on, as under it. All the Bishops of France unwilling to incurr the displeasure of their successful Monarch, submitted; ex∣cepting the Bishops of Alet, and Pamiers. It was now under the Reign of Clement X. an old doating Pope, who having his parts and understanding enfeebled by old Age, he commit∣ted the management of the Pontificate to the sole direction of Cardinal Paluzzi, afterwards adopted by the Pope, and called Altieri; a Person, who from his first beginning was distastful to the Court of France, and not until this time well reconciled unto it, as we have at large declared in the foregoing Life. This was the time, I say, when open Claim to the Regale was renewed in favour of the King, and when the Pope himself was scarce able to distinguish his Interest; and Altieri was so thwarted and opposed by the Court of France, that he had enough to do to conserve his own personal Interest, much less to vindicate, and contend for the Rights of the Church in a case so litigious as this. In January 1676. the King's Right was claimed in disposal of the Deanry of Alet; the Dispute of which was left unto the Bishop to main∣tain, for the Pope being under the foregoing Circumstances, took little cognisance thereof either by himself or his Cardinal. But this good Pope dying in the month of August next following, the Controversie fell to the lot of Innocent the 11th. to maintain, and to dispute in op∣position to the eldest Son of the Church. This quarrel was increased by a Contest at Pamiers; where one Paucet was provided in Right of the Regale to be Arch-deacon of Pamiers, but was rejected by the Bishop and Chapter: howsoever the Regale prevailed, for the Arch-Bishop of
Tholouse was on their side, and gave judgment in favour of the Regalist. But on the contrary, the Bishop of Pamiers acquiesced not with this Sentence, but made his appeal to the Pope, who was now engaged in the Controversie, and the matter lodged in his hands. Wherefore the Pope in the year 1678, wrote his Brief to the French King, and in soft and yet pressing terms complained of the Innova∣sions made on the Liberties of the Church, and the Authority of the Council of Lions: and after several Arguments to persuade him to de∣sist from this Enterprise; he concludes, that he cannot forget those Popes his Predecessours, who upon the like occasions had endured long, and great afflictions. But these Allegations satisfied not the King, who pretended that the Rights of the Regale were inherent in the Crown, and had been en∣joyed by his Ancestors, and by them derived down to himself. The Pope on the other side affirmed, that the Secular Powers had no right to things sacred, but as it was derived to them by the Authority of the Church; and that the Church had not granted any such Right, having expresly limited it by the Council of Lions, which hath now been ob∣served four hundred years. This Controversie seemed to lie dormant from September 1678. to December 1679. until it was again revived, and stirred in the See of Pa∣miers, in that point which concerned the vacant Benefices and the mean Profits; for the King's Officers seized on them likewise, so that the good old Bishop had nothing to live on the last twenty months of his life, but the Oblations and Charities of his People. On this occasion the Pope wrote to the Cardinal d' Estreé to interpose in this Affair, as being a Person more than ordinarily concerned in the dignity of the Aposto∣lical See. To which the Cardinal made answer in the style of a Court-Bishop, extolling the King's merit, his zeal for the Faith, and respect for the Apostolical Chair; what he had done for the suppression of Calvinism, and Heresie within his Dominions, and how bravely he had defended the Christian Cause against the Turks: and in fine, he laid down the dan∣gers which would follow, if any dissention should arise between the King and the Church. At length Cardinal d' Estreé was dispatched to Rome with a Letter of Credence, and Orders to treat immediately with the Pope himself; but it seems, his Negotiations produced little alteration; for the Pope continued steddy and constant to his Principles. And on the other side, the Parliament of Paris became as zealous for the King's Right and Au∣thority; for which the King's Attorney General pleading, made little esteem of the Pope's Censures which were passed for Obedience to the King's Orders. The Church, said he, may indeed have an Authority to punish Men for Heresie, and an ill life: but the World was now too well enlightned, not to discern that the Thunders of Rome had been for several Ages vainly employed for extending its Authority beyond all due bounds; the limits of which were to be found in the Canons of the Church, by which the Pope, as well as others ought to govern himself. And therefore desired that the last Brief sent by the Pope might be suppressed, which was accordingly done by a Judgment of the Court of Parliament on the last of March, 1681.
And to give a farther Authority to this Judgment, an Extraordinary Assembly was called of all the Bishops, then residing at Paris; where were present six Arch-Bishops, twenty six Bishops, and six that were named to Bishopricks, to whom the Agents of the Clergy represented the Invasions made on the Liberties of the Gallican Church by the Pope's Briefs, both in general concerning the Regale, and in particular in the Affair at Pamiers, and the Nunneries, and concerning a Book of Gerbais a Dr. of Sorbonne, De causis Majoribus, which were equally contrary both to Church and State, to the Canons, and the Concordate, by which the Pope upon a simple Complaint without any Appeal, did by the plenitude of his Power, judg at Rome concerning the validity of Elections, and the Authority of Arch-Bishops, and Primats, &c. The issue of which Assembly was this: They asserted the Authority of National Churches for judging of all matters both of Faith and Manners: and in the con∣clusion agreed to make an Address to the King, praying him to give leave either for a National Council, or an Assembly General: the latter of which was consented unto by his Majesty, and summoned to meet the first of October following. Thus far concerning the Regale we have ex∣tracted in short by way of Epitome from the Treatise of Dr. Burnet on that Subject. Now as to what follow'd. The Assembly met at the time appinted; at the opening of which, the Bishop of Meaux preached a most Eloquent Sermon, with much applause: After which the point of the Regale was put to the question, and argued learnedly on both sides; and in conclusion the greatest part were of Opinion, that the Right un∣to the Regalia were inherent in the Crown, and that the pretensions thereunto were Usurpations by the Church, as appears by this following Declaration. The Declaration of the Clergy of the Gallican Church concerning the Ecclesiastical Power. We the Arch-Bishops and Bishops Representatives of the Gallican Church, being by command of his Majesty assembled at Paris, toge∣ther with others of the Clergy in the same manner delegated with us, after long debate, and mature consideration have thought fit to de∣clare, and determine these several particulars following: 1. First, That a Power is given by God to St. Peter and his Successours who are the Vicars of Christ, and to the Church to order, and regulate all Spiritual matters; but not to intermeddle in Civil or Temporal mat∣ters, according to that saying of our Lord, My Kingdom is not of this World. And again, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and un∣to God the things which are Gods. And agreeable hereunto is that of the Apostle, Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers which are, are ordained of God, and whoso∣ever resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God: Wherefore Kings and Princes by the Law of God are not liable in Temporal matters to the Ecclesiastical Power, nor by the Power of the Keys can they be Depo∣sed either directly or indirectly, or can their Subjects be absolved from
their Fealty and Obedience to them, or from their Oaths of Allegiance; the which we confirm, and determine, as principles not onely necessary for conservation of the publick peace and tranquillity, but for the bet∣ter government of the Church; and as truths agreeable to the Word of God, the tradition of the Fathers, and to the example and practise of Saints and Holy Men. 2. Secondly, That the Apostolical See, and the Successours of St. Peter, who are the Vicars of Christ, have a full and plenary power in all Spi∣ritual matters; in such manner as is given to them by the Holy Oecu∣menical Synod of Constance, which is received by the Apostolical See; and in such manner as hath been confirmed by the constant use and practise of the Popes of Rome, and the whole Church, and observed by the Religion of the Gallican Church, and decreed by the Authority of the General Councils, in the fourth and fifth Sessions. And the Gal∣lican Church doth condemn the Opinions of those, who esteeming those Decrees of doubtful Authority, do endeavour to restrain them to certain times of Schism, and to invalidate the present power thereof. 3. Thirdly, Hence it is, that the 3d exercise of the Apostolical power is to be regulated by Canons established by the Spirit of God, and thereunto all the World is to bear respect and Reverence. Likewise the Rules, Manners, and Institutions received by the Kingdom and Church of France, as also the customs of our Forefathers are to remain unal∣terable: the which is a clear demonstration of the greatness of the A∣postolical See, that the Statutes and Ordinances thereof are established and confirmed by and with the consent of the Churches. 4. Fourthly, In questions of Faith the Pope is Chief Judg, and his De∣crees extend themselves to the Churches in general, and to every one in particular; nor can his judgment be repealed, unless by the consent and determination of the Universal Church. 5. Fifthly, These particulars received from the Doctrine of our Fore-fa∣thers, we have by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost Decreed to send unto all the Gallican Churches, and the Bishops presiding over them. And we do all concur in the same sence and meaning of them. Subscribed by Arch-Bishops, and Bishops and Clergy as before re∣lated and registred, as required by the King's Attorney General, March 23. 1682. An. 1681.The Pope, who during his Reign had not as yet assumed any to the degree of Cardinal to supply the places of those who were dead: the College was diminished twenty six in their number; which when the Pope considered, and that old Men were every day dying, and falling off, he was inspired to replenish the places with a supply of sixteen new Car∣dinals, which were these that follow.
1. John Baptista Spinola of sixty seven years of Age, a Genoese, who was Governour of Rome, and Secretary of the Congregation of Regulars. 2. Anthony Pignatelli, a Napolitan of sixty six years of age, Bishop of Lecca, and Master of the Pope's Chamber. 3. Stephen Brancaccio, a Napolitan of sixty four years of age. 4. Stephen Agostini, of sixty five years of age, Arch-Bishop of He∣raclea, and Datary to the Pope. 5. Francis Bonvisi, of Luca, aged sixty three years, Arch-Bishop of Thessalonica, and Nuntio residing at Vienna. 6. Savo Mellini, a Roman, aged thirty seven years, Arch-Bishop of Cesarea, and Nuntio in Spain. 7. Frederick Visconti, of Milan, aged sixty three, Auditor of the Rota, and Arch-Bishop of Milan. 8. Marco Gallio, of Como, aged sixty nine years, Bishop of Rimini, and Vice-gerent of Rome. 9. Flaminio del Tayo, of Siena, aged eighty years, Auditor of the Rota, and Chief Penitentiary. 10. Raymond Capizucchi, a Roman, aged sixty nine years, Master of the Palace. 11. John Baptista de Luca, a Napolitan, aged sixty four years, Au∣ditor to the Pope. 12. Laurentio Brancati, of Laurea in Calabria, aged sixty four years, Library-keeper of the Vatican. 13. Ʋrbano Lacchetti, of Florence, aged forty four years, Auditor of the Apostolical Chamber. 14. John Francisco Ginetti, a Roman, aged sixty years, Treasurer of the Apostolical Chamber. 15. Benedict▪ Pamfilio, aged twenty eight years, Grand Prior of Rome. 16. Michael Angelo Ricci, aged sixty five years, Secretary of the Con∣gregation of Indulgences. The other ten Hats remaining were kept in the hand of the Pope for a reserve wherewith to gratifie Kings and Princes, whensoever they should desire to have some of their own Creatures preferred to that Dig∣nity. All the sixteen preceding Cardinals took their promotion very patiently, and without much reluctancy; excepting Tayo who was eighty years of age, and Ricci: both which made some modest refusals, as un∣worthy of that great honour, but the Pope instantly constraining them, they with humility submitted. And here it is observable, that this Pope is not very forward to create Cardinals, but rather inclinable to lessen, and reduce their number, which of late years hath increased to that de∣gree, as to become a burthen to the Church. But to return unto the Assembly at Paris, which after many Debates and deliberate Consultations held upon the point of the Regale: At length by the Arch-bishop of Paris they offered these several Proposals by way of accommodation between his Majesty and the Pope. That those on whom the King in Right of his Regality bestows any Ecclesiastical Benefices, shall in the vacancy of the Sees have their appro∣bation, and Mission from the Vicars General. That the Chapters which are in possession of bestowing Prebends, and other Dignities, shall continue to dispose of them, whilst the See is va∣cant.
That in the Churches where the collation is alternative between the Bishops, and the Chapters, the same shall be observed during the vacancy of the Sees that are under the Regality, the King having the turn which the Bishop should have had. That where the Bishops dispose of the Prebends jointly with the Chapter; the King shall in the vacancy of the See appoint a Commis∣sioner, who shall have the same power, and place in the Chapter, as the Bishop had. Howsoever, no farther proceedings were made in this matter because the Pope appeared resolute to maintain his priviledg and jurisdiction: and the Cardinal d' Estrée who had ever since the beginning of this year been at Rome to try, and bend the mind of the Pope, gave little hopes to prevail with him: wherefore it was thought fit that the Controversie should remain in suspence, rather than be farther pressed to the breach of that amity, which interceded between the common Father, and the eldest Son of his Church: so the King holds his Right, and the Pope hath not relinquished his Claim, but remains still in a capacity to reas∣sume the same, when either he, or his Successours are strengthened with circumstances of time, and force to make good their Demands. It is known to all the World, that in the Church of Rome, vain and superstitious Opinions have been ever growing for divers Centuries of years; some of the most wild and extravagant of which, certain Popes have been weeding out; but with that negligence and inattention, that where one hath been destroyed, twenty have arisen. Hereof the present Pope Innocent the XI. being sensible, (who is certainly one of the most understanding, and most worthy of those that ever sate in the Papal Chair) hath suppressed an Office called The Office of the Immaculate conception of the most Holy Virgin, approved by Paul V. who granted, unto whosoever should devoutly recite the same an hundred days Indul∣gence, as may appear by his Bull of July 10th. 1615. printed at Milan. This Office he entirely abolished, Decreeing, That no person of what Order, Degree, or Condition soever, should dare to keep, read, print, or cause to be printed the said Book: and requiring that who∣soever should have the said Office in his keeping, should forthwith deliver the same to the Ordinary, or to the Inquisitors of the place. The which Decree was published, Feb. 19. 1678. Moreover, this Pope in his Wisdom hath suppressed a multitude of idle, and foolish Indulgences, which many cheating Priests carried into remote Countries, and raised Money thereupon from the ignorant people. Of which kind were those Indulgences granted by John II. and Sixtus IV. to those, who should recite the Prayer of Charity of our Lord Jesus Christ. By Eugenius the 3d. to the Revelation made to St. Bernard, of a blow or stroak on the shoulder of our Lord Jesus Christ. By John the 22th. to those, who kiss the measure of the Soal of the foot of the Blessed Virgin. By Leo the 10th. to those, who wear the Cord of St. Francis, print∣ted first at Rome, and then at Milan, Anno 1665. To them that shall say the Angelical Prayer, when the Clock strikes, to the Image of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, printed in a Circle with the Moon under her feet.
By Paul V. and Gregory XV. to those who say, Blessed be the Holy Sacrament. Likewise those Indulgences for fourscore thousand years, copied out of the Antient Table, which is said to be kept in the Lateran Church, to those, who say this truly pious Prayer, O God, who for the Redem∣ption of the World, &c. Besides which, this Pope suppressed a multitude of other Indulgences as vain and idle as the foregoing: and declared, that though accord∣ing to the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, the use of Indulgences may be useful to the people, and doth Anathematize such as shall deny, that there is not a power in the Church to grant them, yet he is de∣sirous that the Doctrine thereof be rightly understood, and a mode∣ration used in the granting of them, lest by a too great facility or easiness, the discipline of the Church be corrupted and enfeebled. This Doctrine of Indulgences hath been a prickly and a contentious point, and the Original cause of the present divisions, and separations amongst Christians; for from thence Luther began his quarrel, and took the first rise and ground for a Reformation; and indeed the matter on the part of the Church of Rome was so scandalous, and abusive, that the very common people in all their ignorance were able to discover the fraud and Cheat that was in them: so that the wise and Learned Men at the Council of Trent knowing that this Doctrine was not solid and would not hold water, they slightly touched thereupon; and though it was the chief matter, for which that Council was assembled; yet nothing was farther determined therein, than onely that Indulgences be used with such moderation, as was approved by the Antient Custom of the Church of God. Now it is a most certain, and an undeniable truth, that Indulgences were never in use with any Nation of the Eastern Churches either in the Primitive times, or afterwards. And indeed neither were they in pra∣ctice in the Western Churches, from times of Ancient date, that is, from before the time of Ʋrban II, which was about the year of Christ, 1095. and then also they were not very common, and granted onely to remit the rigour, and severity of Penance enjoined by the Confessour: which reasons this Pope Innocent XI. wisely considering, and the many abuses of this Doctrine, did attempt the means to regulate the extravagance thereof. Besides the suppression of these Indulgences, this Pope condemned sixty five Propositions about Cases of Morality, which were scandalous, and divers of them maintained by the subtle distinctions of the Jesuits, the preamble to which condemnation saith, that this present Innocent XI. in pursuance of the same work commenced by his Predecessour Alex∣ander VII. did by and with the advice, concurrence and assistance of the most Reverend, and Eminent, the Cardinals, as also of the Inqui∣sitors General, and many other Divines, gather, and weed out from se∣veral Books, Theses, and other Papers lately written, a great number of scandalous, and pernicious Doctrines in Morality, tending to the de∣bauchery of Manners, and to the encouragement of a loose, and a disso∣lute life in Mankind. But in nothing more hath the Vertue, Piety, and care of this Pope been conspicuous, than in those large Assistances, and Contributions he
made to the Emperour, whereby to enable him to carry forward his War against the Turk, who is the formidable Enemy of all Christendom. Nor did he onely furnish him with great sums of Money at divers times, but invited and instantly exhorted the King of Poland to undertake that Heroick Act, whereby the City of Vienna was delivered, and all Austria rescued from desolation, and from being a prey to the Mahometan Arms: And farther, his Negotiations prevailed to engage the Venetians in the same War, and to complicate a triple League between these Princes. Thus have we seen, that during the Reign of this Pope, nothing hath been acted by him, but what was designed to the common Good of his Church and State: for having laid aside all the private considerations of his Nephews, and Family, his cares have been diverted towards the Common Good, so that being freed from the importunities of a Car∣dinal Patron, and the unsatiable Avarice of Favourites, and other depen∣dencies; his Government is much less subject to Pasquils, or libellous Censures; but on the contrary applauded, and honoured by all wise, and good Men: so that continuing in this steddy course through the whole remainder of his Reign, he may be esteemed, and numbered in the rank and degree of the good Popes. FINIS.
AN INDEX Of the principal matters in the Lives of the POPES: written by B. Platina. For the Names of the Popes themselves, see the Table at the beginning of the Book. A. ABimelech, Chieftain of the Sa∣racens, 121, 124. Abraxas of Basilides the Here∣tick, 16. Acephali Hereticks, 77. Adauctus a pious Roman, 45. Adelphonsus, King of Asturia and Gallicia, 149. Adrian, Emperour, his qualities and works, 15, 16, 17, 19. S. Aegidius, a Grecian, 133. Aelius Pertinax, Emperour, 25. Aemilianus Emperour, 37. Aeneas Sylvius, created Pope, 389. Aetius, a Roman General, 75. Agarens, who they are, 108. Agrippa Castor, a learned Christi∣an, 16. Aisprandus gets the Kingdom of Lombardy, 129. Aistulphus King of the Lombards, 137, 139, his death, 140. Alalchis Duke of Trent, 120. Alaric King of the Goths takes Rome, 70. Albericus, Marquess of Tuscany, 180. Albert Duke of Austria chosen Em∣perour, 363. Alboinus, 94. Aldeprandus King of the Lom∣bards, 137. Alexander Severus Emperour, 31. Alexander Bishop of Cappadocia, 35. Alexius Emperor of Constantinople, his treachery to the Christian Forces, 217. Allocephalis, a nick-name for Ra∣venna, 116. Almeric King of Jerusalem, 242. Amadeus Duke of Savoy set up for an Anti-Pope, submits, 377. Amalasunta, Queen of Italy, 87. S. Ambrose chosen Bishop of Mi∣lan, 66. appears to the Emperor Conrade, 198. Amoreus, a King of the Saracens, 135. Anastasius gets the Empire of Con∣stantinople, 130. Anastasius a Heretick, 133. Anastasius the Library-keeper, 171. Anatolius Bishop of Laodicea, 42. Andrew Earl of Bremen, 251. Andrew King of Hungary, 258. Angelot, a Cardinal murther'd, 369. Antioch besieg'd by the Christi∣ans, 219. taken, 220. Anti-Pope; See Schism. Antoninus Pius, Emperour, his Vir∣tues, 18. Ant. Verus Emperour, 20, 21. Antoninus Heliogabalus, his vicious life, 30. Antony the Hermit, 54. S. Antony Canoniz'd, 262. Apelles, a Heretick, 23. Apollinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis, 21. Another Bishop of Laodicea, his heretical Opinion, 69.
Apollonius a learned Christian mar∣tyr'd, 24. Aquila translated the Old Testa∣ment, 17. Aquileia destroy'd, 76. Arator, a Christian Poet, 88. Arcadius Emperour, 70. Arioaldus  of the Lombards, 106. Aristides a Philosopher, converted to Christianity, 15. Arithpertus King of the Lombards, 127. loses his Kingdom and life, 129. Arius the Heretick, 51, 56, his death, 57. Arnulphus Emperour, 173. Another of that name, Patriarch of Jeru∣salem, 221. Another, a great Preacher, murther'd by the pro∣curement of some Priests, 234. Asterius, an Arian Philosopher, 59. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, 56. Athaulphus King of the Goths, 71. Athimus, a King of the Saracens, 134. Attila King of the Hunns invades Il∣lyricum, 73, fights the joint Forces of the Romans, Goths, &c. 75. Audoenus, Bishop of Roan, 122. S. Augustin Bishop of Hippo, 71, his body translated, 135. Avignon taken by the Saracens, 134. re-taken, 135. Aurelianus Emperour, 41. Aurelius Commodus Emperour, 20, 23, 24. B Babylas the Martyr, his Body re∣mov'd, 62. Baianus Prince of the Bulgari∣ans, 188. Balahac a King of the Persians, 232. Baldequan King of Damascus, 233. Baldus a great Lawyer, 320. Baldwin of Bulloign, 217. gets a Signiory in Asia, 218. made King of Jerusalem, 224. taken Priso∣ner, 232. Baldwin, Emperour of Constanti∣nople, 265. Baltasar Cossa, Anti Pope, recon∣cil'd to the Pope, 352. Banderesii, what, 320. Bardesanes a Christian Writer, 25. S. Barnabas the Apostle, 5. S. Bartholomew, his body transla∣ted, 158, 190. Baruti, taken by the Turks and ra∣sed, 291. Basil the learned Bishop of Caesa∣rea, 67. Basilides the Heretick, his death, 16. Bassianus, See Caracalla. Bede, the Venerable, when he li∣ved, 126. Belisarius, 88. comes into Italy, 91. beats Vitiges from Rome, and takes him Prisoner, 92. S. Benedict, 87. his body transla∣ted, 137. Berengarius I. King of Italy, 173. made Emperour, 178. the second of that name, 181. the third, 184. Berengarius of Tours, a learned Man, 190. condemned for a Heretick, 203. recants 205. Bernard, Abbat of Clairvaux, 227. Bernardus King of Italy, 154. Beryllus, a Heretick, 32. Bishop not to be ordain'd by fewer than three Bishops, 13, 22. to be attended by seven Deacons when Preaching, 14. the accusation of a Layman not to be admitted a∣gainst him, ibid. when cited by the See Apostolick to be re∣ceiv'd again by his Flock with∣out a Certificate, 17. not to be censur'd by the Metropolitan without consent of his fellow-Bishops, 19. Bishops of Rome allow'd to wear a golden Diadem, 51. Blastus, a Heretick, 25. Blood of Christ, a Relique at Man∣tua, 151. Bocca di Porco, a name not fit for a Pope, 160. Bodies of Saints translated, 163. Boemund, a great General, engaged in the Holy War, 217. wounded, 220, dies, 225.
Constantine, Son of Heraclius, 110. routed by the Bulgarians, 117. Another of the same name Le∣prous, 148 Constantine an Anti-Pope, 142 Constantius Caesar, 44. Emperour, 47. Another of the same name, 58, 59. Another, who spoils Rome, 114 Constitutions, See Decrees. Corporal to be made of fine Linen onely, 17 Council of Nice, 51. Of Constanti∣nople, 117, 169. Of Lions, 280. Of Constance, 345. Of Basil, 362. General Councils where and when holden, 118 Court of Rome when remov'd to France, 300. returns to Rome, 322 Crescentius Consul of Rome, 192 Holy Cross found by Helena Constan∣tine's Mother, 48. brought from Jerusalem to Constantinople, 108 Cunigunda Empress, 197 Cup in the Holy Sacrament, Orders of Pius I. if any be spilt, 20, 21 S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, 36. martyr'd, 37 S. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, 69 D J. Damascenus, a learned Divine, 81 Damrata besieged by the Christians and retaken, 258. deliver'd, 259 Dantes Aligerius a learned Man, 297 Deacons appointed to attend a Bi∣shop when he Preaches, 14 Decius Emperour, 35 Decrees of Anacletus, 13. Euari∣stus, 14. Alexander I. 16. Six∣tus I. 17. Telesphorus, 18. Hygi∣nus, 19. Pius I. 20. Anicetus, 22. Soter, 23. Eleutherius 24. Vi∣ctor I. 28. Zephyrinus, 27. Cali∣stus I. 28. Anterus, 33. Stephen I. 38. Felix, 41. Eutychianus, 42. Caius, 43. Miltiades, 50. Of the Nicene Council, 52. Of Sylve∣ster, ibid. Of Damasus, 63. Siri∣cius, 65. Anastasius, 67. Zosimus, 71. Boniface I. 72. Stephen III. 144. Gregory III. 136. Nicolas I. 168 Desiderius King of the Lombards, 140. takes several Cities in Italy, 145. is overthrown by Charle∣magne, 146 Devil in the shape of Moses beguiles the Jews, 74 Didymus a learned Christian, 65 Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, 23 Dioscorus the Heretick, 77 Disciples of Christ, their several Provinces, 1. Dominic, 256. Founder of the Or∣der of Preaching Friers, 257. Ca∣noniz'd, 262 Domitian the Emperour, his Chara∣cter, 11 Donation of Charlemagne to the Church. 147. Of Maude the Countess, 226 Donatus, a Sectary, 59 Dorothea, a Virgin, her Chastity, 50 Dorotheus, a learned Christian, 42 Dulcinus and Margaret, Hereticks put to death, 300 E Easter observ'd always on a Sunday, upon what occasion, 20, 25 Ebionites, Hereticks, 52 Ecelino, Tyrant of Padua, 270 Edessa taken by the Turks, 236 Edmund Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Canoniz'd, 268 Edward, Prince of England, his Voyage to the Holy Land, 278 stab'd, ibid. being King, he me∣diates between the Kings of France and Aragon, 289. War be∣tween him and the French King, 291. obtains a great Sea Victo∣ry over 'em, 311. Another by Land, 315. besieges Paris, 318 Egesippus, a learned Christian Wri∣ter, 22.83. Elizabeth Daughter to the King of Hungary Canoniz'd, 262 Elisha's Body found, 80 Ember-Weeks, when first instituted, 28, 31
Emmanuel II. Emperor of Constan∣tinople, his treachery to the Chri∣stians, 237 Encratitae, Hereticks, 21 English first make themselves Ma∣sters of Great Britain, 73 Ephrem Syrus, a learned Writer, 67 Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine, ib. Epiphanius, Bishop of Pavia, p. 82 Este, the Family, Lords of Ferrara and Modena, 300. 28 of that House hang'd at once, 302. drive the Church Forces out of Ferrara, 307 Ethelwolph King of England, 164 Evagrius, a learned Christian, 71 Eudocia the Catholick, p. 80 Eunomius a Heretick, 61 Eusebius, surnam'd Pamphilus, and why, 48 Eusebius Emissenus, 58 Eusebius of Cremona, 76 Eutropius, Epitomizer of the Ro∣man History, 73 Eutyches, the Heretick, p. 76 Exarchate of Ravenna extinguish'd, 140 F Fast not to be observ'd on a Sun∣day, 50 Faustus Bishop, 83 Flavianus Bishop, 77 Florence made a free City, 289 Florianus, Emperour, 42 Florinus, a Heretick, 25 Forlimpopoli sack'd and ruin'd, 114 S. Francis, Founder of the Order of Friers Minors, 257. Cano∣niz'd, 262 Frangipani, a Roman Family, 229 Fratricelli, a holy Brotherhood, 297 Frederic Emperour, engag'd in the Holy War, 251 Frederic II. his Contests with the Pope, 260. Frederic III. comes to Rome. 378 Friscus, of the House of Este mur∣thers his Father, 301 Fucinus, the Lake, drein'd, 3 Fulgentius Bishop, 83 Fulk, Earl of Anjou, King of Jeru∣salem, 236 G Galba Emperour; his good and bad qualities, 7 Galerius Emperour, 47 Gallienus Emperour, 37 Gallus Emperour, 37 Gascons subdu'd by Charlemagne, 148 Gemblours, the Monastery, when, and by whom built, 182 Gennadius Bishop, 78 Genoeses routed by the Venetians, 271. a mortal hatred between 'em, 281, 326. defeat the Pi∣sans 289. invade Cyprus, 321 Genseric King of the Vandals, 74. routed, 78 Germanus Bishop, 82 Geta Emperour slain, 28 Gibellines and Guelphs, 264 Gildo, a General of the Empire sets up for himself, 70 Gisulphus D. of Benevent, 125. A∣nother, 202 Gloria Patri when added to the ends of Psalms, 63 Godfathers and Godmothers, a De∣cree concerning them, 19 Godfrey King of Jerusalem, 221. de∣feats the Army of the King of Babylon, ibid. Gordianus Emperour, 34 Goths driven from Rome, 91 Granada in Spain seiz'd by the Sa∣racens, 126 Gratianus Emperour, 66 Gratian, who compil'd the Decrees, 257 Gregorius Baeticus, a learned Bi∣shop, 65 Gregory Nazianzen, 67 Gregory, Patriarch of Constantinople, a Monothelite, 117 S. Gregory, his body translated, 159
Grimoaldus, D. of Beneventum, 112, 114. makes himself King of the Lombards, 115. his death, ibid. Another, 150 Guelphs and Gibellines, when first so distinguish'd, 264 Guido Bonatus, an Astrologer, 286 Guy of Lusignan King of Jerusalem, 248. taken Prisoner, 249 H Hannibali and Ʋrsini two factions at Rome, 285 Hawkwood, an English-man, 319.319. the Pope's General, 320. in several Services, 321, 331, 332 Haydo Governour of Aquitain re∣bels, 155 Haymo Brother to Venerable Bede, 126 Helchesaites Hereticks, 35 Helena, Mother to the Emperour Constantine, finds the Holy Cross, 48 Henry D. of Bavaria, Emperour, 196 Henry II. Son of Conrade, Empe∣rour, 199 Henry III. Emperour, 206. de∣priv'd by Pope Gregory, 209 Henry IV. Emperour, 225 Henry of Luxemburg invades Italy, 302. is Crown'd at Rome, 303 Henry King of England meets the Pope, 235. satisfies him about the murther of Thomas Becket, 245 Henry, Son of Richard of Cornwal murther'd, 279 Heraclea taken by the Christians, 218 Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, 248 Heraclius, a learned Christian, 27 Heraclius Emperour, 104. his A∣ctions, 105 Hermes a Christian Writer, 20 Hilarius Bishop of Poictiers, 65 Hilarius Bishop of Arles, 76 Hildebrand, a Monk, 202. made Pope, 207 Hilminoline a Saracen General, 256 Holy-Water. See Water. Holy-War. See War. Honorius Emperour, 70 Host ordered to be made of Un∣leavened Bread onely, 16 Hubert, a Bishop in Bretagne, 122 Hugo de Sancto Victore, 233 Hungari, a Scythian People, 173 come into Italy, 180, 181 Hunns, a Scythian Nation, 173, 179 John Hus burnt for a Heretick, 346 Hymns added to the Divine Ser∣vice, 17, 18, 125 I James, surnamed Justus, his Acts and martyrdom, 4 S. Januarius his Body translated, 156 Iconium taken by the Christians, 218 S. Jerom the learned Presbyter, 69. his death, 72 Jerom of Prague burnt for a Here∣tick, 346 Jerusalem taken by Titus, 9. per∣mitted by Julian the Apostate to be rebuilt, 62. taken by the Sa∣racens, 108. recover'd by the Christians, 221. retaken by the Saracens, 250. dismantled, 258 S. Ignatius his martyrdom, 13 Images in Churches ordered by the Emperour to be pull'd down, 132, 141. Decrees thereupon at Rome, 144. at Nice, 148 Inventio Crucis, 48 Inundations of the Tiber, 131, 149, 167 Joan Queen of Naples kills her Husband, 313 Pope Joan, 165 S. John the Apostle banish'd into Patmos, 12 John Bishop of Bergamo, 121 John Arch Bishop of Ravenna sub∣mits to the Pope, 168
John King of Jerusalem, 258 Joppa taken by the Christians, 222 Josephus, when he liv'd, 8 Jovinian Emperour 63 Irene Empress of Constantinople, 149 Isidore Bishop of Sevil, 105 Jubilee first kept every fiftieth year, 296 Julian, surnam'd the Apostate, 59.61. his death, 62 Julianus Emperour, 65 Julius Africanus, an eminent Wri∣ter, 33 Justin Martyr, when he liv'd, and his Works, 18 Justin Emperour, 86 Justinian I. Emperour, 88. his A∣ctions, 89 Justinian II. terrifies the Saracens into submission, 121. breaks faith with them, 123. is deposed and his Nose cut off, 124. re∣stored, 126. his severity upon his Enemies, 127. and ingrati∣tude to his Friend, 128. slain, 129 Juvencus, a noble Christian, 56 L Lactantius Firmianus, when he li∣ved, 48 Lambert a holy Martyr, 125 Latinianus a Bishop, 102 Lent first Instituted, 18 Leo Emperour, 78.79. his Edict against Images, 132 S. Leo his body translated. 125 Leodegarius Bishop of Autun, 122 Leontius makes himself Emperour, 124. deposed, ibid. Lewis surnam'd the Godly, Empe∣rour, 153 Lewis King of Bavaria, 154 Lewis Son of Lotharius, 100. Crown'd King of Italy, 161. be∣ing Emperor, he comes to Rome, 167 Lewis King of France, engages in the holy War, 267 Lewis of the French Bloud Royal, canoniz'd, 295 Libanius the Orator, 71 Licinius Emperour, 49 Lions, a Council there, 280 Lombards, their coming into Italy, 96 Lotharingia [Lorain] why so call'd, 160 Lotharius Emperour, 154.160 Lucca made a free City, 289. ta∣ken by the Germans and sold, 308 Lucifer Bishop of Cagliari, 59 Lucina, a Roman Lady leaves the Church her Heir, 47 Lucius King of Britain, 24 Lucius an Heretical Bishop violent against the Orthodox, 64 Luithprandus King of the Lombards, 129. takes Ravenna, 131. be∣sieges Rome, 134. his character, 136 Luke the Evangelist, 10 Lupus Duke of Friuli, 114 M Macarius Bishop of Antioch, a Mo∣nothelite. 117 Macedonius a Heretick, 61 Mahomet the Impostor, 105 Malchion, an eloquent Presbyter, 38 Manes a Persian Impostor, 41 Manfred, Prince of Tarento, 267. made King of Sicily, 270. is kill'd, 275 Manichees their Heresie, 42 Marcion the Heretick, 19 S. Mark employ'd by S. Peter to write his Gospel. 4. his Body translated to Venice, 158 Marriages, a Decree concerning them, 23 S. Martin's body works a Miracle, 172 Martyrs, their Acts ordain'd to be written and preserv'd, 33, 34. Masses yearly to be celebrated upon their account, 41
Mathild or Maud, a noble Coun∣tess, 204. her death, 206 Mauritius Emperour, 98 Maxentius Emperour, 48, 49 Maximian Herculeus Emperour, 44.48. Maximian Galerius Caesar, 44. Emperour, 47 Maximine Emperour, 33.49 Maximus the Tyrant, 77. a learned Christian of that name, 127 Melito Bishop of Sardis, 20 Merlin the British Prophet, 79 Messalina Wife to the Emperour Claudius put to death for Adul∣tery, 3 Mezelindis a Woman of incompa∣rable chastity, 116 Milain taken by Sforza, 377 Minutius Felix, when he liv'd, 31 Modestus a Christian Writer, 25 Monothelites, a Council held con∣cerning them, 117 Montanists, Hereticks, 21 Guido Montfort murthers Henry Son of Richard of Cornwall, 273 Simon Montfort, 256 Moors invade Calabria, 176 N Names of Popes when first chang'd, 160 Naples taken by Belisarius, 91. be∣sieg'd, 253 Narses the Eunuch, 94 Nepos, a Heretick, 39 Nero Emperour, his Vices, 6. kills himself, 7 Nerva Cocceius Emperour, his cha∣racter, 12 Nectorius his Heresie, 74 Nice in Bithynia, a Council there. 51 Nicetas an Eunuch, Patriarch of Constantinople, 141 S. Nicolas his Body translated, 216 Nicopolis taken by the Christians, 218 Nogaret a French Cavalier, 298 Normans have a part of France al∣low'd them to inhabit, 172 Novatianus his Heresie, 34. oppo∣sed, by whom, 36 O Odoacer King of the Heruli in∣vades Italy, 79 Olympius the Exarch, 111 Optatus Milevitanus, when he liv'd, 66 Holy Orders not to be conferr'd at once 65. not upon maim'd or infirm persons, 67. nor Forei∣ners without Testimonials, ibid. nor on Servants, 71. nor Deb∣tors, 72 Organs introduced first into the Church, 114 Origen a learned Christian, 27.29.32 Ostia the Harbour there, by whom made, 3 Otho Emperour, an Account of his life, 7 Otho II. Emperour, 184, conquers Boleslaus King of Bohemia, 183 comes to Rome, 185 Otho Abbat of Clugny, 207 Otho Duke of Burgundy engag'd in the Holy War. 251 P Palaeologus [Michael] assumes the Empire of Constantinople, 272 Pallavicino, a powerful Gibelline, 270.273 Pamphilus a learned Presbyter, 43 Pantheon given to the Christians, 103 Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, 14 Papias the Lombard Glossographer, 257 Paris, when and by whom made an University, 152 Parishes, Rome when first so divi∣ded, 14 Paschal an Arch-deacon, endea∣vours
to make himself Pope, 123. convict of Sorcery, ibid. S. Paul the Apostle, 5. beheaded, 6 Paulus Samosatenus, a Heretick, 26.40 Paulus Diaconus, when he liv'd, 147 Pelagius his Heresie condemn'd, 69 Pepin Duke of Austrasia, 124. King of France, 137.141. his death, 142 Pepin Son of Charlemagne, 149.150. dies at Milan, 151 Pepin Son of Lewis the Godly, King of Aquitain, 154 Perinus King of Cyprus, 321 Pertheris, King of the Lombards, 120 Peter an Hermite, excites the Christian Princes to the Holy War, 217 Peter Abelardus, a learned Men, 238 Peter of Verona canoniz'd, 268 Peter King of Aragon, 287. his Kingdom given away by the Pope, 288 Peter Luna, Anti-Pope, 338. his death, 356 Petrarcha a learned Man, 311 S. Petronilla, S. Peter's Daughter, her body translated, 141 S. Philip the Apostle, 10 Philip the Emperour, 34 Philip King of France, engag'd in the Holy War, 251. returns home, 253 Philippicus Emperour of Constanti∣nople, 129. deposed, and his Eyes put out, 130 Philo Judaeus, when he liv'd, 8 Phocas Emperour, 101 Photinus a learned Bishop, 18. A∣nother of that name, an Ebio∣nite, 65 Photinians, Hereticks, condemn'd 52 Picenninus, a great Commander, 361 Pisans overthrown by the Vene∣tians, 253. by the Genoeses, 289. their City taken by the Floren∣tines, 339 Pistoia taken and rased, 301 Plague through Europe, 98 Platina, the Author of this History imprison'd by Pope Paul II. 403. and tortur'd, 410 Pliny the second, occasions a per∣secution of the Christians to be stay'd, 13 Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, 19 Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, 26 Posthumus, an Usurper in Gallia, 38 Pragmatic Sanction, 396 Presbyters, not to be ordain'd but by a Bishop, 65 Primates, who are to bear that Title, 22 Priscian, the Grammarian, 88 Priscilla, a Roman Matron, builds a Cemetery, 47 Priscillian, his Heresie condemn'd, 69 Probus Emperour, 43 Projectus a Bishop martyr'd, 116 Ptolemais besieged by the Christi∣ans, 251. taken, 253. retaken by the Infidels, 292 Q Quadragesimal Fast, See Lent. Quadratus, a learned Disciple, 14 Quintilian's Works, when and by whom found out, 382 Quintillus Emperour, 40 Quotiliani, Hereticks, 25 R Rabanus, a learned Monk, 159 Racherius, Bishop of Verona, 182 Rachis King of the Lombards, 137 Ravenna, the Church there recon∣cil'd to that of Rome, 116. the pride of their Bishops re∣press'd by the Pope, 119. the City taken by the Lombards, 131. the Exarchate extinguish'd, 140
Raymund a Commander in the holy War, 217. a Debate between him and Boemund, 220 Reggio surprizsed by treachery, 320 Remigius Bishop of Rhemes, 80 Rhodes taken by the Turks, 111 Rhomoaldus Duke of Beneventum, 119 Richard King of England engaged in the holy War, 251. strikes up a Peace with Saladine, 253. is taken Prisoner, 254 Robert Guiscardi, a great General, 202. defeats the Saracens, 203. and Greeks, 204 Rodulphus King of Burgundy, 181. of Habspurg, Emperour, 280. sells to several Cities of Italy their freedom, 289 Rome sack'd by the Vandals, 77. besieg'd by the Lombards, 96 Rothifredus King of the Normans, 171 Ruffinus a Roman General, 70 S Sabellius, Author of the Sabellian Heresie, 39. his Heresie con∣demn'd, 52 Sabinus King of the Bulgarians, 141 Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, various Decrees about it, 16.17.20.27.125 Saladine King of Egypt, 246. de∣feats the Christians, 249. takes Jerusalem, 250. his death and Character, 254 Sanctuaries in Churches first or∣dain'd, 106 Saracens, why so call'd, 107. their insult upon Libya and Africa, 121.124. and Spain, 126. and France, 131. defeated, 132. en∣ter France again, 134. and are again overthrown, 135. Ship∣wrack'd, 162. routed by Pope Leo, 163. driven out of Italy, 171. returning again they are vanquish'd by Pope John XI. 180. driven out of Sicily, 196. besiege Toledo, 256. are allow'd a City in Italy to inhabit, 264.276. take Sardinia, 300 Saxons converted to Christianity, 125.147 Scaligeri, Lords of Verona, 300 Schisms in the Church, 36.58.72.84.89.91.121.122.141.143.166.177.186.190.192.199.206.209.229.233.234.242.308.325.365. Sclavi receive the Christian faith, 187 Scotus the learned Schoolman, 164 S. Sebastian his body translated, 159 Sedes stercoraria, the reason of it, 165 Serapion, surnam'd Scholiastes, 59 Severians Hereticks, 21 Severus the Emperour, his Chara∣cter, 26 Sforza defeats the Venetians, 376. takes Milan, 377 Sicardus Duke of Beneventum, 157 Sicily deliver'd from the Moors, 158 Siconolfus Prince of Beneventum, 161 Sigebert of Gemblours, 226 Sigismund King of Bohemia and Hungary chosen Emperour, 343. comes to Rome, 359 Simeon, a Disciple, crucified, 13 Simon Magus, an account of him, 3.4 Sophronia, a chast Virgin, 50 Spaniards forc'd to receive the faith, 147 Stanislaus Bishop of Cracow Cano∣niz'd, 268 Stilico a Roman General, 70 Stone upon which Christ sate brought to Venice▪ 232 Strabo, Brother to Venerable Bede, 126 Sueropylus Prince of Dalmatia, 187 Syracuse, a Church there falling down kills many, 216
T Tacitus Emperour of Rome, 42 Tamberlane vanquishes the Turks, 338 Tarsus taken by the Christians, 218 Tartars ravage as far as Europe, 259.267. some of their Noble∣men receive the faith, 280 Tatianus a learned Christian, 21 Taxillo Duke of the Boiarians, 141.148 Tertullian the famous Christian Writer, 29 Theoderick King of the Goths, 75. invades Italy, 79. his Actions. 81. imprisons Pope John, 87 Theodolinda, Queen of the Lom∣bards, 99 Theodore Bishop of Ravenna, 116 Theodorus, a Heretick, 92 Theodosius Emperour, 66.68. Ano∣ther of the same name, 73. Ano∣ther, 130 Theodotion, a learned Christian, 23 Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, 20 Thomas Becket Canoniz'd, 245 Thomas Cantilupe, Bishop of Here∣ford Canoniz'd 306 Thomas Aquinas Canoniz'd, ibid. Tiberias taken by the Christians, 222 Tiberius Emperour, 1. Another, 97. Another, 124 Titus the Emperour takes Jerusa∣lem, 9. his Character, 10 Toledo besieged by the Saracens, 256 Totilas King of the Goths, his Acti∣ons, 94 Toto Duke of Nepi, 142 Trajan Emperour, his Character, 13.14 Transamundus Duke of Spoleto, 136 Translation of the Bible of S. Je∣rom, 64 Treasure how found by a Saracen, 202 Trebellius Prince of the Bulgarians, 126.128 Tripoli taken by the Turks and ra∣sed, 291 Tryphon, a learned Christian, 31 Turks, their first successes, 139. take Edessa, 236. Baruti and Tripoli, 291. routed by the Christians at Belgrade, 386 Turriani, a powerful Family in Lombardy, 286.302 U Valens a Roman Emperour, 94. o∣verthrown by the Goths, 65 Valentinian the Emperour, 64.74 Valentinian Hereticks, 18 Valerianus Emperour, 37 Vandals ravage as far as Africa, 73 Venetians forbidden to sell Chri∣stian Slaves, 138. the first In∣crease of that Commonwealth, 157. they take Comachio and burn it, 184. fight successfully against the Saracens, 232. ra∣vage the borders of Greece, ibid. defeat the Pisans, 253. seize se∣veral Islands in the Archipelague, 256. rout the Genoeses, 271. a mortal hatred between 'em, 281.326. put to flight by the Anco∣neses, 2. set under an Inter∣dict by the Pope, 301. defeated by Francis Sforza, 376 Veramundus Patriarch of Constanti∣nople, 232 Vespasian Emperour, 9 S. Ʋgibert, a Nobleman of Lorain, 182 Ʋgutio Fagiolano Governour of Pisa and Lucca, 304 Viconti a powerful Family in Lom∣bardy, 286.302. make them∣selves Masters of Milan, 307 Victorinus an Usurper in Gallia, 38. Another of that name Bishop of Poictiers, 43. Another, 65 S. Vincent his body translated, 165 Vinigisius Duke of Spoleto, 150
Vitellius Emperour, a short ac∣count of his Life, 8 Viterbo made a Bishop's Sea, 254 Vitiges, a Gothish King in Italy, 91. besieges Rome, ibid. Ʋldericus King of Bohemia, 199 Ʋrsini and Hannibali, two factions at Rome, 285 Ʋsun-Cassan King of Persia, his Mes∣sage to the Pope, 388 W Holy War, several Expeditions to it, 217.251.254.255.258.262.267 Holy Water, when first ordered, 16. Water to be mix'd with the Wine in the Sacrament, ibid. Wenceslaus King of Bohemia mur∣thered by his Brother, 183 Whites and Blacks, two Factions in Italy, 297. a History of the Whites, 335 Wickliff, his Opinions condemn'd, 346 William, Earl of Angoulesm, sur∣nam'd Sector-ferri, 176. Count of Calabria, 231. King of Sicily, 243 William, surnam'd Longsword, 247 Women ordered not to touch the Elements or Vessels of the Altar, 17.23. not the consecrated Pall or Incense, 72 Z Zara taken by the Venetians, 355.
AN INDEX Of the Principal matter contain'd in the Con∣tinuation of the Lives of the POPES. A AColti, a Conspirator against Pius IV. 156 Adrian Schoolmaster to Charles V. chosen Pope, 41 Aldebrandino, Cardinal, created Pope and nam'd Clement VIII. 211 Alexandra superadded by the Pope to the name of Christina Queen of Sweden, 327 Alfonso Cardinal of Siena strangled, 33 Alphonsus King of Naples, 13. sur∣renders his Crown to his Son, 14 Altieri (Cardinal) chosen Pope, and nam'd Clement X. 360 Armada of the Spaniards against England destroy'd, 198 Articles of Peace between the Em∣perour and Pope, 54.55. between the Spaniards and French, 353 Aurange, the Prince thereof, General of the Imperial Army, 57 B Bajazet Emperour of the Turks, his Present to the Pope, 11 Banditi their insolence, 172. severe∣ly punish'd by Sixtus V. 179 Barberino (Cardinal Maffeo) chosen Pope, and call'd Ʋrban VIII. 272. his Family how preferr'd, 276. the animosities of Innocent, X. a∣gainst them, 296. to 311 Barbarossa overthrown by Charles V. 70. appears upon the coast of Italy, 81 Battel of Ravenna, 26. of Pavia, 48 of Lepanto, 161 Battory (Stephen) K. of Poland, 194 Belvedere at Rome, by whom built, 11 Bessarion (Cardinal) an Intimado of Sixtus IV. 1. Legat to the King of France, 2 Bologna taken by the French, 24 Borghese (Camillo) chosen Pope, and call'd Paul V. 227 Borgia (Caesar) the Pope's Bastard, made a Cardinal, 13.14. spoils the Country of the Orsini, 15. pro∣cures the assassination of his Bro∣ther, ibid. his abominable cruelty and rapine, 16.17. made Duke Valentino, 17. his Cup bearer mi∣stakes his bottles, 18. imprison'd, 20. enlarg'd, 21. is cut in pieces, 22 Borri, an Enthusiastical Heret. 331 Borromeo (Charles) a holy man, a Confident of Pius IV. 121. Ca∣noniz'd, 203 Bourbon, (Charles, Duke thereof) slain before the Walls of Rome, 56 Buda taken by the Turks, 52 Buoncompagno (Hugh) chosen Pope with the name of Gregory XIII. 163 C Camilla, a poor Sister of Sixtus V. how receiv'd by him, 176. a Pa∣squil upon her, 161 Candia much press'd by the Turks, 349.355. relief for it attempted in vain, 356
Caraffa (John) made Pope by the name of Paul IV. 109. the Fami∣ly hated by the People, 118. and punish'd by the Pope, 121 Cardinals exil'd by Julius II. how receiv'd by Leo X. 30. some un∣der that Character very young, 29.68.90.107.204. number of Cardinals limited, 205. dignified with the Title of Eminence, 278 Casimir King of Poland, 3 Castagna (John Battista) created Pope by the name of Ʋrban VII. 205 Castro utterly demolish'd, with an Inscription, 315 Charles King of Spain, 33. Empe∣rour, 39. Crown'd, 61. renounces his Imperial Dignity, 116 Charles VIII. of France assists the Pope, 10. claims the Kingdom of Naples and enters Italy, 13. gains and loses Naples, 14. dies, ibid. Charles IX. King of France, 126 Chigi (Fabio) created Pope under the name of Alexander VII. 321 Christina Queen of Sweden, 319. abjures the Reformed Religion and comes to Rome, 327 Cibo (John Battista) made Pope with the name of Innocent VIII. 8 Colonneses and Ʋrsini, a fewd be∣tween 'em, 9. reconcil'd, 10. both suffer much from Caesar Borgia, 16. Colonneses vigorous Imperia∣lists, 52 Congo, an Embassie from thence to the Pope, 262 Conventus, the word gives offence at the Council of Trent, 94 Congregation for propagating the faith instituted, 270 Cortesans used unkindly by Pius V. 158 Council against the Pope's mind ap∣pointed at Pisa, 25. Another call'd at the Lteran, 25. that at Pisa declar'd a Conventicle, 27. its acts and decrees abjur'd, 31 General Council indicted at Mantua, 7. then at Vicenza, ibid. after all at Trent, 78. begun there, 80. prorogu'd to Bologna, 85. trans∣ferr'd to Trent, 90.93. debates there, 94, to 103. prorogu'd for two years, 104. renew'd, 125.127. transactions there, from 128, to 156. Cranmer Arch bishop of Canterbury depriv'd, 111 Duke of Crequi the French Ambas∣sadour affronted at Rome, 332. a quarrel thereupon, 333, to 340 Cyprus demanded by the Turks of the Venetians, 160. invaded and taken by them, 161 D Dalmatia invaded by the Turks, 75 D'aubusson Master of Rhodes, 6 Denmark, the Pope's Nuntio denied admittance there by the King, 126 Diet at Regenspurg, 77. at Norem∣berg, 80. at Worms, 82. at Au∣spurg, 85 Divorce of Henry VIII. and Queen Katharine debated, 59. Of Hen∣ry IV. of France and Margaret Dutchess of Valois, 221. Of Al∣phonso of Portugal and his Queen, 351 E Elizabeth Queen of England denies admittance to the Pope's Nuntio, 126. Excommunicated, 159, and deposed by the Pope, 162. well esteem'd by Sixtus V. 182. yet much hated, 197 Eminence, the Title bestowed on Cardinals, when, 278 England, the States of Affairs there upon throwing off subjection to the Pope, 74. returning to its Obedience, how ordered by the Pope, 111 F Fachinetti, Cardinal, chosen Pope and nam'd Innocent IX. 210 Faenza taken by the Venetians, 22 Farnese (Alexander) Pope under the name of Paul III. 67 Farnese (Prince Alexander) a Com∣mander against the Turks, 165.
Governour of Flanders, 197 Ferdinand I. King of Naples defeat∣ed by the Pope's Forces, 6. makes War again, 9. violates his faith, 10. his death, 13. Ferdinand II. quits his Kingdom, 14 Ferdinand of Spain honour'd with the Title of Catholic King, 13 Ferrara the Dukedom devolves to the Church, 215 Fisher Bishop of Rochester made a Cardinal, 68 Florence surrendred to the Imperia∣lists, 62 Florentines favour the House of Me∣dici against the Pope, 5. join with the King of Naples, 9 Franche Compte seiz'd upon by the French King, 349 Francis I. King of France, 31. taken Prisoner, 48. maintains unchri∣stian correspondences with the Turks, 63 Francis II. K. of France, 118. dies, 126 Friers Mendicant and Secular Priests, a Dispute between 'em determin'd, 4 G Gaston de Foix, a French Comman∣der slain, 26 Geneva, the City hated by the Pope, 124 Genoa taken by the French, 88. the Magistracy there give offence to Paul V. 229 Ghisler (Anthony) made Pope by the name of Pius V, 157 Gonsalvo a brave Commander re∣covers Naples from the French, 15 Gregorian Account, when begun, 169 Guise, the Duke thereof assassina∣ted, 199. and the Cardinal put to death, ibid. Gunpowder. Treason in England, 261 H Hats red granted to be worn by Cardinals Friers, 209 Henry VIII. King of England, 25, 28. writes a Book against Mar∣tin Luther, 37. his Divorce debated, 59. throws off all sub∣jection to the See of Rome, 64. Excommunicated, 66 Henry II. King of France slain, 118 Henry III. of France assassinated, 202 Henry King of Navarre excommu∣nicated by the Pope, 181. ac∣knowledged King of France, 202. professes the Catholick Fath, 214. marries Mary de Medicis, 222. murther'd by Ravillac, 203 I James I. King of Great Britain, 223 Jansenius his Opinions, 318. de∣terminations of the Pope upon them, 318.341 Japannese Ambassadours to Grego∣ry XIII. 171. kindly receiv'd by Sixtus V. 176 Jesuits College at Rome, by whom built, 170. their Services to the Church, 171. not openly fa∣vour'd by Sixtus V. 148 Jew at Rome, converted by Pius V. 159 Ignatius Loyola canoniz'd, 262.270 Index expurgatorius by whom pub∣lish'd, 116 Indulgences restrain'd by the Pope, 214.384 Inquisition by whom contriv'd, 110 Interim of Charles, V. what, 87 Interview of the King of England and French King of Boloign, 64. of the Pope and French King at Marseilles, 65 Inundation of the Tiber, 218.326 Don John of Austria General of the Fleet against the Turks, 161.165 Italy divided into Factions, 6. em∣broil'd in War, 9. invaded by the French and their Confede∣rates, 23, clear'd of them, 27 Jubilee celebrated by Sixtus IV. 3. by Paul III. 83. by Julius III. 90. by Gregory XIII. 166. by Ʋr∣ban VIII. 275 K Key of the H. Sepulchre presented to the Pope by Bajazet Empe∣rour
of the Turks, 11 Kinred, unreasonably preferred by Pope Sixtus IV. 2.3. and by A∣lexander VI. 12. not much re∣garded by Adrian VI. 45. nor Paul III. at first, 68. indulged by Paul IV. 110.114. disregard∣ed by Pius V. 159. too much in∣dulged by Ʋrban VIII. 293. the present Pope Innocent XI. not fond of 'em, 382 Knighthood, a new Order instituted by Paul V. 266 L Lance which pierced Christ's side presented to the Pope by the Grand Signior, 11 Lautrec, General of the French in Italy, 57. successful, 56. dies, 59 League of several Princes and States against the K. of Naples and D. of Milan, 14. Of many Italian Lords against Borgia, 16. League of Cambray against the Venetians, 22. Of the Pope and King of Spain with the Venetians, 25. Of the King of England and the French King, 57. the Triple League, 350 Lepanto, the Battel there, 161 Letter Apostolical publishing the Jubilee, 218 Lewis XI. of France favours the Medici against the Pope, 5 Lewis XII. enters Italy, and posses∣ses himself of Milan, 15. gains and loses Naples, ibid. is excom∣municated, 25. dies, 31 Lucca, the Magistracy there give offence to Paul V. 229 Lucretia the Pope's Bastard, how bestow'd by him, 15 Ludovisio (Alexander) chosen Pope, and nam'd Gregory XV. 267 Luther his first appearance in Ger∣many, 36.37. his Sectators in∣crease, 62 M Mahomet the Great dies, 6 Malatesta (Robert) General of the Pope.s Forces, 6 Malta, a Controversie there between the Master and the Knights, 169 Mantua, the troubles there, 279.280 Marignano General for the Empe∣rour retakes Siena, 105 Marriages of several Princes of the same name, 217. Of Lewis XIV. and Maria Teresa Infanta of Spain, 330 Mary Queen of England, her ac∣knowledgment of the Papal Pow∣er, 106. her Ambassadours how receiv'd at Rome, ibid. and 111. Matthias King of Hungary, 3 Maurice Duke of Saxony, 104 Medicis, the Family disoblig'd by Sixtus IV. 4. a Plot against 'em, 4.5. one of 'em murther'd, ibid. John of that House made Pope with the name of Leo X. 29. Ju∣lio another Pope with the name of Clement VII. 46. the Family driven out of Florence, 57. Alex∣ander made first Hereditary Duke of Florence, 62. John An∣gelo de Medicis Pope by the name of Pius IV. 119. Cosmo de Me∣dicis made Great Duke of Tusca∣ny, 159. Alexander chosen Pope, and call'd Leo XI. 205 Messina seized by the French, 374 Milan, its various fortune, 15.27.30.31.39.49.52.71 Modena taken by the Pope's Forces, 24 Monasteries suppress'd by the Pope's permission, 328.348 Montalto (Cardinal) chosen Pope with the name of Sixtus V. 172 Monti (Cardinal) chosen Pope by the name of Julius III. 90 Munster, the Treaty of Peace there, 307 N Naples besieged by the French, 59 Nepotism declar'd against by Alex∣ander VII. 325. but practis'd, ib. Nerius (Philip) Canoniz'd, 263.270 Nitardo Inquisitor General of Spain made a Cardinal, 368 Novaro, its stout resistance of the French, 30
Nuntio's from the Popes denied ad∣mittance by several Princes, 126.180 O Obelisc raised by Sixtus V. 186 Odescalchi (Cardinal) chosen Pope, and call'd Innocent XI. 380 Donna Olympia, her Character, 298. and managements, 299.300.301.310.311.312.313.319. confined to Orvieto, 324. dies of the Plague, ibid. Orsini, see Ʋrsini. Osnaburg, a Peace concluded there, 308 Otranto seiz'd by the Turks, 6 P Palace of the Farnese, 68 Palatine of the Rhine despoil'd of his Dominions, 269 Pamfilio (Cardinal) made Pope, and call'd Innocent X. 594 Paris made an Arch-Bishoprick, 270 Parma, Edward Duke thereof his Contest with Ʋrban VIII. 284, to 292. Pasquil upon Sixtus V. 191 Pavia, the Cardinal thereof assassi∣nated, 24. the City besieged by French King, 48. taken by Lau∣trec, 56. Persia, an Embassie from thence to the Pope, 262 Pescara the Marquess a noble Com∣mander, 48 Peter-pence, the paying of 'em a great Duty, 111 Philip de Comines sent with suc∣cours to the Florentines, 5 Piccolomini (Francis) chosen Pope, with the name of Pius III. 20 Pinarolo Tutor to Sixtus IV. 1 Pius V. Canoniz'd, 368 Plague in Italy, 168.324.326 Plot of Sixtus IV. against the lives of the Medici, 4.5. Of some Villains against Pius IV. 156 Poland, great Contests there about chusing a King, 167.195.369 Pool (Reginald) made a Cardinal, 68. sent Legat to the Council at Trent, 80. almost chosen Pope, 89. recall'd from his Office of Legat in England, 116 Portugal, great troubles there, 168 Priests Secular and Mendicant Friers, a long Dispute between 'em determin'd by the Pope, 4 Progress of Clement VIII. from Rome to Ferrara, 216 Protest of the King of France to the Pope, 94 Protestants routed by the Imperia∣lists, 84 Q Queens of Cyprus and Bosna enter∣tain'd by the Pope, 7 R Ravenna taken by the French, 26 Ravillac murthers Henry IV. of France, 263 Reformation design'd by Adrian VI. 44. by Marcellus II. 108. by Marcellus II. 108. by Paul IV. 117. by Pius V. 158 Relations, See Kinred. Rhodes taken by the Turks, 42 Rome taken and sack'd by the Impe∣rial Army, 56. and spoil'd by the Ʋrsins, 59 Rospigliosi (Cardinal) created Pope with the name of Clement IX. 346 Rovere (Francis) created Pope, with the name of Sixtus IV. 1 Rovere (Julian) made Cardinal, 2. and Pope, with the name of Julius II. 20 S Salvian, Arch-bishop of Pisa in a Plot with the Pope against the lives of the Medici, 5. hang'd, ib. Saraceno, Prebendary of Vicenza oc∣casion of the quarrel of Paul V. with the Venetians. 230 Saxony, the Duke excommunica∣ted, 38 Sebastian K. of Portugal slain, 168 Sfondrati (Nicolas) created Pope, and call'd Gregory XIV. 207
Sforza D. of Milan, taken and sent into France, 31. his Heir restor'd to his Dukedom, 52. dies, 71 Shoomaker of Macerata, a Story of him, 183 Siena revolts from the Emperour, 104. recover'd, 105 Simony practised and punished by the Pope, 12. Debate about its qualifications, 117 Sobietzki (John) chosen King of Po∣land, 369 Soliman the Magnificent, 42.52.61 Spalato (A. de Dominis) the Arch∣bishop thereof, 270 Spain, the Kings thereof when first honour'd with the Title of Ca∣tholick, 13 Statue of Paul IV. ignominiously used by the People, 119 Strozzi General for the French in Tuscany defeated, 105 Stuart (John) D. of Albany, of the Scotch Bloud-Royal, General of the French in Naples, 48 Swiss-Cantons, their Embassie to the Pope, 187 Switzers, their actions in the Pope's Cause, 27.30.31 T Teresa the Virgin, Canoniz'd, 203.270 Theatines, the Order when first in∣stituted, 110 Title of Catholick given to the King of Spain, 13. of Defender of the Faith to the King of England, 37 Treaty at Munster, 307. at Osna∣burg, 308. of the Pyreneans, 329. at Aix la Chappelle, 352 Trent, a General Council appoint∣ed there, 78. begun, 80 Trivulse General of the French takes Bologna, 24 Tunis taken by Charles V. 71 Turks seize Otranto, 6. alarm Chri∣stendom, 35. take Rhodes, 42. and Buda, 52. besiege Vienna, 61. in∣vade Dalmatia, 75.160. demand Cyprus of the Venetians, 160, take it, 161. receive a great overthrow at Lepanto, 161. successful in Hungary, 214. invading Poland, are defeated, 270 U Vanoccia Harlot to Alexander IV. 16 Vatican Library much improv'd by Sixtus IV. 7. much more by Sixtus V. 186. by Paul V. 265. by the addition of the Palatine Library, 269. by Alexander VII. 344 Venetians bandy against the Pope, 5. are excommunicated by him, 7. absolv'd, 9. a formidable League against them, 22. strip'd of all their Acquisitions in Italy, 23. regain some Towns, 27. their Vi∣ctory at Lepanto, 162. make Peace with the Turks, 166. kind to the Nuntio of Sixtus V. 190. they are quarrel'd with by Paul V. 230, to 261. disoblig'd by Ʋrban VIII. 283 Vienna besieg'd by the Turks, 61 Vitelli Count of Tiferno against the Pope, 4 Ʋladislaus King of Bohemia excom∣municated, 4 Ʋrbin the Dutchy seiz'd into the Pope's hands, 32.35. restor'd, 42. devolves to the Church, 281 Ʋrsini and Colonneses, a Discord be∣tween the two Families, 9. are reconcil'd, 10. both spoil'd by Caesar Borgia, 16. Ʋrsini cause a great tumult at Rome, 170 W Wednesdays auspicious to Sixtus V 137. X Xaverius (Francis) a Jesuite, Ca∣noniz'd, 270 Z Zizime, Brother to the Grand Signior brought to Rome, 11. dies, 14 Zuinglius opposes the Pope, 37 FINIS.
