R842 R17012 12863191 94697
A RELATION Of the Kings Entertainment into Scotland, on Saterday the 14 of August 1641. As also the Copy of a Speech which the Speaker for Scotland spake to his Maiesty. And how the Efigies of my Lord Traquire was carv'd in wood, and beheaded after he was con∣demned of high Treason, to his disgrace and shame, although he saved his life by flight. compass Printed 1641.
THE SPEAKERS SPEECH Which was spake before the KING at Edenburg, 1641. WIpe away those teares from your eyes (Coun∣treymen) which you have shed for the depar∣tute of your King, for he is as welcome to his native Scots, as ever was the Sun to the fro∣zen earth. He was no sooner entred into the confines of his owne Countrey, but his Subjects, that they might in the best way shew their love to their King, make the skies to eccho with shours of rejoycing, they made Bonfires and threw up their blew Caps in the aire, to their joy, and as the King was entering into Edenborough, my Lord Speaker spake unto him as followeth. My most honoured Liege, to salute your Highnesse onely with a welcome, is nothing, for you may perceive your most obedient subjects, which are of the vulgar, thronging toge∣ther to perform that duty, tis your presence which hath given to my frozen lips utterance & as near as I can, I wil neither think, nor speak, but what shall be to your Highnesse glory, and my owne credit, for it is the greatest credit among us,
your Leige people to doe nothing but what shall please you; Wih that the Commons in Scotland made knowne by their ecchoing shous, and throwing up theit Bonnets, how neare he had unfolded the secrets of their hearts. Then the noyse being ceased, he thus proceeded, I perswade my selfe (my Lord and King) that we are much ill spoken of, because that we are now in armes, I hope your Majesty shall find, it will prove to the good of you and us, for we shall, & wil make such paties known, when you shal please to grace us in our Parliament, that shall fully take away al suspition of our ils, which are supposed to be meant towards you, we have and will prove true subjects to your Grace, for it were a sin unpardonable to doe othrwise, wee having so loving and magnificent a Prince: Pardon my faultring and unable spee∣chees, I beseech you, for it is my ambition to expresse our plaine downe right dealings, in a plaine and easie way. I know you cannot chuse but thinke that we have shewed our selvs resolute, because we have presumed so far as to take armes, but I hope you will also suppose, that we are as loyall as the best. God knows our thoughts, as we hope he wil re∣ward us accordingly, if bad, we desire his just judgement, if good, I entreat your Majesty to take notice of it. After these words, there was a kind of confused noyse, heard among the souldiers, but an unlook'd for instant there was such a comPleat valley of shot, which did as it were thunder forth their meaning. Upon that occasion my Lord Speaker continueth his speeeh. Thus may you see (my most honoured Liege) how your pople doe strive by al means possible, to shew their duties, and their loves, their loving duties; they have beene as spa∣ring as possible might be, to do any thing that should be pre∣judicill to your Majesty, or your subjects in England, but what must needes be done. I perswade my selfe, that if your Majesty shold but command the greatest thing of them to ac∣complish, they would as willingly strive to performe it, and w th as much good will, as ever Pleiadts did any thing for his friend Orestes, nay my expression is below your Majesties worth, they would doe it as willing to their powers, as the good Christian for his soules heath, would doe any thing to
please his Maker. I beseech your Majesty, than you would be pleased not to harbour an ill conceit of us, or ours, for we shall, and will be true to the Crowne, as long as life endures. I heard lately from England, that it credibly reported that we came into fields with banners displayed onely for poverty sake, because we would enrich our selves by the Eng∣lish, our owne consciences are cleare, and reason will make it manifest. If we had came only for wealth, then had we sought to rob, and spoyle, and felloniously to take away what wee could from the inhabitants adjoyning, which we never did therefore it is cleare, wee never came for such intent, as to inrich our selves. Another thing is we came onely to reveale the names of those which had with might and maine, sought to over∣throw three Kingdomes at once, and more we will reveale; when it shall please your Majesty to set with us in our Par∣liament, & therefore it was not for Lucre we undertooke this taske. Juge favourably therefore of our intets, which are as cleare as the noone-tide of the Day, let not the clouds of di∣respects overshade your serene countenace from us; for your frowne is able to kill us, and your smile able to call us backe againe to life. If you had denyed your presence among us at this time, we had wandred in darkenesse, like those people which are forsaken by the Sun. But now my Liege here is one thing more, if you desire that our army shall be disbanded, your word is a command, if not they will endure the cold of Winter, and thinke themselves happy to endure for your sake. Now our King began to an∣swer to his last demand. In the first place I give you all thanks for all your kindnes shewed unto me, and weare these troublesome times over, I should not be backward in recompencing of your good wils, but I hope you will except the will for the deed; and I will for a time remaine, and conclude that a King is your debtor. For your vigilancy in all things I might particularly thank you for, and shall for ever (whilst it shall please God to de∣taine me here in this pilgrimage) rest beholding to you, and a willing debtor. But now as for the maintenance of this ar∣my I hold it very unfit, for it is seldome seene but after warre
comes famine, which are two of the greatest plagues which can happen to a Kingdome. At these words the Souldiers, each man threw away their weapons, and threw their blew Bonnets into the ayre, with great acclamations of joy; with that our King spak unto them as followeth. I thank you all, for al your love and good will, which I per∣ceive in all your actions to flow abundantly from you, I pro∣test that this your loving kindnes doth enlighten my heart, for this was alwayes my bosome axiome, that that King was not worthy of a Crowne, who would willingly give his Subjects any distaste; me thinks I see already how the Sun of our hap∣pinesse begins to shew his face, through the thicke clouds of distraction. Let all those things which have hapned be buri∣ed in the rotten Sepulcher of oblivion, for my owne part, I cannot harbour any hatred in my heart, my thoughts are cleare. But now after these words there was a kind of Ceremony to be performed, the manner of which was this. If any man be accused of high Treason, and flyeth for it, and after be convicted, it is a law among them that his effigies shall be cut in wood, and brought upon the Scaffold with as much disgrace as if the party offending were there in his owne person. Now there was a Lord among them, which was found faulty, and accused of high Treason, for which he fled into France thinking to escape the disgrace, as well as the death which he had deserved, but he was much deceived in the trusty Scots, from though he fled for death, yet they sent his shame after him: on the very same day on which our King came to his Pallace at Edenborough (which was fryday night last) was his effigies brought upon the Scaffold, and there they cut of its Wooden head. Thus countrey men, may you see how willing these Scots are to please, and not to offend, you may read in their works which they are lately gon about, what their intentions are I perswade my selfe, that they are true Christians, true sub∣jects, and what not; let us therefore joyne with them in their good acclamations, with which the skies doe now ring God save our King, God save our King.
After all these things were performed, our King gave them all most hearty thanks, promising them to thinke of all their curtesies hereafter: and then he was conducted to his Pallace, where he was received with great joy and Gladnesse, and I doubt not but he will have kind entertainment: in the meane time this shall be my voyce. God preserve and save the KING. FINIS.
