S2283A 12329807 59623
A Second Letter from LEGORN, With a farther Account, as Incredible and Unparalell'd as the first. From aboard the Van-herring, December 10. 1679. SIR, LEST mine of Decemb. 1st. should not come to your hands, I send a second, with some farther Account, as incredible and unparalell'd which, for the strangeness of it, may seem rather a Romance than a Reality. So it is, that sundry of our Saylors have capitulated with the Algerines, and conspired together to kill the Captain, to betray the Ship, to make prize of the Goods, and Slaves of our Persons. This cursed Contri∣vance is wonderfully brought to light, by two or three of their own Crew, who (touch'd with remorse for so Hellish an Enterprize) have made an ingenuous Confession of the whole Intrigue. When it was first suggested, and revealed to some of our Principal Commanders, they took little notice of it. Whether it was from their Increduli∣ty, or because they themselves were in the Confederacy, I can't determine. At length an honest Boatswain, being made privy to it, he took the Con∣fession and the Examination of the first Discoverer, and carried it to the Captain and Council of Officers, who seemed to be startled at it, but made no great haste to enquire into it. This officiousness of the Boatswain procur'd him the implacable hatred of the Conspirators; and some of them cunningly trepann'd him (one night) into one of their Cabbins, where they first STRANGLED HIM, and then privately threw him overboard. Next day, being miss'd, great enquiry was made after him, and after a while his dead Corps was found floating on the Sea. Some very confidently affirmed, that in discontent he had drown'd himself; but anon his dead Body being more narrowly viewed, it evidently appeared, that he had been strangled; which made all con∣clude that he was Murthered by these Conspirators, either to strike terrour into others, or to satisfie their own revenge. This wicked Act had a good effect; his Death quicken'd and alarum'd the Captain, the Commanders, and the generality of the Ships-Company. And now the Council is call'd together; the Discoverer of the fore-mentioned Treachery is more fully Examined. He unravels the whole Mystery, and relates how there were on Board the Ship a great many Mahometans, and mungrel Christians, who held correspondence with the chief of Algier: and that their Design was to betray the Ship, to slay or enslave all those that made opposition; and because they apprehended the Captain was not for their turn, to take him out of the way. Further, that the Algerines had promised them their Assistance, to furnish them with Men, Ammunition, and Provi∣sion; as also, to make their Lieutenant Captain, who was a Mahometan, and true to their Interest. He also accused the Purser, and five other great Rogues amongst us, for having a hand in this Conspiracy, and who were to be Principal Officers in the Ship upon this Alteration. Several other Per∣sons he named, as active Managers of this Devilish Design, and told the very times when, and the places where they had their Consults for the carrying of it on, and that he himself had been engaged and employed therein. Hereupon the Captain and Council seize the five persons before-mentioned, and several others, and secure them in the Hold, and some time after the Purser was sent to keep them company. By this time two or three more of the Conspirators began to relent; one of them confess'd the Murther of the Boatswaine, and that he had a hand in it. This mightily confirmed the evidence of the first Discoverer, and convinced all disinterested persons of the reality of the Treachery. Whereupon the Discoverers, (as there was reason) being pardoned, some few of those who were most active and forward in the Plot, and that had a hand in the Boatswain's Death, upon a full and fair hearing, were condemn'd and sentenc'd to death, and accordingly were hanged at the Main-yard. Only one of the Criminals (who had undertaken as was clearly prov'd in the judgment of many unbiassed persons who were present at the Tryal, to poyson the Cap∣tain) a Chyrurgions Mate, chanc'd to be quitted; who made haste (which was his wisest course) to get a Shore, and was never heard of since. The Discharge of this little Doctor greatly astonish'd the Ships-Company, and no less animated the Conspirators. They presently give out, that there was no such Treacherous design in hand; that it was only a false and malicious forgery of two or three persons, whom they loaded sufficiently with Ca∣lumnies. And one thing contributed greatly to their confidence; whil'st they were very warm in searching into this Plot, and bringing the Offenders  LIEUTENANT by his being a Mahometan, had given life to its I say, whilst they were thus busied, they  should be first tryed And though to quiet the Saylors, he hath summoned them twice or thrice since, yet when the time comes, he either won't let them sit, or dismisses them when they are just entred into their Debates; suspecting that some of his Council may have some private Design of their own. This proceeding of the Captains, fills the Council and the whole Ships-Company too, with strange fears and jealousies, they know not what to think or say; but whatsoever the simple sort mutter, the wiser do conclude the Captain is Real and Cordial in his prosecution of the Conspirators, because he hath alwayes professed himself to be a Christian, and the Conspirators have attempted to take away his Life; as also knowing that he will not be found out of his own Interest; for he can never expect a better Command in the Ship than he now hath: and if they should continue him so, it must be with the Imparing of his Honour, and Curtailing of his Power. And though he won't suffer the Council to sit and Act, yet he himself is active for the preventing of this Plot. He hath posted many Orders upon the Main-mast, that all Mahometans shall leave the Ship. And though none of them stir, yet the reason is this, they have great Abettors, as the Lieutenant, the Captains Lady, &c. Besides, they have a Dispensation from the Mufti, and are allowed to conceal their Religion; yea, in order to the saving of themselves and carrying on of their Design, to take any Tests or Oaths that are imposed upon them. Yet notwithstanding (which is to me a Mystery) the Conspirators are much emboldened. The other day they had the Confidence to treat with some of the Discoverers to let fall their Prosecution, to make a Recantation, and promised them great Rewards for their so doing. And to invalidate the Evidence of the first Discoverer, they raised several Scandals upon him; Yea they had suborned a Moor that waited upon him to swear that he would have Buggered him in his Cabbin. Nay, they had the Face to invent and feign a new Plot; which was, that the honest Saylors were about to make head against the Captain, and to run away with the Ship to the Commonwealth of Venice. The Lieutenant sent a spruce forward Seaman to the Captain with an Information about the Sham-plot: which was at first believed, but it was so simply managed, that every Tarpaulin could see through it. For at that time the Captain had several of the Mahomitans, who had been in the former Conspiracy, to betray the Ship, Prisoners in the Gun-room. One of which, having the Liberty for his Wife to come and see him aboard, who was a Woman that pretended to great Cunning and Design, so ordered it, that a Creature of hers was by the Lieutenant re∣commended to the Captain to be by him new listed in the Ship. To him this Woman, by the Advice of a certain Confident of hers, who was esteemed a great Midnight Sorce∣ress or Enchantress among the Mahometans gives full Instructions, and for his better Confirmation orders him to consult with an Arabian, an Intimado of hers, who pretended to have great Knowledge in the Stars, who gave him full Assurances of Success. The Seaman thus furnished, comes to the Captain and informs against one of the Midship-men, that he had contraband Goods concealed in his Cabin, and desires Liberty to search. Which being granted, he privately conveighs a Packet of Letters into the Midship-mans Bed-cloaths, and then finding them himself, when none of the rest of his Assistants could, he cry'd out Treason, Treason, against the Captain. The Midship-man was then gone a Shoar upon some particular Business of his own; but upon his Return finding the whole Ships Company in an Uproar, and all ready to fling him overboard, he was at first in no small Distra∣ction; till at length, being informed by some that were his Friends, of the Occasion, as he was an old experienced Seaman, and not easily daunted, he resolv'd to go and appear be∣fore the Captain himself, and justifie his own Innocency. The Captain heard him with much Patience, as being one that he had never found faulty before, and therefore was not wil∣ling to condemn over hastily. At length, after a strict Examination of the Business, the Midship-man so well acquitted himself, and render'd so invalid the Testimony of the new Sea∣man, that instead of being lookt upon himself as a Conspirator against the Ship, the new Seaman was adjudg'd to have dealt falsely, and was thereupon by the Captain committed to the Bilboes, till he discovered the Authors, Abetters, and Contrivers of the Design against the Midship-man, which had it taken effect, had involv'd most of the honest Seamen in a most destructive Treason, to the greatest Advantage of the Mahometans. But as Treason seldome thrives, it fell out at Length so happily, that the new Seaman, touch'd with Re∣morce of Conscience, most ingeniously confess'd the whole Matter, that he had most treacherously abus'd the faithful and true hearted Sailors, impos'd upon the Mildness of the Cap∣tain, and that he was set on Work by some of those that were the Principalls in this general and most detestable Conspiracy of the Algerines themselves. In this distressed posture we abide, and see no hope of Deliverance. A day or two ago, some Merchants who have a considerable adventure aboard the Ship, address'd themselves to the Captain, and prayed (in most humble manner) that he would consider of the present danger they were in, and suffer the Council to sit, to find out a way (if it were possible) to prevent their utter Ruin. He bad them meddle with what belonged to them, they should let him alone to govern the Ship; who was as sollicitous about her Safety as the best of them all. The Saylors also were about a Petition to the same purpose, which coming to the Captains ear, he express'd his dislike of it, which very much saddens the Hearts of the Saylors. I remember how they received the Captain when he came first aboard; they tost up their Caps, and cryed, God bless the Captain, we'l live and dye with him, one and alll, &c. And still they have that Respect for him, that they vow if he be taken away by any undue means, they will revenge his Death upon all the Mahometans aboard the Ship. And in∣deed there is no great Fear of them: for they are but few in Comparison. The great Fear is that the Algerines, the next fair Wind, will fall upon us in our Harbour; and to speak the Truth, we are but ill provided to defend our selves. But yet the Ship is as stout a Ship as any Sails the Seas, and we are very well mann'd. And the Seamen are full both of Rage and Courage; So that if ever they attack us, they may possibly find hot Work of it, and come short home. Steady a Starboard. No neer Boys. That's the Word. Let the Captain provide us but good Piltes, and we'l warrant the Ship; For if then she fail, 'tis Heaven and not humane Strength that fights against us. But if we be deficient our selves, all that we can hope for, is that kind Heaven wiil be merciful, and not abandon a helpless Vessel to the Waves of Forreign Destruction. Some fall, because they will not stand, Some shipwrack, 'cause they will not Land, What pity, if they ruin'd be That Storms approaching will not see. Quod avertat Deus.
