S2293A R220971 99832354 36827
A SECOND NARRATIVE OF THE Signal Victory Which it pleased Almighty GOD to bestow UPON HIS MAJESTIES NAVY Under the Command of HIS ROYAL HIGHNES THE DUKE of YORK AGAINST The STATES-FLEET of the Ʋnited Neatherlands. On the Third of June, 1665. Licened June 10. by ROGER L'ESTRANGE London, Printed by Richard Hodgkinson M.DC.LXV.
A SECOND NARRATIVE of the SIGNAL VICTORY, &c. HIS Royal Highness, after his Return from the Coast of Holland, where he had lain before the Texell, taken their Merchants Ships, and used all possible means to provoke the Dutch to a Battle, having certain Intelli∣gence, not only that the Dutch Fleet had taken the Sea, but that they publiquely declared their intentions of seeking out the English Fleet; and farther, that the Good Hope with their Convoys from Ham∣burgh had unfortunately fallen into their hands, judging that all these Cir∣cumstances might tend to the disreputa∣tion of His Majesties Affairs, became very impatient of all delays; and though many of the Provisions necessary for the Fleet were not yet on board, His Royal Highness resolved to carry the Fleet from the Gunfleet near Harwich to Sowld Bay,
and there to take in the remainder of vi∣ctuals and other stores; that being a more open place, and therefore more proper for going out to the Dutch, in case they should attempt to make any Bravado up∣on the English Coast. In prosecution there∣fore of that Resolution, the Fleet weigh∣ed anchor at high water on the 30 of May (carrying with them the victualling ships and other stores) the wind being at South East, but it did not long continue so, but veered to the East South-east, East, and East North-east, so that we were forced to stop Tydes, and using all our endevors we could not arrive at Sowld Bay til June the first about 6 in the morning, where we anchored about 5 miles from the shore. Between Twelve and One of the clock this day, his Royal Highness being at din∣ner, news was brought that a great Fleet was discovered to the East, South-east of us, about some six leagues off, which con∣cluding
to be the Dutch, his Royal High∣ness ordered the Victuallers to Harwich, and the Fleet to weigh, and to get farther off the shore, which was done according∣ly till the Flood; when we came again to an anchor, the Dutch kept under Sail, and endevoured to keep to the South-east, and East South-east of us. At Ten of the clock that night, we weighed anchor again, the wind being at East, We did our best to get up to the Dutch Fleet, but they being to windward of us, it did not depend up∣on our choice, so that the Dutch keeping upon a wind, in the morning, June 2. we saw them about 5 leagues South east from us, the wind varying from the South east to South South-east, South and South South-west. At eight in the Evening Lestoff bore North-west about eight leagues off, and the Dutch Fleet was then about 3 leagues off, standing off with their Star-board Tacks on board, and we stood after them, but they stayed not for us.
There was a great desire in the Fleet to have engaged the Dutch this day, which had twelve years since been so fortunate to the English against the same Enemy; what other reason, besides the ill fortune of that day, the Dutch could have to decline the fighting us, then when they might have had the wind of us, we can neither con∣jecture, nor learn from any of the Priso∣ners since taken. This Evening one of the Enemies Sternmost Ships was fired, some of our men perswaded themselves it was one of their Admirals, but we since under∣stand by Prisoners it was one of their Fireships, which took fire before her time by the drunkenness of her Commander: Whatever it was, our men believed the best, and as it was no small joy to see an Enemies Ship so easily destroyed; so they took it for a good Omen of a future Victory. This night we kept sight of the Enemy
all night, and the wind veering to the South-west, between two and three of the clock in the morning, June 3. we lay to weather of the Dutch Fleet, which they perceiving, tacked and stood with us, but could not weather us; being as we suppose about fourteen leagues from Lestoffe, South-east southerly. At half an hour past three in the morning the Battle began: Prince Ruperts Squadron having the Van, and of that Squadron Vice-Admiral Mings; His Royal Highnesse's Squadron was in the Body, and that of the Earl of Sandwich in the Rear: The first salutes the Dutch re∣ceived from Prince Rupert's Squadron, (animated by the example as well as or∣ders of that valiant Prince) made them doubt whether the victory over the Eng∣lish were either so certain, or so easie, as the Heer de Wit; and their other Coun∣try-men who were to stay at home, had perswaded them, Both Fleets having pas∣sed
thus by one the other in a Line, there was for a considerable time a perfect quiet without shooting one Gun; About six of the clock, we tacked, and stood to the West, North-west; and they to the South, South-east, and passed by one the other, there being again an intermission from shooting; Upon this Tack, the Dutch endeavoured to get the wind of us which they hoped to have done, which his Royal Highness foreseeing, they would endevour, kept so close to the wind, that when the Dutch tacked, hoping to weather Prince Rupert, they found his Royal Highness to weather them, and therefore rather then pass between two Lines of our Fleet, they chose to bear to Leeward of Prince Rupert. We stood not long that way, but his Royal Highness ordered the Reer of His Majesties Fleet to tack first, that so we might the better and sooner get up with the headmost of their Fleet.
This was not done without some intermix∣ture of the Ships of the several Squadrons; but yet without any considerable prejudice. This being executed, his Royall Highness making Sail with his Squadron, he came to be the Headmost Squadron of the Line, and had Sir John Lawson, with some other Ships of his Squadron a head of him, with which keeping up to the Headmost of the Enemies Ships, we kept them to Leeward of us, and never suffered them to tack, but kept the wind of them the whole day. The Fight continued long, and the Dutch made very con∣siderable resistance: but it was observed, That as we bore in upon them, they altered their course, so that whereas they might have layn up South South-east, they bore off to the East South-east. His Royall Highness who had observed in the beginning of the Battle, the endeavour of the Dutch to get the wind, and by what means it was prevented, and also the g eat benefit we had by it, by securing us against the Enemies Fire-ships, (in which they had placed a great part of their hopes) had always a regard to the keeping that advantage which God had so fa∣vourably given us; which with the concurrence of another accident, did somewhat prolong the Battel. The continual smoak would not give
us leave to see very far before us what the Ene∣my did; and therefore the Actions of Others, were in some measure to be the guide even of the Admiral: his Royal Highness therefore ha∣ving seen Sir John Lawson with his accustomed Valour bear in towards the Enemies Line, but soon after to edge off again to windward, con∣cluded that Sir John Lawson had seen some of the Enemies Ships endeavouring to get the Wind of us, and therefore to prevent That, his Royal Highness kept near the Wind, which was a guide to the whole Fleet. But this mistake was understood a little while after, by a Mes∣sake from Sir John Lawson, who privately sent to give his Royal Highness an accompt that he was hurt, and for that time uncapable of service, (though, thanks be to God, without danger of life) so that we perceived the Working his Ship, which led us into that Errour, was through the want of their Commander, the Master being also hurt. His Royal Highness therefore ordered Captain Jordon to go on board the Royal Oak; after which She did excellent good service. This Error being now perceived, and about the same time Opdams Ship (which was known by a Pendant under his Flagg) coming up to lie almost opposite in their Line to his Royal High∣ness
Ship in Ours; His Royal Highness was plea∣sed to give command to bear up to him, say∣ing, He would himself have a Bout with Opdam, (for so he termed it.) In which being obey'd, and the whole Fleet taking example by the working of his Royal Highness Ship, we began to ply our Guns at so near a distance, that the Enemy began to shrink apace, though not ab∣solutely to run. Whilst things were in this condition, it pleased God (who had through the whole Conduct of this great Business won∣derfully favoured us) by an extraordinary O∣peration of his Almighty hand to facilitate our Work; and to shorten the danger to which his Royal Highness had resolved to expose his own Person, by the blowing up of Opdams Ship; which as it was a great joy to the English, so it could not but infinitely discourage the Enemy, who did not stand long after, but (we bearing in upon them, presently fled, we following them, and taking and burning their Ships until night; when not being able to do any more service up∣on them, we onely endeavoured to keep so much sight of them, as to be up with them in the morning, when we again followed the pursuit (taking divers of their Ships) unto the very mouth of the Texel, where their Ships getting
into Shoal water, and being perfectly acquain∣ted with the place, we durst not adventure so near the shore with our Ships, which were not in condition to bear much Sail, if there should have been need for bringing them off again. We staid in sight of the Texel till we saw their Ships go in which they did not neglect to do the first Tide. In the beginning of the Battle, two of our Ships, not being able to weather the Enemy, fell into their Fleet; the One (which was the Cha∣rity, a Ship taken from the Dutch in the last War) tacked, hoping thereby to help her self, but was taken; the Other a Merchant Ship in the Kings Service, called the John and Abigal. Captain Joseph Saunders, Commander, finding himself a∣mongst them, resolved to stand the same way with our own Fleet, and to receive the Enemies Broadsides, which he had so near, as with them to receive their Threats also, and was honored with a Broadside from Opdams own Ship, and a Vice-Admiral, betwixt which he lay: but the Enemy was too much in naste to attend one sin∣gle Ship; so that with a considerable losse of Men, and the battering of his Ship, Masts, Rig∣ging, and Sails, he came safe to his Majesties Fleet. During the Battle; there came in to us three of his Majesties Ships returned from the
Sound, as also the Leopard from Harwich: To the Dutch came young Evertson with three Ships. To give an account of the particular Actions of his Majesties Commanders, would be not onely tedious, but prove injurious to many; whose merits would seem less, if not named; nor would it be less injurious to all those who have done well, (if any Actions were to be particularized) not to name (with reproach) those who have been wanting to their Duty. Let it therefore suffice for an evidence of the bravery of his Majesties Commanders in general, that the Invicible Dutch Fleet is by them overcome; though I will not conceal from you, that I hear it said, his Royal Highness doth not think it sufficient that they do bet∣ter then the Dutch, but wil expect that they ll do as be∣cometh English men; and therefore it is thought, this occa∣sion having made some discovery of the tempers of some men, who could not be known b fore, some alterations will be even amongst the Victorious: for the generally of the English Seamen, it is certain, that greater of more valiant hearts are not to be found in any Race of men; nor more indefatigable: of which a greater instance could not be, then this Battle, which was of such continuance, that if separated from the labour, the danger alone would have been insupportable to any other sort of men; and perhaps would have been so to them also, had not the danger awakened their courages, and re-doubled their spirits. Having told you of a Ship of his Majesties lost; if I should give over here, you might think we had lost by the Victory; and there∣fore it is necessary to give you some account
of the Enemies Loss, and Our Gain; which ne∣vertheless, in the present uncertainty; you must give me leave to do as Accomptants use, with a reserve of (errors excepted) endeavouring not∣withstanding so far as maybe, to tell you nothing for certain which is not so. First, Then you must know, that besides Opdams Ship (which we saw blown up, and besides, have since spoken with some of the Men which were saved) There was taken, and afterwards fired (that so she might not clog us in the pursuit) the Orange Tree, a Ship of 76. Guns. There were after∣wards four of their Ships, in the pursuit, fell foul the one of the other, and were by one of his Majesties Fire Ships set on fire, one of them was the Ship Couverden, in which was Tromps Vice Admiral, Gillis Tysse Campen, carrying 60. Guns, The Prince Maurice, Cap. de Clerk, car∣rying 50. Guns; The Stodt Ʋtrecht, Cap. Ou∣dart, 44 Guns; And a fourth, which was, I think, called the Stedan, carrying about 40. Guns: After these were all on fire, and our Ships passed by, one of them burning to her Powder, blew up, and with the blast, blew a∣way all the Rigging, Masts, &c. of one of them of about 40. Guns, which was on fire, and so enabled some of the Dutch, who remained there
to quench the fire, and fave the Ship, at least to preserve their own lives till some of their Ships passed that way; but whether they towed Her into Harbour; or not, we know not: An acci∣dent very extraordinary, and which it was not reasonable to expect or provide against. This was obterved by some of the Boats and Ketches which were sent to save the lives of the poor men, who were left to the two unmerciful Ele∣ments. A little after this, were likewise burned by another Fire-ship, three Ships which were faln foul one of another, the one called Massee∣ven, Jacob Rowse Commander, of 78 Guns, the Ter∣goes, of 34 Guns, and Cap. Cuypers Ship of 30 Guns. Of Ships taken, am not able to give you a perfect account, in regard some are (as we hear) gone directly for England, and others not yet come to the Fleet: Some of the Ships taken, are, The Mars, 46 Guns. The Zeeland, 44 Guns. The Carolus Quintus, 53 Guns. The Delft, 32 Guns. The Nagelboome, 52 Guns. We hear of others taken by other Ships, of which we have not the Names, but do conclude, we have destroyed them 23, or 24 Men of War, at the least; by the next you shall have a more perfect account.
According to what we learn from the Prisoners, there were slain of the Dutch Commanders of ote (besides Opdam) Cortenaer, Stelling werf, Schram; and (most say) Tromp: but for the certainty of this, the Curious must expect Letters from Holland. On Our Part, were slath the Earl of Marlebrough, Rear Admiral Sansum, Captain Ableson, and Captain Kirbye, Commanders; Of Voluntiers of Note, fell the Earl of Portland, Earl of Falmouth, Lord Mus∣kery, and Mr. Boyle, second Son to the Earl of Burlington. (The Three last by one fatal shot) I cannot find that the Dutch Commanders taken, can give any exact account of he number of Ships in their Fleet, that which they seem most perswa∣ded of, is, That they had about 0 Sail besides Fire-ships. I believe the Kings Fleet was stithin very few of 100 Sail; a force worthy on either side to contend for so great a Stake. The number of Men killed and taken from the Dutch, I conjecture may be about 8000. What the number on the side of the English are, I have not yet heard computed; but by the conjectures which may be raised from the accompt of some of the Ships which were in the hottest of the Action, it may be concluded, that never was so great a Victory obtained against the Dutch, with so small loss on the side of the English. FINIS.
