S2501 12434551 62014
NATURAL HISTORY OF THE PASSIONS. Mihi crede, qui nihil agere videntur, Majora agunt; humana divina{que} simul tractant. Seneca Epist. 8. In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Iames Magnes in Russell-Street, near the Piazza in Convent-Garden, 1674.
EPISTLE PREFATORY, To a Person of Honor, Friend to the Author. , exer∣cetur ad virtutem in solitudine anima; was the the saying of a Bragman or Indian Philosopher to Alexander the the Great: and how memorable it is, you may perhaps collect from this diversion. For, the imperfect Dis∣course I herewith send to you, my dear Friend, concerning the PASSIONS, is the product of my late ten weeks solitude in the Country. Where being remote from my Library, and wanting conversation with Learned Men; I knew not how more inno∣cently to shorten the winter evenings, than by spending them in revising
some Philosophical papers of my own, wherein among other things, I had formerly, out of the best Au∣thors, made certain Collections con∣cerning the divine art of acquiring constant Tranquillity of Mind, by Wisedom or the right use of Reason. And of this serious Diversion I then made choice, both because I well understood the best part of Human Science to be that which teacheth us how to moderate our Affections to the deceiptfull and transitory things of this life, and so to regulate our Actions, as to reap from them, what∣ever their Events may be, the hap∣py fruit of internal Acquiescence and Satisfaction: and because my accu∣mulated Misfortunes had at that time reduced me to a necessity of consul∣ting that part of Philosophy, about the most effectual Remedies against Discontent. In this state and resolution then, first I remembred, that Nature hath
made Man subject to no other real Evil, but only pain of the Body; all Grief or pain of the Mind, though many times more sharp and intollera∣ble, being created by our own false Opinion, that we stand in want of things that are in truth without the circle of ourselves, and therefore not absolutely necessary to our wel-be∣ing. Then I considered, that most com∣monly false Opinions are occasioned, and so exorbitant Desires suggested to us by our Passions; upon which all the Good and Evil incident to us in this life, seem's to depend: as Ioy and Grief are the two points in which all Human actions end. For, though it be undoubtedly true, that the Rea∣sonable Soul hath her intellectual De∣lights and Disquiets apart, such as are proper to her simple and spiritu∣al nature: yet is it no less true, that those other Delights and Disquiets that are common to her with the Bo∣dy,
depend intirely upon the Af∣fections. Which when regular, that is, moderated and directed by reason, are indeed of good use to the Soul, in that they serve to incite her to de∣sire such objects which she well know's to be pleasant and beneficial to her, and to persist in that desire: but when irregular, by representing as realy good, things that are so only in apparence, provoke her to errone∣ous Desires, and in persuit of them, to Actions also repugnant to the dict∣ates of right Reason, and consequent∣ly to peace and tranquility of Mind. From these Cogitations it was not difficult for me to infer, that the whole art of attaining unto that internal se∣renity after which I was seeking, con∣sisteth principaly in Directing our De∣sires aright, that is, to things which we clearly and distinctly know to be re∣aly Good: and that the only way so to direct our Desires, is to imploy our Understanding or Faculty of Dis∣cerning,
which God hath to that end given us, strictly and attentively to examine and consider the goodness of things recommended to us by our Passions, before we determin our Will to affect and persue them. For, most certain it is, that as our faculty of Discerning, that is our Intellect, cannot naturaly tend to falsity: so neither can our faculty of Assenting, that is our Will, be deceived, when it is determined only upon objects which we clearly and distinctly un∣derstand; and where our Will is not misplaced, there can be no just cause of Perturbation of mind. Being soon convinced of this no less evident than important verity, in the next place I considered, that if our inordinate Affections be the bitter fountain from whence the greatest part of, if not all our practical Er∣rors, and by consequence most of the Evils we suffer, flow; and if as the diseases of the Body, so likewise
those of the Mind may be more easi∣ly cured, when their nature and cau∣ses are understood: then would it be requisite for me first to inquire as far as I should be able, into the nature, causes, motions, &c. of the Pas∣sions, before I proceeded further in my research after the most powerfull Remedies against their Excesses. To this inquiry therefore I dili∣gently applied myself, both by rea∣ding and meditation; by Reading, that I might recall into my memory what I had long before transcribed out of the books of such Authors who had written judiciously and laudably of the Passions: by Meditation, that I might examin the weight of what I read, by comparing it with what I daily observed within the theatre of my own breast; every Man living be∣ing naturaly so sensible of the vari∣ous Commotions hapning in various Passions, especialy more violent ones, that some have held, the knowledge
of their nature and causes may be without much of difficulty derived from thence alone, without any help from foreign observations. And while I proceeded in this course, I digested my Collections and private Sentiments into such an order or Me∣thod which seem'd to me most con∣venient, aswell to show their genuin succession, and mutual dependence, as to make the Antecedents support the Consequents, and both to illustrate each other reciprocaly. I put them also into a dress of Language so plain and familiar, as may alone evince, my design was to write of this Argument, neither as an Orator, nor as a Moral Philosopher, but only as a Natural one conversant in Pathology, and that too more for his own private satis∣faction, than the instruction of others. And thus have I succinctly acquainted you with the Occasion, Subject, Scope and Stile of the Treatise that accom∣panieth this Epistle.
But this, Noble Sir is not all where∣of I ought to advertise you, before you come to open the Treatise itself. There remain yet two or three things more, which it imports me to offer to your notice, as Preparatives a∣gainst prejudice. ONE is, that if in the preliminary part of the Discourse, where it was necessary for me to investigate the Subjectum Primarium of the Passions, I have declared my assent to their opi∣nion, who hold that in every indivi∣dual Man, there are two distinct Souls, coexistent, conjoined, and cooperating; one, only Rational, by which he is made a Reasonable crea∣ture; the other, Sensitive, by vir∣tue whereof he participateth also of Life and Sense: I did so chiefly for these two reasons. First, it seem'd to me unintelligi∣ble, how an Agent incorporeal, but not infinite, such as the Rational Soul by her excellent faculties and proper
acts appear's to be, can act physica∣ly in and upon a gross and ponderous body, such as ours are, immediately or without the mediation of a third thing; which though corporeal too, may yet be of a substance so refined and subtil, as to approach somwhat neerer to the nature of a pure Spirit, than the body itself doth: and there∣fore for the more probable explica∣tion of the Phenomena of the Passi∣ons which are not raised in the Ratio∣nal Soul, I found myself obliged to admit her to have a Sensitive one conjoyned with her, to receive her immediate suggestions, and to actu∣ate the body according to her sove∣raign will and pleasure; there being less of disparity betwixt the most thin and subtil bodies of Light and Flame (whereof many eminent Phi∣losophers have conceived a Sensitive Soul to consist) and a substance pure∣ly Spiritual, than between a pure spi∣rit and a gross, heavy body, as ours is.
Secondly it seem'd to me no less unconceivable, whence that dismal  or intestin war which every Man too frequently feels within him∣self, and whereof even St. Paul him∣self so sadly complained, when (in Epist. ad Roman. cap. 3.) he cries out, video aliam legem in membris meis repugnantem legi mentis meae; should arise, if not from a Duumvi∣rate as it were of Rulers contending for superiority within us, and incli∣ning us two contrary ways at once. For, to conceive that one and the. same Simple thing, such as the Rea∣sonable Soul is rightly presumed to be, can be repugnant to itself, or at one and the same time be posses∣sed with opposite affections; is mani∣festly absurd. There are indeed, who to evade this absurdity, imagine it possible, that of one and the same Rational, simple Soul, there may be two distinct Faculties or powers opposite each to other, from whose
clashings and contrary inclinations this civil war may proceed. But to ob∣lige us to swallow this palpable con∣tradiction, these Men ought to have reconciled those two repugnant noti∣ons of Simple and Compound; and to have told us, why in the same sim∣ple substance of fire there cannot likewise be two mutualy repugnant faculties, heat and cold. In a Mixed body there may be, I confess, oppo∣site faculties; and therefore the like may be imagined also in the Rational Soul, if she be conceived to be of a mixed or compound nature: but this is against their own supposition, and destructive to the natural immor∣tality of the Soul. What then can remain to cause this dire war daily observed within us, betwixt the al∣lurements of our Sense, on one side, and the grave dictates of our Mind, on the other; but two distinct Agents, the Rational Soul and the Sensitive, co∣existent within us, and hotly conten∣ding
about the conduct of our Will? But You, Sir, will perhaps tell me, there may another, and that a more probable cause be given of this ho∣stility; and that the searching wit of Monsieur des Cartes hath been so hap∣py to discover what it is, in libr. de Passion. part. 1. art. 47. where he thus reasoneth. In no other thing (saith he) but in the repugnancy that is between the motions which the Body by its spirits, and those which the Soul by her will, do at the same time endeavour to excite in the Glandula Pinealis in the brain, consist all the Conflicts which Men commonly imagin be∣twixt the inferior part of the Soul, which is named the Sensitive, and the Superior, which is called the Rational, or betwixt the appetites natural and the will. For, in us there is only one Soul, which hath in her no variety of parts: the same that is Sensitive, is also Rational,
and all the appetites thereof are volitions. The Error by which divers persons as it were, that are for the most part mutualy contrary, come to be imposed upon her; hath pro∣ceeded only from hence, that hi∣therto her functions have not been sufficiently distinguished from the functions of the Body; to which alone is to be ascribed all that can be observed in us to be repugnant to our reason. So that here is no other Contrast, but that when the Glandule seated in the middle of the brain, is impell'd on one part by the Soul, and on the other by the Spirits Animal, which are nothing but bodies, as I have before decla∣red: it often happens, that those two impulses or impressions are contra∣ry each to other, and that the strong∣ger hindereth the effect of the wea∣ker. Now there may be distin∣guished two kinds of motions exci∣ted in the Glandule by the spirits:
some represent to the Soul objects that move the Senses, or impressi∣ons found in the brain, and use no force upon the will; others use force, namely those that make the Passions, or the motions of the body that accompany them. And as for the first; though they often hinder the actions of the Soul, or be hindered by them; yet because they are not directly contrary, there is no strife or contention ob∣served in them: but only betwixt the last and the Wills that are re∣pugnant to them; for Example, betwixt the endeavour by which the spirits impell the Glandule to induce upon the Soul a desire of some one thing, and that by which the Soul repells the same Glandule by her will to avoid it. And this chiefly demonstrateth this strife, that since the will hath not power (as hath been already shown) to excite Passions directly, the Soul
is therefore compell'd to use art, and to apply herself to the considera∣tion of various things successively. Whence if it happen that any one of those various things hath the force of changing for a moment the cours of the spirits; it may so fall out, that the next thing that oc∣curs to be considered, may want the like force, and the spirits may resume their former cours, because the precedent disposition in the nerves, in the heart, and in the blood, hath not been changed: whereby it comes to pass, that the Soul almost in the same moment feels herself impell'd to desire and decline the same thing. And this hath given Men occasion of ima∣gining in the Soul two powers mu∣tualy repugnant. But yet there may be conceived a certain Conflict in this, that oftentimes the same cause that exciteth some Passion in the Soul, exciteth also in the Body
some certain motions, whereunto the Soul contributeth nothing at all, and which she stops, or en∣devours to stop, so soon as she observes them: as is manifest from experience, when that which ex∣citeth Fear, causeth also the spi∣rits to flow into the Muscles that serve to move the leggs to flight; and occasioneth the will of exerci∣sing Courage to stop them. To this Objection therefore I an∣swer (1.) that had this excellent Man, Monsieur des Cartes been but half as conversant in Anatomy, as he seems to have been in Geometry, doubtles he would never have lodged so noble a guest as the Rational Soul, in so incommodious a closet of the brain, as the Glandula Pincalis is; that use whereof hath been demon∣strated to be no other but to receive into its spongy cavities, from two little nerves, a certain serous Excre∣ment, and to exonerate the same a∣gain
into its vein, which nature hath therefore made much larger than the artery that accompanieth it; and which having no Communication with the external organs of the Sen∣ses, cannot with any colour of rea∣son be thought the part of the brain, wherein the Soul exerciseth her prin∣cipal faculties of judging and com∣manding. (2.) This Glandule which he supposeth to be so easily flexible and yielding to contrary impulses, is not loosely suspended, but fixed: so that whoever hath once beheld the solid basis, strong consistence, and firm connexion thereof, will hardly ever be brought to allow it capable of any impulse to either side, though by the greatest Hurricano of spirits imaginable; much less by every light motion of them excited by external objects affecting the senses. (3) Though we should grant this Gland to be both the Throne of the Soul, and most easily flexible every way:
yet hath Des Cartes left it still uncon∣ceivable, how an Immaterial Agent, not infinite, comes to move by im∣puls a solid body, without the me∣diation of a third thing that is less disparil or disproportionate to both. Now these things duely considered, you will (I presume) no longer ima∣gine the Conflicts or Combats that frequently happen within us betwixt the Rational and Sensitive Appetites, to consist only in the repugnancy of the impulses of this little Glandule by the Spirits on one side, to those of the same Glandule by the Soul on the other. Besides, that the Soul hath power to excite Corporeal Passi∣ons directly, that is, without consi∣dering successively various things; is manifest from her soveraignity o∣ver the body, which in all voluntary actions is absolute and uncontrollable; and in the very instance of Fear al∣leadged by our Author, where she determineth her Will to Courage to
oppose the danger suggested, in∣stantly and without running through a long series of various considerati∣ons, for which she then hath not time sufficient. However, evident e∣nough it is, that this conceipt of re∣pugnant impulses of this Gland in the brain, is so far from giving light to the reason of the Conflict here considered, that it rather augmen∣teth the obscurity thereof, by imply∣ing two contrary Appetites or Wills in one and the same Soul, at one and the same time: Whereas the suppo∣sition of two Souls mutually opposing each others Appetites, doth render the same intelligible. Against this opinion of a Duality of Souls in one Man, some have (I well know) with not a little con∣fidence urged the Sentence of some of the Fathers, yea and of whole Councils condemning all who should assert it; and more particularly Con∣cil. 8. act. 10. Vienn. in Clem. VII. & Lateran. 3. sess. 8.
But this, Sir, is Brutum fulmen, dangerous to none, terrible only to the Unlearned. For, to any under∣standing reader of those decrees, it is clearly manifest, that the edge of them is turned against first the doc∣trin of the Maniches holding two human Souls in every individual Man; one polluted with the stain of vices, and derived from an evil prin∣ciple; the other incontaminate, and proceeding immediately from God, yea more, a particle of the Divine Essence itself; then the Platonics al∣so, and Averrhoists, teaching that the Rational Soul is not man's forma informans, but part of the Anima Mundi or Universal Soul: but not against the asserters of two Souls co∣existent, one simply Reasonable, the other merely Sensitive, in every single person, in that innocent sense I deliver it. And thus have the same Decrees been judiciously interpreted by the religious Philosophers of the
Collegue of Conimbra; who as of all Men they have discoursed most acutely and profoundly of this Argu∣ment; so have they with greatest moderation treated the Defendents of this opinion by me here embra∣ced. For (in 1. de Generat. cap. 4. quaest. 21. art. 2.) though they ex∣presly avow their adherence rather to the common belief of the singula∣rity of the Human Soul, as most consentaneous to the sense of the Church: yet they declare also, that the contrary opinion ought not to be censured as heretical or erroneous. Why therefore should I fear to espouse it? especially if to the reasons here urged, and others no less con∣siderable alledged by me in the third Section of the Treatise to which this Epistle invites you, be added for confirmation, that so celebrated text of St. Paul (ad Thessal. 1. cap. 5. vers. 23.) , integer vester
Spiritus, & anima, & corpus, &c. Where our most learned Dr. Ham∣mond of pious memory (in his An∣notations on the place) conceives the Apostle to divide the whole Man into three constituent parts, viz. the Body, which comprehendeth the flesh and members; the Vital Soul, which being also Animal or Sensitive, is common likewise to Brutes; and the Spirit, by which is denoted the Reasonable Soul originally created by God, infused into the body, and from thence after death to return to God; and this genuin exposition of his he confirms by agreeing testimonies both of Ethnic Philosophers, and some ancient Fathers. To these give me leave to super-add (ex abundanti) the concordant suffrages of three eminent Philoso∣phers of our own age; namely the Lord Chancellor Bacon, who (in his 4 Book of the Advancement of Learning, chap. 3.) gravely discour∣sing
of the parts of Knowledge con∣cerning the Mind or Soul of Man, divideth it into that which declares the nature of the Reasonable Soul, which is a thing Divine; and that which treateth of the Unreasonable Soul, which is common to us with Beasts: and then proceeds to affirm at large, that the former hath its origi∣nal from the inspiration or breath of God; the later, from the matrices of the Elements: the immortal Gassen∣dus, de Physiologia Epicuri, cap. de Animae sede, Passionibms Animi, &c. and the now flourishing Dr. Willis, in libr. de Anima Brutorum cap. 7. whose words I forbear to transcribe, out of design to increase your satisfaction, by obliging you to read them at your leisure in the places cited. Now if solid Reasons, Authority Divine, and the judgment of many sublime Wits and profound Philosophers, as∣well Ancient as Modern, be of any weight to recommend this neither he∣retical,
nor improbable opinion to me; certainly I need not blush to incline thereunto. Notwithstan∣ding this, I recount the same tan∣quam in Hypothesi, only as a suppo∣sition convenient to solve the Pheno∣mena of the Passions; not as an arti∣cle of my faith: nor had I so impor∣tunely insisted thus long upon argu∣ments to justify my approbation thereof, in this Letter; had I not, through want of Books, omitted to doe it where I ought, in the III. Sec∣tion of the Discourse itself. ¶ The SECOND advertise∣ment I owe you, Friend, is this, that the greatest part of what is deli∣vered in the same Discourse, concern∣ing the nature, substance, faculties, Knowledge, &c. of a Sensitive Soul, hath been borrowed from that ela∣borate work of our Learned Dr. Willis de Anima Brutorum, lately published. Which I hold my self bound here ingeniously to acknow∣ledge
left otherwise you might justly condemn me as a Plagiary, and that I may invite you also to the pleasure of attentively reading that useful Book. Wherein I found great part of what I had formerly read of that subject in various Au∣thors, so well collected, digested and explained; that I chose from thence to copy an image of the Sen∣sitive Soul of Man, whereupon I was often to reflect my thoughts, while I fate to describe the most re∣markable of the Passions to which it is liable: and this I did the ra∣ther, because at that time I had by me no other Book of the same sub∣ject. You are not therefore to look up∣on the Description of the nature and affections of a Sensitive Soul there∣in delivered, as a supposition newly excogitated, and unheard of by for∣mer ages. For to Men conversant in the Theories of Physiologists con∣cerning
that Subject, it is well known, that all the Ancients were so far from holding the Soul of a Brute to be o∣ther than Corporeal, that they for the most part taught their Disciples, that the Soul of Man was so too: ex∣cept a few of them, namely Pytha∣goras, Plato, and in some favoura∣ble sense Aristotle (when he defined the Soul by that enigmatical term ) and his Sectators, Aristoxe∣nus and Dicaearchus, when they cal∣led it a Harmony. True it is indeed, they were much divided in their opi∣nions about the Substance or Matter of a Soul; some imagining it to be of Fire, as Heraclitus, Democritus, Hipparchus, and the Stoicks; some conceiving it to be on the contrary, of a Watery nature, as Hippon, and Thales; others fancying it to be com∣posed of Water and Earth, as Xeno∣phanes; others, of Earth and Fire, as Parmenides; others again, of all the four Elements, as Empedocles:
and yet notwithstanding they una∣nimously consented in these points, that this Corporeal Soul is divisible; composed of particles extremely small, subtil and active; diffused through or coextens to the whole body wherein it is contained; pro∣duced at first by generation out of the seed of the parents; perpetualy recruited or regenerated out of the purest and most spirituous part of the nourishment; subject to Con∣traction and Expansion in passions; and finally dissolved or extinguished by death. If you doubt of the truth of what I here say, I know not how more easily to convince you, than by referring you to the incom∣parable Gassendus in Lib. 10. Diogen. Laert. cap. de natura, contexturàque Animae ad mentem Epicuri: where you find the same more amply delivered. Meanwhile suffer me to recite a pertinent and memorable text of the
Lord Verulam's (of the Advance∣ment of Learning Book 4. Chap. 3.) that now comes into my head. The Sensible Soul (saith he) must needs be granted to be a Corporeal sub∣stance, attenuated by heat and made invisible. I say, a thin, gen∣tle gale of wind swell'd and blown up from some flamy and and airy nature; indued with the softness of aire to receive impressi∣on, and with the vigour of fire to embrace action; nourished partly by an oyly, partly by a watery substance; spread over the body; residing (in perfect creatures) chiefly in the head; running through the nerves; refreshed and repaired by the spirituous part of the blood of the arteries: as Bernardinus Telesius (de rerum natura lib. 5.) and his Scholar Augustinus Donius have delivered it. And as for the Bipartition of this Sensitive Soul into two principle
members as it were, or active sour∣ses; vix. the Fiery part, upon which Life depends; and the Lucid, from whence all the faculties Animal are, like so many distinct rayes of light, derived: I will not affirm it to be ve∣ry ancient: but yet methinks, I dis∣cern more than a shadow thereof in some lines of the same most acute Lord Bacon (de vita & morte, ex∣plicatione canonis quartae) which are these. Spiritus vitalis omnis sibi continua∣tur, per quosdam canales, per quos permeat, nec totaliter intercipitur. Atque hic Spiritus etiam duplex est: alter ramosus tantum, permeans per parvos ductus, & tanquam lineas; alter habet etiam cellam, ut non tan∣tum sibi continuetur, sed etiam con∣gregetur in spatio aliquo cavo, in bene magna quantitate, pro analogia corpo∣ris; atque in illa cella est fons rivu∣lorum, qui inde deducantur. Ea cel∣la praecipue est in ventriculis cerebri,
qui in animalibus magis ignobilioribus angusti sunt; adeo ut videantur spiritus per universum corpus fusi, potius quam cellulati: ut cernere est in Ser∣pentibus, Anguillis, Muscis, quo∣rum singulae portiones abscissae moven∣tur diu: etiam Aves diutius, capiti∣bus avulsis, subsultant; quoniam par∣va habeant capita, & parvas cellas. At animalia nobiliora ventriculos eos habent ampliores; & maximè omni∣um Homo. Alterum discrimen inter spiritus est, quod spiritus Vitalis non∣nullam habeat incensionem, atque sit tanquam aura composita ex flamma, & aere; quemadmodum succi animalium habeant & oleum, & aquam. At illa incensio peculiares praebet motus, & facultates. Etenim & fumus in∣flammabilis, etiam ante flammam con∣ceptam, calidus est, tenuis, mobilis: & tamen alia res est, postquam facta sit flamma: at incensio spirituum vi∣talium, multis partibus lenior est, quàm mollissima flamma ex spiritu vi∣ni,
aut alias; atque insuper mixta est magna ex parte, cum substantia aerea; ut sit & flammeae, & aereae naturae mysterium. This place of that Prince of Mo∣dern Philosophers, the Lord St. Al∣bans, conjoyned to that other of his immediately precedent, seems to me to contain a pourtraiture of the Sensitive Soul, drawn indeed as in perspective, in colours somwhat faint, and not accurately ground; yet with good judgment, and bold strokes of the pencill, such as give it no obscure resemblance of the original. And if you (Sir) please to compare it with the more ample description of the same Sensitive Soul, lately set forth by Dr. Willis: it will not be difficult to you, to observe, in how many things they agree. ¶ The THIRD and last thing whereof I am here to advertise you, is, that in the description of many of the Passions likewise, I have in∣terwoven
some threds taken from the webbs of those three excellent Men, Gassendus, Des Cartes, and our Mr. Hobbes; who have all writ∣ten most judiciously of that obstruse theme. Nor will I otherwise ex∣cuse myself for being so liberal to you, of what I owe to the bounty of those richer Wits; than by reci∣ting what your beloved Seneca said to his dear Lucilius, in defense of his adopting for his own so many wise and memorable sentences of his, and our Oracle, Epicurus: adhuc de alieno liberalis sum. Quare autem alienum dixi? quicquid benè dictum est ab ullo, meum est. Epist. 16. I will only add, as a reason of my so frank communication of these un∣polished papers to you, who are my Lucilius, what the same Latin Stoic most affectionately pofessed to his, on the like occasion: Ego vero cupio ista omnia in te transfun∣dere, & in hoc gaudeo aliquid disce∣re,
ut doceam. Nec me ulla res de∣lectabit, licet eximia sit & salutaris, quam mihi uni sciturus sim. Si cum hac exceptione detur Sapientia, ut illam inclusam teneam, nec enunciem, reji∣ciam. Epist. 6. ¶
INDEX OF THE CONTENTS. SECTION. I. INtroduction, Page 2. SECT. II. Article 1 WHat kind of Substance a Sensitive Soul may be conceived to be. pag. 5. 2. Two Reasons of that Supposition. p. 6. 3. Second Supposition that the substance of a Sensitive Soul is fiery: p. 9. 4. Because Life is seated principaly in the blood; and can no more than fire itself, subsit without aliment and ventilation, p. 9. 5. And because a Sensitive Soul seems to be first formed of the most Spirituous particles of the same seminal matter, whereof the body itself is made. p. 12. 6. A Sensitive Soul imagined to be also of the same figure with the body it animates. p. 13. 7. That the Existence of a Sensitive Soul dth, s that of flame, depend intirely upon motion. p. 14.
8. That the first Operation of a Sensitive Soul, is the Formation of the body, according to the modell preordained by nature. p. 16. 9. Recapitulation of the premises. p. 19. 10. The Faculties and Organs of a Sensitive Soul, reciprocaly inservient each to other. p. 20. 11. A twofold desire or inclination congenial to a Sensitive Soul; viz. of Self-preservation, and Propagation of her kind. p. 22. 12. To what various Mutations and irregular Com∣motions a Sensitive Soul is subject, from her own Passions; p. 24. 13. From the temperament and diseases of the body; p. 26. 14. From various impressions of external objects; and exorbitant motions of the Animal Spirits. p. 27. 15. The various Gestures of a Sensitive Soul, re∣spective to the impressions of external objects vari∣ously affecting her. p. 28. 16. An inquiry concerning the Knowledge whereby Brutes are directed in actions voluntary. p. 30. 17. The Knowledge of Brutes, either innate, or acquired. p. 39. 18. That Brutes are directed only by natural in∣stinct, in all actions conducing either to their own preservation, or to the propagation of their spe∣cies: not by Reason; p. 41. 19. Nor Material Necessity, p. 43.
SECT. III. 1. THe Excellency of a Rational Soul. Pag. 46. 2. Manifest from her proper Objects, p. 47. 3. And Acts. p. 48. 4. Life and Sense depend not on the Rational Soul of Man, and p. 51. 5. Therefore he seems to have also a Sensitive Soul. p. 53. 6. The same inferred from the civil war betwixt the Rational and Sensitive Souls. p. 54. 7. The Causes of that war. p. 55. 8. Wherein somtimes the Sensitive Appetite pre∣vails: and p. 57. 9. Somtimes the Rational. p. 59. 10. That the Rational Soul is created immedi∣ately by God. p. 60 11. The Resemblance betwixt Father and Son, ascribed to the Sensitive Soul. p. 61. 12. The Rational Soul seated in that part of the brain which serves to Imagination: and p. 61. 13. There connexed to the Sensitive, by the will of her Creator. p. 64. 14. Where the manner how she judges of the images of things formed in the Imagination. seems to be inexplicable. p. 65.
SECT. IV. Of the Passions of the Mind in ge∣neral. 1. A Twofold state of the Sensitive Soul; viz. of Tranquility, and p. 68. 2. Of Perturbation. p. 69. 3. The first, most observable in sleep, and when objects appear indifferent: p. 70. 4. The other, manifest in all Passions. ibidem. 5. That in the state of Perturbation, the Sensi∣sitive Soul varieth her Gestures, by Contracti∣on or Expansion. p. 72. 6. We are not moved to Passion by Good or Evil, but only when we conceive ourselves particular∣ly concerned therein. p. 73. 7. All Passions distinguished into Physical, Meta∣physical, and Moral. p. 74. 8. What are Passions Physical, p. 75. 9. What Metaphysical, p. 77. 10. And what Moral, p. 81. 11. All Passions referred to Pleasure or Pain: and p. 82. 12. All their Motions, to Contraction and Ef∣fusion. p. 83. 13. Wherein consist Pleasure and Displeasure of Sense. p. 83. 14. Rehearsal of the heads handled in this Secti∣on. p. 85.
SECT. V. Of the Passions in particular. 1. WHy Men have not been able to observe all Passions incident to the Sensitive Soul. p. 85. 2. The Passions best distinguished by having respect to the differences of Time. p. 86. 3. Admiration, p. 87. 4. Which causeth no Commotion in the heart and blood: and p. 89. 5. Yet is dangerous, when immoderate. p. 90. 6. Estimation and Contempt, p. 91. 7. Both Consequents of Admiration. p. 92. 8. No just cause of Self-esteem, but the right use our free will. p. 92. 9. Pride. p. 93. 10. Humility, virtuous; and p. 90. 11. Vicious, or Dejection of Spirit. p. 96. 12. Shame and Impudence. p. 97. 13. That Pride, and its contrary, Abjectness of Spirit, are not only Vices, but Passions also. p. 99. 14. Love and Hatred, p. 100. 15. Defined. p. 101. 16. Love not well distinguished into Benevolence and Concupiscence; p. 101. 17. But by the various degrees of Estimation, p. 103. 18. That there are not so many distinct sorts of Love, as of Objects to excite it. p. 104, 19. Hatred, less various than Love. p. 106.
20. Desire, alwayes a consequent of Love: but p. 106. 21. Not alwaies a Concomitant of it. p. 106. 22. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Love; and their Symptomes. p. 107. 23. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in De∣sire. p. 109. 24. The Motions of the spirits and blood in Ha∣tred. p. 111. 25. Hate, alwaies accompanyed with Sadness. p. 114. 26. Hope and Fear. p. 115. 27. Pusillanimity and Courage. p. 116, 28. Emulation, a sort of Magnanimity. p. 117. 29. Confidence and Despair. p. 117. 30. Doubting. p. 118. 31. Remorse and Acquiescence. p. 119. 32. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Hope. p. 121. 33. The Motions of the Soul and spirits in Fear: and p. 122. 34. In Desperation. p. 124. 35. Ioy. p. 126. 36. The various Degrees of Ioy, and their Names. p. 127. 37. The various Degrees of Grief, and their di∣stinct Appellations. p. 127. 38. Envy and Pity. p. 128. 39. Generous Men most inclined to Commiseration; and why. p. 129. 40. Commiseration, a species of Grief mixed with Benevolence. p. 131. 41. Envy, a sort of Grief mixed with Hate. p. 131. 42. Acquiescence of mind, a kind of Joy. p. 132. 43. Repentance, a species of Grief, but allayd with a touch of Joy. p. 133.
44. Favour. p. 134. 45. Gratitude. p. 135. 46. Indignation▪ p. 136. 47. Anger. p. 137. 48. Two sorts of Anger; one Harmless, the other Revengeful. p. 138. 49. Glory and Shame. p. 140. 50. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Joy. p. 141. 51. Laughter. p. 144. 52. The Occasions of Laughter. p. 145. 53. Laughter from Indignation. p. 146. 54. A rare Example of involuntary Laughter. p. 147. 55. Conjecture concerning the Cause thereof. p. 148. 56. The Motions and Effects of Sorrow. p. 150. 57. Sighs and Tears. p. 152. 58. Whence Tears flow: and p. 154. 59. How they are expressed. p. 155. 60. The reason of weeping for Joy. p. 157. 61. Why Infants and Old Men are more prone to shed tears. p. 158. 62. The reason of Sighing and Sobbing. ibid. 63. The Motions and Symptomes of Anger. p. 159. 64. Excess of Anger, to be avoided; and that chiefly by the help of Generosity. p. 163. 65. Of all Passions hitherto considered, only six are Simple: the rest Mixed. p. 164. 66. Reasons against publication of this Discourse. p. 165.
SECT. VI. Conclusion. 1. THat all the Good and Evil of this life, de∣pends upon our Passions, p. 168. 2. Which yet were instituted by Nature, as incite∣ments to the Soul. ibid. 3. That we are liable to Errors, not from want of an Omniscious Vnderstanding; p. 170. 4. But from our ill use of that finite Vnderstanding we have, in the conduct of our desires suggested by Passions. p. 172. 5. That all Errors to which such Desires expose us, arise from hence; that we do not sufficiently distinguish things that depend intirely upon our∣selves, from those that depend upon others. p. 173. 6. Which may be obviated by two General Remedies; viz. Generosity, and p. 175. 7. Dependence upon Providence Divine, p. 177. 8. Which utterly excluding Fortune, doth yet leave us at liberty to direct our Desires. p. 178. 9. How we may extricate ourselves from the Diffi∣culties that seem to make the decrees of Providence Divine, irreconcileable to the Liberty of our Will. p. 179. 10. Whence it is, that we are often deceived by our Will, though never with our Will. p. 180. 11. A third General Remedy against Error oc∣casioned by our inordinate Passions; viz. Preme∣ditation and Deliberation. p. 182.
82. A fourth Vniversal Preservative; viz. the stant Exercise of Virtue. p. 185. 13. Toward the acquisition whereof, the Study of Epicurus's Morals is recommended. ¶ p. 187.
Errors of this Impression to be by the Reader thus Corrected. PAg. 1. l. 5. read . pag. 15. lin. 18. read vivi∣parous. pag. 69. l. 6. read investing. pag. 76. lin. 16. read detests. pag. 180. lin. 8. read undetermined. pag. 185. lin. 2. read thoughts.
SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. Marcus Antoninus Philosophus Libr.  2. Sect. 2. O, , &c. Quicquid sum, constat id omne caruncula, ammula, & parte principante. Proinde mit∣te libros. Nec distrahere amplius: (nihil ob∣stat, quo minus hoc facias) sed tanquam qui jam statim moriturus sis, carnes istas ntemnas. Cruor est, & ossicula, & reti∣culum ex nervis, venulis arteriisque contex∣tum. Quin & Animam considera, qualis sit. spiritus est, sive aer, nec is semper idem, sed qui jugiter efflatus denuò resorbetur. Ter∣tium restat, pars illa principatum gerens. Tu ergo sic tecum: Senex es: partem tui principem servire ulterius ne siveris; sed nec motibus à communione humana alienis raptari. Nec quicquam quod fato destinatum tibi fue∣rit, vel jam ascitum aversari, vel futurum pavere.
NATURAL HISTORY Of the Passions. SECTION I. INTRODUCTION. THe Reasonable Soul of Man seems to be of a Nature so Divine and Excellent, that it is capa∣ble of Understanding all things that are in this life intelligible: but yet so reserved and abstruse withall, that it can∣not understand itself; as many most sub∣lime Wits, who had long exercised and perplex'd themselves in enquiries into the
hidden and mysterious Essence thereof, have at length ingenuously confess'd. Well therefore may we without blush∣ing, own our ignorance of this noblest part of our selves, from which we de∣rive all our Knowledge. Well may we without regret content our Curiosity with those faint glimmerings of light, which shine through the Operations of this Celestial guest in our frail and darksom Tabernacles of Flesh; and which are re∣flected upon our Understanding, only from the illustrious Effects of its proper Powers and Acts. What these Powers and Acts are, and how vastly they transcend the energie of a Sensitive Soul, how perfect soever in its kind; as also in what exercises of the Mind they are chiefly observable; hath been by Sir Kenelm Digby in his Book of the Rational Soul, copiously declared. So that here they need not to be repeated. Nor indeed would such a prolix research be consistent with my present design; which principally aim's at a recollection of some notions, that have partly in rea∣ding, partly in meditation, occurred to me, concerning the various Passions of the Mind, their Genealogy, their first sour∣ses and resorts, their most remarkable Differences, Motions, and Forces, and in
fine, by what kind of Connexion and in∣tercourse betwixt two so disparate Na∣tures, the one Incorporeal, the other Cor∣poreal, it is, that the Rational Soul is re∣spectively coaffected by them. And this with as much brevity, as the amplitude of the Subject can admit; with as much per∣spicuity, as my weak reason can attain unto, in an argument so sublime and difficult. That I may then effect this my Design, if not so happily, as in the end to arrive at the certain and demonstrative Know∣ledge of the truth I seek; yet so plausibly at least, as to form an Hypothesis by which the Nature and Reasons of the principal, and most predominant of our Passions, may be congruously and with probability explained: it is requisite I begin with these few Preliminaries. 1. What kind of thing I suppose the Sensitive Soul to be, as well in Man, as in Brutes. 2. What seem's to me most consentaneous concerning the Original, Nature, and royal Seat of the Rational Soul. 3. How, and after what manner I conceive both Souls to be connexed in Man, du∣ring this shadow of life. 4. How the Rational Soul may come to be affected by the motions of the Sensi∣tive, in some Passions; and this, by
predominion of that, in others; and whence their mutual consent, and dis∣sent. For, my present Conceptions con∣cerning these things, though I foresee, I shall not be able to establish them all upon Reasons irrefutable and cogent: are yet nevertheless to be here premised, as Postulates or Fundamentals, for intro∣duction and support of the following Theory about the Passions. These there∣fore I shall in their order, and concisely, and in a plain familiar Style, (such with which I am always best pleas'd, especi∣ally in Discourses Philosophical) set down, tanquam praecognoscenda. ¶ SECT II. What kind of Substance the Sensitive Soul may be conceived to be. AS for the FIRST Postulatum;Article 1. First Suppo∣sition, that a Sensitive Soul is Cor∣poreal. the Sensitive Soul of a Brute Animal, I conceive to be Corporeal, and consequent∣ly Divisible, Coextense to the whole Body; of a Substance either Fiery, or meerly re∣sembling Fire; of a consistence most thin
and subtile, not much unlike the flame of of pure spirit of Wine, burning in a pa∣per Lantern, or other the like close place. Art. 2. Two reasons of that sup∣position.First, I think it to be Corporeal, Divisible, and Coextense to the whole Body; and that for two reasons, among many others not the least considerable. One is this; that many, and divers Ani∣mal actions are daily observed to be, at one and the same time, performed by di∣vers Parts and Members of the Body: for instance, the Eye sees, the Ear hears, the Nostrils smell, the Tongue tasteth, and all exteriour Members exercise their Sense and Motion, all at once. For as much then as betwixt the Body and Soul of a Brute, there is no Medium (both being intimately connexed) but the Members and Parts of the Body are Instruments fram'd for the use of the Soul: what else can be imagined, but that many and di∣stinct portions of the Soul so extended, do inform and actuate the distinct Organs and Members of the Body; each in a pe∣culiar manner, respective to the peculiar Constitution, Fabrique, and Office there∣of? The Other this; it is observed also, that Vipers, Eels, Earthworms, and most o∣ther Reptils being cut into many pieces; all pieces for a good while after retain a
manifest Motion, and no obscure sense; for, being prick'd, they contract and shrink up themselves, as sensible of the Hurt, and striving to avoid it. And this proba∣bly from hence, that these less perfect Animals having their liquors, both Vi∣tal and Animal, of a consistence viscous, and not easily dissoluble or dissipable; and having their Soul, if not equally, yet universally diffused, and all its parts subsisting immediately in those liquors: cannot suffer a division of their Body, without division of their Soul also; the parts whereof residing for some time after, in the segments of the Body, may perhaps for that time continue to actuate them to Motion and Sense. It hath been more then once unhappily Experimented, that the Head of a Viper hath bitten a Mans Finger, and Poysoned him too, above an hour after it had been cut off. Not by involuntary convulsion of the Nerves and Muscles of the Vipers Jaws, such as not rarely happen to Animals, in the tor∣ments of Death; for those probably could neither last so long, nor so regularly open and shut the mouth, and extend the two fang teeth, by contraction of their erect∣ing Muscles: but certainly by an action voluntary, regular and suggested by sense, and perhaps revenge too. Whence I am
apt to suspect, that not only part of the Vipers Soul, but Anger and Revenge also survived in the divided head. For, it is well known, the bite of a Viper is never Venomous, but when he is enraged: the Chrystalline liquor contained in the two little Glandules at the roots of his fang teeth, being then by a copious afflux of Spirits from the Brain, and other brisk mo∣tions thereupon impress'd, in anger (of all passions the most violent and impetuous) so altered, and exalted, as to become high∣ly active and venenate; whereas at other times, when a Viper is not offen∣ded and provok'd, the same Liquor is found to be as harmless as the spittle of a Man in perfect health. But whether from the dangerous effects of this biting, the dire Symptoms that thereupon ensued, it be inferrible, or not, that in the ab∣scinded head of the beast there remained anything of Anger and Revenge: in my poor judgment 'tis very evident from the very act of biting, there still remained somwhat of life, sense, and voluntary mo∣tion. Which is sufficient to verify my present supposition, that a Sensitive Soul is divisible and coextense to the whole body it animates.
Secondly,Art. 3. Second Sup∣position, that the substance of a sensitive Soul is fiery. I think the same Sensitive Soul to consist of Fire, or some matter analogous to Fire: and the Reasons indu∣cing me to be of this opinion, are many. Some I have formerly alleadged, where I discourse of the Flame of life perpetual∣ly arising from accension of the Sulphu∣reous and inflammable parts of the blood, while circulated through the heart and lungs: which therefore I abstain from reciting in this place. Others, that have since occurr'd to my consideration, I am obliged here to expose to yours. That the Life,Art. 4. Because life is sated principaly in the blood; and can no more than fire subsist without per∣petual ali∣ment and ventilation or Soul of Brute Ani∣mals, is seated principally in their Blood; we are plainly taught even by the Ora∣cle of truth itself, the dictates of the Di∣vine Wisdom that created them: and that Blood, and Fire subsist by the same princi∣ples, viz. Aliment and Ventilation; is evi∣dent from hence, that a defect of either of these, doth equally destroy both the one and the other. Should you here exact from me some description of the Essence of Fire, I should adventure to tell you, that it seems to be only a multitude of most minute and sub∣tile particles, mutually touching each other, put into a most rapid motion, and by continual succession of some parts, and decession of others, renewed: which
conserves its motion, and subsistence, by preying upon, and consuming the Sulphu∣reous parts of its subject matter, or fewel, and the Nitrous parts of the ambient aer. For, even our sense bears witness, that from the particles of this twofold ali∣ment, Sulphureous and Nitrous, resolved to the last degree of smalness, and by a most violent and rapid motion agitated, the forms of Fire and Flame (which dif∣fer only in degrees of density, and velo∣city of motion) do wholy result. Nor doth the image I find drawn in my brain of the Soul of a Brute, much differ from this description of the nature of Fire. I conceive it to be no other than a cer∣tain congregation of most minute, sub∣til and agile particles, corpuscles or atoms (call them what you please) crowded to∣gether; which being, in the very first mo∣ment of life, put into brisk and most rapid motion, like that of the particles of Fire when first kindled; do so long conserve that motion, and their own subsistence, as they have a continued supply of conve∣nient nutriment; sulphureous from the blood within, Nitrous from the aer with∣out; and no longer. For we cannot but observe, that the Souls of all Brute Ani∣mals, of what kind soever, stand per∣petually in need of a fresh supply of those
two sorts of aliment; insomuch that so soon as the recruit fails, they languish and dye: no otherwise than the flame of a lamp grows weak and dim, and is ex∣tinguished, for want of oyl or air. But (what is very remarkable) besides fire and life, there is not to be found in all nature any other thing whatsoever, to whose act and subsistence such a supply of Sul∣phureous and Nitrous matter is necessary. Nor is any other motion in the World, whether it be of fermentation, ebullition, vegetation, or other whatever, besides that of Fire and Life, subject to be arrest∣ed and suppressed immediately from de∣fect of aer. It was not then without very great reason, that our Master Hippocra∣tes affirmed, , that the Soul is perpetually generated, or made a∣new: and that Aristotle held, , life it self to subsist by respiration. This you perhaps may judge to be but a faint and imperfect representation of the nature of a Sensitive Soul. And there∣fore it is requisite I endevour to render it more lively, by adding a few touches more concerning the Hypostasis or Subsist∣ence of such a Soul; the Life, or Act; and the principal Functions, or Operations of it.
Art. 5. Because it seems to be first formed of the most spiritual particles of the same se∣minal mat∣ter, of which the Body it self is made.For the First of these three considera∣bles, viz. the Subsistence of a Sensitive Soul; it seems not unreasonable to con∣ceive, that the Soul of a Brute doth con∣sist of the very same Matter, of which the organical Body is formed: but of such particles of it as are select, most subtile, and active in the highest degree. Which, as the flower of the whole matter, in the formation of the Embrion, emerging out of the grosser mass, and mutually uniting; first force passages convenient for them∣selves through the whole compage of the Body, and then constitute one continu∣ed, thin, and as it were spirituous Hy∣postasis, adequate and coextense to the same. For, so soon as any matter is dispo∣sed towards animation; by the law of the Creation (not by Epicurus's fortuitous concurse of Atoms) the Soul at the same time, which is called the Form, and the Body, which is called the Matter, begin to be formed together, under a certain species, according to the modell or Cha∣racter impressed upon them. When the more agile, and spirituous particles of the seminal matter, having freed themselves from the other parts of it, quickly assem∣ble together; and by little and little rai∣sing a commotion, stir up, and agitate the grosser particles, and by degrees dis∣pose
them into fit postures and places, where they ought to remain and cohere; and so form the body according to the fi∣gure or shape preordained by the Creator. Mean while this congregation of subtile and active Particles, or the Soul, which by expansion enlargeth it self, and insi∣nuating her particles among others more gross, and as it were interweaving them, frames the body, is it self exactly confor∣med to the figure and dimensions of the same body, coextended and adapted to it, as to a case or sheath, doth actuate, enliven, and inspire all and all parts there∣of. While on the other side, the same Soul, apt and prone of it self to be dissol∣ved, and vanish into aer, is by the Body containing it, conserved in its act and sub∣sistence. Now according to this notion,Art. 6. A Sensitive Soul imagi∣ned to be of the same Fi∣gure also with the Bo∣dy wherein it is contai∣ned. a Sensi∣tive Soul may be conceived to be a most subtle body contained in a gross one, and in all points, of the same Figure with it; or as it were a Spectre made up of exhalati∣ons, such as some vain, or superstitious heads have somtimes imagined to ascend from, and hover over the graves of the dead, and called them Ghosts. For, ari∣sing together with the body, out of the ma∣terial principles of Generation rightly dis∣posed; it doth, as well as the body, receive
its determinate subsistence, conform to the idea or Type consigned to it by the Law of Nature. But though the same be intimately united to the body, and every where closely intertexd with all parts of it; as the warp and woof are interwoven in cloth: yet so fine and subtle are the threads of which it doth consist, that it cannot possibly by our senses be discerned, nor indeed be known, otherwise than by its own Effects and Operations. Moreover, when by any violence done either to it∣self, or its Copartner, the Body, the life of this Soul is destroyed; instantly the par∣ticles of which it was composed, their mu∣tual cohesion being dissolved, disperse themselves, and fly away, not leaving any the least print or mark of their late subsist∣ence: and the Body now destitute of its conserving inmate, the Soul, speedily tends to corruption; which sooner or la∣ter, according to the less or greater com∣pactness of the parts of the body, dissolves that likewise into its first Principles, or Elements. Art. 7. That the Ex∣istence of a Sensitive Soul doth, as that of Flame, de∣pend intirely upon Moti∣on.For the Second; it is not obscure, that the Existence of this Corporeal Soul de∣pends intirely upon the Act, or Life of it: and in this very respect, seems exactly like to common Flame, and to that alone; inasmuch as the substance of both ceases to
be, in the very instant it ceaseth from Motion, wherein the very life of both doth consist; nor can either of the two be, by any means whatever, redintegra∣ted, so as to be numerically the same thing it was. From whence it seems a genuine consequence, that the Essence, or Being of a Sensitive Soul, hath its beginning whol∣ly from life, as from the accension or kind∣ling of a certain subtile and inflammable matter. To render this yet more plain; when in the Genital matter, swarms of active, and spirituous, chiefly Sulphure∣ous particles, predisposed to animation, have met with a less number of Saline par∣ticles, in a convenient focus; being as it were kindled, sometimes by another Soul (as in all Vivaparous Animals) viz. of the Generant, somtimes by their own rapid mo∣tion (as it happens in Oviparous) they con∣ceive life, or break forth into a kind of flame, which thenceforth continues to burn so long as it is constantly fed with sul∣phureous fewel from within, and nitrous from without; but instantly perisheth, when either through defect of such ali∣ment, or violence from external agents, it comes once to be extinct. This Act of the Corporeal Soul, or enkindling of the vital matter, is in more perfect Animals, such as are furnished with hot blood, so
manifestly accompanied with great heat, fuliginous exhalations, and other effects of fire, or flame; that it is difficult for even the most Sceptical person in the World to doubt, that the blood is really in a continual burning, and that life is ra∣ther Flame it self, than only like it. But in other Animals less perfect, and endow∣ed with blood less hot; though we can∣not say their Soul is properly Flame: yet we may say, it is somwhat very like it, namely a swarm of most subtile, active and as it were fiery particles, or a spiritu∣ous Halitus: which included in the body, doth move and agitate the denser mass thereof, and inspire the whole, and actuate all the members, and in some with admi∣rable agility, even beyond that of more perfect Animals; as may be observed in some Reptils and Insects. And that even in these there is a fiery vigor or force con∣stantly acting, may naturaly be inferred from hence; that while they remain not unactive and drowsy (as in winter usu∣ally they do) they can no more want the aliments of life, a perpetual supply of blood and aer, than Animals of a hotter consti∣tution; as we shall soon declare. * Art. 8. That the first operation of a SensitiveAs for the Third and last considerable, viz. the Faculties and Operations of a Corporeal or Sensitive Soul; I shall only
in the general observe,Soul, is the Formation of the Body, according to the modell preordained by Nature. that so soon as she begin's actually to exist, she first frames for herself a convenient seat where∣in to reside, the body; and then organi∣zeth the same body, making it (accor∣ding to the platform or model preordai∣ned, and intimated by secret instinct) in all parts sit and commodious for all uses necessary, as well to the propagation of the Species (for still Nature doth, though the Soul it self may not, aim at Eternity) as to the conservation of the individual. For which uses she is furnished with many and various Faculties or Powers; all which she duly exerciseth, according to the va∣rious instincts, and intimate suggestions of her Governess, Nature, in acts of se∣veral sorts; though all performed in al∣most one and the same manner, and as it were by the conduct of Fate, or eternal decree of Divinity congenial to her very Essence. To enumerate, and particular∣ly recount all the natural Faculties with which the Souls of Brutes are endowed; all the various Habits resulting from practise and long exercise of those Facul∣ties; is neither pertinent to my present institute, nor easy to be done: because of their almost infinite diversity, respective to the immense diversity of kinds of sen∣sitive creatures. For, as some Animals
are of a more, others of a less perfect order; and as they are diversly configu∣rated, according to the several places in this great Theatre of the World, in which they are consigned to live and act their several parts: so we see their Souls are, by the wise bounty of the Creator, instructed with diverse inclinations, facul∣ties, and appeties, directive to the ends to which they were predestined. In a word; since there ought to be an exact proportion and congruity betwixt every organical Body, and the Soul that in∣forms and animates it; and that for that reason, Nature seems to have diver∣sified and distinguished the various Kinds of Brute Animals, by an equal diversity of their bodily structures and configura∣tions, easily discernable by the sight: we may even from thence alone conclude, that their Corporeal Souls likewise are no less various, and endowed with Fa∣culties and Proprieties answerably diffe∣rent. Whoever then shall attempt to enrich Philosophy with a perfect Catalogue of these so different Faculties and Proprie∣ties observable among Brutal Souls; will find himself obliged, first to compose a better Natural History of all sorts of Ani∣mals, than any we yet have, and then
to deliver also a true and full account of the various Structures of their Bodies, from a Comparative Anatome of them. A work indeed most desirable and highly delightful, but equally difficult, and la∣borious; nor to be performed, I fear, by any single hand. But were it much less difficult; sure I am, you know my incapacity too well, ever to expect it from mine: and what hath been already said by me here, in the general, touching the nature of a Sensitive Soul; is enough to render my First Preliminary probable. For, from thence it may,Art. 9. A recapitu∣lation of the premises. without con∣tradiction to either reason, or observati∣ons Anatomical, be conceived (1) in what manner the Soul of a Brute may be at first produced by accension of the most spirituous particles of the Seminal humor, in the womb of the Parent, as one flame is kindled by another: (2) how the same Soul then form's the Organical Body out of the grosser parts of the same seed, after the figure or type predesign'd by the Di∣vine Protoplast at the Creation, whose wisdom directs and regulates it in that ad∣mirable work: (3) How it afterwards comes to conserve, expand and augment itself, as the dimensions of the body are by degrees enlarged, until it arrive at its perfection or standard of growth; by ac∣cension
of more and more of the inflam∣mable parts of the Nourishment dayly re∣newed, and converted into laudable blood; as the flame of a lamp is kept alive by a perpetual accension of fresh parts of oyl; (4) How the Duration of the Body depends intirely upon the sub∣sistence, or perpetual renovation or re∣generation of the Soul; and how imme∣diately upon the Souls Extinction, the body submits to corruption; no otherwise than as Wine dyes, and degenerates into a Vappa, so soon as the spirit that pre∣serv'd it in vigour and generosity, is eva∣porated, or suppress'd. Art. 10. The Facul∣ties and Or∣gans of a Sensitive Soul, reci∣procaly in∣servient each to other.Now to the end this Corporeal Soul, or invisible Flame, may the better thus animate the Body, and actuate it to sense and voluntary motion; Nature hath most wisely instituted, that her Organs, and Faculties should all of them be reciprocaly inservient or official each to other, in their acts and operations. For, as out of the grosser parts of the Nutritive juice, prepared and elaborate in the Sto∣mach and other instruments of concocti∣on, the decays of the solid parts of the Body are daily repaired: so are the de∣cays of the Soul itself likewise repaired out of the more subtile and spirituous par∣ticles of the same juice: which continu∣aly
brought afresh to the blood, as oyl to a Lamp, and kindled therein, restore both the Flame and Light of the Soul, which would otherwise quickly be con∣sumed, and perish. More expresly; while the purer part of the Nutritive li∣quor feeds and renews the Lamp of life, or flame of the blood; the most active, and most spirituous particles discharged from that flame, are carried up, and in∣sinuated into the Brain: and there recruite or regenerate the other part of the Soul, viz. the Sensitive. And so the conversi∣on of Chyle into blood, is an operation not only consequent to, but in some sort also dependent upon the conversion of meat and drink into Chyle: and on the other side, the Animal faculty grateful∣ly requites the good offices of the Vital, and both as amply recompense the servi∣ces of the faculty of Chylification; in that the Animal spirit confers the pulsific pow∣er, by which the heart and arteries drive the current of the blood in a perpetual round, for the reaccension of its inflam∣mable parts; and the Bowels ordaind for concoction of the aliment, at the same time borrow, as their enlivening heat from the flame of the blood, so their vir∣tue both motive and sensitive, from the constant afflux of Animal spirits, with∣out
out which they cannot duely do their offices. Thus you see the brain is behol∣den to the heart, both to the stomach; and reciprocally the stomach is assisted by them: and all parts conspire, by con∣tributary helps, to continue the Soul in its subsistence, as that again acts perpetu∣aly to the conversation of herself and them. Art. 11. A two fold desire or in∣clination congenial to a Sensitive Soul; viz. of self preser∣vation, and Propagation of her kind.To this, the Sensitive Soul, or  (as Aristotle not improperly calls it) is strictly obliged by a twofold inclinati∣on or desire, innate or congenial to her. One is that of self-preservation, which she endeavours constantly to effect by being sollicitous for convenient food, out of whose inflammable parts actually incen∣sed, she may every minute redintegrate her own flame. The other, that of Pro∣pagating her Species, or producing, by the same way of accension, other Sensitive Souls of the same kind; that so by an uninterrupted succession of her like, she may attain to that perpetuity, which is denied to her single or individual self. And to this end, she carefully selects out of her stock of aliment, matter fit for generation, stores it up in the Genital parts, and is possess'd with an earnest longing to transmit the same into a place most commodious for its accension into new Souls.
For, as it is by natural instinct, that every living creature is from its very irth, directed to choose food most agree∣able to its nature, and daily to feed there∣upon; aswell that the grosser web of the body may from thence, by insensible ad∣dition and assimilation of new parts, be augmented more and more, until it at∣tain to due magnitude, or perfection of stature: as that the finer intertexture of the Soul may be, by continualy repeted supplies of Spirits, rendred equal and coextense to the body, and inabled to execute all her functions vigorously and effectualy: So it is also from the same natural instinct, that when by that gradual amplification of all lineaments of both body and Soul, the living creature hath at length arrived at its full strength and growth, the Animal Spirits then be∣gin to abound, and swarm in greater multitudes than is necessary to the uses of th' individual; and the luxuriant or superfluous troops of them, together with a certain refined and generous Humor derived from the whole body, are daily transferr'd into the Genitals (natures both Laboratory, and Magazin for propagation of the Species) there to be further prepa∣red, and formed into the Idea of an Ani∣mal exactly like to the first Generant,
which afterwards is in the amorous con∣gress of male and femal, transmitted in∣to the womb, therein to receive its ac∣complishment. Having thus lightly described the prin∣cipal Faculties, and innate Dispositions of a Sensitive Soul, as also the funda∣mental laws of her Oeconomy; it re∣mains only, that we consider the various Mutations, and irregular Commotions to which she is liable. Art. 12. To what va∣rious Muta∣tions and ir∣regular Com∣motions a Sensitive Soul is sub∣ject from her own Passi∣ons▪That the Corporeal Soul, while as a Flame burning within her organical body, she on every side diffuseth heat and light, is herself subject to various Tremblings, noddings, Eclipses, inequalities, and disor∣derly Commotions, as all Flame is observed to be; this (I say) is not obscurely dis∣cernable, in the Effects of those altera∣tions, which happen chiefly in her more violent Passions: though indeed not so clearly and distinctly discernable in Brutes, as in Men; in respect they are subject to fewer passions than Man is, and want the faculty of speech to express any one of those few they feel in themselves. Wherefore that we may in some order briefly recount the most remarkable at least of these turbulent Affections inci∣dent to the Sensitive Soul; we shall shew what Alterations she may suffer (1) from
her own proper Passions; (2) from the temperament and diseases of the Body; (3) from various impressions of sensible Ob∣jects; and (4) from exorbitant motions of the Animal Spirits. Most certain it is, that the Flame of the Soul doth not always burn equaly, or at one constant rate; but now more, now less; sometimes briskly and clearly, sometimes dully and dimly. For, it is not only enlarged, or contracted, accor∣ding as the fewel brought to feed it, is more or less in quantity, and more or less sulphureous in quality: but the very accension of it in the heart, though of itself moderate and equal, is yet some∣times so varied by the fannings as it were of the Passions; that one while it bla∣zeth up to a dangerous excess, as it usu∣aly happens in great Anger and Indignati∣on; another while it is in danger of being blown out, by suddain and surprizing Ioy; or almost suffocated, by unexpect∣ed Terror, or astonishing Grief. The like may be said of the rest of the Pas∣sions, or strong Affects, by whose va∣rious motions the Flame of life, like the flame of a candle exposed to the winds, is variously agitated and changed: as will more clearly appear from our ensuing dis∣course of the Passions in particular.
Art. 13. From the temperament and diseases of the Body.Nor is it▪ from the suddain puffs, or impulses of Passions alone, that such im∣mutations and inequalities as these pro∣ceed. Sometimes it comes to pass, that the Vital Flame by slow degrees, and as it were Hecticaly diminished, becomes little, pale, faint and half-extinct; as may be observed in colder tempera∣ments, in Leucophlegmatic bodies, in Hy∣dropic persons, in Virgins troubled with the Green-sickness, and other the like chro∣nic diseases. In which the blood being more serous or watery than it ought to be, yields but little flame, and that too inconstant, and beclouded with fume and vapour; like that which ariseth from wet and green wood. On the contrary, it somtimes happens, that the blood being immoderately sulphureous, is almost whol∣ly put into a conflagration; as is frequent∣ly observed in Choleric constitutions, and feverish distempers, and great debauches with Wine. And as by these and such like disorders of the blood, the accensi∣on of the Vital Flame is with respective variety altered: so likewise do the Lu∣cid particles that arise to the brain from thence, and constitute the beamy web of Animal Spirits, become more, or less luminous, and regular, or irregular in their motions. For instance; From the
diminished or restrained accension of the blood, the sphere of the Sensitive Soul is contracted into less compass than that of the body, and reduced to such nar∣rowness, that it cannot re-expand itself so as to illustrate all the brain, and actuate the whole contexture of the nerves, with requisite brightness and vigour. And on the other side, when the flame of life is much intended or increased (provided it blaze not to the hight of a fever) then the whole system of Ani∣mal spirits thence deradiated, being pro∣portionably augmented, swells to an ex∣pansion beyond the limits of the body; insomuch that a Man transported and exuing for great Ioy, or puffed up with Pride, seems to be inflated above mea∣sure, and hardly able to contain him∣self within the modest bounds of his own dimensions. Besides these Alterations which the Sensitive or Lucid part of the Soul suffers from the various changes of the Vital;Art. 14. From vari∣ous impessi∣ons of ssi∣ble object, and exorbi∣tant motions of the Ani∣mal spirits. there are others, and those very many, which it receives immediately both from affections of the Brain, and Nerves, and from External objects making impressi∣ons thereupon: which perturb the con∣sistence, and usual order of its parts. For example; at night, the Brain itself,
from a too plentifull infusion of the Nu∣trive liquor, as from a gloomy cloud overcast, seems replete with vapours; so that in sleep, the Lucid part of the Soul is wholly obscured, and envellop∣ped as it were with darkness. Nor is it rare to have Eclipses of one, or more of the Faculties Animal, meerly from some morbisic matter, or gross humor fixed somwhere in the brain, and obstructing the ways of the Animal spirits. Som∣times these Animal spirits are not them∣selves sufficieiently pure, clear and bright; but infected and beclouded with incon∣gruous steams, saline, vitriolic, nitrous, and other the like darksom exhalations; which deform the images of things drawn in the brain, change them into false and chimerical representations, and raise ex∣orbitant motions of the spirits. Whence it somtimes comes to pass, that the whole Soul undergoes various metamorphoses, and is invested in strange apparitions, and confused with delusory whimzies: as it too frequently happens to Men in Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and madness; and likewise in drunken fits. Art. 15. The various Gestures of a Sensiive Soul, re∣spective to the impressi∣ons of exter∣nal objects variously af∣fecting her.And as for the various Gestures of the Soul, by which respectively to the va∣rious impressions of sensible objects, she expresseth one while Gladness and Plea∣sure;
another, Aversion and Offence: it is worthy our observation, that some∣times she is allured outwardly into the organ of some one of the senses, and that she occasionaly crowds herself into the Eye, Ear, Palate, or other instru∣ment of sense, there more neerly to ap∣proach and entertain the pleasing object; somtimes on the contrary, to avoid an Evil she apprehends, and decline an en∣contre with an ingratefull object, she re∣treats inwardly, and leaving her watches, shrinks up herself, as if she labourd to hide her head from the danger threatned. So that we can scarcely perceive, or ima∣gine any thing without disquiet and com∣motion: and at the apprehension of al∣most any object whatsoever, the whole Soul is moved, and put into a trembling, and the substance of it variously agitated, as a field of corn is waved to and fro by contrary gusts of winds. Nor do these agitations, especially if they be any whit violent, stop at the Sen∣sitive part of the Soul, or spirits Ani∣mal (which I imagine to make a kind of lucid Fluidum, subject to Undulations or waving motions throughout, upon either external, or internal impulses) but, as waves rowl on till they arrive at the shore, are carried on, by an Undulating
motion, even to the Vital part glowing in the blood; and impelling the flame thereof hither and thither, make it to burn unequaly. For, so soon as an ob∣ject is either by the sense, or by the Me∣mory, represented to the Imagination, under th' apparence of Good, or Evil; in the very same instant it affects, and commoves the Animal Spirits destined to maintain the Pulse of the heart: and by their influx, causing the heart to be vari∣ously contracted, or dilated; conse∣quently renders the motion, and accen∣sion of the blood variously irregular and unequal. And thus you see in what man∣ner the two parts of the Sensitive Soul, the Vital flame, and the Animal spirits reciprocally affect each other with their accidental alterations. But this you may understand more clearly and fully from the following Theory of the Passions, where we shall enquire into the reasons and motions of them more particular∣ly. Art. 16. An Enquiry concerning the Know∣ledge where∣by Brutes are directed  actions vo∣lntary.Mean while I find my self in this place arrested by a certain mighty Difficulty, which though perhaps I shall not be able to overcome, ought nevertheless to be attempted; not only for its own grand importance, but because without some plausible Explication of it at least, all our
precedent speculations concerning the na∣ture and proprieties of a Sensitive Soul, will fall to the ground; as an arch that wants a key, or middle-stone to support all the rest. It is concerning the Knowledge of Brutes, by which they are directed in actions vo∣luntary. For, supposing all we have hitherto been discoursing of the Origin, Substance, Subsistence, Parts, Faculties, Inclinations, Passions and Alterations of a Corporeal Soul, to be true and evident (which is more than I dare assume) yet doth it not from thence appear, what such a Soul can by her own proper virtue do more than a Machine artificialy fram'd and put into motion. To speak more plainly; tho it be granted; that first th' impression made by an external object upon the in∣strument of sense, doth by impelling the Animal Spirits inwards, and by dis∣posing them into a certain peculiar fi∣gure, or mode (as the Cartesians speak) cause the act of Sensation, or simple Per∣ception; and that then the same spirits re∣bounding, as it were by a reflex undula∣tion, outward from the brain into the nerves and muscles, produce local motions: granting this, I say, yet still we are to seek, How this Soul, or any one part of it,
comes to be conscious of Sensation, or how it can, by a reflex act (as the Schools phrase it) perceive that it doth perceive, and according to that percep∣tion, is impell'd to diverse acts, direct∣ed to an appetite of this, or that good, and somtimes in prosecution of the good desired, to perform actions that seem to be the results of counsel and deliberation, such as are daily observed to be done by several sorts of Beasts, as well wild as domestic. In Man indeed, it seems not difficult to conceive, that the Rational Soul, as president of all thinferiour fa∣culties, and constantly speculating the impressions, or images represented to her by the Sensitive, as by a mirrour; doth first form to herself conceptions and notions correspondent to their nature, and then proceed to acts of reason, judge∣ment and will. But as for Brutes that are irrational; in what manner the percep∣tion, distinction, appetite, memory of objects, and other acts resulting from an inferior kind of reason, are in them per∣formd: this, I confess, is more than I can yet understand. Some there are, I know, who rather then acknowledge their insufficiency to solve this Problem; have attributed to Brutes also Souls im∣material, and subsistent after separation
from their bodies. But these conside∣red not, that the Soul of a Brute, how∣ever docil and apprehensive, and using organs in their structure very little (if at all) different from those in the head of Man, can yet have no capacity of Arts and Sciences, nor raise it self up to any objects, or acts, but what are Material: and that by consequence, the same is different from, and inferiour to the Ra∣tional Soul of Man, and material. So that instead of solving the Doubt, by teaching us, how from a certain Modi∣fication of subtil matter, there may result such Power, which residing in the brain of a Brute, may there receive without confusion all impressions or images brought in by the Senses, distinctly speculate, judge and know them, and then raise appetites, and imploy the other facul∣ties in acts respective to that knowledge, and to those appetites: instead of this, I say, they have entangled themselves in an absurd Error, ascribing to a thing meerly material, a capacity of knowing objects immaterial, and performing actions proper only to immaterial Beings. We are therefore to search for this Power of a Sensitive Soul, by which she is conscious of her own perception, on∣ly in Matter in a peculiar manner so, or
so disposed or modified. But in what mat∣ter? this of the Soul, or that of the Bo∣dy? Truely, if you shall distinctly exa∣mine either the Soul or the Body of a Brute, as not conjoyned and united in∣to one Compositum; you will have a hard task of it, to find in either of them, or indeed in any other material subject whatever, any thing to which you may reasonably attribute such an Energetic and self-moving Power. But if you consider the whole Brute, as a Body animated, and by divine art of an infinite wisdom de∣signed, framed and qualified for certain ends and uses: then you may safely con∣clude, that a Brute is, by the law of the Creation, or institute of Almighty God, so comparated, as that from Soul and bo∣dy united, such a confluence of Facul∣ties should result, as are necessary to the ends and uses for which it was made. Do but convert your thoughts awhile upon Mechanic Engines, and seriously con∣template the motions, powers and effects of them. They are all composed indeed of gross, solid and ponderous Materials: and yet such is the design, contrivance and artifice of their various parts, as that from the figures and motions of them, there result certain and constant opera∣tions, answerable to the intent of the
Artist, and far transcending the forces of their divided ingredients. Before the invention of Clocks and Watches, who could expect, that of iron and brass, dull and heavy metalls, a machine should be framed; which consisting of a few wheels endented, and a spring regularly disposed, should in its motions rival the celestial orbs, and without the help or direction of any external Mover, by repeted revolutions measure the succes∣sive spaces of time even to minutes and seconds, as exactly almost as the diurnal revolutions of the Terrestrial globe itself? and yet now such Machins are common∣ly made even by some Blacksmiths, and mens admiration of their pretty artifice long since ceased. If then in vulgar Mechanics, the contrivance and advan∣tagious disposition of matter, be more noble and efficacious than matter itself: certainly in a Living Creature, in a Body animate, the Powers emergent from a conspiracy and cooperation of so many, so various organs, and all so admirably formed, ought to be acknowledged in∣comparably more noble, and more Ener∣getic. If the art of Man, weak and ig∣norant Man, can give to bodies, of them∣selves weighty, sluggish and unactive, figure, connexion and motion fit to pro∣duce
effects beyond the capacity of their single natures: what ought we to think of the divine art of the Creator, whose Power is infinite, because his wisedom is so? Could not He, think you, who by the voice of his Will call'd the World out of Chaos, and made so many my∣riads of different Beings out of one and the same universal matter; could not He, when He created Brutes, so fashion and organize the various parts and members of their Bodies ▪ thereto so adjust the fi∣ner and more active contexture of their spirituous Souls, and impress such moti∣ons upon them, as that from the union and cooperation of both, a Syndrome or conspiracy of Faculties or Powers should arise, by which they might be qualified and inabled to live, move and act re∣spectively to the proper uses and ends of their Creation? Undoubtedly He could; and tis part of my belief, that He did. Nor do I more wonder at the Knowledge of Beasts, by which they are directed in the election of objects, and in the pro∣secution or avoidance of them; than I do at their simple Perception of them by their outward senses: since I conceive the one to be as much Mechanical, as the other, though perhaps the reason of the one, is of more difficult explication than that of the other.
When you hear the Musick of a Church Organ, is it not as pleasant to your mind, as the Musick is to your ear, to consider how so many grateful notes, and consonances that compose the charm∣ing Harmony, do all arise only from wind blown into a set of pipes gradualy different in length and bore, and suc∣cessively let into them by the apertures of their valves? and do you not then observe the Effect of this so artificial in∣strument highly to excell both the Ma∣terials of it, and the hand of the Or∣ganist that plaies upon it? the like Har∣mony you have perhaps somtimes heard from a Musical Water-work, as the vul∣gar calls it; an Organ that plaied of it∣self, without the hands of a Musician to press the jacks, meerly by the force of a stream of Water opening and shuting the valves alternately, and in an order predesign'd to produce the harmonical sounds, consonances and modes requisite to the composition, to which it had been set. Now, to the first of these Organs you may compare a Man; in whom the Rati∣onal Soul seems to perform the office of the Organist, while governing and di∣recting the Animal Spirits in all their mo∣tions, she disposeth and ordereth all Fa∣culties
of the inferior, or Sensitive Soul, according to her will and pleasure: and so makes a kind of Harmony of Reason, Sense, and Motion. And to the Other, or Hydraulic Organ you may compare a Brute, whose Sensi∣tive Soul being scarcely moderatrix of of herself, and her Faculties, doth in∣deed in order to certain ends necessary to her nature, perform many trains of actions; but such as are (like the vari∣ous parts of an Harmonical Compositi∣on) regularly prescribed (as the notes of a Tune are prickd down) by the law of her creation, and determined for the most part to the same thing; viz. the Con∣servation of herself. So that she seems to produce an Harmony of Life, Sense and Motion. But this Analogy seems to be much grea∣ter in Brutes of the lowest order, such upon whose Souls or natures there are not many Types or Notes of actions to be done by them, imprinted; and which according to that common saying of the Schools, non tam agunt, quàm aguntur, act rather by necessary impulse, or con∣straint, than freely; and of their own accord: than in more perfect Animals, whose actions are ordained to more, and more considerable uses; and upon whose
Souls therefore more original lessons are as it were prick'd, down; and to which we cannot justly deny a power of both varying those innate prints, and compoun∣ding them one with another occasionaly. Which Power seems to be radicated in the Corporeal Soul, by nature so constitu∣ted, as to be knowing and active in some certain things necessary to it; and capa∣ble also of being afterward taught, by various accidents usually affecting it, both to know other things, and to do far more, and more intricate actions. All the Knowledge therefore these more perfect Brutes are observed to have,Art. 17. The Know∣ledge of Brutes, ei∣ther Innate or Acqui∣red. must be either Innate or Adventitious. The Former is commonly nam'd Natural Instinct; which being by the Omnipotent Creator, in the very act of their Formation, infu∣sed, and as an indelible Character im∣press'd upon their very principles or natures; both urges them to, and di∣rects them in certain actions necessary to the prorogation of their life, and to the propagation of their kind. The Other is by little and little acquired, by the daily perception of new objects, by imitation, by experience, by mans teaching, and by some other waies: and in some Brutes, is ad∣vanced to a higher degree than in others. Nevertheless this same acquired cogni∣tion
and Cunning also (how great soe∣ver) doth in some of them depend alto∣gether upon instinct natural, and the fre∣quent use of it. Here it would not perhaps be very dif∣ficult for me to recount, what sorts of actions done by more perfect Beasts, are referrible to their Congenite Knowledge alone; what to their acquired alone; and what to a combination of both. I could also shew how their acquir'd knowledge ariseth by degrees from im∣pressions of new objects, from examples, or imitation, from experience and other adventitious helps just now mentioned. I might moreover explain in what man∣ner the direct images of things brought into the common Sensory, produce first Imagination, and then Memory; how the same images reflex'd, instantly raise Ap∣petite, if they appear good and agreea∣ble; or Aversion, if displeasing and hurt∣full; and how thereupon in the same in∣stant Local Motions succeed, for prosecu∣tion, or avoidance of the things them∣selves. All these, I say, I might deduce from notions competent to a Corporeal Soul, and from the powers of a Body in∣formed and actuated thereby, both being comparated for such determinate actions by artifice Divine; without bringing in∣to
to the scene any immaterial natures (as some have done) to solve the difficulties concerning the science or knowledge of Brutes. But because these arguments have been already handled by many ex∣cellent Men, and curious wits, Sir Ke∣nelm Digby, Monsieur des Cartes, Mr. Hobbes, &c. and most accurately by Dr. Willis, in his late Book de Anima Brutorum, and because a further inquisition into them is not absolutely necessary to my design of explicating the reasons of the Passions: I therefore shall ad no more concerning them; but contenting myself with the hints I have given, conclude this Section with two pertinent and remarkable clau∣ses. Manifest it is,Art. 18. That Brutes are directed only by na∣tural in∣stinct, in all actions that conduce ei∣ther to their own preser∣vation, or to the propa∣gation of their speci∣es: not by Reason. that all Brute Animals of what kind soever, are by natural in∣stinct alone, as by an eternal rule, or law engraven upon their hearts, urged and di∣rected to do all things that conduce ei∣ther to their own defense and conservati∣on, or to the propagation of their species. And hence it is necessarily consequent, that in order to their observance of this congenite law, or accomplishment of these two grand Ends of their Creation, they must all, by the dictates of the same natural instinct, both know, whatever things are convenient and beneficial, what∣ever
are inconvenient, hurtful and destructive to them; and according to this know∣ledge, prosecute these with hatred and aversation, those with love and delight. When therefore we observe Brutes to di∣stinguish betwixt wholesome and veno∣mous plants, to seek for convenient food, cunningly to hunt after prey, retreat from injuries of weather, provide them∣selves denns and other secret places for rest and security, travell from one Cli∣mate to another, and change their stati∣ons at certain periods and seasons of the year, to love their benefactors, and fly from their enemies, to court their mates, build nests and other nurseries for their yong, to suckle, feed, cherish, protect and teach them, to use a thousand pret∣ty shifts and artifices to elude their per∣suers, in fine, to manage all their affairs regularly and prudently, as it were by counsel and deliberation, in order to the two principal ends preordained by the Divine Wisedom: when we (I say) ob∣serve all these their actions, we are not to refer them to a principle of Reason, or any free and self-governing Faculty (like the Rational Soul of Man) where∣with they are endowed; but only to Natural Instinct, by which they are incited and directed.
Neither are we to give credit to their opinion who hold,Art. 19. Nor Materi∣al Necessity. that all such actions arise from a kind of Material Necessity (such as Democritus fancied) and without any intention, or Scope aimed at by the Beasts themselves; merely from the con∣gruity or incongruity of images impressed upon the organ of the sense affected: as if Brute Animals were as little conscious of their own actings, as artificial En∣gines are of their motions, and the rea∣sons of them. For we cannot but ob∣serve, that Brutes, by virtue of natural instinct, perform not only simple acts ex∣cited by some one single impression made upon this or that Sensory, by an exter∣nal agent, or object; as when the scorch∣ing heat of the Sun in sommer beating upon them, makes them to retire to cool and shady places for refuge: but also ma∣ny other Compound actions, such to which a long series, or chain of subservient acts is required. For instance; in the Spring, when Birds feeling the warmth and invi∣gorating (I had almost call'd it also the prolific) influence of th' approaching Sun (that Universal Adjutant of Generation) find themselves pleasantly instigated to their duety of Propagation; then, with∣out any other impulse, or direction, but that of natural instinct, they dextrously,
and as it were with counsel and delibera∣tion, address themselves chiefly to that most delightful work. First, with a kind of chearful Solemnity they choose, and espouse their Mates, all their Femals bringing love, obsequiousness, diligence and feather-beds for their dowry. Then they seek for places convenient to reside in, and there with skill and art excee∣ding the proudest of humane Architecture, they build their Nests. Which are no sooner finished, than they lay their Eggs therein. Upon these in the next place they sit with admirable constancy and patience▪ untill they have hatch'd them. And that great work done, they in fine with ex∣emplary tenderness and care feed, cherish and protect their young, till they are able to live of themselves. Now here, you see, is a multiplicity of actions re∣gularly and with design done in order to one grand scope, or end: such as can∣not possibly proceed from simple impressi∣ons of external objects. 'Twere easy for me here to invite you to reflect on the ad∣mirable Republics of Bees and Pismires, in which all the constitutions of a most perfect Government are exemplified: yet without writen laws or promulgation of Right: but the former example is suffici∣ent. I conclude then, that since in all
these, the affairs or businesses of Brutes are managed and administred always af∣ter one and the same manner, without any variety: that is a convincing argu∣ment, that the enterprises and works of Brutes of this sort, are excited neither by external objects, whose impulse is ever various; nor by any internal purpose of mind, which is more mutable than the wind; but by a principle more certain and fix'd, and always determined to one thing; which can be nothing else but Na∣tural instinct. And how far the power and influence of this instinct may extend toward the ex∣citation of the various Passions to which the Sensitive Soul is of her own nature subject and prone; will appear more clearly from our subsequent Enquiry in∣to their proper causes and motions: to which I now hasten; having thus long detained you in hearing what seems to me most probable and consentaneous to rea∣son, concerning the substance, original, proprieties and faculties of the Sensitive Soul, common to Man with Brutes. Which was my first Preliminary.
SECT. III. Of the Nature Origin, and princi∣pal Seat of the Rational Soul in Man. Art̄. 1. The Excel∣lency of a Rational Soul.HOw neer so ever Brute Beasts may be allowed to approach to the Di∣vine faculty of Reason, or Discours: yet most certain it is, no one of them hath ever been observed to attain thereunto. For, if we with all favor and partiality imaginable, examine the Effects of either their innate, or acquired Knowledge, or of both conjoyned, and improved into Habits by long practice and experience: yet in the end we shall be forced to con∣fess, that even the most intricate, and most cunning of all their actions, come far short of those that are ordinarily done by Man, by virtue of the Reasonable Soul, wherewith he is by the immense bounty of his Creator, endowed. This is a Verity so obvious to every Man of common sense and understanding▪ so evident by its own splendor; that it needs neither Arguments drawn from rea∣son
to establish, nor Examples drawn from frequent observations to il∣lustrate it: especially now after the ma∣ny excellent discourses thereupon writ∣en by Learned Men of almost all ages, all nations, all professions. It being therefore unnecessary for me by prolix reasoning to evince, and superfluous by multiplicity of instances to elucidate the vast disparity betwixt the proper Acts and Operations of a Reasonable Soul, and those inferior ones of a Sensitive: I shall only in brief, and analytically recount to you a few of those many Excellencies and Prerogatives essential to the former, and by the law of nature incommunica∣ble to the later. The Preeminence then of Mans Reaso∣nable Soul is undeniably manifest from both her Objects, and her Acts. Her Objects are all things whatsoever,Art. 2. Manifest from her proper Ob∣jects. true or false, real or imaginary, within or without the World, sensible or insen∣sible, infinite or finite: for, to all these can she extend her unconfined power of speculation. I doubt indeed, whether it be possible for her in this life, while she is obliged to speculate all things by the help of images, or corporeal represen∣tations, to have an adequate, and full cognition of the superexcellent nature of
God: but yet it cannot be denied, that she is capable of knowing for certain, that there is such an incomprehensible Being as God, and that He is infinite and Eternal. I doubt also, whether the mind of Man be capable of any true notion of an Angell, Spirit, Daemon or other the like Beings which the Schools commonly (how intelligibly, let others dispute) call im∣material Substances; because I myself can represent to my thoughts nothing but un∣der some certain figure and quantity, which are inseparable from body: and yet who dares deny th' Existence of such Beings in the World? To speculate such objects then, as fall not under the perception of any of the senses, is the prerogative of a Rational Soul: nor can a Sensitive possi∣bly have any knowledge of things above the sphere of her own nature; all her fa∣culties being corporeal, and by conse∣quence limited to corporeal objects, and those too no other than what are percep∣tible by the senses. Art. 3. And Acts.Her Acts also equaly declare her trans∣cendent Powers. That act of simple ap∣prehension, which in Brutes is Imagina∣tion, is in Man Intellection: and the in∣tellect presides over imagination, dis∣cerning the Errors of it occasion'd by the senses, and correcting them; yea subli∣ming
the notions thereof into true and usefull ones. And as for forming of Propositions, by compounding or dividing the simple notions of sensible things; that power is indeed common to the Sensitive Soul also, and usualy exercised by her, when an image of some object newly ad∣mitted, meets with one or more images either fmerly stored up in the Memory, or at that instant suggested by natural in∣stinct; and is found associable, or repug∣nant to them: but yet the same falls in∣comparably short of that which belongs to the Human Intellect. Which doth not only review all propositions conceiv'd from the Phantasy; but judges also whe∣ther they be true or false, congruous or incongruous; and then orders and disposes them accordingly into trains of notions convenient either to Speculation, or to practice. Moreover, it restrains the Phan∣tasy, of itself instable and prone to ram∣ble through various phantasms; calls it away from extravagant and useless con∣ceptions, directs it to others more con∣form to reason, and at pleasure confines it within certain bounds, that it may not divert, or range too wide from the pur∣pose. All which Acts give clear evi∣dence, that there is in Man a Soul supe∣riour to the sensitive, and which mode∣rates
and governs all the faculties and operations of it: yea, more yet, which from representations sensible deduces ma∣ny other notions of things altogether un∣known to sense, and which the Phantasy is of itself wholly incapable to imagine. For, it understands Axioms, or first prin∣ciples, and that by its own power alone, without recourse to corporeal species: and (what is yet more noble and sublime) by a reflex act views itself, thinks that it thinks, from thence certainly know∣ing its' own Existence, which cannot be either perceived by sense, or imagined by Phantasy. Whereas neither the Sense, nor Imagination (for of these there are no images extant) can perceive that they perceive, or imagine. To these royal prerogatives of Mans Rational Soul, let us subjoyn the native right she hath to the whole Encyclopaedia or Zodiac of Arts and Sciences; Theology, Logic, Physic, Metaphysics, Mathematics, Algebra, Geometry, Astronomy, Mechanics: which being all (Theology alone excepted) the products or creatures of Mans Mind, sufficiently attest their Author to be an Agent Spiritual, admirably intelligent, immaterial, and therefore immortal. Now if this be true (as most certain∣ly it is) then one of these two Assumpti∣ons
must be so too. Either the Rational Soul of man doth alone perform all offi∣ces not only of Vnderstanding and dis∣course, but of sense also, and life; and so administer the whole oeconony of Hu∣man nature. Or else there are in every individual Man two distinct Souls conjoi∣ned, and acting together: one, only Ra∣tional; t'other merely Sensitive; that as Queen regent, this as inferior and subor∣dinate. The FIRST seems to me not a little improbable.Art. 4▪ Life and Sense depend not on the the Rational Soul of man. For, (1) all acts of the Senses, and animal Motions, as likewise the Passions, are corporeal, divided and extended, to various parts: and therefore the Rational Soul, which we conceive to be incorpo∣real, indivisible and finite, seems incapa∣ble to cause or impress those motions im∣mediately, or by herself. To me (I con∣fess) it seems Unintelligible, how an in∣corporeal Agent, not infinite, can physi∣cally act in, and upon a gross body im∣mediately, or without the intervention of a third thing; which though corporeal too, is yet notwithstanding of parts so spirituous, and of a constitution so sub∣til, as to approach somwhat neerer to the nature of a pure Spirit, than solid and ponderous body doth. Flame, and
light I acknowledge to be bodies; but yet methinks there is less of disproportion, or disparity betwixt them and a substance purely spiritual, than is betwixt a pure Spirit and a gross, heavy body, such as ours is. And therefore in my weak judg∣ment, it is more conceivable that the Rea∣sonable Soul should have some spirituous, and subtile thing as flame, or light is, viz. the Sensitive Soul, conjoyned with her, to be a convenient Medium betwixt herself and the gross body, to receive her immediate influence, and actuate the body according to her will and pleasure: than it is, that she should immediately move and actuate the body, betwixt whose nature and her own there is great disparity. (2) As for that nice and amusing doctrine of the School-men▪ that in Man the Sensitive Soul is eminently contained in, and (to use their very term) as it were absorpt by the Rational; so that what is a Soul in Brutes, becomes a mere Power or quality in Man: this I think (as many other of their superfine distinctions doe) sounds like nothing put into hard words. For, how can it be imagined possible, the eternal law of nature should be so far violated, as that a substance should be changed into an accident? that the Sen∣sitive
Soul which is Corporeal and extense, and which they themselves allow to be actually existent in the body, before the infusion of the Rational; should upon ac∣cession of the Rational, lose its former essence, and degenerate into a naked Qua∣lity? This is (I profess) a Mystery much above my comprehension. (3) If it be affirmed, that the Rational Soul doth, at her entrance into the body, introduce life also, and sense; and so there is no need of any other principle of life and sense, where she is: then must it be granted, that Man doth not generate a Man animated, or endowed with life and sense; but only an inform body, or rude mass of flesh. And how absurd that would be, I leave to your judgement. These Reasons discovering the impro∣bability of the first Assumption;Art. 5. And there∣fore he  to have also a Sensitive Soul. what can remain to hinder us from embracing the OTHER, viz. that there are in every individual Man, two distinct Souls, coexistent, and conjoin'd; one by which he is made a Reasonable creature, another by which he becomes also a living, and Sensitive one? Especially since the truth of this seems sufficiently evident even from that , or civil war too frequently hapning betwixt these twins, which every Man sometimes feels
in his own breast, and whereof the holy Apostle himself so sadly complain'd. For, this intestine War, seeing it cannot arise from one and the same thing possessed with affections mutually repugnant, and inclining us two contrary waies at once; argues a Duumvirate of Rulers reciproca∣ly clashing, and contending for superio∣rity; and such too that are as remote in their natures, as different in the modes of their subsistence. Art. 6. That there are in every individual Man two di∣stinct Souls coexistent, argued from the civil warr obser∣ved betwixt them.Upon this War depend all the Passions by which the restless Mind of Man is so variously, and many times also violent∣ly agitated, to his almost perpetual dis∣quiet and vexation: and upon the success of it depends all the happiness, or mi∣sery of not only his present life, but that which is to come. To enquire there∣fore awhile into the grounds and reasons of this fatal discord; will be neither loss of time, nor digression from our purpose. Art. 7. The Causes of that warr.That Man then is endowed, as with two distinct faculties of Knowing, viz. Vnderstanding, and Imagination; that pro∣per to his Rational, this to his Sensitive soul: so likewise with a twofold Appe∣tite, viz. Will, which proceeding from his Intellect, is immediate attendant of the Rational soul; and appetite Sensitive,
which cohering to the Imagination, is as it were the factor or procurer to the Corporeal Soul: is the common doctrine of Plato and Aristotle, to this day read and asserted in the Schools; nor ought it to be rejected. But then it must not be so understood, as if the Rational soul herself, which seems to be immaterial, and consequently exempt from passion, were upon every appulse of good or evil objects, subject to all the turbulent af∣fections of desire or aversation: for, this would be manifestly repugnant to the ex∣cellency of her spiritual nature, and in∣consistent with her dignity and superinten∣dency over the inferiour powers. Affecti∣ons she hath indeed of her own, such as are competent and proper to her semidi∣vine Essence. It is not to be doubted, but that in the contemplation of true and good, and chiefly of what is supremely both true and good, the Deity; as like∣wise in works of beneficence, in the cog∣nition of things by their causes, in the exercises of her habits aswell the contem∣plative, as the practical; and in all other her proper acts, the Reasonable Soul feels in herself a very great Complacency: as on the contrary, the want of these doth affect her with as great Displeasure. Nor is it to be doubted, but our love of God,
and all other real goods; and our de∣testation of vices and vicious Men; as al∣so all other pure and simple affects ari∣sing and continuing without perturbation or disquiet: belong only to the Reasona∣ble Soul, which (to use the elegant simi∣le of Plato) seated in a higher sphere of impassibility, like the top of mount Olym∣pus, enjoys perpetual serenity: looking down the while upon all tumults, com∣motions and disorders hapning in the in∣ferior part of man; as that doth upon the clouds, winds, thunders and other tem∣pests raised in the air below it. But as for all vehement affections, or perturbati∣ons of the Mind, by which it is usualy commoved, and inclined to this or that side, for prosecution of good, or avoi∣dance of evil: these certainly ought all to be ascribed to the Corporeal Soul; and seem to have their original in the seat of th' Imagination, probably the middle of the brain. Nevertheless, for that the Intellect, as it reviews all Phantasms for∣med by imagination, and at pleasure re∣gulates and disposes them; so it not on∣ly perceives all concupiscences, and tem∣pests of passions used to be stirr'd up in the imagination, but also (while it free∣ly exerciseth its native power and juris∣diction) moderates, governs, and gives
law to them: for these reasons, when the Rational Soul approves some, and re∣jects others; raiseth some, and compo∣ses others of those passions, and directs them to right ends; she may also be said, by such her dictates, to exercise acts of Will, as Arbiter, and to will or nill those things, which the Sensitive Appetite de∣sires or abhors by her permission or com∣mand. But yet this empire of the Rational Soul is not so absolute over the Sensitive,Art. 8. wherein somtimes the Sensitive appetite pre∣vails. when this proceeds to Appetite, as when it is imployed about the discernment and Knowledge of sensible objects. For, the Sensitive being much neerer allied to the body, and immediate Guardian thereof; is by that affinity and relation obliged to addict itself altogether to the gratificati∣on, welfare and conservation of the same. And that this province may be more grate∣full and agreeable to so delicate a Go∣verness, she is continualy courted and presented by all the Senses with variety of blandishments and tempting delights. So that charmed by those powerful en∣chantments of sensible objects, and in∣tirely taken up with care of the body, and in that respect prone to pursue pleasures: she too often proves deaf to the voice of Reason advising the contrary, and refuses
to be diverted from her sensual to no∣bler affections. Yea somtimes grown weary of subjecti∣on, she takes occasion to cast off her yoke of allegiance, and like a proud and insolent Rebell, aspires to unbounded license and dominion. And then, then it is we feel those Twins strugling within us, that intestine war betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit, that dire conflict of the Sensitive Appetite with Reason; which di∣stracts one Man into two Duellists, and which ceaseth not, till one of the Com∣batants hath overcome and brought the other to submission. And (what is yet more deplorable) the event of this com∣bat is often so unhappy, that the nobler part is subdued and led captive by the ignoble: the forces of sensual allurements then proving too strong for all the guards of Reason, though assisted by the auxilia∣ry troops of Moral precepts, and the sa∣cred institutes of Religion. When the di∣vine Politie of the Rational Soul being subverted, the whole unhappy man is furiously carried away to serve the bru∣tish lusts of the insolent usurper, and aug∣ment the triumphs of libidinous carnali∣ty: which degrades him from the digni∣ty of his nature, and cassating all his roy∣al prerogatives, debases him to a parity
with beasts, if not below them; for, Reason once debauch'd so as to become brutal, leads to all sorts of excess; where∣of beasts are seldom guilty. Yet this is not alwaies the issue of the war.Art. 9. And some∣times the Ra∣tional. Sometimes it happens that the victory falls to the right side; and the Princess overpowring the Rebell, re∣duces her to due submission and confor∣mity. Nay somtimes Reason, after she hath been long held captive, breaks off her fetters; and remembring her native Soveraignty, grows conscious and asha∣med of her former lapses: and thereup∣on with fresh courage and vigour renew∣ing the conflict, vanquishes and depo∣ses the Sensitive Soul with all its legions of lusts, and gloriously re-establishes her∣self in the throne. Yea more, at once to secure her empire for the future, and expiate the faults of her male-administra∣tion in times past; she by bitter remorse, severe contrition, and sharp penance, punishes herself, and humbles her traito∣rous enemy the Flesh. And as the war itself, so this act of Conscience, this self-chastising affection, being proper to Man alone; doth clearly shew, that in Man there are either two Souls, one Subordinate to the other; or two parts of the same Soul, one opposing the other, and contending
about the government of him and his affections. But which of these two con∣sequents is most likely to be true, you may have already collected from my dis∣course precedent. It remains then, that I give you some account of the Opinions, or rather Con∣jectures of Men (for they can be no other) which seem to me most probable, concer∣ning the Origin of the Reasonable Soul; concerning the principle seat of it in the body; concerning its connexion with the Sensitive Soul; and concerning the man∣ner of its Vnderstanding. Art 10. That the Ra∣tional Soul is created▪ immediately by God.For the First; if the Rational Soul be a pure Spirit. i. e. a simple or incompound substance; as I have already shewn her proper acts, affections and objects seem to infer, and as most wise men, ancient and modern, Ethnics and Christians, Phi∣losophers and Theologues have unani∣mously held her to be: and if it seem inconsistent with the purity and simpli∣city of such a Being, to be generated by the Parents, who are compound Beings, as reason teacheth us it is: granting this, I say, nothing can remain to divorce me from that common opinion which holds, that she is created immediately by God, and infused into the body of a human Embryon, so soon as that is organized, for∣med and prepared to receive her.
For, as to that grand Objection,Art. 11. The resem∣blance be∣twixt Father and Son, im∣puted to the Sensitive Soul. that the Son oftentimes most exactly resembles the Father, not only in temperament, shape, stature, features and all other things discernable in the body; but in disposition also, wit, affections, and the rest of the Animal faculties: and there∣fore it must needs be, that the Father begets the Rational Soul, as well as the body: it is easy to detect the weakness thereof, in the violence of the illation. Since all those endowments and faculties wherein the chief similitude doth con∣sist, proceed immediately from the Cor∣poreal Soul, which I grant to be indeed Ex traduce, or propagated by the Father; but not the Rational, which is of Divine Original. For the Second,Art. 12. The Ratio∣nal Soul sea∣ted in that part of the brain which serves to Imaginati∣on. viz. the Rational Souls chief seat or Mansion in the body, tho I cannot conceive how, or in what manner an immaterial can reside in a material, because I can have no representation or idea in my mind of any such thing: yet nevertheless when I consider that all im∣pressions of sensible objects, whereof we are any ways conscious, are carried immediately to the Imagination; and that there likewise all Appetites, or sponta∣neous conceptions and intentions of acti∣ons are excited: I am very apt to judge
the Imagination to be the Esurial, or imperial palace of the Rational Soul, where she may most conveniently both receive all intelligences, from her Emissaries the senses, and give forth orders for govern∣ment of the whole state of Man. That the whole Corporeal soul should be pos∣sessed by the Rational, seems neither competent to her Spiritual nature, which is above Extensibility; nor necessary to her Empire over all: no more than it is ne∣cessary for a King to be present in all parts of his dominions at the same time. And if she be as it were inthroned in any one part thereof; what part so con∣venient, so advantagious as the Phan∣tasy, where she may immediately be in∣formed of all occurrents in the whole body, and whence she may issue forth mandates for all she would have done by the whole or any member thereof? I think therefore, I may affirm it to be probable, that this Queen of the Isle of Man hath her Court, and Tribunal in the noblest part of the Sensitive Soul, the Imagination, made up of a select assem∣bly of the most subtil Spirits Animal, and placed in the middle of the Brain. As for the Conarion, or Glandula pinea∣lis seated neer the center of the brain, wherein Monsieur Des Cartes took such
pains to lodge this Celestial ghest; all our most curious Anatomists will demonstrate that Glandule to be ordained for another, and that a far less noble use, which here I need not mention. For the Third, to wit,Art. 13. And there connexed to the Sensitive by the will of her Crea∣tor. what obligeth the Rational Soul to continue resident in the Imagination during this life; truely I can∣not think either that she is capable of, or that she needs any other ligament or tye, than the infringible law of nature, or Will of her Divine Creator: who makes and destines her to reside in the body of man, to be his Forma informans; and gives her therefore a strong inclination to inhabit that her inne or lodging: ordaining her to have a certain dependence, as to her opera∣tion, upon the Phantasy, so that without the help and subserviency thereof, she can know or understand little, or nothing at all. For, it is from the Imagination alone that she takes all the representations of things, and the fundamental ideas, upon which she afterward builds up all her Science, all her wisdom. And therefore though the Mind of one man understands more, and reasoneth better than another; it doth not thence follow, that their Rational Souls are unequal in their natural capacity of under∣standing and discourse: because the dis∣parity proceeds immediately from diffe∣rence
of Imagination, mediately and prin∣cipally from the various dispositions of the Brain. For, when the Animal Spirits, being either of themselves less pure, sub∣til and active than is requisite, or hinderd in their expansion and motions, are not able duely to irradiate and actuate the Brain affected with some distemper, or originally formed amiss: in such case, the Phatasms created in the Imagination, must be either deficient, or distorted; and the Intellect being obliged to judge of them accordingly, must be misinformed. Hence it often happens, that by reason of some wound, contusion, or other great hurt done to the brain, men who formerly were of acute wit, and excellent under∣standing, are more or less deprived of those noble Faculties, and degenerate into mere fools or idiots. For, the acquiring, and loseing the habit of intellection and ratiocination, depends totally upon the Brain and Imagination, the corporeal sub∣ject thereof: but the Intellect it self, since it hath no parts, cannot be perfected by parts; being from the beginning, and of its own nature, a full and perfect power of Understanding. Nor doth it, by ac∣cession of any whatever Habit, understand more: but is it self rather a Habit alwayes comparated to understand. And in truth
the principal Function of the human Intel∣lect seems to be this, that it be of its own nature merely intelligent, that is knowing things, not by ratiocination, but by simple intuition. But during its confinement within the body, it is surrounded with that darkness, that it doth not simply, naked∣ly, and as it were by way of intuition per∣ceive all things which it understands; but attains to most of its knowledge by reason∣ing, that is, successively, and by proceed∣ing as it were by degrees. If therefore the Organ or instrument, by the help of which the Intellect is obliged to ratioci∣nate, or gradualy to attain to the know∣ledge of things, be unfit, or out of tune: no wonder if it be not able to make good Musick thereupon. Concerning the Fourth and last thing therefore,Art. 14. Where how she exerci∣seth her fa∣culty of judging of the images of things formed in the Imagi∣nation, seems to be inex∣plicable. namely the Manner how this Unintelligible Intellect of man comes to know, speculate and judge of all Phantasms or images pourtraid in the Imagination: I can much more easily guess what it is not, than what it is. I am not inclined to espouse their conceit, who tell us, that the Rational Soul sitting in the brain, some∣where near the original of the nerves be∣longing to the Senses (as a Spider sits watching in the centre of her net) and feeling all strokes made upon them by the
Species of sensible objects, distinguishes and judges of their several qualities and pro∣prieties, by the different modes of their impressions. Because, the supposition of a percussion, or stroke to be made by a Cor∣poreal image, is manifestly repugnant to a Faculty incorporeal. But whether or no I ought to acquiesce in that other opinion delivered, and maintained by a whole army of Contemplative men, viz. That the Intellect knowes and discerns things by simple Intuition, i.e. by beholding their Images represented in the Phantasy, as we see our faces represented in a mirror or looking-glass: truely I am yet to learn from wiser heads than mine. For, though I admire the subtilty of the conceipt, and love not to be immodestly Sceptical, espe∣cially in matters that transcend my narrow comprehension: yet, to speak ingenu∣ously, I as little understand how Intuition can be ascribed to an immaterial, that hath no Eyes; as I do how Feeling of strokes can be ascribed to a thing that can∣not be touched. Nevertheless I will not point blanck deny this latter opinion to be true, only because I cannot perceive the Competency of such an act as intuition to the incorporeal Soul of man: for, that were to make my scanty reason the measure of truth; and to confide more in my own
dulness, than in the admired perspicacity of so many eminent Wits preceding me. Wherefore having confess'd my igno∣rance, I refer the matter to your arbitra∣tion: allowing you as much time as you shall think fit, seriously to consider the same; and in the interim contentedly sus∣pending my curiosity, which hath too of∣ten perplexed me. For, hitherto could I never drive it into my head, how those terms of infusion, connexion and intuition can be intelligibly applyed to a spiritual, or incompound essence, such as we con∣ceive the Reasonable Soul to be: and if I have used them in this discourse, it was rather because I could think of none less improper, than because I approved them as adequate to the notions to which they are vulgarly accommodated. Besides, I hold it extremly difficult, not to speak some non-sense, when we adventure to treat of the nature of spirits, whereof we under∣stand so little: and you (I presume) will rather pitty, than condemn a man for stum∣bling in the dark. But I have too long de∣tain'd you upon Preliminaries: and there∣fore deprecating your impatience, invite you now from the porch into the little Theatre of the Passions, which I design'd to erect more for your divertisement, than study.
SECT. IV. Of the Passions of the Mind in ge∣neral. TAking it for granted then, from the reasons precedent, that in Man, be∣sides the Rational Soul, by which he be∣comes a Reasonable creature, there is also a Sensitive one, by which he is made a li∣ving and sensitive creature; and that this later being merely Corporeal, and coextens to the body it animates, is by the law of its nature subject to various Mutations: I come in the next place to consider what are the most remarkable of those Mutati∣ons, and the Causes whence they usually arise; as likewise the principal effects of them upon the body and mind of man. Art. 1▪ A two-fold state of the Sensitive Soul. viz. of tranquil∣lity.Obvious it is to every mans notice, that there is a twofold state or condition of his Sensitive Soul; one of quiet and tranquilli∣ty; another of disquiet and perturbation: every man living finding his spirit some∣times calm and serene, sometimes agitated and ruffled more or less by the winds
and tempests of passions raised within him. In the state of Tranquillity, it seems pro∣bable that the whole Corporeal Soul being coextens to the whole body inshrining it (as the body is to the skin envesting it) doth at the same time both inliven all parts with the vital flame of the blood, to that end carried in a perpetual round (as the vulgar conceive the Sun to be unces∣santly moved round about the Earth, to illuminate and warm all parts of it) and irradiate and invigorate them with a con∣tinual supply of Animal spirits, for the of∣fices of Sense and Motion. And this Halcyon state certainly is the only fair wea∣ther we enjoy within the region of our breast, and the best part of human life. On the contrary,Art. 2. And Pertur∣bation. in the state of Pertur∣bation, all that excellent Oeconomy is more or less discomposed. Then it seems that the same frail soul is so strongly shock'd and commoved, that not only her vital part, the blood, the calm and equal circu∣lation being interrupted, is forced to un∣dergo irregular floods and ebbs, and other violent fluctuations; but the Ani∣mal spirits also, impelled to and fro in a tumultuous manner, cause great disorders in the functions of sense and motion; yea
more, by their exorbitant manner of in∣flux into the nerves of the Heart and Lungs, they move them irregularly, and so contribute to render the course of the blood yet more unequal. Nor doth the tempest stop here; it extends sometimes also to other Humors of the body, to the solid parts and members of it, and even to the discomposure of the Reasonable Soul her self. The Tranquillity of the Sensitive Soul is easily observable in sleep,Art. 3. The first, most obser∣vable in sleep, and when objects appear in∣different. when the spirits are bound up, or at least at rest; and ve∣ry often also when we are awake, namely whensoever the objects affecting the sense, or created in the imagination, appear to import neither good, nor evil to us, and we are no further concerned than barely to apprehend and know them. For, then they smoothly and calmly slide into the common sensory and imagination, and soon pass away without any the least disquiet or commotion of the appetite. Art. 4. The other, manifest in all Passion.The Perturbation of it is as easily mani∣fest in all the passions, which are the conse∣quents of desire, or of aversation. For, when any object is represented under the apparence of good or evil to us in par∣ticular; instantly the Sensitive Soul is mo∣ved to imbrace, or avoid it; and imployes not only the Animal Spirits, her Emissa∣ries,
but the blood also, and other hu∣mors universally diffused through the bo∣dy, and even the solid parts too, as in∣struments to effect her design. More plainly; when the Imagination conceives any thing to be embraced as good, or avoided as evil; presently by the spirits residing in the brain, and ranged as it were into order, the Appetite is formed: and then the impression being transmitted to the Heart, according as that is contracted or dilated, the blood is impelled and for∣ced to various fluctuations, and irregular motions: and thence the Appetite being by instinct transmitted to the nerves or∣dained for that use, they cause motions of the solid parts respective thereunto. And this we may conjecture to be the order of motions excited successively in the phanta∣sy, spirits, blood and solid parts, in every Passion of the mind of what sort soever. Nor can it indeed sink into my dull head, by what other means of mutual inter∣course, besides such a quick transmission of spirits first from the brain into the Praecor∣dia, and thence back again to the brain, by nerves to that end extended betwixt those sources of life and sense, the great and speedy commerce in all passions ob∣served to be maintained between them, can be effected.
Art. 5. That in the state of Per∣turbation, the Sensi∣tive Soul vath her Gestures, by Contraction or Expansi∣on.But however this admirable Commerce may be otherwise explained, it is lawful for us us to conceive, that the Sensitive Soul, when put into this state of perturbati∣on, doth strangely vary her Postures, accor∣ding to the diversity of motions caused in her: and though that diversity be very great, yet that in all perturbations whatever, she is more or less amplified, so as to swell be∣yond her ordinary bounds; or more or less contracted within her self, so as to be less ex∣tense or diffused, than usually she is at other times, in her state of tranquillity: as will be exemplified in all the passions we design particularly to describe. Mean while it is observable, that sometimes she being af∣fected with joy, or pride, and as it were ex∣ulting above measure, doth advance and expand her self, as if she strove to be great∣er, and to stretch her grandure beyond the narrow limits of the body. Where∣upon the Animal Spirits being respectively commoved in the brain, enlarge the sphere of their irradiation, and by a more abun∣dant influx vigorously agitate the Praecor∣dia or vital parts, so forcing the blood to flow more copiously into all parts, and to diffuse it self more freely and speedily through the whole body. On the contrary, sometimes being surprised with grief, or fear, she contracts her self into a narrower
compass; so that shrunk up to a scant∣ling less than her usual circuit of emana∣tion, she becomes of too small a size vi∣gorously to actuate the body as she ought. Whence the Animal faculties drooping as it were, perform their actions either slow∣ly and weakly, or perversly: and the Prae∣cordia wanting their due influx of spirits, almost flagg, suffering the blood to remain in their conduits longer than it ought, even to danger of stagnation, and conse∣quently of sudden death. These two contrary Motions therefore of Contraction and Expansion, I suppose to be the two Ge∣neral ones, to which all the various Postures of the Sensitive Soul, when she is pertur∣bed, may be commodiously referr'd: it seeming to me, considering her to be ex∣actly like a Flame, and obnoxious to the like accidental mutations, that she is not naturally capable of other besides these; and that how great soever the variety of such her Mutations may be in the vast di∣versity of Passions, yet they are all but se∣veral degrees,Art. 6. We are not moved to Passion, by Good or Evil, but only when we conceive the same to concern our selves in particular. and divers modes of either her Extension, or Contraction. This being then supposed, I proceed to the first and General Causes of all Passions. Where I observe first, (what was only hinted a little afore) that it is not the sim∣ple representation of good or evil in any
object, how great soever it be, that is suffi∣cient to raise Commotion in the sensitive Soul; for, we usualy without perturba∣tion behold the prosperous or adverse events befalling other Men no waies rela∣ted to us: and therefore it is further re∣quired to the moving our affections, that the good or evil apprehended, be by us conceived to concern ourselves in parti∣cular, or our Friends at least, and near relations, who in this case are part of our selves. Secondly, that even that good or evil wherein a Man conceives him∣self to be concern'd, is not always ap∣prehended by him under one and the same ration or aspect; but variously, aswell in respect of the object itself, as of the Sub∣ject to which it doth more peculiarly and immediately appertain. Of the divers rations under which one and the same object, good or evil, may be apprehen∣ded by one and the same Man, respective∣ly to the various circumstances thereof; we shall more opportunely speak anon. And as for those that respect the Subject, or Man apprehending; it is worthy our serious remark; Art. 7. All Passions distinguished into Physi∣cal, Meta∣physical, and Moral.That all Good or Evil represented to Man, doth concern the Sensitive Soul, ei∣ther as she is distinct from the body, and abstract from all relation; or as she is in∣timately
conjoyn'd to the body, and in∣terressed therein; or finally as she is sub∣ordinate to the Rational Soul. For, though every Affect or Passion be founded in the Corporeal Soul, yet it always re∣spects the good or evil of one or other of these three subjects, and is first raised on the behalf of this, that, or the other. Wherefore according to this triple relati∣on of the Sensitive Soul, all Passions in∣cident thereto; may be said to be either Physical, or Metaphysical, or Moral: of which in their order. 1. Passions meerly Physical,Art. 8. What are passions Physical. or which properly belong to the Sensitive Soul alone, are those natural and occult inclinations and aversations commonly call'd Sympa∣thies and Antipathies, whereby one Man, more than another, is not only dispo∣sed, but even by secret impuls forced to affect, or dislike such or such a per∣son, or thing, without any manifest cause or inducement so to do. Of Sympathies betwixt Persons there is great variety of Examples, especialy in Lovers; among whom many are not allured by that grand bait of the Sensitive Soul, Beauty; but strongly attracted, and as it were fasci∣nated by they know not what hidden Congruity or (as the French call it) agreeableness of Spirits: which enchains
them so firmly to the persons beloved, that notwithstanding the deformities they see and acknowledge to be in them, yea and the contempt they somtimes re∣ceive from them, they still doat upon, and with delightful submissions court and adore them. And as for Antipathies as well toward Persons as things; instances of them also are without number, and many shew them∣selves at our very table. Where one Man abhors a brest of Mutton, yet loves the Shoulder cut from it; a second swoons at the sight of Eels, and yet will feast up∣on Lampreys or Congers; a third abomi∣nates Chees, but is pleased with Milk; a fourth devests rosted Pigg, yet can make a meal upon bacon. This Man sweats at presence of a Cat; that falls in∣to an agony by casting his eye upon a Frogg or Toad; an other can never be reconciled to Oysters. Nay more, there are who feel themselves ready to faint, if a Cat be hidden in some secret place of the room wherein they are, though they suspect no such encountre of their natural enemy, till they are wounded with the invisible darts or emanations from her body. And all these admirable Effects proceed not from any positive Evil or malignity in the things abhorred; for, what's one Mans meat, is an others
poyson: but only from their incongruity, or occult Enmity to this, or that particu∣lar Sensitive Soul. For if at any time it happens, that the consistence of Animal Spirits that constitute the lucid or Sensi∣tive part of this Soul, be by the encoun∣tre of any object, put into great disorder: she ever after abhors the approach, or effluvia of the same. Whereas the Con∣gruity of particles proceeding from an object, to the contexture of the Soul, is on the contrary the ground of all her se∣cret Amities. 2. Passions Metaphysical,Art. 9. What Meta∣physical. or which seem to have their first rise from, and principaly to relate to the Rational Soul, are those which Divines call devout and religious Affections directed to objects Su∣pernatural, and chiefly to God. For, when our nobler Soul reflecting upon the excellency and immortality of her nature, aspires by sublime speculations toward her supreme felicity, the con∣templation and love of her Creator; and determines her Will to persue that in∣comprehensible, because infinite subject of all perfections, which alone can satisfy her understanding with light or know∣ledge, and her will with love: she doth not only exercise herself in simple and ab∣stracted conceptions, such as are proper
to her immaterial essence alone, and conformable to the dignity of the thing she speculates; but communicates her af∣fects also to the Sensitive Soul, by whose subordinate motions she is obliged to act respectively to her end. And these mo∣tions or acts being thus traduced from the superiour to the inferior Soul, and thence derived first to the brain and imaginati∣on, then to the heart; produce therein, and so in the blood, the various motions that constitute such Passions, as we ob∣serve in our selves, when we are most ardently urged to acts of devotion and piety toward the supream Being. Whence it is doubtless, that Divine love, de∣testation of sin, repentance, hope of Salva∣tion, fear of incensing Divine justice, and most, if not all other acts (or passions) of devotion are commonly ascribed to the heart: and that not without some reason. For, though I cannot admit the heart to be the Seat of the Passions, as the Aristoteleans unanimously hold it to be, only because of the sensible alte∣rations therein produced in most passions: since in truth those alterations are rather consequents, than causes of Passions; and since they are not felt by us as in the heart, but only by means of the nerves descending thither from the brain; as pain
is not felt as in the foot, but by inter∣vention of nerves betwixt the foot and the brain; and as the starrs appear to us as in heaven, by mediation of their light affecting our Optick nerves. So that it is no more necessary the Soul should ex∣ercise her functions, or receive her passi∣ons immediately in the heart, only be∣cause she feels her passions therein; than it is she should be in heaven, because she sees the starrs to be there; or in the foot, because pain appears to her to be there. Notwithstanding this I say, yet the ad∣scription of these devout Passions to the heart, is not altogether destitute of rea∣son. For, (for instance) when the infe∣riour Soul is commanded by the Supe∣rior, to humble, and as it were to pro∣strate▪ herself in adoration of the sacred Majesty of God; instantly both parts thereof, as well the Sensitive, as the Vi∣tal, are forced to repress and restrain their wonted emanations or effusions. Whereupon the Animal Spirits being in whole legions withdrawn from mini∣s tring to the Imagination and Senses, are by the nerves transmitted in crowds to the heart: which while they closely contract and shut, they cause the blood to remain longer than is usual, in the cavities thereof, and by that means keep
it both from being too much kindled in the Lungs, and from being sent from the heart in too great abundance into the rest of the body, and more especia∣ly into the brain; as if Nature itself had instituted, that in sacred passions the blood, or principal seat of life, should be offe∣red up to the Author of life, upon the altar of the heart, while the brain, or seat of reason, is kept serene and clear. Nor is it difficult to a man praying to Al∣mighty God with fervency of Spirit, to observe in himself, that his blood is more and more arrested and detained within his breast the while; insomuch that his heart seems to swell, his lungs to be opprest, and he is forced frequent∣ly to interrupt his oraisons with pro∣found sighs, for attraction of fresh aer: as if the reasonable Soul not content to devote herself alone, and pour forth her holy desires to God, laboured to make a libation also of the vital blood, for a propitiatory oblation. So that though the Soul cannot in strictness of truth be said to receive her passions in the heart; yet since the alterations cau∣sed in us by them, are greater and more sensible in the heart, and consequently in the blood, than in any other part of the whole body beside: I am not so ad∣dicted
to vitilitigation, as to contend about the propriety of those expressi∣ons in scripture, which seem to ascribe all our sacred passions principaly to the heart. 3. And as for Passions Moral; I refer to their classis all those that are excited in the Sensitive Soul,Art. 10. And what Moral. upon her percep∣tion of such good or evil objects as con∣cern her confederate the Body, with which she is most intimately conjoynd, and upon whose welfare her safety doth necessarily depend. Concerning these in general, it is remarkable; that though the Sensitive Soul hath secret loves and aversations of her own, commonly cal∣led (as we have already said) Sympa∣thies and Antipathies; and though she owes obedience to the commands and dictates of her superior, the Rational Soul: yet being by so strict a ligue, and as it were a conjugal union affianced to the body, she is strongly inclined to prefer the conservation of that her favo∣rite, to all other relations; and accor∣dingly to gratify and indulge it even in those things that are prohibited by reli∣gion and reason. So that no wonder if she be affected with pleasure, or pain, and with all other passions referible to them, for the prosperous or adverse state of the body.
To make this our entrance into the spring-head of all Passions somwhat more lightsome; we are here to recount two fundamental verities, both of so conspi∣cuous evidence, I do not remember, I ever heard them contradicted. Art. 11. All Passions referred to Pleasure or Pain.One is, that all Affects which external objects can possibly excite in us, in re∣spect of the various modes or manners by which they fall under our notice, may be commodiously referred to two general heads, namely Pleasure, and Pain. For, whatever is perceived by the Sen∣ses, appears to the Soul to be Good, or Evil, gratefull, or offensive; and what∣ever is offered to her under the appa∣rence of Good, or Gratefull, instantly causeth some certain Pleasure in her: as on the contrary, whatever is represen∣ted to her as Evil, or offensive, as quick∣ly raiseth in her some kind of Pain, or trouble: provided (as was before ad∣vertised) she apprehend herself to be any way concerned in such good, or evil. So that we cannot but applaud the judg∣ment of Epicurus and Aristotle in consti∣tuting but two kinds of Passions, name∣ly Pleasure and Pain: the one calling them , voluptatem & dolorem; the other naming them , voluptatem & molestiam.
The other is,Art. 12. And all their Motions, to Contraction and Eff that all the various mo∣tions of the spirits and blood, or of the Sensitive Soul, excited in the various Passions, may likewise be conveniently reduced to two general heads, namely Contractions, and Effusions; which our Ma∣ster Galen, I remember, terms : as they are referred to Pain and Pleasure. Because in Pleasure, the Soul dilateth herself as much as she can, that is, she diffuseth the spirits, as her Emissaries, to meet and receive the good represented to her: and in Pain, she on the contrary compresseth or withdraws her∣self inward, that is, she recalls the spi∣rits toward herself, in avoidance of the Evil apprehended. Manifest it is therefore, that all Cor∣poreal Passions have their roots groun∣ded in Sense, whereof pleasure and pain re two opposite affects: one, , agreeable and familiar to nature; he other, , alien and offensive. And that I may, as far as I am able,Art. 13. Wherein consist Plea∣sure and dis∣pleasure of sense. xplain wherein pleasure and displeasure of nce doth consist; I take liberty to sup∣ose, that at first when an object affects he Sensory with soft and smooth tou∣hes, or motions, such as are consenta∣eous to the delicate contexture of the erves of which the sensory is chiefly com∣posed,
or to the internal motions of the spirits therein residing; it instantly cau∣seth that gratefull sense called delight: as on the contrary, if the object invade the sensory with asperity, or violence, such as hurts the tender nerves thereof, or hinders the natural motions of the spi∣rits therein; then it produceth that in∣grateful sense call'd displeasure or pain. The impression being thus made by the object upon the Organ of sense, and thence by a certain motion of the spirits resem∣bling the waving of water, carried on to the brain; if it be pleasant, it immedi∣ately puts the spirits therein reserved, into brisker, but regular motions confor∣mable to their nature and uses: if dis∣pleasing, it puts them into confusion. If the impression be light, the motion thereby caused in the brain, soon de∣cayeth, and vanisheth of itself: if strong, the motion is continued from the brain down to the breast, and the heart and blood participate thereof respectively; and so passion instantly succeeds. But whether this be the true manner of ob∣jects producing pleasure, or displeasure of sense, or not, most evident it is, that we have, as no conceptions of things without us in the brain, so no passions for them in the heart, but what have their firs original from Sense.
Now having in this manner shewn as plainly as I could (1) what Mutations are incident to the Sensitive Soul (2) what are the most considerable Causes of those Mutations (3) what the most remarkable Effects and consequents of them upon the body and mind of Man (4) the Differences of Passions respective to the various relations of the Sensitive Soul to the Rational,Art. 14. A rehearsal of the heads handled in this Section. and to the body (5) that all passions are referible to pleasure, or pain (6) that all Motions of the Spirits and blood caused in passions, belong to Contraction, or Ef∣fusion: and (7) wherein consist pleasure and displeasure of Sense: our next work must be to speak SECT. V. Of the Passions in particular. NOt of all that are incident to the mind of Man,Art. 11. Why Men have not been able to observe all Passions inci∣dent to the Sensitive Soul. which were extreme∣ly difficult, if not altogether impossible for me to do. For, seeing the objects that raise pleasure and displeasure are in∣numerable; and the various waies or manners by which they affect the sense,
and excite motions in the brain, spirits and heart, are equaly innumerable: even those Philosophers themselves who have with all possible attention of mind la∣boured to search out the several sorts of Passions, have not been able to take no∣tice but of very few, nor to give names to all those neither. Besides, conside∣ring of how subtil particles, how fluid and easily moveable a substance, and how delicate a contexture the Sensitive Soul seems to be composed; we may soon conceive her to be subject to grea∣ter variety of impressions, commotions, fluctuations, inclinations, alterations and perturbations, than can possibly be ob∣served and distinguished even by the most curious. It may well suffice then to enu∣merate and describe the most remarkable of her Passions, such as like so many lesser streams, flow from the two general fountains before mentioned, Pleasure and Displeasure of sense, or motions begun in the sensory, traduced to the brain, and continued to the heart; and that are of a more simple nature. Art. 2. The Passions best distin∣guished by having re∣spect to the circumstan∣ces of Time.Which that we may perform with more of order, and less of obscurity; we are to consider, that the Passions receiving their most notable diversity from certain
circumstances of Time, may therefore be most intelligibly distinguished by having respect to the same Circumstances. For, since there are of Conceptions three sorts, whereof one is of that which is present, which is sense; another, of that which is past, which is Remembrance; and the third, of that which is to come, which is called Expectation: it is manifestly neces∣sary, that the condition of the pleasure, or displeasure consequent to conceptions, be diversified, according as the Good or Evil thereby proposed to the Soul, is pre∣sent, or absent. For, we are pleased, or displeased even at things past; because the Memory reviving and reviewing their images, sets them before the Soul as pre∣sent, and she is affected with them no less than if the things themselves were present. So also of things future; for∣asmuch as the Soul by a certain provi∣dence preoccupying the images of things that she conceives to come, looks upon them as realy present, and is according∣ly pleased or displeased by Anticipation: every conception being pleasure, or dis∣pleasure present. This being presupposed we proceed to the Genealogy of the pas∣sions. When the image of any new and strange object is presented to the Soul,Art. 3. Admiration. and gives
her hope of knowing somwhat that she knew not before; instantly she admireth it, as different from all things she hath already known; and in the same instant entertains an appetite to know it better, which is called Curiosity or desire of Know∣ledge. And because this Admiration may, and most commonly is excited in the Soul before she understands, or considers whether the object be in itself convenient to her or not: therefore it seems to be the first of all passions, next after Plea∣sure and Pain; and to have no Contra∣ry: because when an object perceived by the sense, hath nothing in it of new and strange; we are not at all moved there∣by, but consider it indifferently, and without any commotion of the Soul. Common it is doubtless to Man with Beasts; but with this difference, that in Man it is always conjoyned with Curiosi∣ty; in Beasts, not. For when a Beast seeth any thing new and strange, he con∣sidereth it so far only as to discern whe∣ther it be likely to serve his turn, or to hurt him; and acordingly approacheth neerer to it, or fleeth from it: whereas Man, who in most events remembreth in what manner they were caused and be∣gun, looks for the cause and beginning of every thing that ariseth new to him
Whence it is manifest, that all natural Philosophy, and Astronomy owe themselves to this passion: and that ignorance is not more justly reputed the mother of Admi∣ration, than Admiration may be accoun∣ted the mother of knowledge; the de∣grees whereof among Men, proceed from the degrees of Curiosity. Now this Passion is reducible to delight, because Curiosity is delight: and so by consequence is Novelty too, but especialy that novel∣ty from which a Man conceiveth an opi∣nion of bettering his own estate, whether that opinion be true or false: for in such case, he stands affected with the hope that all Gamesters have while the Cards are shuffling; as Mr Hobbs hath judiciously observed. Nevertheless it seems rather a calm than a tempest of the mind. For,Art. 4. Which cau∣seth no com∣motion in the heart and blood. in Admi∣ration, whereby the Soul is fixt upon the contemplation of an object that appears to her new and strange, and therefore well worthy her highest consideration; the Animal spirits are indeed suddainly determined, and with great force, partly to that part of the brain, where the image is newly formed, and partly to the Muscles that serve to hold the organs of the external senses in the same posture in which they then are, that so the ob∣ject
may be more clearly and distinctly perceived: yet in the heart and blood there happens little or no commotion or alteration at all. Whereof the reason seems to be this; that since the Soul at that time, hath for her object, not good or evil, but only the Knowledge of the thing which she admires; she converts all her power upon the brain alone, wherein all sense is performed, by the help whereof that knowledge is to be acquired. And Art. 5. And yet is dangerous, when immo∣derate.Hence it comes, that Excess of Admi∣ration sometimes induceth a Stupor, or Astonishment; and where it lasteth long, that wonderful disease of the brain, which Physicians name Catalepsis, where∣by a Man is held stiff, motionless, and senseless, as if he were turned into a statue. For it causeth that all the Ani∣mal Spirits in the brain are so vehement∣ly imployed in contemplating and conser∣ving the image of the object, that their usual influx into other parts of the body is wholy intercepted, nor can they by any means be diverted: whereby all members of the body are held in a rigid posture, inflexible as those of a dead carcas, or of Man killed by lightning. Of this admirable effect of excessive Ad∣miration, Nich. Tulpius, an eminent Phy∣sician of Amsterdam, hath recorded (ob∣serv.
medic. lib. 1. cap. 22.) a memora∣ble Example in a young Man of our Na∣tion, who violently resenting a suddain and unexpected repulse in his love, and astonished thereat, became as it were congeal'd in the same posture, and con∣tinued rigid in his whole body till next day. Immoderate Admiration therefore cannot but be, by fixation of the Spirits, hurtfull to health. After admiration followeth Esteem,Art 6. Estimation and Con∣tempt. or Contempt, according as the thing appears great and worthy estimation, or of small value and contemptible. For which rea∣son we may esteem or contemn ourselves also: from whence arise first the Passions, and consequently the Habits of Magnani∣mity, or Pride; and of Humility or Ab∣jection. But if the Good that we have a great esteem of in another man, be ex∣traordinary: then our esteem is increa∣sed to Veneration; which is the concep∣tion we have concerning another, that he hath the power to do unto us both good and hurt, but not the will to do us hurt; accompanied with an inclination of the Soul to subject ourselves to him, and by fear and reverence to purchase his favour. All which is evident in our wor∣ship or veneration of God▪
Art. 7. Both conse∣quents of Admiration.That these two contrary Passions▪ Existimation and Contempt, are both con∣sequents of Admiration; is inferrible from hence, that when we do not admire the the greatness or smalness of an object, we make neither more nor less of it than reason tells us we ought to doe; so that in such case we value or despise it with∣out being concerned therein, that is, without passion. And although it often happens, that Estimation is excited by Love, and Contempt proceeds from Hatred; yet that is not universal, nor doth it arise from any other cause but this, that we are more or less prone to consider the greatness or meanness of an object, be∣cause we more or less love it. Art. 8. That there is no just cause for a man to have a high value for himself but the right use of his free-will.But though Estimation and Contempt may be referred to any objects what∣soever, yet are they then chiefly obser∣ved, when they are referred to ourselves, that is, when we put great or small va∣lue upon our own merit. And then the motions of the Spirits upon which they de∣pend, are so discernible, that they change the very countenance, gestures, walking, and in word all the actions of those who think more haughtily or meanly of them∣selves than is usual. But for what may we have a high esteem of ourselves? Truely I can observe but one thing that may give
us just cause of self-estimation; and that is the lawful use of our free will, and the soveraignity we exercise over our Passions. For (as the incomparable Monsieur des Cartes most wisely noteth) take away the actions dependent upon our Free will, and nothing will remain for which we can deserve to be praised or dispraised with reason: and that in truth renders us in some sort like unto God Almighty, by making us Lords of ourselves; provided we do not through carelesness and poorness of Spirit, lose the rights and power that royal preroga∣tive of our nature conferreth upon us. Wherefore I am of the same Des Cartes his opinion, that true Generosity, which makes a Man measure his own merit by right reason, doth consist only in this; that he both knowes he hath nothing true∣ly his own, except this free disposition of his Will, nor for which he justly can be commended or blamed, but that he useth that liberty well: and finds in himself a firm and constant purpose still so to do; that is, never to want will to undertake and perform all things that he shall have judged to be the better; which is perfectly to follow Virtue. Whereas Pride,Art 9. Pride. which is a kind of Tri∣umph of the mind from an high Estimati∣on
of ones-self without just cause, expres∣sed chiefly by haughty looks, ostentation in words, and insolency in action; is a Vice so unreasonable and absurd, that if there were no Adulation to deceive men into a better conceipt of themselves than they realy deserve; I should number it a∣mong the kinds of Madness. But the con∣tagious aire of Assentation is diffused so universaly, and hath infected the tongues of so great a part of mankind, that even the most imperfect frequently hear themselves commended and magnified for their very defects: which gives occasion to persons of stupid heads, and weak minds, and consequently of easy belief, to fall into this Tympany of Pride or false Glory. A passion so far different from true Ge∣nerosity, that it produceth effects ab∣solutely contrary thereunto. For, since other Goods, besides the virtuous Habit of using the liberty of our wills according to the dictates of right reason, as Wit, Beauty, Riches, Honours and the like, are therefore the more esteemed, because they are rare, and cannot be com∣municated to many at once: this makes Proud men labour to depress others, while themselves being inslaved to their own vicious cupidities, have their Souls unces∣santly agitated by Hate, Iealousie, or An∣ger.
The contrary to Self-estimation,Art. 10. Humility▪ is Hu∣mility: whereof there are likewise two Sorts; one, Virtuous or Honest; the other, Vicious or base. The Virtuous,Virtuous▪ which is properly na∣med Humility, consisteth onely in that reflexion we make upon the infirmity of our nature, and upon the errors we either have heretofore committed, or may in time to come commit: and maketh us therefore not to prefer ourselves before others, but to think them equaly capable of using their freedom of Will, as well as ourselves. Whence it is, that the most Generous are also the most Humble. For being truely conscious both of their own infirmity, and of their constant purpose to Surmount it, by doing none but vir∣tuous actions, that is, by the right use of the liberty of the Will, they easily perswade themselves, that others also have the same just sentiments, and the same good resolution in themselves; be∣cause therein is nothing that depends upon another. Wherefore they never despise any man, and though they often see o∣thers to fall into such Errors that disco∣ver their weakness; yet are they still more prone to excuse, than to condemn them, and to believe their faults pro∣ceeded rather from want of knowledge
and circumspection, than from defect of an inclination and will to good. So that as on the one side, they think not themselves much inferiour to those who possess more of the goods of Fortune, or exceed them in wit, learning, beauty &c. So nei∣ther do they on the other, think themselves to be much Superiour to others, who have less of those perfections; because they look upon such qualities as not worth much consideration, in comparison of that goodness of Will, upon which alone they have a just valuation of themselves, and which they suppose that every man equaly hath, or at least may have. This Hu∣mility therefore is inseparable from true Generosity: and being well grounded, al∣ways produceth Circumspection or Caution, which is fear to attempt any thing rash∣ly. Art 11. Vicious or Dejection of Spirit.The Vicious Humility, which is distin∣guished by the name of Dejection or Poorness of Spirit, proceeds likewise from an ap∣prehension of our own infirmity; but with this difference, that a man conceives him∣self to be so far deprived of the right and use of Fre-will, that he cannot but doe things against his inclination, and of which he ought afterward to repent; and believes himself not able to subsist of himself, but to want many things
whose acquisition depends upon another. So it is directly opposite to Generosity or Bravery of mind, and it is commonly ob∣served, that poor and abject Spirits are also Arrogant and Vain-glorious: as the Ge∣nerous are most modest and humble. For, these are above both the smiles and and frowns of Fortune, still calme and se∣rene as well in adversity as prosperity: but those being slaves to Fortune, and who∣ly guided by her, are puffed up by her fa∣vourable gales, and blown down again by her gusts. Nor is it a rarity to see men of of this base and servile temper, to descend to shamefull submissions, where they ei∣ther expect some benefit, or fear some e∣vil: and at the same time to carry them∣selves insolently and contemptuously to ward others, from whom they neither hope nor fear any thing. This Ague of the Soul then, being ill grounded, doth so shake a man with distrust of himself, that it utterly Cows him, and keeps him from daring to attempt any worthy action, for fear of ill success: which Vice the Lord Bacon calls Restifeness of mind, and falling out of love with ones-self. There is yet another remarkable Passi∣on that seem's to belong to Humility,Art. 12. Shame and Impudence▪ and that is Shame. Which ariseth from an unwary discovery of some Defect or infir∣mity
in us, the remembrance whereof sen∣sibly dejecteth us, and puts us for the most part to the Blush, which is its proper Sign. That it is a sort of Modesty or diffidence of our selves, is manifest from hence; that when a man thinks so well of himself, as not to imagine another can have just cause to contemn him; he cannot easily be checkd by Shame: and as the Good that is or hath been in us, if considered with re∣spect to the opinion others may conceive of us, doth excite Glory in us; so doth the Evil whereof we are conscious, pro∣duce Shame. And yet it cannot be deni∣ed but that in this discouraging Affect there is also some mixture of Grief or se∣cret regret, proceeding from apprehensi∣on of Dispraise: because being ever accom∣panied with inward displeasure at the defect or fault uncircumspectly discove∣red, it cools or damp's the Spirits, teach∣ing more wariness for the future. The Contrary to this, is Impudence; which is contempt of Shame, yea and oftentimes of Glory too. But because there is in us no special motion of the Spirits and heart, that may excite Imprudence; it seems to be no Passion, but a certain Vice opposite to Shame, and to Glory also, so far forth as they are both good and laudable: as Ingratitude is opposed to Gratitude, and
Cruelty to Commiseration. And the chief cause of this vicious insensibility of Honor, is founded in grievous contumelies to which a man hath been accustomed in for∣mer times, and which he by degrees comes to despise, as of no force to hinder his en∣joyment of commodities belonging to his body, whereby he measures all good and evil: thereby freeing himself from many necessities and streights to which honor would have obliged him. This therefore being no Passion, we are not concerned here further to consider it. But as for Pride and Dejection; that they are not onely Vices, but Passions too,Art. 13. That Pride and its con∣trary, Ab∣jectness of Spirit, are notonly Vi∣ces but Pa∣ssions also. is evident enough from the commotion of the Spirits and blood that discovers itself out∣wardly in men surprised by them upon a∣ny new and suddain occasion. The same may be said of Generosity also and Humili∣ty. For, notwithstanding their Motions be less quick and conspicuous, and that there seem to be much less of Convenience or fellowship betwixt Virtue and Passion, than between Passion and Vice; yet no reason appears, why the same Motion that serves to confirm a conception that is ill grounded, may not serve likewise to confirm the same conception though itbe well grounded. And because Pride and Generosity consist equaly in Self-esteem▪
differing only in the injustice and justice thereof: they seem to be but one and the same Passion originaly excited by a certain motion, not simple, but composed of the motions of Admiration, Ioy and Love, as∣well that love which is conceived for ones∣self, as that for the thing which makes one to value himself: as on the Contrary, the Motion that causeth Humility, whether it be Vertuous or Vicious, seems to be com∣posed of the motions of Admiration, Grief, and self-love mixt with Hatred of the De∣fects that give occasion to one to conceive a mean opinion of himself. Now what are the Motions of the Spirits or Sensitive Soul, that produce Admiration and Pride; we have formerly declared: and as to those that are proper to each of the other passions already considered; they remain to be particularly described in their due places.¶ Art. 14. Love and hatred.As Admiration, the first of all the Pas∣sions, ariseth in the Soul before she hath considered whether the thing repre∣sented to her, be good and convenient to her, or not: so after she hath judged it to be good, instantly there is raised in her the most agreable and complacent of all Passions, Love; and when she hath conceived the same to be Evil, she is as quickly mo∣ved to Hatred. For Love seems to be no∣thing
but a Propension of the Soul to that thing which promiseth pleasure or good to her: and Hatred is nothing but the Souls Aversation from that which threatens Pain or Grief. By the word Propension here used, is to be understood, not Cupidity or desire, which is in truth a distinct passion procee∣ding from love, and always respecting the future; but Will or consent by which we consider ourselves as already joyned to the thing loved, by a certain conception of ourselves to be as it were a part thereof. As on the contrary, in Aversation or Hate, we consider ourselves as intirely separate from the thing hated. According to these two opposite notions,Art. 15. Defined. I should define Love to be a Commotion of the Soul, produced by a motion of the Spi∣rits, which inciteth her to joyn herself, by her will, to objects that appear convenient and grate∣full to her: and Hatred, to be a Commotion produced by the spirits, that inciteth the Soul to be willing to be separated from objects that are represented to her as ungratefull and hurt∣full. Of Love there are made by the Schools two Sorts,Art. 16. Love, not well distin∣guished into Benevolence and concu∣piscence. whereof the first is commonly cal∣led Amor Benevolentiae, love of Benevolence or Good-will, whereby we are incited to wish well to the thing we love: the other,
Amor Concupiscentiae, which causeth us to desire to enjoy or possess the object loved. But this Distinction, if considered with∣out prejudice, will be found to concern onely the Effects of love, not the essence of it. For, so soon as a man hath in Will joyned himself to an object, of what na∣ture soever it be; he is at the same instant carryed toward it by Benevolence, or (to speak more plainly) he in will also ad∣joyns thereunto what things he believeth conducible to the good thereof: which is one of the principle Effects of love, but doth not infer a different Species of it. And the same object, if it be judged good to be possessed, or to be joyned to the Soul in another manner than by the will alone▪ is instantly desired: which also ought to be accounted among the more frequent effects of love. Whence I conclude, that Desire connexed to Love, is Benevolence: as con∣nexed with Hate, it is Malevolence or ill will. I add, that as Amity or Friendship seems to be nothing but constancy of Love: so Enmity, nothing but constancy of Ha∣tred. Art. 17. But by the various de∣grees of Eimation.If then you seek for a more genuine Distinction of Love, I know not how bet∣ter to gratify your Curiosity, than by en∣tertaining it with that delivered by the most excellent Monsieur Des Cartes in his
book concerning the Passions; which I will therefore faithfully recite. Love (saith He) may, in my judgement, be with good reason distinguished by the several degrees of Esteem we have of the thing loved. For, when a man hath less esteem for an object, than for him∣self, and yet loves it; his love is no more but simple Propension or Benevolence: when as much as for himself, 'tis Amity or Friendship; when greater than for him∣self, it may be called Devotion. By the First, a flower, a Bird, a Horse &c. may be loved. By the second, no man of understanding can love any thing but Men, who are so properly the object of this passion, that one can hardly be found so imperfect, but he may be conjoyned to another in the most perfect bond of friendship, if that other conceive him∣self to be truely and sincerely beloved by him, and think him to have a Soul truely noble and generous. And as for the last, Devotion; indeed the princi∣pal object thereof is God Almighty, to∣ward whom there is no man living, who considers as he ought, the incompre∣hensible perfections of the Divine na∣ture, but must be devote (for, as Sene∣ca, Deum colit, qui novit) Yet there is a Devotion also to ones Prince, or Coun∣try,
or City, or to any private person, whom we esteem above ourselves. And the difference betwixt these three sorts of Love, is chiefly manifest from their divers Effects. For when in each of them the person loving considers himself as joyned and united to the thing loved; he is always ready to quit or leave the least part of the whole that he makes with the same, to preserve the rest. Whence it comes that in simple Benevolence, the Lover always prefer's himself to the thing loved: but on the contrary, in Devotion, he always prefers the thing loved, so far above himself, that he fears not to dye for the conversation thereof, of which noble Love there have been glorious Examples in men who have voluntarily exposed them∣selves to certain death, for defence of their Prince, or of their City, yea sometimes also for private persons to whom they had particularly devoted themselves. Art. 18. That there are not so many di∣stinct sorts of Love, as of objects to ex∣cite it.This Distinction being admitted (as in my opinion it well deserves to be) there will remain no necessity of constituting so many distinct sorts of Love, as they are various objects to excite it: seeing there are many Passions very different among themselves, and in respect of their several
objects, which yet agree in this, that they all participate of Love. For Example, the Passion by which the Ambitious is carried on to Glory, the Avaricious to riches, the Drunkard to wine, the Libidinous to women, the Honest to his friend, the Vxorious to his wife, the good Father to his Children, &c. differ very much among themselves, and yet so far resemble each other, that they all participate of Love. But the love of the first four aimeth at nothing but the possession of their peculiar objects; nor have they indeed any thing of love for those objects, but only Desire mixt with some other special passions. Whereas the love of a Parent to his Children, is so pure, that he desires to obtain nothing at all from them, nor to possess them in any o∣ther manner than he doth already, or to bring them to a neerer conjunction with himself; but considering them as parts of himself, seeks their good as his own, yea with greater care than his own, as not fearing to purchase their felicity at the rate of his own undoing. And the Love of an honest man to his Friends, is also of the same perfection. But the Love of a man to his Mistress, commonly distin∣guished by the name of the Erotic passion; is alwaies mixed with desire of Fruiti∣on.
Art 19. Hatred less various than Love.And as for Hatred; though that be di∣rectly opposed to Love: yet cannot it be distinguished into as many different kinds; because the difference betwixt Evils from which we are by our will separated, can∣not be so well observed, as that which is betwixt the Goods to which we are by by our will joyned. Art. 20. Desire, al∣waies a Con∣sequent of Love.From what hath here been said concern∣ing Love, as distinguishable chiefly by the several degrees of Estimation conceived for the thing loved, it may easily be col∣lected▪ that from Love ariseth Cupidity or Desire, whereby the Soul is disposed to covet for the time to come, those things which she represent's to her∣self as convenient and likely to afford her pleasure. Thus we desire not one∣ly the presence of an absent good, but also the conservation of the good that is present: yea we desire likewise the ab∣sence of Evil, aswell that which is alrea∣dy incumbent, as that which we believe possible to come upon us in the future. For in Cupidity or Desire of any thing whatsoever, which the Soul judges to be wanting to herself; she alwaies looketh foreward to the time to come. Art. 21. But not al∣wayes Con∣comitant of it.It may be collected also, that though Desire cannot be without Love, yet Love may be without Desire of possessing or
enjoying the object, otherwise than by the pure embraces of the will alone. And this may be confirmed by observa∣tions of the different Motions of the Soul and Spirits raised in these two Passions, and the divers symptoms consequent thereunto. For In Love,Art. 22. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Love, and their Sym∣toms. when it is not accompanyed ei∣ther with Cupidity, or with vehement Ioy, or with Sadness, but continues pure and simple; the Soul being incited to con∣joyn herself in will to objects that appear good and convenient to her, and instant∣ly dilated; the Animal Spirits are like lightning dispatched from the brain by the nerves instantly into the Heart; and by their influx render the pulse thereof more strong and vigorous than is usual, and consequently the circulation of the blood more nimble and expedite. Where∣upon the blood being more copiously diffused by the arteries, and more par∣ticularly those ascending to the brain, carries with it a recruit of vital spirits newly enkindled: which being there further sublimed or refined, and corro∣borating the idea or image that the first cogitation hath formed of the thing lo∣ved, oblige and in some sort compell the the Soul to continue fixed upon that co∣gitation, and continually to indulge the
same. And herein, if I am not much mistaken, doth the passion of Love prin∣cipally consist. For, they who are af∣fected therewith, have their pulse equal (the Spirits that cause it, being immit∣ted into the Cardiac nerves with an e∣qual and placid motion) but stronger and more frequent then ordinary; they feel a certain agreable heat diffused in their breast; they find their brain invigorated by abundance of Spirits, and there∣by grow more ingenuous; and in fine they digest their meat quickly, and per∣form all actions of life readily and with alacrity. All which may be ascribed to the free and expedite, but equal Circu∣lution of the blood, caused by a copi∣ous influx of Animal Spirits into the Heart. Whence we may safely conclude, that this grateful passion is highly bene∣ficial to all parts of the body, and con∣duceth much to the conservation of health; provided it continue within the bounds of moderation. But if it exceed them, and break forth into a wild and furious desire; then on the contrary, by degrees enervating the members, it at length induceth very great weakness and decay upon the whole body. For, Love accompanied with vehement desire, doth so intirely imploy the Soul in the consi∣deration
of the object desired, that she retains in the brain the greatest part of the Spirits, there to represent to her the image thereof: so that the whole stock of nerves, and all the Muscles are defrauded of the influx of Spirits from the brain, with which they ought to be continualy inspired or invigorated. Whence in process of time the whole Oeconomy of nature is perverted, and an universal languor ensueth. And in Cupidity,Art. 23. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in desire. whereby the Soul is so effused towards good or pleasure re∣presented to her as certainly to come, as that she is suddainly checked and con∣tracted again by reflection upon the delay of the same; there occurs this Singular, that it agitateth the heart more violently, and crouds the brain with more legions of spirits, than any other of all the passions. For out of Desire to obtain what we ar∣dently pursue, the Spirits are most swift∣ly transmitted from the brain into all parts of the body that may any way serve to do the actions requisite to that end; but above all into the Heart. which being thereby dilated and contracted both more strongly and more frequently than in the state of tranquility, quickly forceth up a more abundant supply of Vital Spirits with the blood into the brain; aswell that
they may there conserve and corrobo∣rate the Idea of this Desire, as that whole brigades of them may be from thence dispatched into the Organs of the Senses, and into all Muscles, whose mo∣tions may more especially conduce to ob∣tain what is so vehemently desired. And from the Souls reflexion upon the delay of her fruition, which she at the same time makes; there ariseth in her a solli∣citude or trouble, whereby she is check∣ed and contracted again, and the spirits are by intervals retracted toward the brain. So that the more subtil and spi∣ritual blood being with the spirits recal∣led from the outward parts, the heart comes to be constringed and streightned, the Circulation of the blood retarded, and consequently the whole body left without spirits and vigor. Let none therefore admire, if many of those Men whom Lust, or Concupiscence, Ambition, Avarice, or any other more fervent de∣sire hath long exercised and inslaved, be by continual sollicitude of mind, brought at length into an ill Habit of body, to leanness, a defect of Nutrition, Melancho∣ly, the Scurvy, Consumption and other incurable diseases. Nor are you after this so clear manifestation of the great disparity betwixt the Motions and neces∣sary
Consequents of Love when pure and simple, and those of Love commixt with Cupidity or ardent Desire of enjoyment, longer to doubt, but that Love and Desire are Passions essentially different; notwith∣standing it be true, that the Later is al∣waies dependent upon the Former. And as for the Motions of the Spi∣rits and blood in that anxious Affect of the mind, Hatred,Art. 24. The Motions of the Spi∣rits and blood in Hatred. which is directly op∣posed to Love, evident it is, that when the Soul is moved to withdraw herself from any object that appears to threaten Evil or pain, instantly the Spirits are re∣tracted inwards to the brain, and prin∣cipaly to that part of it which is the in∣strument or mint of Imagination; there to corroborate the idea of Hatred, which the first thought hath formed of the un∣grateful object; and to dispose the Soul to sentiments full of bitterness and dete∣station: So that the while, very few of them, and those too inordinately and by unequal impulses, are transmitted into the Heart, by the Pathetic nerves, And from this offensive Contraction of the whole Sensitive Soul, and as it were com∣pression of the Animal spirits, and sub∣sequent destitution of the Heart, it comes, that in this sowr passion alwaies the Pulse is made weak and unequal, and of∣tentimes
frequent and creeping; that cold, mixt with a certain pricking heat not easy to be described, but sensibly injurious to the vital parts, and repugnant to their regular motions, is felt within the breast; and that even the stomach itself, diver∣ted from its office of Concoction, nausea∣teth the meats it had received, and strives to reject them by vomit. Which often happens upon sight of an odious and abominable object. Now all these evil effects of Hate, give indisputable evi∣dence, that it can never be either grate∣full to the mind, or beneficial to the motions of life, upon which health so nearly depends: and this, because Hate always hath Sadness for its concomitant; and because by diversion of the Animal spirits, partly to assist the Imagination, partly to move the members for avoi∣dance of the hated object, it defrauds the blood of its due supplies of spirits and fewel, retards the motion and equal distribution of it, and by that means de∣stroies concoction, incrassates the hu∣mors, heaps up melancholy, and by de∣grees brings the whole body to poverty and leanness. Moreover, sometimes this disagreeable Passion is exalted to Anger, whereby the Soul, offended with the Evil or wrong she hath suffered, at first
Contracts herself, and by and by with ve∣hemency springs back again to her natu∣ral posture of Coextension with the whole body, as if the strove to break out into revenge: and then it is that the spirits are in a tumultuous manner, and im∣petuously hurried hither and thither, now from the brain to the heart, then back again from the heart to the brain; and so there follow from these contrary mo∣tions alternately reciprocated, aswell a violent agitation, palpitation, burning and anxiety of the heart; as a diffusion of the blood, distension of the veins, redness of the face, and sparkling of the eyes, together with a distorsion of the mouth (such as may be observed in great indignation, and seems composed of laughter and weeping mixt together) grinding of the teeth, and other symp∣toms of Anger and fury. It is not then without reason Physicians advise Men to decline this passion, as a powerful ene∣my to health in all but such as are of a cold, dull, and phlegmatic temperament; because it inflames first the spirits, then the blood, and when violent, it puts us into fevers, and other acute distempers, by accension of choler, and confusion of humors. And I could furnish you with examples of some whom this short
fury hath fired into perpetual madness, of others whom it hath fell'd with Apo∣plexies, others whom it hath thrown in∣to Epilepsies, rack'd with Convulsions, un∣nerved with Palseys, disjoynted with the Gout, shook with tremblings, and the like: but that the books of Physicians are full of them. Art. 25. Hate alwaies accompanied▪ with SadnessHere before we proceed to other con∣sequent Passions, it is fit to make a short reflexion upon Hatred, that I may verify what was only hinted in the precedent enumeration of the evil Effects thereof, viz. that it is ever accompanied with Sad∣ness. Concerning this therefore I reason thus. Forasmuch as Evil, the proper object of Hate, is nothing but a Privati∣on; and that we can have no conception thereof without some real Subject where∣in we apprehend it to be; and that there is in nature nothing real which hath not some goodness in it: it follows of necessi∣ty, that Hatred, which withdraws us from some Evil, doth at the same time remove us also from some Good to which the same is conjoyn'd. And since the Privation of this Good, is represented to the Soul as a Defect or want belonging to her: it in∣stantly affecteth her with sorrow. For Example; the Hate that alienateth us from the evil manners of a man with whom
formerly we have been acquainted, se∣parateth us likewise from his Conversati∣on, wherein we might find somthing of Good: and to be deprived of that Good, is matter of regret and Sorrow. So in all other Hatred, we may soon observe some cause of Sorrow.¶ To the excitement of Desire in the Soul,Art. 26. Hope and Fear. it is sufficient that she conceive the acquisition of the Good, or avoidance of the Evil represented to her as to come, to be possible: but if she further consider whether it be Easy or Difficult for her to obtain her end; and there occur to her more reasons for the facility: then there succeeds that gentle Effusion or Tenden∣cy of the Soul toward the good desired, which is called Hope or Expectation of good to come. Whereas on the contrary, if the greater weight be found in the other Scale, and she apprehend the thing desi∣red, to be Difficult; she is immediately Contracted, and coold with that ungrate∣ful passion, Fear, which is expectation of Evil to come. And as Hope exalted to the highest degree, is changed into Trust, Confidence or Security: So on the contra∣ry, Fear in extremity becomes Despera∣tion. Again, if this Contraction of the Soul by Fear, be suddain and profound, and the Evil expected very great; then
is the passion called Terror, Dread and Con∣sternation, which sometimes is so violent, as to cause Exanimation or suddain Death. Art. 27. Pusillanimi∣ty and Cou∣rage.If the Soul, upon apprehension that the Good desired, is not indeed abso∣lutely impossible, but highly difficult for her to obtain; or the Evil feared, is not altogether impossible, yet extremely hard to be avoided; persist in her Contraction: she is daunted or cowd into that ignoble weakness called Pusillanimity or Cowardise. But if after her Contraction at first, she exserting her strength, spring forth as it were, and with vehemency dilate herself, to surmount her fear, and overcome the difficulties apprehended: then is she rea∣nimated as it were, or fortified with the noblest of all Passions, Courage or Bold∣ness, or Bravery of Mind, which makes her contemn all obstacles to her attain∣ment of her end, whether it be the acqui∣sition of good, or declination of Evil; and which (when it is not a habit or na∣tural inclination) seems to be an ardor or flashing of the Sensitive Soul, disposing her to act vigorously, and without fear, toward the vanquishing of difficulties that stand betwixt her and the scope she aims at. And of this Animosity, Emulation is a species, whereby the Soul is disposed to
attempt or enetrprise difficult things,Art. 28. Emulation, a species of Magnani∣mity. which she hopes will succeed happily to her, because she observes them to do so to others. But then it is to be distingui∣shed from simple Animosity by two pro∣prieties. Whereof One is, that it hath not only an internal Cause, viz. such a disposition of the spirits and body, that Desire and Hope may have greater pow∣er in impelling the blood in abundance to the heart, than Fear or Despair can have in hindering that motion: but al∣so an external Cause, namely, the Ex∣ample of others who have been prospe∣rous in the like attempts, which creates a belief in us, that we also shall be able to conquer the difficulties occurring af∣well as those others have done. The Other, this; that Emulation is ever accom∣panied with secret Grief, which ariseth from seeing ourselves exceeded or excel∣led by our concurrents. But simple Ani∣mosity wants both Example for incitement, and Grief for alloy. But both these passions equaly depend upon Hope of good success. For, Though the object of Audacity be diffi∣culty, yet to animate us to contend bravely with that difficulty,Art. . Confidence▪ and Despair. we must be possessed with a strong hope, or certain belief, that we shall at length attain our
end. Yet this end is not the same thing with that object; for, there cannot be both Certitude and Despair of the same thing at the same time. So when the Roman Decii rushed into the thickest troops of their enemies, and ran to cer∣tain death; the object of their daring was the difficulty of conserving their lives in that action, for which difficulty they had nothing but Desperation, be∣ing resolved certainly to dye: but their End was, either by their example to in∣spire courage into the Roman army, and by them to obtain the victory they hoped; or to acquire posthume Glory, whereof they were certain. If therefore even in this action that was in itself des∣perate, Courage were grounded upon Hope; we may well conclude, that it is alwaies so. Art. 30▪ Doubting.From the reasons we have alleged of Hope and Fear, it is evident, that we may have those contrary passions excited in us, though the Event of the thing ex∣pected no way depend upon our selves. But when we proceed to consider the Event as altogether, or for the most part depending upon our own counsel, and perceive a difficulty to arise either in our election, or execution of the means whereby to obtain our end: then there
immediately follows a Doubting or Fluctua∣tion of the mind, whereby we are dispo∣sed to deliberate and consult; and which is indeed a species of Fear. And this wa∣vering, while it retains the Soul as it were in a doubtful balance betwixt two actions which are offered to her election; is the cause that she performs neither, but takes time to consider before she deter∣mineth which to do, for fear of erring in her choice. Which Fear, if moderate and under the command of Prudence, is always of good use; in that it serves to prevent Temerity or Rashness: but in some over-cautious persons, it is so vehement, that though but one thing occurr to be done or omitted by them, it holds them too long upon the rack of suspence, and hinders them from proceeding to action. And in this case, the passion is Ex∣cess of Doubting, arising from too ardent desire of good success, and weakness of Vnderstanding, which hath indeed many confused notions, but none perspicuous and distinct concerning the means to effect its design. If during this irresolution,Art. 31▪ Remorse and acquiescence we have determined the liberty of our choice, and fixed upon some one action in order to our end; and the event be not answera∣ble to our expectation: presently we are
affected with that disquiet of mind, which is named by the Greeks, Syntere∣sis; by the Latins, Morsus Conscientiae; and by the French, Regret; which yet doth not (as the precedent passions) re∣spect the future, but present or past time▪ This Remorse of Conscience is no other but a kind of Sorrow, arising from a scruple interposed, whether what we are doing, or have done, be good, or not. And it necessarily presupposeth dubitation. For, if we were clearly convinced that the action we are doing, is realy evil; we should certainly abstain from doing it: because the will is not carried to any thing, but what hath some shew of good∣ness in it. And if it were manifest, that what we have done, is realy evil: we should presently be touched not with sim∣ple regret, but with Repentance. For, as the Good we have done, gives us that internal Acquiescence or satisfaction, which is of all other Passions the swee∣test: so on the contrary, the ill we have done, punisheth us with Repentance, which is of all passions the bitterest. Having in this manner discovered the originals and distinct proprieties of these two opposite Passions, Hope and Fear, with their genuin dependents; it may not a little conduce to the illustration of
what hath here been briefly delivered concerning them, if we more expresly describe the divers Motions of the Sensi∣tive Soul and Spirits that constitute their formal reasons, so far at least as those motions are observable from their re∣spective Characters or Effects. In Hope therefore (which we defined to be a gentle and sweet Effusion or Ex∣pansion of the Soul towards some good ex∣pected to come) if we be possessed with an opinion,Art. 32.▪ The Moti∣ons of the Soul and Spirits in Hope. that the thing desired will short∣ly come to pass; I conceive that present∣ly the Animal Spirits, which before were imployed as Emissaries, to contemplate the image of the object, returning to∣ward the Soul, give notice of the ap∣proach of the guest expected: and that thereupon the whole Soul composing her¦self by expansion to receive and welcome the same, sets open all the doors of the Senses to admit more freely all the good belonging thereunto; retains the ima∣gination fixt and intent upon the gratefull idea thereof; and by copious supplies of spirits dispatched into the nerves of the Heart, so invigorates and quickens the pulse thereof, that thereby the blood is more briskly sent forth into the outward parts of t he body, as it were to meet the expected thing. Whence it is, that
when we are full of Hope, we feel a certain inflation both within and without in our whole body, together with a glowing but pleasant heat, from the blood and spirits universaly diffused. But if during this comfortable emotion of the Soul, there occurr any suddain cause of Doubt or fear; she is instantly checked and coold into an anxious Retraction of herself, and a sinking of the spirits, so that the motion of the heart becomes weaker and slower, and the external parts grow languid and pale. For, Art. 33. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Fear.In Fear, the Sensitive Soul, which was before expansed, being surprised with apprehension of approaching Evil, and willing to decline it, immediately withdraws herself into her retiring room, and shrinks up herself into herself; at the same time recalling her forces, the spirits, to her aid, and compressing them. If the Fear be exalted to the degree of Terror, and the Evil seem impendent; then at the same time the spirits are sud∣dainly recall'd from the outguards, the pores of the skin also are shut up by strong constriction (as if the Soul would ob∣struct and barricado all avenues against her invading enemy) whereby the hairs are raised an end, and the whole body is put into a Horror or shaking, After this,
if the passion continue, the whole army of spirits being put into confusion, so that they can not execute their offices; the usual succors of Reason fail, and the pow∣ers of voluntary motion become weak; yea sometimes, by reason of a resolution of the nerves and sphincters of the gutts and bladder, the Excrements themselves are let forth involuntarily. From this damp obscuring the Lucid part of the Sensitive Soul, there quickly succeeds an Eclipse also of the Vital. For the influx of the Animal spirits from the brain into the Cardiac nerves being intermit∣ted, the motions of the heart must of necessity be renderd weak, and insuffi∣cient to maintain with due vigour and ce∣lerity the circulation of the blood: which therefore stopping and stagnating in the ventricles of the heart, causeth fainting and swooning by oppression; and some∣times (where the passion is hightned in∣to Consternation also suddain death. And from this arrest of the blood in the heart, by strong constriction of the nerves there∣unto belonging; we may with reason de∣rive that same anxious oppression, and chil∣ling weight which men commonly feel in their breast, when they are invaded by violent Fear; and upon which the most acute Monsieur Des Cartes seems to have
reflected his thoughts, when he defined Consternation to be not only a cold, but also a perturbation and stupor of the Soul, which takes from her the power of resisting evils that she apprehends to be neer. Art. 34. The Motions in Desperati∣on.This Fear, when it excludes all hope of evasion, degenerateth into the most cruel of all passions, Desperation. Which though by exhibiting the thing desired as impossible, it wholy extinguish de∣sire, which is never carried but to things apprehended as possible: yet it so af∣flicts the Soul, that she persevering in her Constriction, either through abso∣lute despondency yeelds up herself as overcome, and remains half-extinct and entombd in the body; or driven into confusion and neglect of all things, con∣tracts a deep Melancholy, or flyes out in∣to a furious Madness; in both cases, seek∣ing to put an end to her misery by destroy∣ing herself. On the contrary, when Fear gives place to Hope; and that Hope is strong enough to produce Courage; thereby to incense the Soul to encounter the difficul∣ties that oppose her in the way to her end: in this case she first dilates herself with great vigor and celerity, breaking forth as it were into flashes of efforts; then instantly diffuseth whole legions of
spirits into the nerves and muscles, to extend them, in order to resistence or striking with all their forces; and uni∣ting all her powers into a brave devoir to overcome, undauntedly pursues the the conflict. Hence it comes, that the breast being strongly dilated and con∣tracted alternately, the voice is sent forth more sounding and piercing than at other times; as if to sound a defiance and charge at once: the armes are raised up, the hands constringed into fists, the head advanced into a posture of daring and contempt of danger, the brows contract∣ed, and the whole face distorted into an aspect full of terror and threatnings, the neck swoln, and most other parts dis∣tended beyond their usual dimensions. All which symptoms evidently arise from a copious and impetuous effusion of Ani∣mal spirits from the brain, and of blood from the heart, into the outward parts. ¶ From this concise explication of the motions of the Sensitive Soul, the spi∣rits and blood, that constitute the passi∣ons of Hope and Fear, with their depen∣dents, Animosity and Desperation, the clue of our method leads us to the fifth classis of passions. The consideration of good present,Art. 35. Joy. and belonging to us in particular, begets in
the Soul that delight which we call Ioy: wherein consisteth our possession of that good, which the impressions of the brain represent to the Soul as her own. First I say, that in this delightful com∣motion doth consist the possession of good; because in truth the Soul reaps no other fruit from all the goods she possesseth: and when she takes no delight or joy in them, it may justly be said, she doth no more injoy them, than if she did not at all possess them. Then I add, that the good is such as the impressions made upon the brain repre∣sent to the Soul as hers; that I may not confound this Joy whereof I now speak, and which is a Passion; with Joy purely intellectual, which enters into the Rational Soul by an action proper to her alone, and which we may call a pleasant commo∣tion raised by herself in herself, wherein consisteth the possession of good, that her intellect represents to her as her own. Tho realy so long as the Rational Soul continues conjoyned with the Sensitive, it can hardly be but that this intellectual joy will have the other that is a passion, for its companion. For, so soon as our Intellect observes that we possess any good, though that good be so far diffe∣rent from all that pertains to the body,
that it is wholy unimaginable; yet pre∣sently the Imagination makes some im∣pression in the brain, from whence fol∣loweth a motion of the Sensitive Soul, and of the Spirits, that exciteth the pas∣sion of Joy. Of this so gratefull affection there are divers sorts,Art. 36. The various Degrees of Ioy and their names. or (to speak more strictly) degrees. For, as various circumstances may intervene, and cause the Soul to be more or less affected with her fruition of the good she possesseth: so may we di∣stinguish various differences of the passi∣on itself. To be more particular; as the good she possesseth, is great or small; unexpected, or long desired; durable, or transitory; and as reason moderateth the appetite, or suffers it to be unbrid∣led: so it comes to pass, that the Effu∣sion of the Soul, and consequently the pleasure is greater or less, permanent or momentary, immoderate or temperate, &c. And hence the kinds of more re∣miss Joy are call'd Complacency, Iucun∣dity, Gladness, Exhilaration: and those of more intens, Rejoycing, Exsultation, Tri∣umph, Boasting, Transport or Ecstasy, Laughter, &c. By the same reason,Art 37. The various Degrees of Grief, and their names. as the Evil that causeth the opposite passion of Grief, is in the present great or little, suddain or
foreseen, long or short, and the like: so are there excited various kinds or de∣grees of Trouble or Grief; and according∣ly the passion is distinguished into Discon∣tent, Sollicitude, Vexation, Sadness, Sor∣row, Affliction, Misery, Lamentation, Weeping and Howling. All which belong to Grief, which is an ingrateful Languor of the Sensitive Soul, wherein alone con∣sisteth the incommodity that hapneth to her from Evil or defect, which the im∣pressions made upon the brain, represent to her as her own. For, besides this, there is also an Intellectual Sorrow proper to the Rational Soul, which is not to be placed in the number of the passions, tho for the most part it hath for its ad∣junct the passion of Sorrow; by reason of the most strict conjunction betwixt the two Souls in this life. Art. 35. Envy and Pitty.As the Good or Evil present, being represented as belonging particularly to ourselves, produceth Joy or Grief in us: so when Good or Evil is proposed to us, as belonging to others; we so far concern ourselves therein, as to judge them wor∣thy, or unworthy of the same. If we judge them unworthy of the good that is hapned to them; that raiseth Envy in us: if we think them not to deserve the Evil that is befallen them, then we are af∣fected
with Pity or Commiseration, which is a species of Sorrow, and the contrary to it is Hardness of Heart, proceeding either from slowness of imagination (for men of dull capacities are generally less apt to pity the calamities of others) or from strong opinion of our own exemption from the like sufferings, or from that inhuman temper of mind which the Grecians call Misanthropia, Hatred of all or most men; or finally from despair after long adversi∣ty, whereby the mind being grown as it were callous or brawny (as Seneca expres∣seth it) is apt to conceive, that no evil can come to it, greater than what it hath been accustomed to undergo. On the contrary,Art. 39. Generous men most inclined to Commisera∣tion; and why. they are more than others propens to Commiseration, who think themselves very weak and obnoxi∣ous to adverse fortune: because repre∣senting to themselves anothers misfortune, as possible to happen to themselves also (for the evil that happeneth to an innocent man, may happen to every man) they are easily moved to pity, but more out of love of themselves than of others. And yet it hath been ever observed, that men of the most generous and Heroick spirits, such who having by brave resolutions, and ha∣bitual magnanimity, elevated their souls above the power of fortune, and so
could fear no evil that she could bring upon them▪ have nevertheless been prone to Commiseration, when they beheld the infirmity of others, and heard their complaints, because it is a part of true Generosity, to wish well to every one. But the Grief of this Heroick Commiseration is not (as the other) bitter, but like that which Tragical cases represented in a Theatre, produce, it is placed more in the Sense, than in the Soul itself which at the same time injoyeth the satisfaction of think∣ing that she doth her duty in sympathi∣zing with the afflicted. And the diffe∣rence betwixt the Commiseration of the vulgar, and that of Generous minds, doth chiefly consist in this; that the vulgar pit∣tieth the misery of those who complain, as thinking the evil they suffer, to be ve∣ry grievous and intollerable: but the principal object of generous pity, is the imbecillity and impatience of those who complain n; because men of great Souls think, that no accident can fall upon a man, which is not really a less evil than the Pusillanimity of those who cannot en∣dure it with constancy; which Seneca in∣timateth (de tranquillitate anim, cap. 15.) where he saith, neminem ebo sientem; nam suis lacrymis efficit, ne ullis dignus sit: and though they hate the vices of men,
they do hate not their persons, but only pity them. Manifest it is therefore, that in some,Art. 40. Commisera∣tion, a speci∣es of Grief mixed with Benevolence. Commiseration is nothing but imaginati∣on of future Calamity to our selves, pro∣ceeding from the sense of another mans calamity; as it is defined by Mr Hobbs: in others, a species of Grief, mixt with Love or Benevolence toward those whom we observe to suffer under some evil, which we think they have not deserved; as it is defined by Monsieur des Cartes. Manifest it is likewise,Art. 41▪ Envy, a sort of Grief mixed with Hate. that the contra∣ry passion, Envy, is a sort of Grief mixt with Hate, proceeding from our sense of prosperity in another, whom we judge unworthy thereof. A passion never ex∣cusable, but where the Hatred it contain's, is against the unjust distribution of the good that is envied, not the person that possesseth it, or that distributed it. But in this corrupt age, there are very few so just and generous, as to be free from all Hate towards their competitors, who have prevented them in the acquisition of a good which is not communicable to many at once, and which they had desired to appropriate to themselves; though they who have acquired it, be equally or more worthy thereof.
Art. 42. Acquiescence of mind, a kind of Ioy. When we reflect our thoughts upon good done by our selves, there results to us that internal Satisfaction or Acquiescence of mind, which is a species of Ioy; calme indeed, and serious, but incomparably sweet and pleasant; because the Cause of it dependeth upon nothing but our selves. But then that cause ought to be just, that is, the good upon which we reflect our cogitations, ought to be of great moment: otherwise the Satisfaction we fansy to our selves, is false, and ridiculous, serving only to beget pride and absurd arrogan∣cy. Which may be specially observed in those who esteem themselves truely re∣ligious, and pretend to great perfection of Sanctity, when in reality they are Superstitious and Hypocrites: that is, who because they frequent the temple, recite many praiers, wear short hair, observe fasting-daies, give alms, and perform other the like external duties of Reli∣gion; therefore think themselves to be arrived at the highest degree of purity, and to be so far in the favor of Almighty God, that they can do nothing that may displease him, and that whatever their passion suggesteth to them, is of holy zeal; though it not seldome suggesteth the most detestable crimes that can enter into the heart of Man, as the betraying of Ci∣ties,
assassination of Princes, extermina∣tion of Nations, only because they fol∣low not their fanatique opinions. And this Delusion seems to be the Daughter of internal Acquiescence grounded upon an unjust cause. Again, to excite this most comfortable passion, it is requisite that the good act upon which we re∣flect, be newly done by us: because that constant satisfaction or self-acquiescence which alwaies is a concomitant and cer∣tain reward of Virtue, is not a passion, but a pacific Habit in the Rational Soul; and is therefore call'd Tranquility and Quiet of Conscience. On the contrary,Art. 43. Repentance, a species of Grief, but allayd with somthing of Ioy. from our remem∣brance of an Evil act by us committed, ariseth Repentance, which is a branch of Grief, alwaies most bitter, because the cause of it is only from ourselves: but then this Grief is allayed by expectation of amendment, or returning into the right way to good; which is referrible to Ioy. Nor doth the bitterness of this passion hinder it from being of excellent use in our life, when the action whereof we re∣pent, is realy Evil, and we certainly know it to be so: because in such cases it strongly inciteth us to doe better in the future. But it is not universaly profita∣ble. For it is no rarity for men of weak
and timorous minds to be touchd with Repentance of actions they have done, tho they do not certainly know those actions to be realy evil, but only believe them to be so, because they fear lest they be so, and if they had done the contrary, they would have been equally disquieted with repentance. Which is an imperfection in them well worthy Commiseration: and they ought to repent of such their Re∣pentance. 44. avour. When we observe, or recall to mind good performed by an other, tho not to ourselves; we are thereby moved to Fa∣vour the doer: because we are by na∣ture inclined to like and love those who doe actions that we think good, althouh from thence nothing of good redounds to us in particular. Favour therefore is a species of Love, accompanied with desire of seeing good to happen to the person whom we favour; and somtimes with Commiseration, because the adversity that falls upon those whom we think to be good, makes us the more to reflect up∣on their merits. But if the good done by another up∣on which we reflect our cogitations, 45. Gratitude. hath been done to Vs; then to favor is adjoi∣ned Gratitude: which likewise is a kind
of Love, excited in us by some action of another, whereby we believe▪ that ei∣the he hath realy benefited, no at least intended to benefit us in particular and accompanied with Desire to shew ourselves thankful to  there∣fore this passion of Gratitude  excells simple Favour in this, that it is grounded upon an action which concerns Vs: so hath it far greater force upon the mind, especialy in men of noble and generous natures. The Contrary hereunto is In∣gratitude, which notwithstanding is no Passion (for Nature, as if she abhorr'd it, hath ordained in us no motion of the Spirits whereby it might be excited) but a meer Vice, proper to men who are ei∣ther foolishly proud, and therefore think all benefits due to them; or fottishly stu∣pid, so as to make no reflexion upon good turns done them; or of weak and abject minds, who having been obliged by the bounty and charity of their Bene∣factors, instead of being gratefull, pro∣secute them with hatred; and this be∣cause either wanting the will to requite, or despairing of ability to make equal re∣turns, and falsely imagining that all are like themselves, venal and mercenary, and that none doth good offices but in hope of remuneration; they think that
their Benefactors have deceived them; and so deprave the benefit itself into an injury. Hatred then being an adjunct to Ingratitude; it follows that Love must at∣tend on Gratitude, which is therefore al∣waies honest, and one of the principal bonds of human Society. Art. 46. Indignation. On the contrary, when we consider Evil committed by an other, tho not against us; we are moved to Indignati∣on: which is a species of Hatred or Aver∣sion raised in us against those who do any thing that we judge to be evil or un∣just, whatsoever it be; somtimes com∣mixed with Envy, somtimes with Com∣miseration, somtimes with Derision; as having its object very much diversified. For, we conceive Indignation against those who doe good or evil to such who are unworthy thereof; but we Envy those who receive that good, and pity those who suffer that evil. And yet in truth, to obtain good whereof one is unworthy, is in some degree to doe evil: and to do Evil, is in some sort to suffer evil. Whence it comes, that somtimes we con∣joyn Pity, somtimes Derision to our In∣dignation, according as we stand well or ill affected toward them whom we ob∣serve to commit Errors. And therefore the Laughter of Democritus, who derided
the folly, and the Tears of Heraclitus, who bewail'd the misery of mankind, might both proceed from the same cause, Indignation. But when Evil is done to ourselves,Art. 47. Anger. the passion thereby kindled in us, is An∣ger: which likewise is a species of Hatred or Aversation, but different from Indig∣nation in this, that it is founded upon an action done by another with intention to hurt us in particular; and in this, that when it hath proceeded to a determina∣tion of hurting him who did it, it pas∣seth into Revenge; whereas at first ac∣cension, the Passion is no more but Ex∣candescence or suddain Heat of blood. The Desire of Revenge that for the most part accompanieth Anger, whether it aim at the death, or only at the subjection of our Enemy; is indeed directly opposed to Gratitude (for this is desire of returning good for good, and that, desire of re∣quiting evil with evil) as Indignation is to Favour: but incomparably more vehe∣ment than either of those three affecti∣ons; because the desire of repelling harm, and revenging our selves, is a part of natural instinct necessary to self-preserva∣tion, and so of all desires the strongest and most urgent. And being consocia∣ted with Love of ourselves, it affords to
Anger all that impetuous agitation of the Spirits and blood, that Animosity and Boldness or Courage can excite: and its assistant, Hatred, promoting the accensi∣on of the Choleric or more Sulphureous parts of the blood as it passeth through the heart, raiseth in the whole mass thereof a more pricking and fervent heat, than that which is observed in the most ardent Love, or most profuse Ioy. Art. 48. Two sorts of Anger; one, Harmless the other Re∣vengefull. Now as men inflamed with this violent passion, or (as Seneca calls it short fury of Anger, differ in point of temperament; and as this or that of the usual concomi∣tants of it, is more powerful than the rest: so must the Effects thereof upon the body be likewise various. And from this varie∣ty men have taken notice chiefly of two sorts of Anger. One, that is quickly kindled, violent at first, and discovers it self visibly by outward signs: but per∣forms little, and may be easily composed. And to this, they are most obnoxious, who are good-natur'd, i.e. who are inclined to goodness and love. For, it ariseth not from profound Hatred, but from a sudden Aversion surprising them: because being propens to conceive that all things ought to proceed in that manner which they judge to be the best; whenever they see others to act otherwise, first they ad∣mire,
and then are offended; and so what would be to others matter only of In∣dignation, to them proves cause of An∣ger. But this commotion is soon calm∣ed, because the force of the sudain Aver∣sion that raised it, continues not long: and so soon as they perceive that the thing for which they were offended, ought not to have commoved them to passion; they suppress their displeasure, and repent of it. The Other, that where∣in Hatred and Grief are predominant, and which though at first it hardly betray it self by external signs, unless by the sud∣dain paleness of the countenance, and trembling; is notwithstanding more im∣petuous within, secretly gnaws the very heart, and produceth dangerous effects. And to this pernicious sort of Anger they are most subject, who have prou, cow∣ardly and weak Souls. For, so much the greater doe injuries appear, by how much the better opinion pride makes Men to have of themselves; yea and by how much greater value is put upon the things which the injuries take away: and these things are alwaies so much the more valu∣ed, by how much the more weak and ab∣ject the Soul is; because they depend up∣on others, but the Generous put little va∣lue upon any thing that is not dependent upon themselves.
When we consider what opinion other Men have of Us, the Good which we believe to be in us, disposeth us to Glory, which seems to be composed of Self-estimation, and Ioy;Art. 49. Glory and Shame. for to see ourselves well esteemed by others, gives us cause to have a good esteem for ourselves: and on the contrary, the Evil we are consci∣ous of, forceth us to Shame, which is a sort of Modesty or Humility, and Self-diffidence; for (as we have formerly obser∣ved) who thinks himself above Con∣tempt, will hardly be humbled to shame. These two Passions, Glory and Shame, tho directly opposite each to other, doe yet agree in their End, which is to incite us to Virtue; the first by hope, the other by fear: and that we may make a right use of them both, we are to have our judgment well instructed what actions are truely worthy praise or dispraise; lest other∣wise we be ashamed of virtuous actions, or affect glory from vices; as it happe∣neth to too great a part of mankind. Thus have we at length recounted all the Passions of this our fifth division, and deduced them successively from their several causes or occasions, in that order wherein their most remarkable diversity seemd to us most easily distinguishable.
But now because some of these passions are simple, others Composed; and that to our more clear understanding of the nature of both sorts, it is necessary to enquire more profoundly into the Mo∣tions of the Sensitive Soul and spirits that constitute their Essential Differences: it remains that we yeeld obedience to that necessity, so far forth at least, as to ex∣plain the Motions proper to that couplet of more simple affections, Ioy and Grief; the two points in which all human actions end; and to that most violent one, Anger. In Ioy therefore,Art. 50. The Motions of the Soul and spirits i Ioy. which is a delightful commotion of the Sensitive Soul as it were triumphing in her fruition of good or pleasure; I conceive that the Animal spi∣rits being in great abundance, but with a placid and equal motion, sent by the nerves to the heart, cause the orifices thereof to be opened and dilated more than at other times; and so the blood to be imported and exported more copiously and freely: and that by this means, from the blood are brought into the brain a plentious supply of new spirits, which extracted out of the purest and most re∣fined parts of the blood, are most fit to confirm the idea formed of the present good in the imagination, and so to con∣tinue the Soul in her pleasant Emotion.
Hence probably it is, that in this most agreeable passion, both the pulse is al∣waies made equal and more frequent, tho not so intense and strong as in Love; and a certain gratefull heat is felt, not only through the Lungs and all the breast, but through all outward parts of the bo∣dy; from the diffusion of the blood in full streams into them, which is discerni∣ble even by the florid purple colour where∣with they are suddainly tinged, and by the inflation or plumpness of all the mus∣cles of the face, which is thereby rende∣red more serene, sweet and cheerful. Easy therefore it is to infer, that as this passion is most congruous to the nature of the Corporeal Soul, so are the corpore∣al motions that accompany and characte∣rize it, most profitable to health; pro∣vided they be moderare. For, this Com∣motion and Effusion may be so vehement and suddain, that the Soul may become weak, and unable to rule the body, or to actuate the organs of speech, yea swoon∣ing, and death itself somtimes follow pro∣fuse and insolent Joy. So Lacon Chilo, an eminent Philosopher, suddainly expired in excessive joy, beholding his Sonne a Victor in the Olympic games. So Sopho∣cles the Tragedian also, and Dionysius the Tyrant died of a surfet of suddain Joy.
The reason whereof seems to consist, not in a vehement effusion and dissipation of the vital spirits, and a destitution of the Heart consequent thereunto; as Ferneli∣us would have it; because the faster the blood is effused through the arteries from the heart, the swifter must it return to the heart through the veines, so that the heart cannot be totaly exhausted and left destitute of blood: but rather in a sur∣charge and suffocation of the heart by too redundant an afflux of blood. For, up∣on extraordinary dilatation of the floud-gates of the heart by immoderate joy, the current of blood both out of the Ve∣na cava, and from the arteria venosa, may pour itself with so much violence, and in so great a quantity, into the ventri∣cles thereof, that the heart, unable to discharge itself soon enough of that op∣pressing deluge, by retruding its valves, may be suffocated, its motions stopped, and the Vital Flame in a moment extin∣guished. For certain it is, that in the state of health, the blood is not admitted into the heart beyond a certain proportion: nor can that proportion be much excee∣ded, whatever the cause be that maketh an apertio portarum there, without mani∣fest danger of life.
Art 51. Laughter.Among the Signs of this delightful pas∣sion, some have given the upper hand to that distortion of the countenance, accompanied with a loud, but inarticu∣late voice, which we call Laughter: but this being neither proper to, nor inse∣parable from Ioy, cannot therefore be∣long to it essentialy. That it is frequent∣ly a concomitant of Mirth or Hilarity, is not to be disputed: but Mirth is the lowest degree of Joy, a light and super∣ficial emotion of the Sensitive Soul and Spirits, a kind of short tickling of the Imagination, usualy expressed by Laugh∣ter: whereas Ioy is serious, profound and grave, according to that memorable Sentence of Seneca (epist. 23.) res severa est verum gaudium. Laughter then (as I said) is not proper to all Joy; because common to some other affections: for some are observed to laugh out of In∣dignation, others out of Contempt and dis∣dain, neither of which belong to any kind of Joy. Nor is it inseparable from Joy; because in truth Joy cannot produce Laughter, unless when it is very moderate, and hath somthing of Admiration or Hate mixt with it. For, we have it from the oracle of Experience, that in great and profound Joy, the cause of it, whatsoe∣ver it be, doth never force us to break
forth into laughter: nay more, that we are most easily provoked to laugh, when we are sad. Whereof the reason seems to be, either because in solid Joy, the Sen∣sitive Soul is so deeply commoved, so in∣tirely taken up with the delight of fruiti∣on, that she cannot attend to shake the Midriff, Lungs and Muscles of the breast; nimbly and strongly enough to create laughter: or because at that time the Lungs are so distended with blood, that they cannot, by repeted concussions, or alternate contractions and relaxations, be further inflated with air, whereof no lit∣tle quantity is required to produce that loud sound emitted in Laughter. That we may understand this matter more ful∣ly, let us examine the cause or occasion, and the Motions of Laughter. As for the First,Art. 52. The occasions of Laughter. viz. the Occasion or Motive; whatsoever it be, there must concur therein these three Conditions fol∣lowing. (1.) it must be new and surpri∣sing; because whatsoever is ridiculous at first, ceaseth to be so when grown stale, (2.) it must be such a novelty as may suggest to us a conception of some emi∣nency or advantage in our selves above another whom the occasion chiefly con∣cerns: for, why are we naturally prone to laugh at either a jest (which is no∣thing but a witty or elegant discovery and
representation of some absurdity or inde∣cency of another, abstracted from his person) or at the mischances and infir∣mities of others; unless from hence, that thereby our own abilities are the more set off and illustrated, and recommended to us by way of comparison? (3.) It must not touch our own, or our friends ho∣nour; for, in that point we are too ten∣der to tolerate, much less to laugh at a jest broken upon our selves, or friends, of whose dishonour we participate. These requisites in a ridiculous cause considered, we may adventure to conclude, that Laughter is an effect of sudden, but light Joy arising from the unexpected discovery of some infirmity in another not our friend, and from imagination of our own eminency, and exemption from the like. Here then (you see) is something of Admiration from the Novelty, something of Aversion from the In∣firmity, & something of Ioy or triumph from our opinion of some eminency in our selves. Art 53. Laughter out of Indigna∣tion.And as for that Laughter which is some∣times joyned with Indignation; it is most commonly fictitious or artificial, and then it depends intirely upon our will, as a vo∣luntary action: but when 'tis true or Na∣tural, it seems likewise to arise from Ioy conceived from hence, that we see our selves to be above offence by that evil which is the cause or subject of our indig∣nation;
and that we feel our selves sur∣prised by the unexpected novelty of the same. So that to the production of this Laughter also is required a concurs of Ioy, Aversion and Admiration; but all moderate. If this be so,Art. 4. A rare ex∣ample of in∣voluntary Laughter. what then shall we think of that odd example of Laughter in Lu∣dovicus vives; who writes of himself (lib. 3. de Anima, cap. de Risu) that usu∣ally when he began to eat after long fast∣ing, he could not forbear to break forth into a fit of loud laughter? This doubt∣less was not voluntary; because he strove to suppress it: nor could it be Convulsive, such as Physicians call Risus Sardonius; be∣cause he was in perfect health, sensible of no pain therein, nor incommodity there∣upon. It must therefore be Natural, though not Passionate; proceeding from some cause very obscure, and idiosyncriti∣cal, that is peculiar to his constitution: perhaps this, that in this Learned man, either the Lungs were more apt to be di∣stended with blood, or the Midriff more easily put into the motions that produce laughter, than commonly they are in most other men. The First, because in gene∣ral, whatsoever causeth the Lungs to be suddenly puffed up and distended with blood, causeth also the external action of Laughter; unless where sorrow changeth that action into groaning and weeping:
the other, because all Laughter is made chiefly by quick and short vibrations of the Midriff. But this rare Phenomenon we shall perhaps be better able to solve, when we have considered how the action of Laughter is performed in all other men. Art. 55. A conjecture concerning the cause thereof.Concerning this Problem therefore, it is observable that in Man, there seems to be a greater consent or sympathy, or ra∣ther commerce of motions betwixt the Midriff and the Heart, yea and the Ima∣gination also; than in Brutes of what or∣der or tribe soever: and that the Reason given hereof by the most accurate of our Modern Anatomists, is this; that the principal Nerve of the Midriff is rooted in the same Nerve of the Spine (named Nervus vertebralis) from whence there comes a conspicuous branch into the grand plexus of the Intercostal nerve; and that commonly two, sometimes three other branches more are derived from that same notable plexus, into the very trunk of the Nerve of the Diaphragm (as you may see most elegantly represented by Dr. Willis in the 9th Table of his most elabo∣rate Book de Anatomia Cerebri) which are not found in Beasts. For, from this plenty and singular contexture of nerves, it may be conjectured, not only why the Dia∣phragm doth so readily conform its moti∣ons to those of the Praecordia, and of the
Animal Spirits excited in passions of the Mind, and cooperate with them; but also why Risibility is an affection proper only to Man. For (as the same most curious Dr. Willis reasoneth, in his chapter of the functions and uses of the Intercostal pair of nerves) when the Imagination is affected with some pleasant and new conceipt, instantly there is caused a brisk and placid motion of the heart, as if it sprung up with joy to be alleviated or eased of its burden. Wherefore that the blood may be the more speedily dis∣charged out of the right Ventricle of the heart into the Lungs, and out of the left into the Aorta or grand Artery; the Dia∣phragm, being by abundance of Animal spi∣rits immitted through so many nerves pro∣ceeding from the aforesaid Plexus, briskly agitated is by nimble contraction drawn up∣wards; and so making many vibrations, doth at once raise up the Lungs, and force them to expell the blood out of their vessels into the arteria venosa, and to explode the aire out of their pipes into the windpipe; and this by frequent contractions of their lax and spongy substance, answerable in time and quickness to the vibrations of the Midriff. And then because the same Intercostal nerve, which communicateth with the nerve of the Diaphragm below, is conjoyned above also with the nerves
of the jaws and muscles of the face; thence it is, that the motions of Laugh∣ter being once begun in the brest, the face also is distorted into gestures or grimasces patheticaly correspondent there∣unto. And this is the most probable ac∣count I am able at present to give of the occasions and motions of passionate Laugh∣ter in general: nor can I at present think of any more plausible conjecture concern∣ing the reason of the admirable laughter of Ludovicus Vives, than this; that in him the nerves inservient to the motion of the Midriff, might be after such a pecu∣liar manner contrived and framed, as easily to cause quick and short recipro∣cations thereof, upon the pleasant af∣fection of his Imagination by the grate∣ful relish of his meat, after long absti∣nence, which doth alwaies highten the pleasure of refection: But we have in∣sisted too long upon the motions of Ioy. Art. 56. The Motions and Effects of Sorrow.In the contrary whereof, viz. Grief or Sorrow (which we have above described to be an ingrateful languor of the Soul, from a conception of evil present, mo∣ving her to contract herself, that she may avoid it) the Animal Spirits are in∣deed recalled inward, but slowly and without violence: so that the blood being by degrees destitute of a sufficient influx of them, is trasmitted through the heart
with too slow a motion. Whence the pulse is rendered little, slow, rare, and weak; and there is felt about the heart a certain oppressive strictness, as if the orifices of it were drawn together, with a manifest chilness congealing the blood, and communicating itself to the rest of the body. From which dejecting symp∣toms it is easy to collect, that this dole∣full affection, especialy if it be vehe∣ment and of long continuance, cannot but infer many, and grievous incommo∣dities to the whole body. For, besides this that it darkneth the spirits, and so dulls the wit, obscures the judgment, blunts the memory, and in a word be∣clouds the Lucid part of the Soul: it doth moreover incrassate the blood by refri∣geration, and by that reason immode∣rately constringe the heart, cause the lamp of life to burn weakly and dimly, induce want of sleep by drying the brain, corrupt the nutritive juice, and convert it into that Devil of a humor, Melan∣choly. No wonder then if in men over∣come with this so dismal passion, the countenance appears pale, wan and live∣less; the limbs grow heavy and indispo∣sed to motion, the flesh decays and con∣sumes through want of nourishment, and the whole body be precipated into imbe∣cillity, Cachexy or an evil habit, langui∣shing
and other cold and chronic diseases. All which the wisest of Men, King Sa∣lomon, hath summ'd up in few words in 17 Chap. of his Proverbs, where he adver∣tiseth, that a sorrowful spirit drieth up the very bones. And yet notwithstanding, it is very rarely found, that from Grief either long and obstinate, or violent and sud∣dainly invading, any man hath fallen in∣to a swoon, or been suddenly extingui∣shed. Which I am apt to refer to this; that in the ventricles of the heart, tho but very slowly commoved, there can hardly be so smale a quantity of blood, but it may suffice to keep alive the vital flame burning therein, when the orifices of them are almost closed, as commonly they are by immoderate grief. Art. 57. Sighs and Tears.Somtimes this bitter passion is signified by a certain uncomely distortion of the face, somwhat different from that of Laughter, and acompanied with Tears; somtimes only by Sighs: by Sighs, when the Grief is extreme: by Tears, when it is but moderate. For as Laughter never proceeds from great and profound Joy, so neither doe Tears flow from profound sorrow; according to that of the Trage∣dian, leves curae loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Nor is weeping the pathognomonic or in∣fallible sign of Grief, For, all tears are not voluntary; every light hurt or pain of
the Eyes causing them to distill against our will: nor all voluntary ones the ef∣fect of Grief. Some weep for sudden joy joyned with Love, especialy old men: some when their Revenge is suddainly frustrated by the repentance and submis∣sion of the offender; and such are the tears of Reconciliation. Some again weep out of Anger, when they meet with a repulse or check of their desires, which causing them with regret to reflect upon their own weakness and insufficiency to compass their wills, affects them with displeasure, and dissolves them into tears, as if they fell out with themselves upon a sudden sense of their own defect: and this kind of weeping is most famili∣ar to Children and Women when they are crossed in their wills and expectation; as also to Revengefull Men, upon their beholding of those whom they commis∣serate, and their want of power to help them. Notwithstanding the Occasions of weeping be thus various, yet since Tears are frequently both an effect and testimo∣ny of sorrow, the nature and motions whereof we have now attempted to ex∣plain: it can be no impertinent Digression, to inquire further into their original or sours, and the manner how they are made to flow, when we are willing to
signify our present sorrow by shedding them. Art. 58. Whence Tears flow.As for the Fountain therefore whence all our Tears flow, and the Matter whereof they consist; the succesful industry of Modern Anatomists hath discovered, that in the Glandules placed at each cor∣ner of the Eyes, there is either from the blood brought thither by the arteries (as the vulgar doctrine is) or (as I, upon good reasons elswhere delivered, con∣ceive) from the Nutritive juice brought by nerves, separated, and kept in store a certain thin, clear and watery humor, partly saline, partly subacid in tast; the use whereof is aswell to keep the globes of the eyes moist and slippery, for their more easy motion; as to serve for Tears when we have occasion to shed them. And to this some have added, that be∣cause there are certain branches of nerves (like the tendrels of a vine) incir∣cling the vessells leading to and from those Glandules, and by their tension somtimes constringing them: therefore it is proba∣ble, that when the serous humor is too abundant in the blood brought into the brain, the same is by the arteries (whose pulse is quickned somwhat by the pres∣sure of these nerves) brought more co∣piously than at other times, into those
Glandules, and after its separation, there detained from returning by the veins, that are likewise streightned by constricti∣on of the same nerves. Whether this ingenious conjecture be true or not; cer∣tain it is, that the Matter of Tears is the same with the liquor of the Lymphae-ducts, and that they flow from the aforesaid Glandules, which are therefore named Lacrymales. And as for the manner of their Ex∣pression from thence in some passions of the Mind;Art. 59. How they are expressed. the most rational account I have hitherto met with concerning it, is this. When any occasion of weeping occurrs, and affects the Sensitive Soul; instantly the Ventricles of the heart, with all the Praecordia, are by the blood in abundance brought into them, more than usualy crowded and distended, and the Lungs also stuffed and inflated, so that they cannot perform the action of respi∣ration but by sobbs intermixed; and the Midriff, to give room to such distension of the heart and Lungs, is pressed down∣ward, with a more intense contraction alternately succeeding; which great de∣pression and brisk contraction being re∣peted, is the efficient cause of Sobbing. and at the same time the air being with difficulty admitted into the lungs, by rea∣son
they and the Midriff are so excee∣dingly distended, and with no less diffi∣culty exploded again by the windpipe: thence comes that whining sound of cry∣ing and howling. To this affection of the vitals, the parts of the face also, be∣ing distorted into a sad and mournfull as∣pect, exactly correspond: because the nerves which contract the Praecordia, have a communion of continuity, and coope∣rate with those which are inserted into the muscles of the face, and which com∣pose it into the postures of weeping and laughter in passion. Nor doth the dis∣order cease here, but extend itself to the upper region also, to the brain, where the Spirits being put into confu∣sion, and the arteries surcharged with too great an afflux of blood from the op∣pressed heart; the palace of the Soul it∣self is brought into danger of a purple de∣luge. For prevention whereof, the nerves incircling and binding the trunks of the arteries in many places, strongly con∣stringe them; so that the commotion of the blood is much repressed, the liquor thereof (in the beginning of the passion highly rarefied) suddainly condensed, and the serous part of it being put into a flux, is transmitted into the above mentioned Glandules of the Eyes, there
placed and destined by nature to receive it. And then because these Glandules are in like manner constringed, and as it were squeez'd by certain nerves that are of the same original and community with the Pathetic nerves of the face and heart: the serous liquor is expressed out of them through their excretory channels leading to the corners of the Eyes (most accur∣rately described, with their uses, by that diligent Anatomist Nichol. Steno, in a singular treatise) and forced to distill in a shower of tears; the strong Contracti∣on of the membranes investing the whole brain, concurring to that expression. The same may be said likewise of the shedding tears for Ioy.Art. 60. The reason of weeping for Ioy. For in suddain and great Ioy conjoyned with Admira∣tion, the Sensitive Soul very much ex∣panding herself, and diffusing the Animal Spirits; the blood is sent from the heart in great abundance to the brain, so as to distend the vessels that contain it: which being soon after strongly con∣tracted again by the same Soul withdraw∣ing herself inward, (as if she feared a dissolution by so ample an Effusion) the blood is in a sort put into a flux or mel∣ted, and the serous part of it separated in the Glandules of the Eyes, and thence by constriction of the nerves squeezed forth in tears.
Art. 61. Why Infants and Old men are more  prone than others to shed tears.This being supposed, it will not be difficult for us thence to infer, that In∣fants and Old Men are indeed more prone to weep than those of middle age: but for divers reasons. Old Men for the most part weep out of Love and Ioy together; because both these affections causing a great Effusion of the Sensitive Soul, and consequently a large apertion of the ori∣fices or sluices of the heart; must there∣fore (especialy where they are conjoy∣ned) cause also a transmission of the blood from thence to the brain in great abun∣dance: and the blood being generaly more thin and diluted with serum in old men, must yield more matter for their tears. But Infants commonly weep out of mere Sorrow and vexation, such as is not accompanied with the least of Love: because the contraction of the Soul and nerves caused by sorrow, expres∣seth out of the blood (which is alwaies abundant in children) brought by the ar∣teries to the brain, a sufficient quantity of serum to replenish the Glandulae La∣chrymales, and supply the sourse of their tears. Art. 62. The reason of Sighing and Sobbing.There remains yet that other Sign of Sorrow, which doth usually accompany it when it is profound and extreme; and that is Sighing; the cause whereof is very
much different from that of weeping, though both proceed from Grief. For, the same occasion that moves us to shed tears, when our Lungs are stuffed and di∣stended with blood; provokes us also to fetch deep sighs, when they are almost empty, and when some sudden imaginati∣on of Hope or comfort opens the sluice of the Arteria Venosa in the lungs, which sor∣row had lately contracted. For, then that little blood that remained in the lungs, in a moment passing down through that pipe into the left ventricle of the heart; the ambient aire instantly rusheth by the mouth into the lungs, to replenish that place the blood had left free: and this great and quick repletion of the lungs with aire, is what we call Sighing. You have now heard what Conjectures seem to me most consentaneous to reason and Anatomical observations, concern∣ing the Corporeal Motions excited in those two eminent passions, Joy and Sor∣row, with their usual Adjuncts, Laughter and weeping: be pleas'd to hear also a few words touching the more violent motions proper to Anger, which I have promised next to consider.Art. 63. The Motions and Symp∣toms of An∣ger. That the Effects of this most vehement Commotion of the Sensitive Soul are vari∣ous, not only as the occasion or injury is
conceived to be greater or less; but also according to the various temperaments of persons, and to the diversity of other Pas∣sions conjoyned therewith: is obvious to common observation, and we have alrea∣dy hinted. And from this variety it is, that men have distinguished Anger into Harmless and Dangerous, or simple heat of blood, and thirst after Revenge: assign∣ing moreover to each sort its proper Signs or Characters observable in the outward parts of the body, and especially in the face. For some when they are angry, look pale, or tremble; others grow red, or weep: and the vulgar judgeth the passion of the first sort to be much more dangerous, than that of the other. Whereof the rea∣son may be this; that when we either will not, or cannot shew our resentments, and revenge otherwise than by our change of countenance, and by words; we then put forth all our heat, and ex∣ert all our force at the very beginning of the commotion; so that the blood being in this sudden effort copiously effu∣sed from the heart into the face. and there detained a while by constriction of the veines by those Branches of the Fifth pair of nerves that are inserted into the mus∣cles of that part; we are forced to ap∣pear in the scarlet livery of shame, that is,
to blush out of indignation and regret or grief at the unworthy affront. And some∣times the first emotion of desire to vindi∣cate our selves, together with commisera∣tion of our own want of power to re∣venge more effectually, causeth us also to shed tears. But they who on the contrary, reserve themselves for, and strongly resolve upon revenge in time to come, grow deeply sad and pensive at the present; as conceiving themselves thereunto obliged by the na∣ture of the injury done to them, and cast∣ing about in their thoughts how to ac∣complish their revenge: and all this while the Sensitive Soul persisting in her Contraction and revocation of the Spirits inwards, there is no extraordinary, nay but little diffusion of the blood outwards. And sometimes they also fear the evils that may ensue from the revenge they in∣tend; which strikes them into paleness, shivering and trembling: the Sensitive Soul being then distracted betwixt the contrary motions of desire of revenge, and of fear of the ill consequents thereof; like a Sea beaten by two contrary winds. Yet after this first conflict is over, when they come to execute their revenge, then fear giving place to rage, they soon grow the more inflamed and daring, by how much
the colder they were during their delibe∣ration: as in Fevers that invade with cold and shivering, the following heats are al∣wayes most ardent and unquenchable. You see then how the Motions, and con∣sequently the Efforts and Effects of this vio∣lent passion may be diversified even by di∣versity of other affections conjoyned there∣with. For in the Harmless and Blushing or Weeping anger, there is alwayes a mix∣ture of shame and self-pity; which by allaying the desire of revenge, helpeth much to check and moderate the commo∣tion of the blood; and therefore such anger seldom lasteth long, and is more easily composed: when on the other side, in the Pale and Trembling, but Dan∣gerous anger, there is first deep Indignati∣on, then Fear, and at last Furious persuit of revenge; by which the blood being most violently agitated, and the sulphureous parts of it all kindled into a flame, is not to be calmed and reduced to temper, un∣less by the pleasure of revenge, or by tri∣umph in the submission of the Enemy, or by the cold damp of repentance. For pre∣vention of which most bitter passion, by moderating our Anger; I think my self in Charity obliged to conclude this argu∣ment with an excellent Moral remark of Monsieur des Cartes.
Although the passion of Anger be in itself usefull,Art. 64. xcess of Anger, to be avoided; and that chiefly by the help of true Generosity. in that it inspires us with vigour and courage necessary to repell in∣juries: yet the Excesses of no other passi∣on are with greater care and caution to be shunned. Because by perturbing our judgment, they often induce us into those errors, whereof we ought after∣ward dearly to repent: yea somtimes they hinder us from repelling injuries so safely and honourably, as otherwise we might, if we were less commoved. But as nothing doth more increase the flame of Anger, than Pride: so (I am perswa∣ded) nothing can more abate and re∣strain the Excesses of it, than true Gene∣rosity. Because while Generosity makes us to have but little value for all things that may be taken from us; and on the other side, to prize above all temporal things, our Liberty and Empire over ourselves, which is lost when we are capable to be hurt by an other: it makes us with Con∣tempt alone, or at most with Indignation to revenge those injuries, with which weaker minds are wont to be offen∣ded. ¶ Being now at length arrived at the end of this my divertising Exercise, wherein I proposed to my self to inquire into the Occasions, Causes, Differences,
Motions and Effects of the most powerfull and remarkable of all the Passions, by which the Mind of Man is apt to be per∣turbed; so far as my weak understanding assisted by reading and meditation would permit: before I lay aside my pen, I find it requisite to advertise you briefly of two things, one whereof may conduce to your more easy comprehension of what I have hitherto delivered concerning the more general Differences of the Passions; the other may serve to my exemption from the censure of the Illiterate. Art. 65. That of all the Passions hitherto considered, only six are Simple; the rest Mixed.The First is, that of all the Passions recounted and described in this impolite discourse, there are only six that seem to be Simple and Principal, namely Admira∣tion, Love, Hatred, Desire, Ioy and Grief; which are therefore said to be Simple, be∣cause they consist of only one single act or commotion of the Sensitive Soul di∣sturbed with the apprehension of things whether real or imaginary. For, as to all the rest; either they are but various species of those Simple ones, or they re∣sult from divers mixtures and combinati∣ons of them; being therefore named Mixt Passions, because they consist of more than one act or Motion. If there∣fore I have chiefly considered the Nature, motions, and principal Effects of the Six
Simple or Primitive passions; contenting myself only with a brief Genealogy of the Compound or Derivative, as sufficient to direct your cogitations to the various Mixed commotions whence they result: it was only lest I might abuse your pati∣ence by undecent repetitions, or oppress your mind with too great multiplicity of particulars, which is none of the least im∣pediments of Science. The Other is,Art. 65. Reasons a∣gainst publi∣cation of this discourse. that notwithstanding the Excellency, and singular Vtility of the Argument whereof I have treated in this Discourse; yet seeing my design in com∣posing it, hath been partly to render my present solitude less tedious to my self, and chiefly to give you some testimony that I convert not my leisure into idleness: You ought not to frustrate my confi∣dence of your secrecy, or to expose my defects, by communicating these papers to Others. Not to Philosophers, least they find nothing new in them but my Lapses. Not to the Vnlearned, because they are incompetent judges of truth or error, es∣pecially in such Philosophical Enquiries; more addicted to barbarous contempt of Knowledge in others, than to confess ig∣norance in themselves. To These there∣fore (you may be most assured) I am not ambitious you should recommend this
Treatise, wherein is contained nothing that can either please, or reform them. I know it is no less difficult to teach them the art of regulating their exorbi∣tant Passions, than it is to bring them to prefer the severe dictates of reason, to the flattering suggestions of Sense; or to convince them, that realy nothing is pleasant, but what is also honest; nothing very desireable, but the right use of their freedom of will; nothing formidable, but the evil they themselves commit. I know, that in the Vulgar, Religion is fear; con∣stancy, bruitish obstinacy; zeal, pride; friendship, interest; and virtue itself but dissimulation. I know also, that the mul∣titude is not led by merit, but carried headlong by prejudice, to praise or dis∣praise: and that they are more propens to malignity and detraction, than to cha∣rity and candor. The Vulgar then, and all that herd with them, I exclude from my studies; lest by perversely interpre∣ting them (as they do all things) they should interrupt my tranquility, which I value infinitely above their favour, and wherein I endeavour to find a hap∣piness, which neither their hatred, nor the iniquity of Fortune shall take from me. That I may find this the sooner, I
now and then entertain myself with seri∣ous reflections upon my own defects, as the only impediments that have hitherto hindered me from attaining unto it: and among the rest, I hold my mind longest fixed on this following Meditation: which I therefore freely impart to you who are my Friend, both because I think it may be of equal use to you also, by helping you to moderate your Affections to the transitory things of this shadow of life; and because the precedent discourse will perhaps be somwhat the less imper∣fect, after it hath received so perti∣nent a
CONCLVSION. Art. 1. That all the Good and Evil of this life depends upon the Passions:THat all the Good and Evil of this life depends upon the various Passions incident to the Mind of Man; I need no other document than my own dearly bought Experience: which hath too often convinced me, that while I out of weakness suffered my self to be seduced and transported by the ardor and excesses of my Affections, I have fallen into Errors, that have more de∣jected my spirit, than a long succession of infortunes could ever doe; and from whence I could not expect better fruit, than that of shame, sorrow and repentance. Art 2. Which yet were institu∣ted by Na∣ture as in∣citements to the Soul.Notwithstanding this, I ought not to be so unjust, so ingrateful to Nature, as to transfer the blame of such Errors upon her; as if she had been less careful than she might have been, to secure Man from infelicity: only because she thought fit to make him obnoxious to so great a multitude of inward Perturbations. No, I ought rather to remember, that among all of them, there is no one but hath its
Vse, and that a good one too: provided we rightly imploy the forces Nature hath given us, to keep it within the bounds of Moderation. And it may suffice to Natures vindication, that reason obli∣geth me to acknowledge, that her design in instituting our Passions, was in the general this; that they might dispose and incite the Soul to affect and desire those things, which Nature by secret dictates teach∣eth to be good and profitable to her; and to persist in that desire: as the same commotion of the spirits that is requisite to produce them, doth dispose the parts of the Body also to those motions that serve to the executi∣on of her will. And hence doubtless it is, that they who are naturaly most apt to be moved by passions, have this ad∣vantage above others of duller and gros∣ser constitutions, that they may (if they will) tast more of the pleasures belong∣ing to the Sensitive Soul: but then again they are likewise thereby more exposed to drink of the gall and wormwood of pain and remorse, when they know not how to regulate their passions, and when adverse Fortune invades them. I am con∣firmed then, that because man is constitu∣ted propens to Passions, he is not there∣fore the less perfect, but rather the more capable of pleasure from the right use of
the good things of this life: and by consequence, that Nature by making him , hath therein signali∣zed both her wisedom and indulgence. Art. 3. That we are prone to Er∣rors, not from want of an omnis∣cious under∣standing:But had he not been more perfect, if it had pleased his Creator to endow him more∣over with such Excellency above all other Animals, as might have secured him from committing Errors through the violent in∣stigation of his Passions, whenever they should incite him to desire and persue things not realy, but onely apparently good for him? Certainly no. For it is not on∣ly impious, but highly absurd, to ima∣gine that God can be Author of our Er∣rors, because he hath not given to us an Understanding Omniscious: for it is of the formal reason of a created intellect, that it be finite; and of a finite intellect, that it extend not itself to all things. But that Man should have a Will unconfined or extensible to all things, this indeed is convenient to his nature: and it is a transcendent perfection in him, that he can and doth act by his own will, that is freely; and so is, by a peculiar prero∣gative, Author of his own actions, and may deserve praise and reward for them. For no Man praiseth a Watch, or any other Self-moving engine made by art, for performing the motions thereby de∣signed;
because those motions necessarily result from the figure and construction of its parts: but the Artist himself deserves praise, because he framed the engine not by necessity or compulsion, but freely. So we by the same reason deserve the more by well doing, that is by embracing truth, because we do it voluntary or by election; than we should, if we could not but do it. When therefore we fall into Errors, occasioned by our Passions; the defect lieth in our own act, or in the use of our liberty, not in our nature: for that is the same when we make an erroneous judgement of things represented to us, as it is when we make a right judgment. And although Almighty God might, if He had thought good, have given so great perspicacity to our Understanding, as that we could never have been decei∣ved: yet by what right can we require that privilege from him? True it is (I con∣fess) that among us Men, if any hath power to hinder this or that evil, and yet doth not hinder it; we accuse him as cause of it: and justly too, because the power that Men have one over others, was instituted, and committed to them to that end, that they should use it to the restraining of others from evil. But there is not the same reason why we should
think God to be Author of our Errors, only because it was in His power to have prevented them, by making us superi∣or to deception: for the power that God hath of right over all Men, is most so∣veraign, most absolute, most free. And therefore we are obliged to ascribe to His Divine Majesty, all possible praise and thanks for the good gifts He hath out of his infinite benignity been pleased to be∣stow upon us his Creatures: but we have no pretext of right to complain, because He hath not conferred upon us all things that we conceive he might. Besides, although the Intellect of Man be not omniscious;Art. 4. But from our ill use of that un∣derstanding we have, in the conduct of our de∣sires suggest∣ed by passi∣ons. yet is it not so narrow, so limited, as not to extend to the con∣duct of his Unlimited Will, in the Electi∣on of Good, and avoidance of Evil; and consequently to his exemption from Error by the violence of his Passions. For, first, by virtue of his Understan∣ding, Man is capable of Wisedom, which is alone able to teach him how to subdue and govern all his Affections, and how to dispense them with such dexterity, as not only to make all the Evils they pro∣duce, easily tollerable, but even to reap internal satisfaction and joy from all. And secondly, it is evident from the very nature of our Passions, that they cannot
carry us on to any actions whatsoever, but only by the Desire they excite in us: and therefore if we can but direct that desire to right objects, that is to things realy Good; we may by that alone pre∣vent our being deceived, that is our be∣ing carried to evil actions by violence of our Passions: but that Right Reason is of itself able so to direct our desire arising from passions, is manifest from the known Utility of Moral Philosophy, which pre∣scribeth certain rules to that end. I will conclude then, that I commit Errors in passion, not because I am naturaly prone to Passions, nor because I want an om∣niscious Understanding: but only because I make not a right use of that finite in∣deed, yet sufficient Vnderstanding God hath given me,Art. 5. That all Er∣rors to which the desires ex∣cited by our Passions, ex∣pose us, arise from hence, that we doe not suffici∣ently distin∣guish things that depend intirely upon ourselves, from those that depend upon others. in the conduct of that Cupidity my passions excite in me. That I may therefore be henceforth bet∣ter able to make use of my Understanding as I ought, in such occasions; it highly concerneth me to enquire in the next place, into the origin of that Error, to which the Cupidity accompanying our Passions, doth most frequently expose us: for, that being once known, will be the more easi∣ly avoidable. This Error then doth arise (if I mistake not) from hence; that we do not sufficiently distinguish those things that
depend intirely upon ourselves, from those that depend upon others, as to their events: it being a general rule, that Desire is al∣waies good, when grounded upon certain Knowledge; and on the contrary alwaies evil, when founded upon some error. Now as to things that depend upon our∣selves alone, that is upon our Free-will; to know them to be good, is sufficient to assure us we cannot desire them too fervently: because to doe good things that depend upon ourselves, is to pursue Virtue, which cannot be too fervently desired, nor can the event of our desire of such things possibly be unhappy, be∣cause from the conscience that by desiring them we have rightly used the freedom of our will, we receive all the satisfaction we expected. But alass! the Error that is too commonly committed in such cases, lieth not in the over fervent, but in the overcold desire. And the best remedy against this defect, is to free the mind as much as is possible, from all other desires less profitable; and then to endeavour clearly to understand, and with due at∣tention to examine the goodness of the thing that is represented as worthy to be desired.
As for the things that are altogether independent upon Vs;Art. 6. And that they may be prevented by two General Remedies, viz. Genero∣sity. however good they may be, yet we are never to desire them vehemently: not only because tis possible they may never arrive, and so vex and torment the mind so much the more bit∣terly, by how much the more eagerly they have been desired; but chiefly be∣cause by preoccupating our thoughts, they withdraw our study from other things whereof the acquisition depends upon ourselves. And against these vain desires there are two general Remedies; where∣of the first is true Generosity; the other, a firm belief of, and tranquill depen∣dence upon Providence Divine. For, that noble and heroic habit of the mind, which is called Generosity, and which seems to comprehend all other Virtues; though it animateth Men to great and honorable en∣terprises, doth yet at the same time re∣strain them from attempting things which they conceive themselves incapable to effect; inspiring courage, not temerity. Then by teaching, that nothing is either more worthy of, or more delightful to a spirit elevated by the love of Virtue, above the vulgar, that to doe good to others; and in order thereunto, to pre∣fer beneficence to self-interest: it makes us perfectly charitable, benign, affable,
and ready to oblige every one by good offices, when it is in our power so to do. Again, being inseparable from virtuous Humility, it makes us both to measure our own Merits by the impartial rule of right reason, and to know that we can have no just right to praise or reward, but from the genuin and lauble use of the freedom of our▪ Will. And from these and other the like excellent effects of this divine Virtue, it is that the Ge∣nerous attain to an absolute dominion over their exorbitant passions and desires. They conquer Iealousie and Envy, by con∣sidering, that nothing whereof the acqui∣sition depends not wholy upon themselves, is realy valuable enough to justify their earnest desire of it. They exempt them∣selves from Hatred towards any, by esteeming all as worthy of love as them∣selves. They admit no Fear, by being duely conscious of their own innocency, and secure in the confidence of their own Virtue. They banish Grief, by remem∣bring that while they conserve their will to doe good, they can be deprived of no∣thing that is properly theirs. And An∣ger they exclude, because little esteem∣ing whatsoever depends upon others, they never yeeld so much to their Adversaries, as to acknowledge themselves within the
reach of their injuries. It is not then without reason, that I fix upon Generosi∣ty, as one of the universal remedies against our inordinate Cupidities. And As for the other,Art. 7. And frequent reflections upon Provi∣dence Di∣vine. namely frequent re∣flection upon Providence Divine; this doubtless must likewise be of soveraign efficacy to preserve us from all distem∣pers of mind. For, it establish us in a certain perswasion, that it is absolutely impossible that any thing should come to pass otherwise than this Providence hath from all eternity determined: and con∣sequently, that Fortune is but a Chimera, hatch'd in the brain out of an Error of human understanding, and nourished by popular superstition. For, we cannot de∣sire any thing, unless we first think the same to be some way or other possible: nor can we think those things to be possi∣ble, that depend not upon us, unless so far as we imagine them to depend upon Fortune, and that the like have hapned in times past. But this opinion proceeds only from hence, that we know not all the Causes that concurr to single Effects. For, when a thing that we have apprehen∣ded to depend upon Fortune, and so to be possible, succeeds not: that is a certain sign, that some one of the Causes neces∣sary to make it succeed or come to pass,
hath been wanting; and consequently, that the same was absolutely impossible; as also that the like event, that is such a one to the production whereof the like necessary Cause was wanting, hath ne∣ver come to pass. So that had we not been ignorant of that deficient Cause, we never had thought that event to be pos∣sible, nor by consequence ever desired it. Art. 8. Which utter∣ly excludeth Fortune, but leaveth us at liberty to di∣rect our de∣sires.We are therefore utterly to renounce that vulgar absurdity, that there is in the World a certain Power called For∣tune, that makes things to happen or not to hapen as she pleaseth: and in the oom thereof to establish this great verity, that all things are directed by Divine Provi∣dence, whose decree is so infallible and immutable, that excepting those things which the same decree hath left to depend upon our Will, we ought to think, that in respect of Vs, nothing doth or can come to pass, that is not necessary, and in some measure fatal: so that we cannot without error desire any thing should come to pass otherwise than it doth. But for∣asmuch as our desires for the most part extend to things that depend neither who∣ly upon us, nor wholy upon others: therefore we ought in them to distinguish exactly what dependeth intirely upon our∣selves,
that so we may extend our de∣sires to that alone. And as for the rest; though we ought to look upon the suc∣cess as fatal and immutable, lest we place our desire thereupon: yet ought we al∣so seriously to weigh and consider the reasons that suggest more or less hope, that they may serve to direct our actions accordingly. For reason requires we should follow the more probable and safe way to our end: and when we have done so; whatever the Event be, we ought contentedly to acquiesce in this, that we have done what our Vnderstanding judg∣ed to be best. And truely when we have learned thus to distinguish Providence Divine from Fortune, we shall easily ac∣quire a habit of directing our desires in such a manner, that because the accom∣plishment of them depends upon our∣selves only, they may alwaies afford us full satisfaction.Art. 9. How we may expedite our selves from the difficul∣ties that seem to make the decree of Divine Pro∣vidence ir∣reconcileable to the liber∣ty of our will. But doe we not here intangle ourselves in great difficulties, by endevoring thus to re∣concile this eternal Preordination of God, to the Liberty of our Will? we doe, I con∣fess; but conceive withall, that we may disentangle ourselves again, by remem∣bring, that our Vnderstanding is finite, but the power of God by which He hath from eternity not only foreknown all
things that are or can possibly be, but al∣so willed and preordained them so to be, is infinite: and then that it is enough for us, clearly and distinctly to know that this infinite Power is essentialy in God; but too much for us so to compre∣hend the same, as to see in what manner it leaveth the actions of Men undermined and free. For of the Liberty or indiffe∣rency that is in us, we are all so con∣scious within ourselves, that there is no∣thing we can comprehend more evident∣ly, more perfectly. And it were ab∣surd, because we cannot comprehend one thing which we know to be of its own nature incomprehensible to us; therefore to doubt of another which we do inti∣mately comprehend, and by daily expe∣rience find to be in ourselves. Again, since we thus know most cer∣tainly, that all our Errors depend upon our Will;Art. 10. How it comes that we are often deceived by our will▪ though we are never de∣ceived with ou will. is it not wonderfully strange that we are ever deceived, when no Man is willing to be deceived▪ 'Tis so indeed; but nevertheless the Problem seems ca∣pable of solution by considering, that it is one thing to be willing to be deceived, and another to be willing to give assent to those things wherein it hapens that error is found. And though there be no Man, who is expresly willing to be deceived:
yet there is scarcely any, who is not of∣ten willing to assent to those things where∣in error is, unknown to him, contained. Yea it often falls out; that the very de∣sire of attaining to truth, causeth those who do not rightly know by what way it is to be attained, to give judgment of things they do not clearly perceive, and so to err. So that the summe of all this perplex and intricate matter is this, that Error ariseth from our assent to things whose truth or falsity, good or evil, we have not clearly and distinctly discerned. For, since God cannot without impious absurdity be imagined to be Author of deceipt, the faculty He hath given us of perceiving and discerning, cannot naturaly tend to falsity: as neither can our faculty of assen∣ting, that is our will, when it extends itself only to those things that are clearly perceived. Whence it follows, that to direct our desires aright, our main business must be to imploy our Vnderstanding or faculty of discerning, strictly and atten∣tively to examine and consider the good∣ness of the objects, before we determin our Will upon them: wherein doth chief∣ly consist the use of all Moral Wisedom, and whereupon great part of our tempo∣ral Felicity dependeth.
Art. 11. A third ge∣neral Reme∣dy against Error occa∣sioned by in∣ordinate Pas∣sions, viz. Premedita∣tion and De∣liberation.But do not I here propose a lesson ve∣ry hard to human frailty to learn? Is it not extremely difficult thus accurrately and calmly to examine things, when the imagination is vehemently commoved by the object of some more violent passion, and the judgment strongly surprised? I acknowledge it to be difficult indeed: but this difficulty hath its proper Reme∣dy, namely Premeditation and Deliberati∣on. I find in myself (and so do all Men, I believe) that the motions raised in my blood by the objects of my affecti∣ons, doe so promptly follow upon the first impressions made by them in my brain, and from the mechanical disposition of the organs of my body, though my Soul contribute nothing toward their advance∣ment, but continues indifferent; that all the wisedom I can call to my assistance, is not sufficient to resist and arrest them. And others there are, I know, who be∣ing naturaly propens to the commotions of Joy, or of Commiseration, or Ter∣ror, or Anger; have not the power to refrain themselves from swooning, or tears, or trembling, or heat of blood, when∣ever their Phansy is vehemently assaul∣ted by objects apt to excite those Passi∣ons. Nay, as if all Mankind were equa∣ly subject to the same defect, it is held for
a Maxim, that the firs motions of our pas∣sions are not in our power. And yet not∣withstanding, this so universal defect is not incurable by Premeditation and care. When therefore we first feel any such strong commotion of our blood, we ought to be premonished and to remem∣ber, that all things that offer themselves to the imagination, respect only the de∣ception of the Reasonable Soul, and to perswade her that the reasons which serve to recommend the object of her passion, are far more firm and conside∣rable than in reality they are: and on the contrary, that those which serve to dis∣commend it, are much weaker and less considerable than in truth they are. And when Passion comes at length to perswade us to do those things whose execution admits of any the least pause or delay: we must remember to abstain from gi∣ving judgment concerning them, much less assent to them, and to avert our co∣gitations to other things, untill time and quiet have wholy composed the commo∣tion in our blood. Finaly, when heat of passion inciteth us to actions that al∣low little or no time for counsel or de∣liberation; in this case we are to con∣vert our will chiefly upon following those reasons that are contrary to what that pas∣sion
suggesteth, although they appear less valid. So when an Enemy invades us unexpectedly, that suddain occasion permits us not to take time for delibe∣ration whether of the three is best, to resist, to submit, or to fly. Here there∣fore, when we feel ourselves surprised with fear; we should endeavor to avert our thoughts from the consideraton of the danger, and fix them upon the rea∣sons for which there is greater security and honor in resistence than in flight: and on the contrary, when we perceive our∣selves to be by anger and desire of re∣venge provoked to rush turiously upon him who assaults us; we must remember to think, that it is great imprudence to precipitate ones self into manifest danger, when safety may be obtained without infamy: and where we are infe∣rior to the Aggressor in point of strength, there we are likewise to consider, that it is better to retreat honorably, or to consent to terms of submission, than like a wild beast to expose ourselves to certain death. This therefore I ought to prescribe to my self, as a Third Panc∣reston or Vniversal Antidote against the incommodities impendent from Passions; viz. to give myself time for deliberation, where the occasion will allow it: and
where it will not, there to convert my thought chiefly upon the reasons that contradict the suggestions of my passion: and alwaies to remember that the reasons that offer themselves to recommend the object of my passion, are not realy so va∣lid and considerable, as my imagination represents them to be. Nor doth this counsel seem difficult to be put in practise, especialy by considerate Men and such who are wont to make serious reflecti∣ons upon their actions. But what need I thus perplex my thoughts in searching for Medicins to mi∣tigate the violence of Passions,Art. 12. A fourth universal Re∣medy, viz. the constant exercise of Vertue. when there is one singular Remedy infallibly sufficient to secure us from all the Evils they can possibly occasion, and that is the constant exercise of Vertue? For, seeing that the internal commotions of the Rea∣sonable Soul touch us more neerly, and by consequence are much more preva∣lent over us, than the affections of the Sensitive, which though diffe∣rent from, are yet many times con∣joyned with them: most certain it is, that all the tumults raised in the Sensitive, have no power to perturb the tranquil∣lity of her Superior, the Rational, pro∣vided she have reason to be in peace and content within herself; but serve rather
to augment her Joy, by giving her oc∣casions to know and delight in her own perfection, as often as she finds herself much above any the least discomposure or disturbance from them. And that she may be thus content within herself, she need do no more but intirely addict herself to the love and persuit of Virtue. For, whoever hath so lived, that his conscience cannot accuse him of ever neg∣lecting to do those things which he judg∣ed to be best (which is exactly to follow the conduct of Virtue) this Man doth from thence receive that intellectual joy and satisfaction, which is of such sove∣raign power to make him happy, that the most violent commotions of his af∣fections can never be of force enough to perturb the tranquility of his Soul; and which being the Summum Bonum of human life, is not to be attained (as Se∣neca from his oracle Epicurus most judi∣ciously observes, Epist. 23.) nisi ex bona conscientia, ex honestis consiliis, ex rectis actionibus, ex contemptu fortuitorum, ex placido vitae ac continuo tenore unam pre∣mentis viam. Nor is there indeed any other internal satisfaction or joy belong∣ing to the Rational Soul, but what she thus formeth to herself out of herself; and what can therefore be no more in∣terrupted
than she can be destroyed: the assurance whereof made the fame Se∣neca say (Epist. 27.) Sola virtus praestat gaudium perpetuum, securum: etiam si quid obstat, nubium modo intervenit, quae infra feruntur, nec unquam diem vincunt. And these, my dear friend,Art. 13. The study of Epicurus's Morals re∣commended are some of those Philosophical considerations up∣on which I sometimes reflect (as I lately told you) as Universal and Efficacious Remedies against vain desires suggested by our Passions, and the various Evils to which they usualy expose us. Which now you have with so great patience heard; 'tis fit I should gratefully resign you to a more profitable conversation with your own thoughts, which I know to be for the most part imployed in the study of things noble and worthy your excellent wit. But first, lest you should think I do it somwhat abruptly, and by omitting to prescribe also Special Preserva∣tives proper to the excesses of each par∣ticular Affection, end this discourse be∣fore I have finished it: suffer me in a word to advertise you, that I make this omission, not from incogitancy, nor out of weariness, but only for your greater benefit. For, being of opinion, that the Ethicks of Epicurus are (after Holy writ) the best Dispensatory I have hitherto read,
of Natural Medicines for all distempers incident to the mind of Man: I conceive, I may do you better service by recom∣mending that Book to your serious per∣usal, than by writing less accurately of the same most weighty argument. This therefore I now do; not doubting but that in the Morals of that grave and pro∣found Philosopher, you will find as good Precepts for the moderating your Passions, as Human wisedom can give. FINIS.
