S2818 11781979 49123
A MOST EXCELLENT Eloquent Speech, MADE, NOT BY An Irreligious, Rebellious, Improbous, Impious, Seditious, Pestiferous, Pernicious, Factious, Flagitious, Vicious, Vafritious, Mischievous, Malicious, Mutinous, Luxurious, Letcherous, &c. NOBLE PEER; BƲT BY A most Noble and Wise, Pious and Vertuous EMPEROR, (VIZ.) Alexander Severus, To the Common People of ROME, Assembled before him in POMPEY'S THEATRE. With the CAUSES, as likewise the EFFECTS thereof, which were an Humble and Real Cordial Verbal ADDRESS, to His Imperial Majesty, of all their Lives and Fortunes; Being a Rare Pattern of Pagan Piety and Obedience. Made English out of the Greek. With a few Quintessential Queries and Remarques thereupon. Calculated for the Meridian of the Famous City of LONDON, but may prove of singular Service and Infallible Use to all the Atheistical, Dissenting, Disloyal, and Phanatical Subjects of His Sacred Majesty of Great-Brittain, France, and Ireland, &c. without the least Preceptible Error or Mistake in the World. Divisum Imperium cum Jove Cesar habet. Virgil. Principilus summum rerum Arbitrium Dij dederunt; subditis obsequij Gloria vero relicta est. Tacit. 4. Annal. Printed for W. Davis, in Amen-Corner. M.DC.LXXXIII.
A most Excellent and Eloquent ORATION, &c. BEfore I come to this Incomparable Speech it self, you are to be acquainted with some∣thing concerning the Cause thereof, ac∣cording to promise, which in short was this follow∣ing. This good Emperor one day looking out at his Palace Window,The cause of this Speech. chanc'd to see certain Gentlemen Exercising themselves in Wrestling, Running, Leaping, &c. To whom there happen'd to come a certain number of Common People; who, without any sign of Reverence or Respect, or so much as saying by your leave, intruded themselves into the Gentlemens Society; and Malapertly undertook with arrogant and presumptious sawcy Language, to contend with them about those their Recreati∣ons; Now the Gentlemen being therewith offend∣ed, bad them be content with their own Degree and Stations, and go and associate themselves with their Companions and Equals. But these Common∣ers taking this Reproof as a grand Affront; with sturdy stubborn Countenances, proudly made this Reply; viz. That every one of them was able to live, and had more store and plenty wherewith
to follow their Pleasures than the best of them∣selves. Insomuch, as if the Emperor's Guards had not interven'd in season, the Commons had fought with the Gentlemen, and, in all propability, had worsted them, being more by far in number than they. Now the Emperor viewing these passages, was perceiv'd to be put into such a passion thereby, as was observ'd never to have been seen in him, during all his past life-time; and thereupon caus'd the said Common People to be secur'd, every Man of them, and strictly commanded, that not any thing that had passed should be taken notice of in the least, until his farther Will and Pleasure were made known concerning the same: And immediately thereupon sends for the Governour of the City and Tribunes, and commands them to send their Officers, to Summon all the Men Commons of Rome, to appear in Pompey's Theatre the 2d. day follow∣ing; where the Emperor in his own Person would also be present, and declare unto them some things of very great Weight and Moment, concerning the most Important and Perillous Affairs of the State of the Weal-Public. The Emperor's Commands were accordingly Executed; and an High Place Erected on pur∣pose at the end of the Theatre, where the Em∣peror himself should sit in his Majesty, that all the people might plainly behold and perfectly hear him.
Now the Theatre was made in form of a Bow that hath a great Bend;A Description of Pompey's Theatre. and in all the round part thereof, were many Benches, one behind another, and over one another, (for it was narrowest be∣low, and upward grew larger and larger) and there sat all the Common People; and at the streight end, which was to the other part, as the String to the Bow, were the Seats for the Senators, and be∣hind them sat the Gentlemen. At the time appointed, the People being in the Theatre according as they were commanded, the Emperor came in Person, accompanied only with the Governour and Tribunes, leaving all his Guards at the Theatre Gate. At his coming all the people rose, and Saluted him with most joyful Acclamations; but he, good Man, contrary to his accustomed Custome, pass'd by them with a displeased Countenance: whereat they were not a little amazed, and with hearts full of dutiful, loving dread, and general constant Si∣lence, prepar'd their Ears to hear attentively what the Emperor would say; who, after he had long view'd them, with a Grave Countenance and full of Majesty, spake to them as hereafter followeth. The Emperor Alexander Severus's Speech to the Common People of Rome. WE wot not how to begin to speak unto you, for we know not by what Name we shall call you; for if you were our Senators, then we would
call you Fathers; if you were Gentlemen, then would we call you our Friends; and if you were, as you ought to be, good Commoners, then would we call you our good People of Rome, as you know we were wont to do. But since Election hath not made you Senators, nor Birth made you Gentlemen, nor your Merits good Commoners, we be in no small doubt what we shall call you; For should we call you Romans, we fear least Romulus, from whom proceeded that Name, (if he be Deify'd, as you suppose he is) being therewith offended, should be avenged as well on us as on you, for abusing his Glorious Name on such People, which go about to dissolve this Noble Empire, destroy this City which he first founded with his most excellent Prowess and Wisdom; and what worse is, if any thing can be worse, utterly to Extingush the most Honourable and Glorious Fame of this City and People thereof, which hath pierc'd the Clouds, flown over the high Mountains, pass'd the peril∣ous Seas and large Rivers, ran through the vast Desarts and Wildernesses, and touch'd the farther∣most Bounds of the World: We will therefore omit to call you by any Name, until we can find out a proper one, and according to your deserts. Perhaps at our coming, you beholding our Countenance towards you more strange than it was formerly wont to be; you thought, I say, it may be, that we were moved by some private Displeasure, for something touching our particular Person; or that we were alter'd from our former Temperance to Tyranny, conceiving some Suspicion of our
Nature, by the remembrance of that Monster in Nature, our late Predecessor Heliogabaius, foras∣much as we both came from one Lineage, which I deny not: But truly if this be your phantasie, we will soon acquit our self thereof, and set all your minds at Liberty. We will then say thus much to you; As touch∣ing our Person and Family, no Man by Words hath offended us; no Man hath taken any thing from us; no Man, that we know, hath gone about to betray us, or conspire against us: Nor is there any other thing privately acted to our Detriment, that hath displeased us: And as for our accustomed Man∣ners, which so well liked and contented you, we shall assure you we have not alter'd, neither intend we to alter them: For Tyranny, as we have ever had it in extream detestation; so do we now most fer∣vently abominate and abhorr it. The Corrupt Nature of our Predecessor had never place in us. One Garden at one time brings forth deadly Poy∣son, and wholesome Medicine. We see that one Woman, which by one Man hath many Children, of them some be fair and personable; some ill-fa∣vour'd and Deform'd; some be Ingenious, and apt to receive good Learning; others we see be Fools and dull-witted; one we see is Courageous and Hardy, another is a Dastard and a Coward; this Child is gentle and inclin'd to vertue, that's fierce and full of Vice. Now this is no new thing, but in daily experience: and if this diversity and varity then happens to be in one Garden, and in the Generation of one Father, and also of one Mo∣ther,
then I hope we may well escape the cause of this Suspicion. We and Heliogabalus had seve∣ral Fathers and several Mothers, and they as diffe∣rent in their Conditions, as you your selves can bear witness; who have known and seen experi∣enced the Chaste living, Sanctity and Prudence of our Reverend Mother; and in what vertuous Discipline She hath nurtur'd us, and brought us up, unto the time that we were called to this Dig∣nity by God; and this ought certainly to suffice, as well to persuade you that not any thing con∣cerning our self, hath moved us to displeasure to∣wards you; as also to Exclude all suspicion of Tyranny out of your minds: and now shall you know the real cause why we be at this time dis∣contented with you. Although we said at the beginning that you went about to dissolve this Empire, destroy this City, and extinguish the Glorious Fame thereof, which indeed is the cause of our displeasure and heaviness; yet in those general Words, you per∣ceive not I suppose, what we mean thereby: wherefore be attentive and take good heed, and you shall hear it more particularly declared unto you. After Romulus had Built this City,Romulus. he, by his Divine Reason, considered, and, as I doubt not, in the time of the Building, Experience declared, That in a confused multitude of People, and they being of divers Wits and Conditions, if Order were wanting, there would be no perpetual Con∣cord; but the People of necessity, would be com∣pell'd,
by continual variance and discord, either to abandon the City, and, dividing themselves, to seek for sundry places to inhabit in, or else, abiding there in continual Sedition, would shortly and easily be subdued or destroyed by their Neighbors dwelling about them: Wherefore he proceeding from a Gentile and Noble House, excelling the residue of the people in Noble Courage and fine∣ness of Wit, first devised and established this Order; viz. That the Company which he had Assembled, as well of them which he had brought unto him, as of those which he, out of divers parts, had allured with him, should generally be called by the Name of Romans, for ever: and that of them should be Three States or Degrees, every one of them neces∣sary for the Weal-Public of his Noble City, in their sundry Administrations, Stations, Duties, and Ex∣ercises. For the first State he chose, out of the whole Congregation, an hundred Men, Ancient in years; which, in Moderation of Living, Soberness of Man∣ners, and sharpness of Wit, were the principall Personages of all that number. Of these he E∣stabished a Council, whereby the Affairs of the City and the Appendices thereof should be Ruled and Ministred; and these Counsellors, for their Age, should be called Senators,Senators (for Senes in Latine signifies old Men) notwithstanding, being saluted or spoken to, they should be named Fathers: as also the College or Company of them, was Incorporate by the Name of the Senate.
Moreover, out of this College should be Elected the chief Judges and Officers in the Weal-Public, to whom should be committed the determination of Justice, the Execution of Ceremonies and So∣lemn Sacrifices, and other Authorities which belong to Government: Wherefore he would that in this State there should be a Majesty, which, of all o∣ther Men, should be had in singular Honour and Reverence. Now as this State was ordained for Counsel and Government; so likewise he Elected, out of the redsidue, which were Lusty in years, Valiant, Hardy, and Courageous, a greater number; whom, because in Wars they should be on Horse-back, he called Equites;Equites. Equestris. and the other he called Equestris, to them should chiefly pertain the defence of the City a∣gainst the Invasion of Enemies, with other small Administrations about the necessary Provisions and Ornaments of this Noble City. And this State also would he have Honoured of the rest of the People; and to the intent they should be known from other Men, he assigned them to wear a Ring, and to bear Javelins in their hands; from whence afterwards they were called Quirites,Quirites. which in the ancient Tongue of this Country, signified Spear-Men. Out of this State should be Elected the Senators, when the just num∣ber of the Senate decayed, The third State was of the base People,The Common∣ers. or Com∣moners, to whom severally should not be Com∣mited any Authority, but should imploy and busie themselves in their proper Occupations, and be
ready at all times to Execute the Statutes and Or∣dinances made by the Senate;Note, That Ro∣mulus was none of the three States. as also to be obedient to the chief Officers in what pertained to the Weal-Public: And moreover when Wars requir'd, that they should go forth, then were they to be o∣bedient and diligent at the Commands of their Captains and Leaders. This Order being Established by Romulus, as long as, in every degree, it was duely observed, how marvelously did this City prosper? yea, how won∣derfully did a few Romans, in respect, not only de∣fend this little Territory, against the great number and vast Puissance of divers and sundry people, confederated against them, but also beat them back to their own houses; entred into their Cities, de∣spoil'd them of their substance, and also compell'd them, not only to desire perpetual Peace, but more∣over, at the last, to become their Subjects and Tri∣butaries? And when this good Order began to be broken, your Common State aspiring to Government and Rule, where they were ordain'd to obey only; What Year, I pray, can ye find free from Sedition and Discord among you? Who can number the Romans which have been slain in Civil Wars and Commotions? Who could, without tears,The Ld. Russel would call these but Stirrs. write the dolorous State of this City in the time of Cinna and Marius, whom, for disdain that they had for the Nobility, you Elevated to the highest Digni∣ties? By this your Disorder, sundry Calamities befell this City: you chose Caligula to be your Emperor, and where could there be found a more horrible Tyrant? in the which Name he so much
delighted, that often, looking in a Glass, he would most exactly form his Visage to the most terrible fashion: Also in recompence of your kindness, he wish'd that all the people of Rome had but one Neck, that he might strike it off at one stroke. I'm asham'd to reherse my Predecessor and Kins∣man Heliogabalus, that detestable Vessel of Abo∣mination: but you ought rather to be asham'd that vou, setting apart so great a number of Honourable Personages, as were then in the Senate, for their Experience, Wisdom, and Prowess, worthy every one of them to be Emperors, chose the said Helioga∣balus, a Stranger born, a Boy in Years, a Fool, in respect of their Wisdom, to be your Soveraign Lord; who brought you to the most vile Subjecti∣on that any people were in the World? For is there any thing in Mankind so vile, as to be un∣der the Condition of brute Beasts? What Beast can you name, that will suffer, in his presence, an∣other Beast to Occupy, in the act of Generation, her whom he hath chosen for his Mate and Com∣panion; but to his power will resist and fight with him? Heliogabalus held you in such Slavery, that, partly to avoid his displeasure, partly to Flatter him, and get somewhat of him, you not only suffer∣ed him to abuse your Wives and your Children, such as best liked him; but also increas'd your Brothel-Houses, and with open eyes let your Wives and your Children daily and nighly haunt 'em; and openly in the Streets, which I abhorr to re∣herse, pick up Men and provoke them to Le∣chery.
I omit, for shortness of time, many such other Elections, which have proceeded from your gross and presumptuous Wits, after you had transgressed the Order, wherein Romulus left you, and exceeded the bounds of your Office and Dutys; which at last was perceiv'd by you, as I suppos'd, when you, being tedious of that Beastly Liberty and License, which that Beast Heliogabalus gave freely to you, had slain him, and took me to be your Emperor; although with all my power I refus'd that burthen, until I was, by the Senate and you, constrain'd to take it upon me; and then did you desire me to reduce the State of this City to its first Order. About which I have laboured these 8 years, with not a little pains, study, and labour; beginning at mine own Houshould; to the intent, that as well by the example of my Servants and Officers, you and others being under my Rule, might the sooner reform your selves; as also that you might the bet∣ter perceive and be less offended with my Severity. And because I saw much ill Example proceed from the Senate; and also that you were oppressed with the Pride and Corruption of Judges and Offi∣cers, I, using much diligence, weeded them out, and discharged them of their Authorities; nay, they went not unpunished according to their de∣serts. I purged also the State of Gentlemen, from Ri∣balds and Riotors, and advancing others thereunto, I caus'd them to be daily exercised in Acts of Prowess; or else to hear Lessons in such matters of Doctrine, as thereby they might acquire more
Wisdom, to be Officers or Counsellors in the Weal-Public: only the State of the Common People I did not visit, saving in punishing of Theeves; forasmuch as I judg'd, that they had least Liberty to do any great evil, being, as I said, oppress'd with Tyran∣ny. And that those Vices which were among them, like as they were taken by the Example of their Superiors; so I trusted that by their Punish∣ment the said ill manners would be forsaken: and by the virtuous Example of such honest Men, as I have put in their places, good Manners should be as gladly embraced. But now I perceive all hath hap'ned contrary to my expectation; for the sparing of you and the correcting my own Servants, with the sharp Refor∣mation of the Senate and Gentlemen, hath brought you to such a heigth of Presumption and Arrogancy, that you contend and strive to be equal with the Gentry, using no form of Reverence unto them; either because you think and imagine that I fear your Puissance more than I favour their Honesties; or else that your Riches make you so proud; which you abusing in excessive Usuries, have there∣with devour'd the Patrimonies of many young Gen∣tlemen, and have made them Beggars: or, by the severity of the ancient Laws of this City, taken them in Bondage and slain them in Irons. And by such colorable Rapine, you have bought great Possessions in Greece, Sicily, Spain, &c. whereby you accumu∣late Treasures and Pleasures like to great Princes. If you think me to be afraid of your Puissance, your opinion is false; for, above all things, I most
desire to dye for the defence of the Weal-Public of this Noble City: And indeed, rather will I dye than see the Calamities which needs must ensue thereupon, if Order be not kept, as I have before declar'd. At that word all the People cry'd out with one voice, pouring out tears from their eyes; Live most No∣ble and Gracious Emperor, he that would your death, let him dye, let him be rent into pieces; our Puissance shall never annoy you, but, unto death, shall defend you; you have restored us unto life that were dead▪ unto Li∣berty that were in Captivity; unto Honour that were dishonoured. Live long vertuous Emperor, and what you find amiss and faulty in us, reform it, and we shall obey you; and he that shall offer to resist and Re∣bell, let him be slain, and drawn with an Hook through the City, and thrown into Tiber. You are, in Go∣vernment, our Father, whom we chiefly will Honour; in Age you be our most dear Son, whom we will fa∣vour more than our own Lives; and they often cry'd out, Live most gentle and Righteous Emperor. Hereat the Emperor relented, and with much ado kept the tears from flowing from his eyes; and after he had setled his Spirits and Countenance, he then speak to them farther, after this manner; I am glad that you have declared, that there is yet in you some portion of Loyalty; which gives me hope that neither the Noble Renown of this City, began by Romulus, and augmented by other Ho∣nourable Governors; nor my labours in restoring thereof, when it was decay'd, and likely to perish, shall prove of none effect: But if you be constant,
in this Affection, I trust that very shortly the Pub∣lic-Weal shall flourish, and that this City and Peo∣ple shall be in as much estimation, as ever it was in the time of any of our Progenitors. And now have I found again your old Name whereby I will call you; the Children and Suc∣cessors of the vertuous Romans, I say, you most Victorious People, Branches of Romulus, Subduers of Realms; Samplers of Vertue, and Prowess to all the world; mitigate your covetous Appetites, expell from you Avarice, vale your high Courages; I mean in exceeding the bounds of your Popular State; and comparing your selves with your Supe∣riors; be Charitable and Merciful to your own Country-Men, where their necessity may be reliev'd with your plenty: Be ashamed that People of o∣ther Countries, People rude and barbarous, should condemn you of Cruelty for destroying your Gen∣try; the chief Ornament and Defence of this Noble City: That they should reproach you of Rudeness and Pride, in omitting to do Reverence to them that do in Order excell you. Remember, that as if the State of the Senators decays, such of the Gentry are Elected into the Senate, as are vir∣tuous; so you that shall be found equal to them in virtue (for your Substance and Riches only can∣not make you Gentlemen) shall be advanced to the State of Gentlemen, according to Reason: And then consider with your selves, if you would not then your selves require to be preferr'd in Reve∣rence? For nothing certainly shall cause a Man more willingly to do his duty, than to think what
would require of him that is inferior to him: and it hath been said of Wise Men; That he that would be a Ruler, should first learn to be a good Subject: for truly a proud and covetous Subject, will never make a mild and temperate Governor. And now have I no more to say unto you; but that you apply your selves with all your hearts, to restore this City to its former Ancient and Laudable Order; as I shall endeavour my self by Example and diligence, to bring e're long to its perfect Perfection. The Effects of the foregoing SPEECH. THus ended this most Noble and Wise Emperor's Oration; and so he departed, the Effect where∣of was, besides what you have heard already, that all the Common People followed him home with these loud Acclamations; The Gods Immortal pre∣serve and defend you, most Noble Emperor; you are the Crown of our Glory, of our Wealth and Prosperity; hated be he of the Gods and of Men, that would you displeasure; do you with us what best liketh you, and so the Immortal Gods defend you. And now Reader, having lay'd before thee an al∣most incomparable pattern of Common Pagan Loy∣alty and Obedience of Subjects to their Superiors, I wish it may have the same Effect on them for whom it was now publishd, as it had on them for whom it was first made. And I would only be resolv'd in a few very Important Queries, by our unnatural ungrate∣ful disloyal, and hypocritical Prig-Prince Presbyters of these times, and all other their Seditious, Factious, Rebellious, Fratres in malo, Brethren in Iniquity,
but chiefly of Jack Presbyter, because I look upon him, in my weak opinion, always to have been, and at present are, and ever will be, if not prevented, the most dangerous and formidable Enemy to Mo∣narchy and Hiearchy of any within His Sacred Ma∣jesties Dominions; and so I shall conclude. 1st. then let me ask you whether you don't imagine that these Dutiful & Loyal Pagans shall one day rise in Judgement against you for your damnable Disloy∣alty and Rebellion, against two so good, so gracious, so mild, so merciful mirrors of Majesty, Father and Son, and to be acknowledged, by all true Subjects, Gods Anointed and our Terrestial God?And whether it shall not be more tollerable for Tyre and Sydon, &c. in that Day than for you And whe∣ther it do not exactly resemble the Lucifero-machy and Giganto-machy of Old? which if they would but consider, may one day prove somewhat available to them, towards their Eternal Happiness and timely Repentance, and preventing their future Eternal Damnation. Secondly, What Account they will, one day, be able to give Almighty God, for not only, as this good Emperor complain'd of in his Common Sub∣jects, their Cruelty and Barbariety in destroying their Gentry, the chief Ornament and Defence of their City, &c. And that Rude and Barbarous peo∣ple should reproach them of their Rudeness and Pride, in omitting only to do Reverence to the Gentry their Superiors; &c. I say, what Account will they be able to render at the last dreadful day, for their not only contemning and destroying their Nobles and Gentry, but the very Fountain of No∣bility and Gentry, viz. King Charles the I. and
Subverting all Order, and endeavouring to make his Son, like his Father, viz. a Glorious King. For in that Cursed Tryal of King Charles the I. you'l plainly see the Common People Condemn'd and Murther'd their King; for there you have 1st. An Act of the Commons, &c. for Erecting an High Court of Justice; &c. Then the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, according to the Power and Fun∣damental Trust repos'd in them by the People, &c. in be∣half of the Commons of England and all the People, &c. in the Name of the Commons, &c. the Rights and Liberties of the People, &c. and on the People behalf, &c. He Levyed War against Parliament and People therein represented, &c. caus'd Thousands of the Free and Good People to be slain; &c. much Innocent Blood of the Free People spilt, &c. against Publick Interest of the People, &c. And again on behalf of the People and Commons thrice, &c. then, this Authority re∣quires you in the Name of the People, &c. in behalf of the Commons, &c. in the Name of the People, &c. in behalf of the People, &c. by Authority of the Commons, &c. Sir, the VOTE of the Commons in Parliament, is the Reason of the Kingdom. By Authority of the Commons: on behalf of the Commons; We shew you there the Commons make War a∣gainst the Parliament and People; & in desiance of the Par∣liament, and in behalf of the People; and the House of Com∣mons the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom; and in the Peoples behalf, and in behalf of the Commons, and in the Name of the People; and the Powers and Supreme Authori∣ty of the Commons; And lastly, in that Satanical Sentence of Death you have the Commons, &c. where you may find the Words Commons, People, Parliament, nam'd Alternatim, and Vice Versa about some 37, or 38 several times; but from such Parliaments, People, and Commons; Good Lord de∣liver good King Charles and his Loyal Subjects: So that you may see this damn'd Idol and Oracle of the Rebells, Vox Populi, is often, if not always, Vox Diaboli: For was't not Vox Populi cry'd up Rebellious Absalom against his King and Father? Was't not Vox Populi cry'd Crucifie, &c.
Then let me ask the People whether our present Dread Soveraign, hath not, under God, restor'd them to life that were dead; and to Liberty that were in Captivity, and un∣der the greatest Tyranny, as this good Emperor did his? And whether they have not as great Reason to Eccho as they did, Live long, &c. and Address their Lives and For∣tunes to his disposing: Whose Father indeed dyed in de∣fence of the Liberties and Properties of an ungrateful Gene∣ration of Viperous Commons,The Ld. Rus∣sel's Word. and he, now living, whom the King of Kings long hath hitherto defended, and continue among us, &c. Sero abat in Coelum; would not infallibly no less suffer himself to become a Victime for the Rights of his Liege-People, &c. as this good Emperor said he was ready to do: And God grant he may Principiis obstare as to all his Dis-affected and Rebellious Subjects; as this Noble Emperor did; Amen, Amen. As for what's said about the Citizens, there's an Old Verse for them. O▪ Cives, Cives, querenda Pecunia primum, Virtus post Nummos, &c. Caveat Emptor. Then lastly, since mention is made of Tribunes, note they were those Magistrates that were chose to Preserve the Rights, and ascertain the Liberties of the Common People, against the Puissance of the Nobles: they were Instituted soon after that Notable Discord between the People and Nobles, which was appeased by Ʋenenius Agrippa, who wiselly United the Commons seperating themselves from the Nobles that commanded them, and retiring to the Mount Aventine, complaining of excessive Imposts laid upon them, by moralizing this following Table. The Members of the Body, says he, would one day seperate themselves from the Belly, and de∣ny'd it their Assistance, under pretext that they were in continual labor to furnish it with Provisions for its Gluttony, &c. This Discord lasted till the death of the whole Body ensued: Even so shall it happen to you the Commons, says he, if you seperate your selves from your Nobles; for there∣by you will ruin the whole Body Politic; for though it seem to you that your Nobles live in Delights, Gluttoning themselves with the best of your Goods, &c. Yet must they Communicate thereof to you in a short time, and so couserve you; As the Belly distributes to the other Members, of the substance it formerly received from them, and so maintains the Body in perfect Health. These Tribunes at last with the People became Insolent; and commited many Disorders, to the prejudice of the Nobles, &c. So that they were sometimes call'd the Pest of the Weal-Public. FINIS. Licensed and Entred according to Order.
