s350 18421594 107561
SAINT PAULS POTION, PRESCRIBED BY Doctor Commons, Being very sicke of a dangerous FULNESSE. WITH The great effects it wrought. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
Doctors Commons Potion prescri∣bed to Pauls Quire. Doctors Commons. HOW doe you Pauls Quire? methinks that your countenance is much chan∣ged? Why looke you so wan? Pauls Quire. Truly there is cause, since the sweat hath so issued from both our sides, to the so great fouling of our Surpli∣ces, that the sent thereof hath so much offended our curious Laundresses, they will not come neer to wash them clean: no marvell then though we look wan? Doct. But I know you are not well, you have some dangerous disease, therefore be advised, and look to it in time. Pauls. I pray you will you looke upon my water▪ see there it is, tell me your opinion by that. Doct. Truly Sir, let me tell you, your water is very high and dangerous, you have a great distemper, you are very ill I see. Pauls. Indeed I have been much troubled of late; but I pray what doe you conceive to be the cause of my distemper? Doct. You are troubled with a disease called Plenitude: the disease lieth much in the head, the
Archbishops, Bishops▪ &c. Paul. But can you tell me what hath bred and nou∣rished this disease in me? Doct It hath been caused by fulnesse of bloud, a∣bunding alne over the other humours, as it did whn three mns bloud surcharged their stomackes, dropping from their eares in one day, as also by the increase of the four humours altogether in their pro∣portion, which in your head were sored to mighty violence. Pauls. What caused this disorder in the humours so to bund? Doct. The cause ariseth from pride and fulnesse of bread, neglect, and omitting of exercises of the Mi∣nisteriall function, and closing with Popery and Po∣pish rites: which disease hath increased by those na∣turall and artificiall vacuations which the said Arch∣bishops, Bishops &c. have fomented and established. Paul. What signes doe you see in mee of any such disease? Doct. Your face and your eyes be ruddy; that is to say, your Pictures, Altar. Cops, Candles, Bow∣ings, &c. looke not like, he eyes or face of a prote∣stant Church: for even such practices are this dy at Rome. Paul. What other signes doe you see? Doct. Your veynes, that is to say, your Orgn pipes, are swolne, the smallest veine whereof doth not become a Protestant Church, but rather the Iews Synagogues. Paul. What say you to my Pulse? I pray you Do∣ctor feele.
Doct. Your pulse is great and vehement, whilst all the life of your Religion consists in dumb shewes and ceremonies. Paul. I pray you tell mee what signes you finde in my water of this disease. Doct. The disease is easily discerned by your urine, which is reddish and thicke, an infallible signe, procee∣ding from your well fed body, daily full gorged with wie both French and Spanish. Paul. Oh! Master Doctor, I am very full of paine▪ of a sudden, the veines in my temples doe beat ex∣treamly. Doct. That ariseth from the nature of the disa, especially since your head is possest with such a giddi∣nesse, Lambeth pillow lyes now very uneasily. Paul. I am very heavy, good Mr. Doctor prescribe somehing to comfort me. Doct. In the first place, you must remove away all Popery and Popish innovations from about you, that so you may freely and fully receive the Protestant aire▪ for that is very wholesome. 2. Remove away all infe∣cted idolatrous persons, and offices from about you. 3. Remove the stinking sent of all scandalous mem∣bers out of their places. 4. Avoyd all such nourishing diet as may strengthen Popery in you. 5. Use. Ptisan, mixt with nothing but what is gathered out of Gods word. 6. Use Repentance, made up of cooling herbs. 7. Avoyd wine and women and drinke onely the clear water of the well of life. 8. Lastly, exercise the word of God truly and constantly. Paul. But what will you prescribe for the cure? Doct. The cure must be begunne with blood letting
as loon as may be; thou must have an experienced Chyrurgian to open the uttermost veine within the Arme, called Humeralis, on the High-commission and spirituall Court side, for there the griefe is most vehement, this veine is so annexed to the head, the Bishops, &c. that by it you shall not only pull backe blood, into a contrary part, but you shall also empty out that by it, as sith, Hippocrates, Galen, Rhases, &c. Paul. But alast, I am old, and weake, such bleed∣ing my be dangerous to me. Doct. Then you must have boxing glasses, which the Chyrurgion must use, not to your head it selfe only, but to the parts adjoyning, as the shoulders, and brest, all upholders and maintainers of Popery, and Popish innovations. Paul. But what physicke will you prescribe me? was I not best to take a potion first? Doct. Let me see penne and inke and paper, and I will prescribe a potion, and let it be sent for to the A∣pothecaries speedily, that you may take it this mor∣ning before I goe from you. A Coppy of the Receipt. Take of Gods threats against Idolatry, two dragms, and pick off as many flowers of the promises of the gospell as you can finde, of each an handfull, with 12. dragmes of the splinters of the Bishops last Canons, and halfe an ounce of their last articles, and ad t it 3. scruples of the sweat of a furious Proctors grease, and an ounce of the Pastors fees: Add more 20. drops of the teares of oppressed Cly∣ents,
&3. scruples of a Lambs tongue, with 2. Ducks feathers chopt very small, and the fragments of an old Record; put all these together into an Organe pipe, and seeth them in a sufficient quantity of the water of repentance, untill the greatest part be con∣sumed; then straine it all through a Bishops lawne sleeves, and presse it hard; adde to the decoction as much of a Lent Licence, as will serve to sweeten it, then purifie it with the white of a Ducke egge, and make a potion. Paul. I have taken the potion M Dctor, but it makes me monstrous sick. Doct. Walke upon it, it will worke by and by. Paul. Oh, M. Doctor hold my head, something comes up; what is it? Doct. A great wax-candle, it is well, hold your head still it may be something else will follow. Paul. Oh! something comes that will kill mee I doubt; it sticks by my ribbs, I thinke, and will not come away; oh, it's almost up now, hold my head hard I pray you; so now it is up, I am glad of it; what is it? Doct. A great Altar pend about with Railes, the strangest vomit that ever I saw before. Paul Oh! hold me, hold me, helpe good M. Doctor; something sticks in my throat, oh tht it weere puld away; pull oh pull hard, I am almost dad with it; soe, now it is almost up, one pull more doth it; so, I am glad it is up, it hath eased mee well, what was it M. Doctor? Doct. See here what it is, a great bundle of golden Copes rapt up in linnen Surplices, no marvel though
they were so troublesome to you to bring them up. Paul. There is something yet that rumbles in my stmack, I would it were up; it stirres as if it were a∣live. Doct. Strive with it doe what you can, it will not stay, I see the Potion works well, and will trouble you, feare not; so well done, see what it is, a Musi∣tian wih an organe pipe, it is well it is up; how doe you now? Paul. A great deale btter methinks then I was, but very soare and weary with straining, may I not now lye downe, and slpe a while? Doct. Yes by and by, but I woud advise you to sy a little; I must crave leave of you to depr a while, I will be with you againe presently, in the men I pray you have a care of your self, and  other be alwaies by you to looke well to y Paul. I thanke you M. Doctor; I pray be no long from me. Doct. I will not, Sir, God willing; fare you well. FINIS.
