S4445 99835126 39785
A SOLEMN League and Covenant, FOR Reformation, and Defence of Religion, the Honour and Happinesse of the KING, and the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Also, Two speciall ORDERS: VIZ. I. Concerning the taking of the League and Covenant in all Churches and Chappels in London and Westminster, up∣on the next Lords-day in the afternoon. II. Concerning divers Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Colonels, Officers, Souldiers, and others, that are desirous to meet this present Friday in the forenoon at Margarets-West∣minster, and to take the said League and Covenant. Jer. 50.5. Come, let us joyn our selves to the Lord in a perpetuall Covenant that shall not be forgotten. Prov. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousnesse. 2 Chron. 15.15. And all Iudah rejoyced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and he was found of them; and the Lord gave them rest round about. DIe Sabbathi,30. Sept. 1643. It is this day Ordered by the Commons in Parl. That this Covenant and Orders be forthwith Printed & published: H. Elsynge, Cl. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, Octob. 2. 1643.
Die Lunae 25. Septemb. 1643. IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that the Ministers in all the Parish-Churches and Chappells of London, Westminster, Suburbs and Liberties, and in all the Parishes within the Bills of Mortalitie, do read the solemn League and Covenant on Wednesday next, being the Day of Publique Humiliation; And do explaine it, and urge the ground and necessity of it, and exhort the People to the cheerfull taking of it, and that the severall Inhabi∣tants and Parishioners of the severall and respective Parishes aforesaid, and Students of the Innes of Court, do take the said League and Covenant on the Lords-Day next in the afternoone: And that notice hereof be given to my Lord Maior, and his Lordship desired to give timely notice hereof to the places aforesaid: The Ministers are likewise to give notice, that the Commissio∣ners of Scotland now here, do take it here. H: Elsynge, Cler: Parl: D: Com.
Die Sabbathi, 30 Septem. 1643. WHereas divers Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and divers Colonells, Officers and Souldiers, and others now residing in the Cities of London and West∣minster, and within the Line of Communication, are desirous to meet at Saint Margarets Church at Westmin∣ster on Friday next, to take the solemn League and Co∣venant for Reformation, and Defence of Religion, the Honour and Happinesse of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And whereas divers of the Scotish-Nation are desirous likewise to meet at the same time and place; And divers Ministers who have no charge within the said limits, to take the said Covenant; It is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Carrill of Lincolns-Inne be desired to Preach on Friday next in the forenoon, to those that shall so meet, for the taking of the said Co∣venant; And a Parchment-Roll, with the said Cove∣nant written therein, shall be prepared for every one that takes the said Covenant, to subscribe his Name▪ And Colonell Long and Master John Brown, Members of the said House, are to see the Names subscribed accordingly: And this Order is appointed to be print∣ed and published forthwith. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
A Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation, and defence of RELIGON, the Honour and Happinesse of the KING, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citi∣zens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Com∣mons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the King∣dome of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the honour and happinesse of the Kings Majesty and His Posterity, and the true publique Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included, and calling to minde the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, At∣tempts, and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the Reformatian of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplo∣rable state of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distres∣sed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England; and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and publique Testimonies; We have now at last, (after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protesta∣tions,
and Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter Ruine and Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the Example of Gods people in other Nations; af∣ter mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter in∣to a mutuall and solemn League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear: I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God, endeavour in our severall places and callings, the preservation of the Re∣formed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline & Government, against our com∣mon Enemies the reformation of Religion in the King∣doms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Chur∣ches, And shall indeavour to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the neerest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church-government, Directory for Worship and Cate∣chizing; That we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the middest of us. II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, indeavour the Extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, (that is, Church-government, by Arch-Bishops, Bi∣shops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ec∣clesiasticall Officers depending on that Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresie, Schisme, Prophanenesse, and
whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Do∣ctrine, and the power of Godlinesse; lest we partake in other mens sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms. III. We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and con∣stancy, in our severall Vocations, endeavour with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Priviledges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdomes, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesties person and authority, in the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdomes, that the world may beare witnesse with our consciences of our Loyaltie, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesties just power and greatnesse. IV. We shall also with all faithfulnesse endeavour the discovery of all such as have beene, or shall be In∣cendiaries, Malignants, or evill Instruments, by hin∣dering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the people, contrary to this League & Covenant, that they may be brought to publick triall, and receive condigne punish∣ment, as the degree of their offences shall require or de∣serve, or the supream Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient. V. And whereas the happinesse of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denyed in former times to
our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of GOD granted unto us, and hath been lately concluded, and setled by both Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, indeavour that they may remain conjoyned in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilfull Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the precedent Article. VI. We shall also according to our places & callings in this common cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdomes, assist and defend all those that en∣ter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining & pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our selves direct∣ly or indirectly by whatsoever combination, perswasion or terror, to be devided & withdrawn from this blessed Union & conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give our selves to a detestable indif∣ferency or neutrality in this cause which so much con∣cerneth the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honour of the King; but shall all the dayes of our lives zealously and constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our selves to suppresse or o∣vercome, we shall reveale and make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of God. And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins & provocations against God, & his Son Jesus Christ as is too manifest by, our present distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof; We professe and declare before God
and the world, our unfayned desire to be humbled for our own sins, & for the sins of these Kingdoms, especi∣ally, that we have not as we ought, valued the inesti∣mable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not laboured for the purity and power thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of o∣ther sins and Transgressions, so much abounding a∣mongst us; And our true and unfayned purpose, desire, and endeavour for our selves, and all others under our power and charge, both in publick and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a reall Reformation, that the Lord may turne away his wrath, and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to performe the same, as we shall answer at that great day when the secrets of all hearts shall be dilos, Most humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to blesse our desires and proceedings with such successe, as may be deliverance and safety to his people, & encouragement to other christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoake of Anti-chri∣stian Tyranny; to joyne in the same, or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingome of Jesus Christ, and the peace and Tranquility of Christian Kingdoms and Common∣wealths. FINIS.
