S4493A R218717 99830288 34738
Some Considerations on the Proposal of the Old East-India Company, as it re∣lates, I. To the New Company, and other Subscribers to the Two Millions, to whom the Trade was sold for a limited time. II. To the Persons who are to Subscribe to the New Loan at 5 l. per Cent. in case the Proposal take effect. III. To the Credit of the Nation. I. THAT the Old Company, before the late Act for Settling the Trade to the East-Idies, had no Right in Law to the Trade to India, Exclusive of all others, nor any Right by their Charters, but what was subject to a Proviso upon being Dissolved upon Three years Notice, has been in several Prints un∣answerably made out; And the Honourable House of Commons Twice Address'd the King to Dissolve them; Afterwards the Old Company pro∣posed to the House to Lend 700000 l. to have the Trade to them∣selves, exclusive of others, for Thirty one years; And the House wanting Money for the Service of the Government, and being wil∣ling to Settle the Trade to India, invited all Persons to make Propo∣sals to that purpose; Others, not of the Company, proposed to Lend Two Millions, and to demonstrate the Probability of Advancing that Sum, did in a few days Subscribe about 1300000 l. and brought in their Subscriptions and Proposal to the House, which was accepted; and in pursuance thereof, an Act passed, with such Conditions, Re∣strictions, and Regulations, as the Parliament thought proper; And, P. 760. P. 780. particularly, the Sole Trade to India was granted to such as should Lend Money upon the Fund Settled by the said Act, subject to a Power of Redemption by Parliament upon Three years Notice after the 29th of September 1711. and no otherwise, nor in any shorter time. The New Company having Subscribed to the said Loan 1663000 l. became thereupon possessed of the said Right of Trade for that Sum yearly, according to the said Act, and His Majesty's Charter founded thereon; and many of the Members of the said Company diverted themselves from other Affairs, sold Tallies at great loss, and other∣wise put themselves to Streights to Serve the Government, by the Advance of the said Money; tho' at the same time they could have
bought Tallies that carried Eight per Cent. Interest on Parliamentary Funds, at 30 and 25 l. per Cent. loss, that is to say, 100 l. for 70 or 75 l. And this they did in confidence of enjoying the Agreement stipulated with them by the most Publick and Solemn Act the Nation is capable of. In pursuance of this Contract the New Company have ex∣pended great Sums in Settling themselves, and great Factories in several parts of India, in China, and Borneo. And therefore the said Agreement cannot with Right be broken, nor the said Trade taken away from the Persons in whom the Property is vested, nor has such a thing ever been done by any Parliament. II. As their Proposal relates to such as shall come in and sub∣scribe; 1. They, are only to be allowed a limited Sum, and must come in upon a certain Valuation of the Old Companies Stock, which consider∣ing the large Engagements and Claims they are under, and lyable, to in India, and England, if any be so unwary as to be drawn in and disapointed in the real value of it, as many were by unwarrantable Artifices upon the last Subscription to the Old Companies Stock, it will occasion great Complaints by those who will justly blame them, who have been the cause of their Misfortune. 2. They can have no Security, that the Trade granted them, will not be taken from them in another Parliament, be their Right never so clear in the Apprehension of themselves, and the rest of the World. III. As it relates to the Credit of the Nation, nothing can be more fatal to that, than a Proposal to the Parliament to break a Solemn Agreement made with Persons without Doors in a matter that meerly relates to Property as this does; The Reference from the House to the Committe is to receive Proposals for Paying off the Debts of the Nation, and advancing the Publick Credit; and this would be in∣tirely to destroy the Publick Credit, for Credit is the same in Pub∣lick Societies as in Private Men; Nothing gains or preserves Credit to a Man, but a punctual Compliance with his Contracts and Agree∣ments; the failing therein destroys his Credit, and no body will afterwards trust him that does so. The Case will be the same with the Parliament; if they break one Contract, by the same Rule they may break all; and he that lends Money or purchases either the Forfeited Estates in Ireland, or any other Estates, may have the same taken away in whole or in part, whenever the Parliament pleases: The Consequence whereof will be, That no body will lend or purchase on such precarious Security, let the Necessities of the Government be never so great.
