T112 R200596 99825077 29449
Πυρετολογια, A Rational Account OF THE CAUSE & CURE OF AGUES, With their SIGNES Diagnostick & Prognostick. ALSO Some specifick MEDICINES prescribed for the Cure of all sorts of AGUES; With an Account of a successful Method of the Authors for the Cure of the most Tedious and Dangerous QUARTANS. Likewise some OBSERVATIONS of CURES performed by the aforesaid Method. Whereunto is added A short Account of the Cause and Cure of FEAVERS, and the GRIPING in the GUTS, agreeable to Nature's Rules and Method of HEALING. Authore RTO TALBOR Pyretiatre. Non multa, sed multum. London, Printed for R. Robinson, and are to be sold at his Shop near Greys-Inne Gate in Holborn, 1672.
To his worthy Friends B. Ayle∣more, A. Blackwell, Esquires; Mr. R. Alchorn, Mr. W. Thorn∣ton, Citizens; and the rest of those worthy persons that have been my Patients. Worthy Patients and Patrons, A Book sent abroad into the World, is like a Ship lanched forth into the Sea; It must expect not always to sail with the fair gale of judicious Censures, but sometimes to meet with blustering storms, raised either by the puffing blasts of Criticks breath, or the envious murmurings of the ignorant: From these two, viz. the seeming-wise Critick, and the grosly Ignorant, I can expect little favour: the one will cavil at the Rational part, because perhaps it doth not square with his Imaginary Fancies;
the other will deny the Rational and Experimental parts; and both will endeavour to withdraw the breath of people from it, that wanting the air of Reputation, it may be either becalmed by that little notice people take of it, or else be stranded on the dangerous sands of prejudice. I have there∣fore chosen you my Patrons, whose known Reputation is suffi∣cient to check the insolence of a∣ny that shall contradict or deny what your selves can testifie of your own knowledge and expe∣rience. And I desire that your mouthes may only speak my Acti∣ons, and let the world from them read my Merits; From whom I re∣quest nothing more than a kind ac∣ceptance of that which is intended for a general good, By him who is ever ready to serve, his Country and his Friends, R. Talbor.
To the Reader. WHen I first began the study and practice of Physick, amongst other Distem∣pers incident to humane Bodies I met with a Quartan Ague, a disease that seem'd to me the ne plus ultra of Physick, being commonly call'd Ludibrium & opprobrium Medi∣corum, folly and derision of my Profession, did so exasperate my spi∣rit, that I was resolved to do what study or industry could perform, to find out a certain method for the cure of this unruly distemper: In order thereto I first dived into the cause of it, and to that end read most Authors that have writ on this sub∣ject; but I could find no more satis∣faction from them, than I can in Phi∣losophy from that odd solution by oc∣cult qualities. I considered then
there was no other way to satisfie my desire, but by that good old way, ob∣servation and experiment: To this purpose I planted my self in Essex near to the Sea side, in a place where Agues are the expidemical diseases, where you will find but few persons but either are, or have been afflicted with a tedious Quartan: In this place I lived some years, making the best use of my time I could, for the improving my knowledge; curiously observing all Symptoms, Diagno∣sticks and Prognosticks; by which observations, and the assistance of my reason (God blessing my endea∣vours) I have attained to a perfect knowledge of the cure of the most in∣veterate and pertinacious Agues, and can inform a patient to a day when I will remove the fits, and what method I will proceed in with him; though to several persons, ac∣cording to their several constitutions
and other complicated diseases, I use different methods. If our Physi∣cians would use the Primitive way of the Egyptians, apply themselves to the study of some one disease, they would in a short time bring this no∣ble Science to great perfection; but idleness hath so possest this age, that most of us care for no more than a little smattering of every thing. As you accept these my Primitiae, you encourage him to proceed, Who is Yours and his Countries Friend, R. Talbor.
To his Friend the Author on his Πυρετολογια. THe Learned Author in a gene∣rous Fit, T' oblige his Country hath of Agues Writ: Physicians now shall be reproacht no more, Nor Essex shake with Agues as be∣fore, Since certain health salutes her sickly shoar. Philosophers spend oyle and time in vain, And no Minerva issues from their brain, Whilst here a general good accrues to all, Like the disease, 'tis Epidemi∣cal.
Man, though the lesser world, does far surpass All that's ith' greater world, or ever was, Whilst he these earthly gods obliges thus, He shall be styl'd an Esculapius. J. D.
The Introduction to the Discourse of Agues. MAN being subject to as many and more distempers than his famous structure can boast va∣riety of parts, all the facul∣ties of his soul have been continually em∣ployed to find out Remedies for the pre∣servation and restauration of his decaying body. Now the first man Adam had a per∣fect knowledge of the virtues of all Plants, Minerals, or Animals; but whether it was immediately dictated to him by the Creator, I shall not here argue; or whe∣ther their innate vertues were engraven upon the front or superficies of every creature, in those lines we see on Plants, &c. which I believe are not flou∣rishes a-la-vole of natures Pen, but fair
characters legible to our forefather Adam, and some few of his posterity: But since the Fall, Soul and Body have deviated from their first perfection, all the facul∣ties of the Soul are depraved, the Memory is subject to fail, the Judgement given to erre, and the Will often known to rebel, and become a voluntary slave to passion: so is his Body subject to so ma∣ny infirmities, that he that shall consider upon what slender filaments the life of man depends, will have greater cause to admire at the Providence of the Creator seen in the preservation of Man, than at his Wisdome known in his Creation, though both of them surpass the scale of our reason; for our Reason being fallen from its primitive purity, is as much con∣fused as our Languages: now, tot homi∣nes, tot sententiae, & tot rationes; Reason is at best but the harmony or musical sound of a well tuned Hypothesis, where∣with the fancy is delighted, and it suffers the same fate with our common Musick; for as every tune delights not every ear, so every reason pleases not every fancy. We have nothing certain in Physick or Philosophy but Mathematical and Expe∣rimental
Demonstration, and what we have learnt in either Science, hath been by in∣dustrious Observations and Experiments. Thus by the industrious toils and labours of those Primitive Heroes (the ancient Empiricks) in their observations and ex∣periments, the foundation of this famous structure of Physick was laid, and in some ages by the same hands reer'd and finish∣ed; but since polished and refined by the more curious wits, but less industrious persons of our latter ages: but were they more industrious and less witty, this con∣jectural art of Physick would become more certain by the help of observations and experimental demonstration. The art of Physick began originally either from accidental Experiment, or Obser∣vations taken from the irrational Crea∣tures, as Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, which being led by some instinct of Nature to convenient remedies for the cure of their proper Maladies, have furnished Man with many wholesome remedies and medicaments. Thus the virtue of Celan∣dine in the effects of the eyes was learnt from the Swallow, who hath been often observed to squeese the juice of that herb
with her bill upon the blind eyes of her young, by which means they gain their sight. It is observed of the Dear in Candy and those parts, that being wound∣ed with a poysonous Arrow, they repair immediately to Dittany, an herb that grows plentifully in those Countries, which by an Alexipharmick virtue expels both Arrow and Poyson. According to Virgil, Plutarch, Pliny, and others, Naturalists: Dictamnum genetrix Cretea carpit ab Ida Puberibus Caulem foliis, & flore Coman∣tem Purpureo: non illa feris incognita ca∣pris Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae. Virg. Aeneid. Thus englished by Mr. George Sandys. With her white hand she crops from Cretan Ide, The fresh-leav'd stalk with flower in Purple dy'd;
A soveraign herb, well known to fear∣ful Deer, Whose trembling sides the winged Ar∣rows bear. The Egyptian Ibes was the Inventor of Glysters; a Bird not much unlike the Stork, and a great Enemy to Serpents, who filling his beak with salt water, and spouting it up into his guts when he was hard bound, taught the world the con∣venience of provoking a stool that way. Letting Blood we learnt from the Sea∣horse in Nilus, who finding himself op∣pressed with too much blood, doth at such times come to the shore side, and with a sharp reed or thorne pricks his leg, then stands and bleeds some time, and after∣wards dips his leg in the mud, which stops the bleeding and heals the wound. I could insert a great many more observations from Naturalists, but these are suffi∣cient. To these we must joyn that ancient cu∣stom of bringing the sick into their pub∣lick market towns, where they were lodged in convenient places, such as our Hospitals; there being placed one or
more Overseers, who were sworn to take care of the sick, and administer such me∣dicines as should be prescribed by such as came to visit the sick (all persons be∣ing obliged to view the sick before they acted in their own affairs,) who did com∣monly give an account to the Overseers whether they at any time had been affli∣cted with any of those diseases the sick laboured under, and if they had, by what means and remedies they were relieved and recovered; which remedies were ad∣ministred to the sick, and if they had good success, they were recorded with a Pro∣batum. By this way they in time came to have a stock of approved remedies for all known diseases; and thus was the foun∣dation of Physick laid: and these Over∣seers took upon them the name of Empi∣ricks (or experienced men) and such a one was Archagathus the first Physician we read of, who was called from Pelopon∣nesus to Rome, and for his skill in healing, was made a Freeman of that famous City. Then our Empiricks or Protomedicks began curiously and with much industry to observe the precedent signs of a disease, and the several symptomes in the begin∣ning,
state, and declination of every di∣stemper; and by these observations they framed their Diagnosticks and Progno∣sticks, by which they could foresee a dis∣ease, and tell the event of it: With this knowledge only our Protomedicks were satisfied, viz. to know a distemper, and to foretel its event; as, whether long or short, sharp or mild, terminate in life or death, and to know how to cure it by approved Medicines delivered them by their predecessors, not troubling them∣selves with that which we call the ratio∣nal part of Physick, as to give reasons for the causes of Diseases, the operation of Medicines, and several such niceties which after ages dived into. Then started up a second sort of Medicks which called themselves Methodists; these did a little smooth and plain the former rough cast structure of the Empiricks, by reducing the several diseases to general heads, as to the eight principal parts, viz. the head, heart, lungs, stomach, liver, spleen, reins, womb; and appropriating Medi∣cines and Herbs to the several parts, cal∣ling them Cephalicks, Cordials, Pectorals, Stomachical, Hepaticks, Spleneticks, Ne∣phriticks,
Hystericks; and to these they added Arthritick Medicines appropriated to the joynts. Thus far the Methodist. Then came the Dogmatists, and they un∣dertook to dive into the causes of Dis∣eases, and the reason of the various Ope∣rations of Medicines; and having fra∣med this Hypothesis of the four humours, they made the Plethora or Cacochymy of those humours in the various parts of the body, to cause the several diseases: But for the reasons of the operation of Me∣dicines upon these humours, and their ap∣propriation to such parts of the body, they were absurd and ridiculous; as, because they did assimilate the form or colour of the part and humours, therefore they must operate upon that part or humour they did resemble. This they rendred the reason why Eye-bright was specifical to heal the distempers of the Eyes, because its flow∣er they say resembles a Birds eye; elder Mushromes, or Jewes Ears, good against the swelling of the Glandules of the Ears; Lung-wort for the Lungs; Beans for the Reins and Testicles, from the similitude they have to those parts; so Rheubarb to purge Choller; Agarick, Phlegme; black
Hellebore, Melancholly, because they are of that colour they suppose the humours to be of. But what rational man would be satisfied with such reasons? Were it not better to tell a Patient, these have been approved Medicines in those cases, con∣firmed by the experience of many ages? Others in our latter dayes, styling them∣selves rational Physicians, have rendred more plausible reasons, being grounded upon Experimental Philosophy: these by anatomizing the parts of Plants and Minerals, know the natures of them, as also the effects and constitutions of the whole body or parts, not only by ordinary dissection, but by a spagyrical examina∣tion and separation of those parts; and the reasons grounded upon these tryals make a greater impression on our belief, because they are demonstrable by some analogous Experiments. Thus have I shown you (Physiophilus) the progress of Physick through the seve∣ral ages to this present time. I shall now treat something of the present state of the Practice of Physick as it stands divided between the Learned Rational Physician, and the Illiterate Modern Em∣pirick;
the one hath Law and Reason to warrant his Practice, the other only suc∣cess; the one in his Practice is guided more by reason than experience, the o∣ther not so much by reason as experience; but if a golden mean were found out be∣tween both, it would be the best and su∣rest practice. We find many strange vir∣tues in Plants, Stones, and Minerals, which our reason cannot solve; and if we should therefore leave off the use of them, we should do great injury to Mankind. The polar virtue of the Loadstone sur∣passes the scrutiny of the most solid judg∣ment and refined reason, and yet nothing of greater use to Mankind in the universal benefit they receive by Navigation. The effects produced by the herb Lunaria, precious Stones, are beyond the reach of our Reason. That Gold and Antimony do emit virtue by Infusion without loss of weight of their substance, is unquestio∣nable, and yet inconsistent with our rea∣son. So have several Medicines been found by experience to be specifically suc∣cessful in the cure of many diseases, and yet their composition, or the several in∣gredients, may not square with some of
our rational Hypotheses. The Experimen∣tum mirabile of Rulandus, seems to our common reason to be an astringent medi∣cine by its composition, and yet by only applying it to the pulse, it is found by ex∣perience to purge. I knew an Empirick in the Country, that did use a prepara∣tion of Opium with extraordinary success in Pleurisies, and in the Stone, and yet no∣thing seems more Irrational, since we sup∣pose Opium to bind, and contract the ves∣sels, and so would hinder expectoration, that necessary evacuation by which nature is chiefly relieved in Pleurisies, and by the same quality it should exasperate in the Stone, by causing greater obstructions in the urinous passages. But I have seen contrary effects; for Nature being relie∣ved by the cessation of pain, expectoration followed of course, either without or with little help of Prisan or Liquorish drink, and in the Stone I have known it to move Urine powerfully, and oftentimes stones have come forth upon the taking of it. I knew another performed strange cures of Gouts with a mercurial Plaister, or Un∣guent, and yet few persons can give a rational account either of the cause of
the Gout, or why Mercury should be spe∣cifical to its cure. I have experienced it, and found it successful in six or seven, and the Empirick, from whom I had the receipt, in hundreds. The gathering of Cinque∣foil and Verbascum at certain elected times, observing the aspects of the Pla∣nets, seems to savour more of Supersti∣tion than Reason; but whosoever shall observe the contrary effects of them that are carelesly gathered, and those gathered at elected seasons, will be convinced; the one viz. Cinquefoyl, gathered in the hour of Jupiter, with some other neces∣sary observations Astrological, becomes a good specifick in Quotidian, Tertian, and new Quartan Agues, and operates by Vomit; whereas the Cinquefoyl care∣lesly gathered is unsuccessful, and hath rarely any sensible operation: the like of Verbascum, observing the time (pre∣scribed by Hartman) in gathering it, is a good specifick in Catarrhes, and performs admirable effects. I have two or three hundred of these Empirical observations by me which I reserve for a particular Treatise; I have made it my business some years to converse with that sort of
people, from whom a Physician may learn more of the true and experienced virtues of Medicines in a few dayes, than he shall by reading, or his own practice alone in many years; for these having but two or three medicines (delivered them by Tra∣dition) which they call their Arcana's, they try them in all cases, and find out those virtues in them by accident, that a rational Physician would never dream of. It was the advice of an ingenious and learned Physician, Let not a Mountebank go out of the Town before you dis∣course him, and by exchanging some good medicine with him, get his, or rather than fail tell him two for one. This advice I have followed and found no small benefit from it; for from these weeds (that start up in every corner of our Physick Gar∣den) I have (like the industrious Bee) suckt honey, as well as from the flowers of learning and ingenuity; and this (I ingenuously confess) not for my own, but my Countries benefit, and do intend to publish them, that they may come into the hands of learned and judicious persons, who will make a better improvement of them than such illiterate persons in whose
hands the best of Medicines are often found to be like a well-temper'd Sword in a mad mans hand. But methinks I hear some ill-natur'd people, from that Proverb, Homo cogno∣scitur exsociis, affirm, because I have made Empiricks my companions, I must be such a one, (in their worst sence.) But their words I shall count no slander; for I had rather be, or be called an Empirick, (that is in English an experienced Phy∣sician (for  comes from  experior) than to be a Dogmatical or ra∣tional Physician, without experience, and those well-tried and approved Medicines I have gain'd by such Empirical con∣verse: and I hope no judicious person will think the worse of me for my industri∣ous endeavours, to improve this noble sci∣ence of Physick.
CAP. I. Of the Ʋse and Offices of the Spleen and Stomach. IN order to your better understanding my following discourse (Physiophilus) it will be necessary that I first treat of those two noble parts, the Spleen and Stomach, which the ingenious Helmont calls the Duumvirate, whose defects give birth to all internal diseases: I shall begin with the Spleen being the principal part deficient in these distempers. 1. Of the use and office of the Spleen. The Bulk of the Spleen is different, in some bigger, in some less, according to the variety of mens bodies; its figure com∣monly oblong, its colour in children red, in adult persons inclining to blackness, its substance of black blood congealed amongst the fibers: It is furnished with three sorts of Vessels; first a branch
from the Coeliac Arteries, which disper∣seth it self in many small twigs amongst the fibers: In the second place, it hath a vein which sprouts into it from the Por∣ta, which is all spent and lost in the sub∣stance of it, except two arms, the Vas breve, which goes away to the stomach, and the other the Haemorrhoidal vein, which runs away to the Anus: In the third place, it is furnished with nerves from the eight pair, which with their nu∣merous threds and fibers, weave them∣selves into a kind of Net, upon which the Parenchyma sticks, leaving every where multitude of little holes, into which the small arteries running every where dis∣persed among the threds of the nerves, empty themselves of the blood, which having passed through, and washed the whole substance of the Spleen, is again drunk up and carried away by the veins. The use of this part is to prepare a fer∣ment for the blood, and to supply the sto∣mach with that acid juice or menstruum that serves for the concoction of aliment. It prepares a ferment for the blood after this manner; The blood brought hither by the Coeliac Arteries, passing through many
turnings and windings, being strained through the Parenchyma, doth leave be∣hind it some salt and earthy parts; which after they have suffered some alteration by their attrition, and justling in the se∣veral passages, through the cells, cavi∣ties, and Pores of the Parenchyma, are by fresh blood, which perpetually flowes thither, by continual circulation carried back through the veins into the mass of blood, in which they serve for a most use∣ful ferment, by which the blood becomes rarified, and is made more brisk and lively, fit to circulate for the better supply of the parts. 2. Of the use and office of the Stomach. In the next place (Physiophilus) I shall show you the use and office of its com∣peer, the Stomach. The office of the Stomach is to prepare Chyle, of which by several alterations by several ferments, is made that vital juice, the blood; the manner of which is as followeth: Food being conveyed into the Stomach, is by virtue of a ferment
or menstruum, inherent in that part, re∣duced into a whitish chyle subacid; from whence, when it hath attained Natures ends, it is emitted by the passage of the Pylorus into the Intestins, where it suffers another alteration by a bitter ferment in those parts; the more pure part of which is sucked up by the lacteous vessels im∣planted in the mesentery, and the gros∣ser parts discharged by the intestins: In these lacteous vessels runs the Chyle through the Pancreas into the Vena cava, by means of which it is conveyed into the right ventricle of the heart, and by mo∣tion of that Engine by the pulmonary Ar∣teries is flung into the Lungs; out of which, having there separated some crude and phlegmatick Excrements, it hasts through the pulmonary Veins to the left ventricle of the Heart, out of which it is sent by the aorta into all the parts of the body.
CAP. II. A discourse of the cause of Inter∣mitting Feavers or Agues. I Know (Physiophilus) it will be expected by this curious Age, that I should be as happy in finding out the cause, as I have been successful in finding out the cure of this supposed unknown and uncura∣ble disease, a Quartan Ague; which that I may not seem altogether Irrational and Empirical, I shall here endeavour to give the world my opinion of the seat and cause of Agues, which I shall not confi∣dently assert (as some have their dreams and conjectures) but only propose and submit it to the more mature judgments of the learned and judicious; and if any nice Critick shall take the pains to con∣tradict it, I shall return him no other An∣swer than that of Martial; Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
The principal seat of Agues is the Spleen, which being deficient, the blood wanting its ferment is obstructed in its circulation, and likewise the ferment of the stomach wanting a supply from this part, is depraved; so that Concoction not being well performed, tough viscous humours are generated, which with the Chyle conveyed into the mass of blood, do at certain periods when they arrive at the heart disturb that noble part, by ob∣structing the passage of the chyle or blood; upon which violence offered to Natures chief Fortress, a trepidation of the whole microcosme doth ensue, which lasts so long till by the impulse of the blood or chyle following it, it is at last forced through: No sooner doth the blood find a free passage, having been for some time dammed up, but it flows more vio∣lently; as when a Sluyce is opened in a Mill, or other current of water; from which violent motion an ebullition of the blood doth ensue, which causeth the hot Fit: The Ebullition being ended, and the blood running again in its ordinary course, Nature relieves her self by Transpiration, resettling the blood disturbed by the
commotion of the late Fit: Then doth the Patient continue well, till the morbifick matter come round again, continually re∣cruiting it self with fresh supplies from the imperfect digested chyle, till that cause be taken away, either by nature a∣lone, by recovering strength and vigour, or by help of proper Medicines, assisting her against so subtil and potent an enemy. The distances of the Fits (some being once in 24 hours, as Quotidians; others once in 48 hours, as Tertians; and some but once in 72 hours, as Quartans,) are from the levity or ponderosity of the ma∣teria morbifica, whether Phlegme, Cho∣ler, or Melancholly: The heavier bo∣dy moving more sluggishly in the san∣guinary Channel than that which is lighter; as we see in a current of water, a piece of Firre shall move swifter than a piece of Oak, or heavier wood; and a Paper or Feather swifter than the Firre. The length or shortness of the Fits are from the quantity of the matter, more or less: Double Tertian, double and treble Quartans, are occasioned by a quick sup∣ply of the morbifick matter; so that there may be two or three several masses of
the morbifick matter, in the veins, which arrive at the heart by succession. But since the most plausible reasons, un∣less backt by some demonstrable experi∣ments, seem but suppositions, or conje∣ctures; I shall instance one common expe∣riment used for the cure of Agues; which though it doth not certainly cure, yet it always delays the fit, and that is strong ligature to the pulse, which by retarding the circulation of the blood, doth likewise hinder the coming of the morbifick matter to the heart, and it may accidentally cure (as some times it is known to do) by re∣taining the morbifick matter, if it be on that side the ligature, that it must pass under it before it arrive to the heart, where by the continual impulse of the blood, the morbifick matter may be so dissipated and disunited, that it may never unite again. I have observed where it hath cured, the part hath been extraordi∣narily swelled, and they endure a great deal of pain, and once a Gangrene happened upon this ligature. Another confirmation of the cause of Agues, being from tough viscous hu∣mours, is that which the country people
in Essex and other parts call an Ague∣cake. I have observed these in four Pa∣tients; two were cast out of the stomach by nature, and the other two by Emetick medicines: One of them was like a clot∣ted piece of phlegme, about the bigness of a Wallnut, pliable like Glue or Wax, weighing about half an ounce; another about the bigness of the yolk of a Pullets Egge, and like it in colour, but stiffer, weighing about five drachmes; the other two of a dark colour, more tough, about the like bigness, and heavier. It is a ge∣neral observation amongst them, that their Ague comes away when they see those Ague-cakes. In those before mentioned it was verified, and I have reason to believe it, since the observation hath been con∣firmed by so many experiments. CAP. III. Of the Diagnostick Signs of Inter∣mitting Fevers, or Agues. THe signs of Intermitting Fevers in general are these: They suddenly
invade the Patient with a trembling or shaking and vomiting, or at least some provocation thereto, and sometimes they have convulsive motions in the mouth and other parts. The hot fit is attended with heat, great thirst, pains in the Head, shinings in the Eyes, a quick Pulse, and sometime with Phrensies; the Urine is thick, crude, and ill-digested: The fits go off by sweat, urine, and insensible tran∣spiration, and return again at certain pe∣riods, as once in twenty four, forty eight, or seventy two hours, more or less, and are distinguished by the names of Quo∣tidians, Tertians, and Quartan Agues. Of the Diagnostick Signs of par∣ticular Agues. First of Quotidian Agues. The Quotidian Ague invades the sick once in twenty four hours, with a trem∣bling or chilness in the back, which shortly passes through the whole body; after which a mild and gentle heat fol∣lows, with some swelling or pain in the hypochondria's; they continue eight, twelve,
and sometimes twenty hours: The U∣rine is pale, thin, and crude, and towards the end of the fit, thick, inclining to red∣ness; the pulse flow and weak. Of the signs Diagnostick in Ter∣tian Agues. The Tertian Ague comes once in forty eight hours, with a great shaking, which is succeeded by a vehement heat, thirst, head-ach, and, often, phrensies, a high quick pulse, urine high coloured, thick toward the end of the Fits, with a red sedi∣ment. The double Tertian, from an en∣crease of the morbifick matter, comes twice in forty eight hours, and hath the same symptoms, by which it is known from a Quotidian. Of the Signes Diagnostick in Quartan Agues. The Quartan Ague invades the Patient once in seventy two hours: First with gapings, yawnings, and stretching of the limbs, paleness in the nails of the fingers and toes, and coldness in the extream
parts; then a tremor at the heart, and soon after a trembling or shaking through∣out the whole body, which is mild at first, and afterwards encreaseth gradually; after which follows a burning heat, dif∣fusing it self through all the parts of the body; the pulse in the beginning slow and weak, intermitting often, and that an hour or more before the fit; in the hot fit it is swift and high; the urine in the cold fit thin and waterish; in the hot fit higher coloured, and toward the latter end of the fit, thick; the sweats in the be∣ginning of the disease little, and after some continuance copious. Double Quartans afflict the patient two days, and intermit one; and treble Quartans come once every day, but differ from the Quo∣tidian in their symptomes, and by their beginning, which is always a single Quar∣ran. The like may be said of double Quartans, whose causes are treated of be∣fore.
CAP. IV. Of the Prognosticks in Agues. Of the Prognosticks in Quotidian Agues. QUotidians generally invade the Pati∣ent about the Winter solstice, and last till the spring, if they be not cured be∣fore by proper medicines. In the Spring they go off with a little help, except in ca∣chectical bodies, which do often fall into Dropsies, and other Chronick diseases: Its cure in the beginning is easie, but if complicated with chronick distempers, it is as hard to be cured as the Quartan Ague. Of the Prognosticks in Tertian Agues. Tertian Agues invade the sick in the Spring, or Summer solstice, and are often known to go off in seven or fourteen days without help of Physick; but it is not good trusting to it; for the fits of a Tertian
are so violent, that nature is often foiled before the fourth fit, and the Patient many times miscarries for want of timely help: Its cure in the beginning is very easie, viz. in one or two fits, and afterwards, if nature have any strength, without great trouble, if a proper method be used. There are some Tertians (whose symptoms are mild, and such generally happen after a Fever) that last a month or two, and often change to Quartans. Of the Prognosticks in Quartan Agues. Quartans generally seize the sick about the Aequinoctials (that is about September or March) but more in the Autumnal than Vernal Aequinox; they rarely go off alone, but have been known to continue two or three years commonly, and in some bodies seven, nay, twelve years; and in that time bringing such a Cachexia, or ill habit upon the body, that they live miserably, or die of a Dropsie or Consumption, soon after. Amongst the great number of per∣sons I have been conversant with, that have had this distemper, I could never
meet with any whose Agues were con∣quered, either by nature, or those ill cures they sometimes accidentally met with, though it continued but half a year, but they were troubled with great obstru∣ctions in the spleen, an ill digestion in the stomach, and a general cachexia; so that at first sight I could read where a Quartan did lodge, or had been lodged. A Quar∣tan Ague is the most subtil Enemy nature hath to deal with; sometimes it seems to make a truce, or take its final leave; but breaking it, and rallying again in few days, surprising her who perhaps was mean time busied in managing the great affairs in the oeconomy of the body, and rectifying the disorders that unruly guest had made in it: Other times, it slightly creeps upon the body, and doth not shake the frame, lulling the Patient asleep; whilst nature watching its coming, is de∣ceived, and performs not what she in∣tended, or could have done, if the Enemy had appeared in open hostility. I have observed that those Patients who had mild fits, (as they thought them) because they generally slept, and were not much sensible of them, were longest troubled
with them. And such Agues are harder to be cured than those where these fits are more strong and violent. It sometimes will take its leave for a fortnight, and re∣turn again with more violence; at other times it divides it self in two or three parts, making the double and treble Quartan. It very often deceives the Patient a∣bout May, and bids farewell, and as cer∣tainly returns about August, as it went off. I never could yet read or hear of any Quar∣tan, discharged by nature without help of means, but went off about the Aequi∣noctials, but most generally about the vernal Aequinox, viz. March, and then oftentimes caused by the imprudence of Physicians to return, by their giving Pur∣ges, those imaginary helps to nature, but pernicious in this distemper, because they do weaken and debilitate nature, and ferment that humour she had concocted and precipitated.
CAP. V. Of the several Remedies used for the cure of Agues. YOu have often heard (Physiophilus) that the number of Medicines in∣vented and used for the cure of Agues, exceed all others: the reason is, our Phy∣sicians in all ages have mistaken its cause or care, and have only shot at a venture, as a blind man at a mark, sometimes cu∣ring, but more often failing, trying all things they could think of, or meet with, hoping at last to meet with something that would do; and having after the obser∣vations of many Ages, and the experiments of many hundred Medicines, at last found out something that would sometimes cure, they thought themselves happy, and began to write discourses of the cause and cure of Agues, though their supposed specificks were specifical only to some particular constitutions, and not to the disease; more often failing than curing. Hence it came that Agues (and especially Quartans) were called Opprobrium Medicorum, the
reproach of Physicians, which is now taken off; for I do assert, that a Quartan Ague is as easily cured as any chronick distem∣per the body of man is incident to, and will undertake the cure, and perform it with as much certainty, as a Surgeon can heal a cut finger. Of Medicines used in the cure of Quotidians. First of all, a Vomit is administred of In∣fusio Croci Metallorum ℥j, Oxymel. Scilli∣tici ʒvi; or if the Patient be weak, only Oxymel 3 or 4 Ounces before the fit, and sweating in two or three following fits, with this following Bolus: ℞ Rad. Contrayervae serpentariae an. ʒss. laudani Lond. gr. j. Conserv. rosarum vi∣triolisat. ʒj. misce, fiat bolus. After this, take a spoonful of Vinum Scilliticum every morning and night for three weeks or a month.
Topicks. Apply this Playster to the wrists and navel: ℞ Myrrhae, Aloës, olibani, croci, an. ʒj. Terebinth. Venet. q. s. fiat emplastrum. Of Medicines used in Tertians. Emeticks. Juice or Infusion of Asarum, Sal vi∣trioli, Infusion of Crocus Mettallorum, oxy∣mel simplex & scilliticum. Diaphoreticks. Aq. cardui benedicti ℥iij. salis absyn∣thij ʒj. Succi limonum ℥j. misce, fiat potio. Rob sambuci ℥ss. Aqua vel spir. lumbri∣corum, mixtura de tribus, spir. Theriacalis Camphorat. Crollii. Topicks to the Wrist and Feet. Conserva rosarum ʒij. croci pulverisati ʒj. carpis applicand. Cataplasmes of Plantane, Mouseare, Tormentill, to the Wrists: To the Feet apply this Cataplasme;
℞ Carnis Halecium ex muria ℥ij. Ra∣dicis brioniae ℥j. saponis nigri ℥iss. salis nigri hispanici ʒvj. misce, fiat cata∣plasmus. Of Medicines used in Quartans. Digestives. Sal Tartari, Tartarum vitriolat. &c. Emeticks. Infusio Croci mettallorum, Absynthiaci Minsichti, sal vitrioli, pulveris Radicum asari ad ʒj. Aluminis Rochae ʒiss. pul. nu∣cis moschat. ʒss. misce oxymel scillit. Mer∣cur. vicae ad gr. 6. cum multis aliis. Diaphoreticks. ℞ Rob. sambuci, extractum gentiani, ana ʒiss. salis Absynthij ʒss. laudani gr. j. misce, fiat bolus; Arcan. duplicati ʒss. Bezoardicum Joviale; Bezoard. minerale; elixir Tartari, &c. Topicks. Emplast, Febrifugum Helmontis. ℞ Ar∣tificum naturae domest. cum toto ℥j. contun∣dantur,
& optimè misceantur, Balsami ve∣get abilis ℥ij. lachrymarum pini inspiss at. ℥j. misce, fiat emplast. Carpis applicandum hor. 2. ante paroxysmos. Spleneticks. Aqua Penoti, Tartarum Chalybiatum, Spiritus Tartari Alkalisatus, Tinctura Tar∣tari, &c. I have inserted these Medicines (Phy∣siophilus) that my Countrymen may not be left remediless, they being the choycest and best Medicines I could meet with, be∣fore I found out my particular and more effectual method. CAP. VI. Of Charms used for the cure of Agues, how they operate; with the dangerous consequences that have attended the use of them. THe Quartan Ague, being supposed by the people to be an unknown
and uncurable distemper, because it so often resists the force of Medicines, and baffles the skill of Physicians; they have left untried nothing that hath been pro∣posed to them for a cure. Thus amongst other fancies came in the use of Charms, Sigils, &c. Charms are of three sorts; either words of no sense, which disturb not the Imagination; or words of similitude, that humour and feed the Imagination; or Scripture words, which, out of a conceit that such texts and words have power, do strengthen the Imagination. Sigils are certain characters engraven upon Metals, impregnated with the in∣fluences and virtues of certain Stars and appropriated Plants. These are com∣monly found to be of greater force than Charms; because, being back'd with some shew of reason, they more confirm and corroborate the Imagination. By the help of these last, Paracelsus is supposed to do his great Cures. I shall next (Physiophilus) acquaint you with two or three Examples, wherein you will find what dangerous effects were produced by the use of these unlawful means.
Being at Cambridge about November 1666, in an Inn, a Country-man came into the room where I was, shivering with a fit of a Quartan Ague: A certain Smith that work'd to the house, being in the same room, enquired of him how long he had been troubled with an Ague? The man answered, about three months, and that it was a Third Ague, that he had tried many Medicines to little purpose, and now was resolved to try no more, but endeavour to work it away. The Smith replied, he had a Remedy that did never sail to cure any Ague, and perswaded the Country-man to try it, promising to give it him for a Pot of Ale. The Medicine being to be purchased at so easie a rate, the Country-man accepts it. I fat by all this while, expecting to see the remedy, which proved a Charm; the word was Kalamiris, which was to be writ nine times on several Papers, abating a Letter every time, till it came to the last letter K: These nine Papers were wrapt up close, and put into nine Raisons of the Sun, and were ordered by the Smith to be swallow∣ed down at nine mornings following, be∣ginning with the largest, and ending with
the least. The Country-man went his way, and so far as I could perceive, of a pretty strong and healthy constitution, free from any complicated disease: But the next news I heard of the Country-man was, that upon the next Fit-day, ha∣ving swallowed three of his nine charmed Raysons, he died. Another sad effect happened upon the use of a Charm in Essex; which was thus: A Farmers Wife having long been af∣flicted with a Quartan Ague, a Beggar one day coming to the door, and obser∣ving her to be then in a fit, told her, he could cure her of that troublesome dis∣ease: She willing to be rid of it, accepts his proffer, and desires him to give her something for it. The Beggar call'd for a Pen and Ink, and writ some words in a piece of Paper, which he seal'd up, and bid her wear it about her neck for two or three months, and then to burn it. She used the Charm according to his directi∣ons, and from that time was freed from her Ague, and continued well two months af∣ter: About which time, the Minister of the Parish coming to her house, and en∣quiring
after her health, she relates to him the passages before mentioned; Upon which, the Minister told her the danger of using Charms, and that he believed it was the Devil, or some messenger of his that gave her the Charm; and wished her to pull it off; which she did, and was going to burn it: But he took it from her, and opened it, where he found written these words, Ague farewell, till we meet in Hell. This then confirmed the Minister in what he had said, viz. that the Devil, or some Messenger of his, had given her the Charm, and exhorts her to repen∣tance. But this was the event; the next day she had a violent fit of her Ague, and in that fit became distracted, and in a little time after made away her self. Sigils are made of an electral Metal, either simple, or mixt, under the domi∣nion of some proper Planet; as the Lord of the tenth House, in the Scheme of the decumbiture, if he be well dignified and aspected. This is melted down in an e∣lected hour, and quenched or infused in the juice of some proper specifick Plants, impregnated with their own or other ana∣logous
salts: Then it is melted again, and cast into some proper Figure, on which is to be engraved the characters of some friendly Planets; and this worn about the neck or other proper part, is intended to cure the disease. Sigils are likewise made for Epidemical Diseases, and serve indifferently for all persons having the same disease. Another Relation I had from a credi∣table person of the effects of a Sigil, made against Epileptick Fits. A child in Cam∣bridgeshire, being troubled with Epilep∣tick Fits, some years, internal means proving unsuccessful, the Father of the child consults an Astrological Empirick, that lived near him; who undertakes the cure for ten pound. Both thus agreed, the Astrologer, with the help of some of his brotherhood in London, makes a Sigil of electral Metal, and orders it to be hung about the childs neck, which did immediately cure the child, and free it from Fits, during the time of its wearing the Sigil. But at length the Astrologer demanding Money for his cure, was re∣fused payment, and instead of it, was ap∣prehended, and carried before a Justice
of the Peace for a Sorcerer; but he there cleared himself, and by the Justices or∣der had his Sigil returned: upon which the Fits return with greater violence, and in a few days the Child dies. And not long after the Astrologer, as strangely, with a slight fall he got by wrastling, after which he never spoke or stirr'd. Thus, you see, (Physiophilus) how justly they are punished that leave the lawful way, and refuse the help of Physi∣cians, which are styl'd in Scripture the hands of God, and seek for help from the hands of the Devil; who ever makes a palliative cure, sometimes pretending to heal, that he may have the opportunity of future mischief. As to Agues, I can assure you, where-ever I met a Patient that used Charms, I found the disease more difficult to remove. Let these Examples be caveats. Deme veneficiis, Carminibús{que} fidem.
CAP. VII. The Author's particular method of curing all sorts of Agues. I First administer a convenient dose of a specifical Emetocathartick Powder (which was communicated to me by the name of Febrifugum Riverii;) It is com∣posed of three Herculean Medicines, each of them requiring twelve several labours in their preparations: To which is added a fourth, which is not unfitly call'd A∣thleta; because like a powerful Champion, it dissipates, and expels all Natures ene∣mies; It agrees likewise with that ac∣count Riverius gives of the operation, dose, and success of his Febrifugum, (though of the last, viz. success, I might boast more than he.) This Febrifugum is administred three hours before the Fit; after its operation, which is very mild, and the Patient got to bed, a Febrifuge Cor∣dial is given, which operates gently by sweat and urine, for five or six hours: In the interval I administer a Cordial Elixir,
that rectifies the stomach and spleen, re∣moves obstructions, and reduces them to a due temperament. If the Ague be a Tertian, or new Quotidian, this method cures them; but if it be a long Quoti∣dian or Quartan, at the second fit I give a more powerful specifick, which, pro re natâ, is made to work either by sweat and urine, or only by urine and insen∣sible transpiration. This specifick is a preparation from four Vegetables, where∣of two are foreign, and the other dome∣stick; At the third fit I administer a spe∣cifical splenetick medicine, which is a preparation from five or six Vegetables, pro re natâ, whereof two only are foreign, and the rest domestick; upon the taking of which, I advise my Patient to walk or ride abroad, and never fail upon this dose to remove the Ague: Then with splene∣tick and antiscorbutick Medicines, or as the diseases complicated require, taken for some time after, the disease is per∣fectly cured, without any ill effects re∣maining after it; all the complicated dis∣eases being with it eradicated, and the person left in good and perfect health. Neither (though this method seem tedi∣ous)
are the Patients consined within doors, or from any business above two or three dayes at most, during the whole course of their Cure. And let me advise the world to beware of all palliative Cures, and especially of that known by the name of the Jesuits Powder, as it is given by unskilful hands; for I have seen most dangerous effects follow the taking of that Medicine uncorrected and unpre∣pared, viz. Convulsions, Epileptick Fits, Phrensie, greater obstructions than before; and such as do take it have only a cessation for a time, the Ague return∣ing in a fortnight or three weeks gene∣rally. Yet is this Powder not altogether to be condemned; for it is a noble and safe medicine, if rightly prepared and corrected, and administred by a skilful hand; otherwise as pernicious a medi∣cine as can be taken. I always find that Patient, whose Ague hath been palliated with Jesuits Powder, to require a double method to cure him. Palliative Cures are always succeeded with some or most of these distempers, viz. Dropsie, Con∣sumption, Scurvy, Tumours in the Spleen, Hypochondriack pains, and always an ill
digestion; by which the Patient is con∣demned to a miserable life, or lingring death. For the prevention of which mis∣chiefs, Consulite peritos, Take the advice of the skilful. CAP. VIII. Of the proper Diet to be observed by such as have Agues, and during my method of curing Agues. 1. Diet to be observed in the Quotidian. IN this Distemper a thin moderate Diet is required; For nature is so often opposed by the disease, that she hath lit∣tle leisure to attend the digestions. Let the diet therefore be little at a time, and often, during the intervals, and let it be broths of Chicken, Lamb, or Veal, well boyled with Parsly, Fennel, and Sparagus∣roots; Let the drink during the Paro∣xysmes be White-wine Posset-drink, and
in the intervals, good fresh small Beer, with a fourth part of White-wine. 2. Diet to be observed in the Tertian. During the Fits, or two hours before, no food is proper; for drink in the Fits, let it be White or Rhenish-wine posset∣drink, tinctured with a little Saffron; or, in the hot sit, small Beer, with a fourth part of Rhenish-wine. During the inter∣mission, eat good broths, made of Mut∣ton, Chicken, or young Cock, boyled with Plantane, Sorrel, Endive, and Dan∣delyon. 3. Diet to be observed in the Quartan. In the intervals, let the Diet be Chick∣en, or Mutton-broth, boyled with the five opening Roots; a little Harts-horn and Cordial flowers, and sometimes Gruels: and the gravey of Mutton stued with a little Clarret-wine, and Spice, with a little Anchovy, to give it a rellish: Let their table drink be small Beer, with a
fourth part of Rhenish-wine, with Horse∣radish-roots, Raysins of the Sun, and Orange-pill steep'd in it; and sometimes small Beer and Ale warmed with a gagge of steel: during the Fit, and four hours before, no food is to be eaten. For drink in the cold Fit, Rhenish-wine alone, a∣bout a glass or two; In the hot Fit, small Beer and Lemmon, with a fourth part of Rhenish; and Sack, or White-wine pos∣set-drink in the time of sweating. CAP. IX. Observations of this successful method in some long tedious Quartans, complicated with other Chronick diseases. 1. Observation in Essex. ABout the beginning of October 1666, I was call'd to visit a child of B. A. Esquire, which had been severely handled, with a Quartan Ague, above a year: The Child was about six or seven
years of Age, a thin body, Consumptive, having a desperate Catarrh; and that which at first was a single Quartan, was become a treble Quartan. I enquired after the method of the Physicians which had been there before me, and was in∣formed that they had prescribed only o∣pening and purging drinks, and some strengthning Cordials: but these gave little relief to nature, and did rather ex∣asperate than mitigate the distemper. In this weak condition I found the Child, and undertook the Cure, and performed it after this manner: I first administred eight grains of Fe∣brifugum Riverii, which wrought very mildly with the child about six or seven times; after which I administred a Fe∣brifuge Cordial, and the two following fits, the Specificks: then I gave a Splenetick wine for a month after, to be taken at several times in the day, by which, with proper Syrrups, and a tincture of Coral, the child was perfectly recovered.
2. Observation in Essex. Octob. 25. 1667, I was called to visit A. B. Esq at Malden, who had been afflicted with a Quartan Ague about a year, which was now trebled, and he so weak, that he had kept his bed twenty or more weeks, sweating cold sweats every Fit. I first administred 25 grains of Fe∣brifugum Riverii, which wrought gently with him six or eight times: after its work∣ing I gave him a Diaphoretick Pill, after which he fell into a warm breathing sweat, and continued in it eight or nine hours: This threw off one of the fits, and it be∣came a double Quartan. The next Fit I repeated the same method, and reduced it to a single Quartan; and then by rea∣son of his weakness, I desisted from gi∣ving him any more Vomits, and gave Diaphoretick Cordials (for at that time I had none of my first Specifick by me;) neither was I so exact in the Cure, as I am now; yet in three weeks time I provided my Specificks, and administred them to him at the two following Fits, which re∣moved his Ague, and he in a months
time, from the time I first came to him, was able to walk abroad, and hath been ever since free from an Ague, except two or three Fits, which he had upon a relapse about a month after, which I may attribute to his neglect in taking the Splenetick Wine which was prescribed to him. Yet it was taken off again by the Specificks, and some Diaphoretick Pills, and he restored to perfect health. 3. Observation in London. July 8. 1671. Mr. W. T. consulted me about his Ague, which was a single Quar∣tan, and had continued with him above a year, having tried many Medicines, and especially (that supposed never failing Medicine) Jesuits Powder, eight or ten times, till it had like to have taken away Ague and life together: As he inform'd me, that upon the taking of it, he lay for some hours convulsed, and in a manner bereav'd of life and senses, and being re∣covered, had only a cessation for three weeks, or a month, and then it returned with more violence. Now almost de∣spairing of help, I undertook to cure him;
and July the ninth, being his Fit day, I ad∣ministred 30. grains of Febrifugum Riverii, and after its working, a Cordial Diapho∣retick. July the 11. I administred a Febrifuge Diaphoretick, with which he sweat 8 or 9 hours. July 14. I gave him the first of my Specificks, after which he sweat three or four hours: and July 18. the second Specifick: Upon the taking of which, he walked four or five miles, and returned home without his Ague: then by the Splenetick and Antiscorbutick Medicines for some time after, he was cured, and remaineth so ever since. 4. Observation in London. Aug. 13. 1671. I undertook the Cure of the Daughter of Mr. R. A. in Covent-Garden, who had been afflicted with a Quartan Ague a year and half, or more, and had neglected no means that could be heard of for her recovery; as the advice of the ablest Physicians in Town, change of Air, Tunbridg and Epsom waters; had taken Jesuits Powder ten times, (with the like dangerous success I mentioned in the last Observation:) But all proved ineffe∣ctual;
her distemper encreased, and was complicated with the Scurvy in a high de∣gree; obstructions in the Spleen, and an incipient Dropsie. I first administred Febrifugum Riverii twenty grains; after which I gave the Cordial Diaphoretick; in the interval I gave an Elixir to rectifie the Stomach and Spleen: The next fit was administred the first of my Specificks; and the fit after, viz. the third fit from the time I began the Cure, she took the second Specifick; after which she rid two or three miles out of Town, and re∣turned home without her Ague; then she continued four or five weeks, taking some Antiscorbutick and Splenetick Medicines, and was perfectly recovered, and conti∣nues in good health. I might insert many more observations, but these may suffice, being as strange and difficult Cures as I can expect to meet with. As I find the world grateful in their acceptance of this Treatise, I intend hereafter to publish a larger, and with it a fuller account of my particular Method, & Medicines, not being willing to conceal such useful remedies from the world any longer, than till I have made some little
advantage my self, to repay that charge and trouble I have been at, in the search and study of so great and unheard of se∣crets. Non nobis sed Patriae nascimur. I would not have the tediousness of the Cures mentioned in my Observations, de∣terr any from seeking my help; for ex∣cept their cases be as difficult as those there mentioned, I can perform the Cure in less time, as sometimes in a fortnight, week, or less, as the disease may be. Multum novit, qui unum bene novit.
Appendix. Nature's Method in time of Sickness, and by what means she opposeth her Enemies. SECT. I. DIseases, Nature's enemies, though their shapes and number be many, yet they may be reduced to these two general heads, viz. Chronick, and A∣cute. Chronick diseases move slowly at first, slightly invading Natures Castle; so that she, Non vacans exiguis Rebus adesse, is often surprised: sometimes the spirits evacuated, or evaporated, the ferment of the stomach becomes weak and feeble, not able to perform its Office; from hence proceeds a general decay of the parts, as in Consumptions, &c. other times the Ferment grows exorbitant, and will not admit of Nature's Rules; here food may be quickly dissolved, but not so well digested: From hence comes the
Scurvy, Rheumatismus, vagrant Pains, &c. sometimes the passages as well for the conveyance of the Chyle, as evacuation of excrements, become so obstructed, that not only a decay of the superior parts do ensue, but Tumors and Inundations in the inferiour parts do arise; from whence Dropsies, &c. do proceed. But although upon the first sensible in∣vasion of these diseases, Nature useth her utmost endeavours to oppose them; yet in these Chronick distempers she meets with so many obstructions, that she rarely or never overcomes them, without the assistance of her friend, the Physician. Acute diseases charge more violently; but Nature having timely notice, she pre∣sently applies all her force to oppose them, and is sometime known to throw off these distempers without the help of a Physician. But when, either by the ir∣regularity of the Patient in his diet, or otherwise, the distemper is re-inforced, or re-invigorated; Nature is often known to be over-power'd without the timely assistance of her friend, the Physician. In these Distempers, a sudden and vio∣lent charge being given to Nature, a
Tremor shakes the whole body; after that the Enemy having got into the san∣guinary channel, all force is used to drive it out; but this is not done without much violence. Hence a Fermentation or E∣bullition of the blood doth ensue, and con∣tinues so long till the morbifick matter is discharged, part per poros cutis, and the rest by the Ureters and Intestines. SECT. II. Natures several Indications in Chronick and Acute diseases, according to which the Physi∣cian ought to frame his method of Cure. IN Chronick diseases, where the sto∣mach is troubled with tough viscous humours sticking to the sides thereof, Na∣ture indicates vomiting, by the Nausea that attends that part, and offers of Na∣ture to be relieved that way. If these hu∣mours be fluid, they generally participate of an acid quality, being impregnated with
a fixed acrimonious salt, which mixing with the chyle, converts it into a juice of the same nature, whose exorbitant acidity resists the alteration designed by nature in the intestines; and by its acrimony, ex∣timulating and exciting the expulsive fa∣culty of those parts, a Diarrhoea, Bloody-flux, griping of the Guts, &c. are caused: Nature here indicates dulcoration of the Acrimony, and Evacuation, with emol∣lient and lenitive Medicines. Where the passages by which the chyle is conveyed, or the excrements pass through, are ob∣structed, occasioned from a defect of the splenetick ferment, or otherwise, Nature indicates opening and attenuating Medi∣cines, and such as do excite the ferment of the Spleen. In Acute diseases, as Nature is most watchful and industrious in opposing them, so is she most curious in her indications, giving timely notice of the approach, and critical Battalia of the Enemy; for no sooner doth the adversary invade, but a sudden tremor gives notice of the ap∣proach of a potent Enemy, and when it assaults her, she leaves all to oppose it. Therefore we are not to charge the sto∣mach
with too much, or any gross food; for nature and the spirits being employed otherwise cannot attend the digestions: And no sooner doth she get a little re∣spite, but she indicates to the Physician (her friend) how part of the morbifick matter is expelled, and how the rest by his assistance may be carried off. And this she doth by those pearly drops dis∣played upon the superficies of the Cutis, as so many Trophyes of her late acquired Victory: but if the disease be so potent, that she cannot by her own desired way, viz. per poros cutis, throw it off; she is forced to throw the morbifick matter into some other parts, till she can reco∣ver more strength to vanquish it: and here she acquaints her friend (the Phy∣sician) where she hath lodged the ene∣my, calling for his assistance. The symptomatical Pleurisie and Phrensie, and other symptoms in Fe∣vers, are only signs of nature's weakness, who wanting ability to discharge the mor∣bisick matter her own way, was forced to throw it into some other part, as into the Membrane Pleura, or into the me∣ninges of the Brain, from whenoe Pleu∣risie
and Phrensie happen in Fevers: when she hath separated and vanquished her Enemies, she usually offers to drive them out at the inferior Postern, indica∣ting to the Physician that way she would be assisted. I could instance many more, but to the rational this is sufficient, to ac∣quaint them with Natures method and wise government in the Oeconomy of our body, and that the true method of cure ought to be according to Natures own prescripts and indications. For which I will bring the authority of that true friend of Nature, the learned Helmont, page 802. Naturam esse morborum medicatrioem, eam confortandam ideo non consternandam: Nature being the Physicianess of diseases, she is to be strengthned, and comforted, not frightned, or disquieted.
SECT. III. A Discourse of the cause and cure of continuing Fevers. FEvers, though by some distinguished by various names, may be reduced to these two heads, viz. Putrid and Malig∣nant. Of the signs Diagnostick of Putrid Fevers. They invade the sick with a chilness in the back, and oftentimes shaking like an Ague; after that a burning heat, which diffuseth it self through the whole body, and increaseth gradually to the 4th. 7th. 14th. or 21. day, and then decreaseth ac∣cordingly: It is attended with Thirst, a quick Pulse, high coloured Urine, Head∣ach, Phrensie, Convulsions; with many more dangerous symptoms, if the disease be high.
Of the signs Prognostick. These Fevers happen commonly in the Spring or Summer; and if the symptoms be mild, they sometimes go off in 4. or 7. dayes; if violent, they last 14. 21. and 42. dayes: when a Phrensie, Delirium, Epilepsie, Convulsion, an irregular Pulse, no signs of concoction are seen in the U∣rine after a Crisis, or such like violent symptomes appear, the Patient hardly recovers without powerful remedies, and the diligent care of the Physician, and his Assistants. But if milder symptoms ap∣pear, as, if the thirst be not great, the Patient not disturbed in his sleeps, and wakes somewhat refreshed after them, good Crises happen, and Nature at those times gives some signs of a conquest, ei∣ther by sweat, urine, or a looseness; the Patient recovers with little care and help. Of the signs Diagnostick of Malig∣nant Fevers. They seize the Patient with a pain in the back or head; the strength is debili∣tated
without any manifest cause, viz. more than could be expected from the na∣ture or heat of the Fever, a dry Cough, palpitation of the Heart, involuntary Weeping; the heat in these distempers at first touch mild, but after some time more sharp; the Pulse low and quick, of∣ten intermitting; the Urine oft-times pale, and like the urine of healthy persons, but sometimes thick, with a red sediment; if the disease run high, Phrensie, Convul∣sions, Madness happens; Spots, Pustules, Blains, Buboes, Carbuncles, &c. break forth. Of the signs Prognostick in Malig∣nant Fevers. These Distempers generally afflict the people about the Autumn and Winter, more than the Spring and Summer; they last (according to the nature of the dis∣ease, and strength of the Patient) four, seven, twenty one, or forty two dayes: The dangerous symptoms in these dis∣eases, are unquiet sleeps; the Patient not relieved by them; madness; imbecillity of the retentive faculties; a creeping, low,
and irregular Pulse; black and turbid U∣rine; Convulsions, Epilepsies, &c. other∣wise, if the Patient is relieved by sleeps, hath a regular pulse, good Crises happen, moderate sweats, and the Patient appear∣ing refreshed after them, signs of concocti∣on in the Urine, &c. the Patient is in no danger. SECT. IV. A discourse of the cause of Fe∣vers. YOu know (Physiophilus) such is the humour of this present age, that they are not contented with those accounts of Fevers the Antients thought rational, but must have some new well-tuned Hy∣potheses to please their humours: that I may not be thought altogether Empirical, I will follow the steps of some of our mo∣dern ingenious Physicians, and run with them in their rational accounts of Fevers, which being pleasant and coherent, do gra∣tifie our humours, and delight our curious fancies. But I must beg their pardon, if I
leave them sometimes in the method of curing, and follow the experienced and well-troden paths of the Ancients. The Hypothesis granted, that Blood and Wine are analogous, and observe the same rules and method in casting out ex∣traneous bodies; the cause of Fevers will be thus understood, when either from the defects of the Duumvirate, i. e. the Sto∣mach and Spleen, change of Air or Diet, whereby the habit of the body is altered, violent Passions, retention of Excrements, and the like; an imperfect and ill-dige∣sted chyme is prepared, and conveyed in∣to the mass of blood, which being not fit for mixture and assimilation, is resected and cast forth as an Heterogenous matter: From hence is caused a commotion, or hermentation of the whole mass of blood, which last so long till the extranious matter be cast out, either by the Pores of the skin, Ureters, Intestins, or other emun∣ctories. The Experiment may be proved in Wine; into which if you put any Hete∣rogeneous matter, as a drop of a Candle, Sugar, or any Liquors, it will immedi∣ately ferment, which will not cease, till
the extraneous matter be thrown out, or separated from the Wine, and lodged at the bottom of the Vessel, and the whole body of the Wine remain pure and clear. Thus, we see, persons after excess in eat∣ing or drinking, fall into Fevers; the ferment of the stomach being diluted, and depraved by such excess, and the parts designed for conveyance of chyle, or nu∣triment, are obstructed; so that an un∣suteable chyme is sent to the Veins, which the blood cannot admit of. So likewise we may observe from such persons as have fed upon ill diet a long time, as at Sea, or in Captivity, the body at length hath been accustomed to it; but when such have returned home, and came to feed upon good and wholsom food, they have oftentimes fallen into very high Fe∣vers; the reason of it may be this: The parts of the body designed for concoction were not acquainted with such food, and through depravity could not digest them sufficiently; or, if this food were digested into good Chyme, yet when it came into the veins, the blood could not admit of its mixture and assimilation, because it is of a contrary nature to that which
was produced from the former ill diet. When this Chyme, from some ill food, or bad air, hath contracted a poysonous nature; the blood touched with this ve∣nomous Miasme, is either too much fused, from whence follows a greater ebullition in the mass of blood, by which the vital spi∣rits are wasted and dispersed; or some∣times the blood is coagulated, by which its circulation is hindred, and a stagnation of that vital current follows, as in the high malignant and Pestilential diseases. SECT. V. Of proper Diet (to be observed) in Fevers. IN putrid Fevers, in the beginning and state of the disease, a thin diet is ne∣cessary; as Water-grewel, broth of Chicken, Mace-Ale, Barly-water, with cooling and cordial Syrrups: In the de∣clination, Mutton or Veal-broth, or gra∣vey of meat stued with a little Claret, and a chive of Mace: after the first Purge, (which is not to be administred till signs
of concoction appear in the Urine) Chicken boyled, or roasted, Mutton, or Veal, &c. may be allowed: For drink, White-wine Posset-drink, or small Beer, with a fourth part of White-wine. In Malignant, the Diet must be thin, but spirituous; as, clear Sack posset-drink, Mace-ale, broth of Chicken, with Harts∣horn, and cordial Flowers boyled in it: In the declination of the disease, White∣wine Cawdles, gravy of Mutton stued with Claret, a little Mace and Nutmeg; then after purging, Flesh may be permit∣ted, viz. such as is of easie digestion, as Chicken, young Rabits, Lamb, or Veal: the drink, during the encrease or state of the disease, must be cordial Julips, but af∣terward good fresh Beer, with half Ale, that is well boyled, and neither too new, or stale.
SECT. VI. Of the method of curing putrid Fevers. FIrst of all take care to clear the Sto∣mach, if you be consulted in time, and nature will bear it. Proper Vomits are these: Oxymel scilliticum, Oxymel simplex, Infusio croci metallorum, Sal vitrioli, vel Gilla Theo∣phrasti. Then prescribe as a Julip this tincture of Roses, viz. ℞ Florum Rosarum Rubr. ℥j. Spir. vitrioli ʒiv. Aquae Fontanae liv. in∣fundantur in loco calido per horas sex, po∣stea coletur & colaturae depuratae adde sac∣chari albissimi ℥iij. Aquae Rosarum Da∣mascenarum ℥iv. misce, fiat tinctura, de quâ bibat aeger ad libitum. At other convenient times, let the Pa∣tient take this Cordial; ℞ Aquarum melissae, cardui benedicti, una ℥iij. perlarum Corallii praeparat. an. ℈j. syr. acetositatis citri ℥iss misce, fiat Julapium pro quatuor dosibus.
If the Fever increase, and violent symptoms appear, as Delirium, Phren∣sie, &c. apply blistering playsters to the Neck, Arms and Anckles; and Her∣rings, or this following Cataplasme to the Feet. ℞ Carnis Halecum ex muria ℥iij. Ra∣dicis Brioniae ℥j. fol. Rutae M. j. Salis ni∣gri ʒvj. saponis nigri q. s. fiat cataplasma plantis pedum applicandum. After which Applications administer this following bolus; ℞ Conservae Rosarum Rubr. vitriolat. ʒj. pulveris ex chelis cancrorum compositi ℈j. laudani Londinensis gr. j. misce, fiat bolus. Then administer other proper Cor∣dials, pro re nata, till you observe a good crisis, and signs of concoction in the U∣rine; at which time, observe Natures indications; as, which way she offers to drive out the morbifick matter, whether still by the Pores of the skin, or by the In∣testines; and according to your obser∣vation assist her either with proper Dia∣phoreticks, such as, Pulvis ex chelis can∣crorum compositus, cum Rad. contrayervae, & serpentariae; Or else with a lenitive Purge, such as followeth; viz.
℞ Fol. endiviae, cichorei ana pj. coquan∣tur in Aquae font. ℥vj. ad ℥iv. postea add. Rhabarbari electi ʒij. sennae mundatae ʒj. Zinziberis ℈j. sam. Anisi ʒss. & infundantur per noctem, mane colentur, & colaturae adde syr. Rosarum solutiv. ʒvj. misce, fiat potio. The same Potion, or another, may be afterwards repeated as occasion serves. SECT. VII. Of the method of curing malig∣nant Fevers. IF you are consulted in time, first clear the stomach with Oxymel seillitic. ℥iij. vel ℥iv. After its operation is ended, give this Cordial, viz. ℞ Aquae cardui benedicti, ℥iij. corallii praeparati, boli armenii ana ℈j. diascor∣dii ʒss. syr. Garyophyllorum ℥j. misce, fiat potio cordialis. Then let the Patient drink of this fol∣lowing Julip every three hours: viz. ℞ Cornu cervi usti, ℥j. Rad. Scorzo∣nerae ℥ss. Rad. Contrayervae, Serpentariae, ana ʒiss. Lujulae M. j. coquantur in Aquae
fontanae Lb. iv. ad Lb. ij. colaturae adde syrrup. melissae, Garyophyllorum ana ℥j. confectionis de Hyacintho, elect. de sassa∣frâ ana ʒij. misce, fiat Julapium, de quo capiat Cochlear. quatuor, tertiâ quavis borâ, tepide. Once in two hours, let the Patient take a spoonful of this Cordial, viz. ℞ Aquae melissae, Scordii ana ℥iij. Aquae Pezoardicae, ℥j. syr. Garyophyll. ℥iss. con∣fectionis de Hyacinth. ʒij. corallii, per∣larum, praeparat. ana ℈j. misce, fiat Julapium cordiale, de quo capiat cochlear. j. secundâ quavis borâ tepide. If violent Symptoms appear, apply blisters to the Neck, Wrists, and Anckles; Pigeons, or Herrings, to the Feet; Chick∣ens split to the Heart and Stomach; Heighten your Cordials as the disease en∣creaseth, and change them often in these distempers: Administer nothing cold, ei∣ther actually, or potentially: when you see signs of concoction, you may admini∣ster a gentle Purge, such as that before prescribed in putrid Fevers. Thus have I given you (Physiophilus) that method which I have used with extra∣ordinary success some years; but except
there be judgment and experience join∣ed with it, viz. to know a disease; and what doses, according to the several ages and constitutions of Patients; when to administer and apply Remedies; the best methods and medicines are used in vain. SECT. VIII. A discourse of the disease called the Griping of the Guts. THere hath appeared (Physiophilus) amongst many other diseases, a strange Monster, called the Scurvy, acting its part upon the stage of this little world in various shapes, counterfeiting the guise of most other diseases: sometimes it con∣sumes by little and little, as it were gra∣ting and crumbling the body into the grave; then again it rends and distracts separating the union of body and soul suddenly puffing out the lamp of life sometimes it is couchant, other times ram∣pant; so alternately chronick and acute.
But amongst the many appearances of this Protean disease, there is none more eminently atrocious, than this termed the Griping of the Guts; and though by some, it may be accounted a substantial disease; it appears to my reason to be only a product, or an effect of a virulent scorbutick root. Of the signs Diagnostick of the Griping of the Guts. It seizeth the Patient with wringing gripes usually, and oftentimes with in∣tolerable racking, and convulsive pains: some have only a flux downward, others evacuate both by vomit and stool; they are accompanied with a Fever manifest, or hidden; giddiness, great pains in the Head, Drowsiness, Phrensies, tedious Watchings, weakness of the Limbs, diffi∣cult breathing, a weak and irregular Pulse, pains in the sides and loins, fluxes of blood, oppression at the stomach, the urine for the most part like healthy per∣sons; but sometimes it is thick and trou∣bled, oftentimes spots appear of a red∣dish, or purple colour, being small, and lying deep in the flesh.
Prognosticks in the Griping of the Guts. If a Fever, with other bad symptoms, as Lipothymie, Convulsion, Phren∣sies, &c. be joined with these griping pains; the patient generally miscarries, except the virulent Ichor be transmit∣ted by large sweats, or more gentle breathings, with eruptions of Pustules, Spots, or red Blotches. If these malignant Gripes, joined with a Fever, invade any that have been de∣bilitated by a long infirmity; or intem∣perate persons, the ferment of whose sto∣mach is diluted and depraved, the case is dangerous. Sometimes it happens, that the Torminous matter is translated into the limbs, whereupon Palsie, Rheuma∣tismus, or Gowt happen, to the preser∣vation of life. If none of these symptoms appear, the Patient recovers with little help of pro∣per Remedies; but otherwise, not with∣out great care and industry, annexed with medicines of some force and energy.
SECT. IX. Of the cause of the Griping of the Guts. ITs Cause may be supposed (Physiophi∣lus) from an exorbitant acidity of the stomachs Ferment, occasioned from the ill disposition of the Air, Diet, Contagion, or Hereditary constitution: By this luxuri∣ant exorbitancy of the stomachs Ferment, the food dissolved and digested is con∣verted into a juice of the same sharp and corroding nature; and resisting the alte∣ration and dulcoration designed by the Ferment, implanted in the intestins, by its acrimony frets, extimulates, and excites the expulsive faculty of those parts, col∣liquating the nitrous juices, turning them into an acid, fretting, and vexatious Ichor, bringing a damp upon the spirits, and if not timely prevented, totally ex∣tinguishing them.
SECT. X. Of the method of curing the Gri∣ping of the Guts. IF consulted in time, a gentle Vomit will be necessary, such as Oxymel scilli∣ticum, from ℥i. to ℥iv. after that some proper Diaphoretick, such as Pulvis ex chelis cancrorum compositus, lapis contra∣yervae, prepared Pearl and Coral; these do dulcorate acid and corroding juices, and relieve nature, by throwing out the offending humours, per poros cutis: Let the Patient drink Julips made of Cornu cervi ust. Rad. scorzonerae, contrayervae, serpentariae, &c. Administer Cordials made of spirit of Juniper, Scurvy-grass, Harts∣horn, with proper Sytrups, Elixir pro∣prietatis Parsi, Spirit of Tartar, Tin∣cture of Coral, Haematitis or Blood∣stone: proper chalybiate Medicines may be used at convensent times, as the judi∣cious Physician shall find occasion. The Diet may be the same prescribed in malignant Fevers. Let this short discourse suffice at pre∣sent. (Physiophilus;) as occasion offers, and
acceptance answers, I shall be ready to serve you, and my Country, to the utmost of my power. —Si quid scis rectius istis Candidus imperti; si non, his utere me∣cum. From my dwelling, next door to Grey's-Inn-gate in Holbourn. July the 14th 1672. ERRATA. IN the Epistle to the Reader, line ult. for yours read your; pag. 34. lin. 1. for Halecium read Halecum; lin. 4. read cataplasma; lin. 12. read extracti; lin. penult. read Helmontii; pag. 33. lin. 13. read conservae. FINIS.
The Contents. THe Introduction to the Discourse of Agues. Page 1. CAP. I. Of the Use and Offices of the Spleen and Stomach. p. 15. CAP. II. A discourse of the cause of intermitting Fe∣vers or Agues. p. 19. CAP. III. Of the Diagnostick signes of intermitting Fevers or Agues. p. 23. CAP. IV. Of the Prognosticks in Agues. p. 27. CAP. V. Of the several Remedies used for the cure of Agues. p. 31. CAP. VI. Of Charms used for the Cure of Agues, how they operate: with the dangerous con∣sequences that have attended them. p. 35. CAP. VII. The Authors particular Method of curing all sorts of Agues. p. 42.
CAP. VIII. Of the proper diet to be observed by such as have Agues, and during my method of curing Agues. p. 45. CAP. IX. Observations of this successful method in some long tedious Quartans complicated with other Chronick diseases. p. 47. Appendix. SECT. I. NAtures method in the time of sickness, and by what means she opposeth her enemies. p. 54. SECT. II. Natures several indications in chronick and acute diseases, according to which the Physician ought to frame his method of cure. p. 56. SECT. III. A discourse of the Cause and Cure of conti∣nuing Fevers. p. 60.
SECT. IV. A discourse of the cause of Fevers. p. 63. SECT. V. Of proper Diet to be observed in Fevers. p. 66. SECT. VI. Of the method of curing putrid Fevers. p. 68. SECT. VII. Of the method of curing malignant Fe∣vers. p. 70. SECT. VIII. A discourse of the disease called the Griping in the Guts. p. 72. SECT. IX. Of the Cause of the Griping in the Guts. p. 75. SECT. X. Of the method of curing the Griping of the Guts. p. 76.
