T2296 99832297 36769
THE Triumphs of Grace: OR, THE Last Words AND Edifying Death OF THE LADY Margaret de la Musse, A Noble French LADY, Who Died in May 1681. Aged but Sixteen Years. Englished by P. L. LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey, over against the Compter. 1687.
Imprimatur. Hen. Maurice Rmo Dom. Christ. P. D. Wilhelmo, Archiep. Cant. à Sacris. Feb. 1. 1686.
TO The most Pious AND Virtuous Gentlewoman MADAM ANN HEWER. Madam, ASI was casting in my Mind to present you with something in token of my high Esteem for
your Virtue, I hap∣pily met with these LAST HOURS of a young French La∣dy; in which I found so many things rare and ad∣mirable, useful and edifying, divinely transporting and inflaming, that I concluded it a Gift most agreeable and comporting with your Pious and Devout Inclinati∣ons;
and there∣fore was soon de∣termin'd in my thoughts to Dedi∣cate this Translation to you, as judging it (setting aside my own Faults) most worthy of your Acceptance. For what can be imagined more strange and won∣derful, than to see so tender an Age, so weak a Sex, so
delicate an Educa∣tion, not one∣ly combating the most formidable of all things, that King of Terrours, but tri∣umphing over, and trampling on him? What move Edify∣ing, than to behold the Power of Grace so gloriously in∣thron'd amidst the Infirmities of Nature, rais'd to their highest pitch, and
making them all serve as foils to its Divine Lustre? What more trans∣porting, than to hear a Soul woun∣ded with Divine Love, send forth its flaming Desires to the Glorious and All-Beautiful Object of them? Or what can be thought more en∣gaging and inci∣ting to Virtue, than
to see not onely the peaceful, but joyful Latter End thereof; and what great Triumphs & Exultations at∣tend it, even in the most difficult and affrighting Cir∣cumstances of the Last Scene of Life? In a word, MADAM, you may see here the miraculous and powerful effects of the RELIGION
you profess, and the GRACE you entertain and have chosen for your Portion and Orna∣ment; how no∣thing can stand a∣gainst it, how eve∣ry thing must turn to its advantage, and how all that oppose it, serve onely to adorn it with never-fading Trophies of Glory. I question not,
MADAM, but your reading of this Book will start many more useful and delightful hints, than are here men∣tioned, which may afford you Advice and Comfort in this your Pilgrimage through the Valley of the shadow of Death, to the Land of Bliss and Glory. But I de∣tain you too long from the Banquet
within, where (ac∣cording to Sampson's Riddle) you'll find the Eater giving Meat, and the strong one sweet∣ness. So commend∣ing you to that Grace whose Triumphs are here so signally exemplifi'd, I re∣main with all due Respect, MADAM, Your most Obedient Humble Servant, P. L.
THE Preface. IT is so rare a thing to see Persons of Quality, in the flower of their Age, whol∣ly disengag'd and set loose from the World and Vanities thereof, and it is of so great import to publish such Edifying Examples as these, that
we may suppose the best of all sorts will think themselves oblig'd by our communicating to them the Last Words of the Lady Margaret de la Musse, it being impossi∣ble to read them, without being powerfully affected therewith. For (indeed) we find in this little Piece so many Objects of Won∣der, as we are at a stand where to fix it most. We have here a Lady presented to us, who at
the Age of Sixteen years, when others onely begin to enter upon the Stage of the World, and to relish the vain Pleasures of it, earnestly desires to leave it; and not minding ought, save those Felicities which never end, affronts Death, and all its ter∣rifying Concomitants, with so much Constancy, Bravery, and Foy, as if she were full of Days, and had liv'd to that ut∣most
most term of Life, which uses to make Death wel∣come; who, at those years, when others have scarce attain'd some slight Tin∣ctures and Impressions of Piety, and are only ac∣quainted with the first Rudiments of Chri∣stianity, speaks so so∣lidly and worthily of the Mysteries of Salva∣tion, & the Grounds of her Hope, that one would think she had spent an Age in the reading and
meditation of those Sa∣cred Records. To be brief, we see a young Virgin, who being dearly belov'd of all her Relations and Friends, might be thought to have strong ties to the Earth, where she was about to leave them, and yet speaks of nothing but Heaven, & the Salvation her SAVI∣OUR purchas'd for her; Who every moment darts her flaming desires to the All-Glorious and Lovely
Cause of them; and who amidst the extream Ago∣nies & Pangs she suffers, permits not the least mur∣mur against Divine Providence to 'scape her lips; but meekly sub∣mitting to the will of her Creator, triumphs by Faith, over all the Weak∣nesses and Oppositions of Nature. Finally, we see a Mother, who though she were most sensibly af∣flicted to find her self at the point of parting with
Her she most tenderly lov'd, yet has Courage enough to comfort her Daughter in her last Conflicts, and is not at all asham'd to learn to die well of Her, whom she had taught to live so. It's like there will not be found so exact a Connexion in all that this Illustrious Ex∣pirer delivers, as some critical ears may require; but besides, that it is not strange to find the Dis∣courses of Dying Per∣sons,
broken and interrup∣ted, and that it was not well possible to retain all she spoke, I dare affirm, that the Reader will meet with so many sur∣prizing and affecting Passages in these Papers, that he will give little heed to their connexion, or exactness of stile. In a word, the onely aim in publishing This, is to expose to view the mira∣culous Effects of Grace, when it works on the
Heart, and seizes it for its own; making the very Mouths of Children the Trumpets of its Praise. GOD, of his infinite Mercy, grant to us all, That we may die the Death of the Righteous, and that our latter End may be like theirs.
Advertisement. THE Translator desire the Reader to take notice, That where thi Young Lady repeats the Psalms in Verse, which also (as it is usual for French Protestants to do) she frequently sang; he has made use of such English Translations, as best express the sence of the French Metre.
THE Last Words AND Edifying Death OF THE LADY Margaret de la Musse. THE Lady Margaret de la Musse, whose Last Words are here recorded, was of one of the Noblest Families in the Province of Britany, she being the Daughter of Caesar, Lord Marquess de la Musse, and the Lady Ʋrsulina de Champagne de la Suse, his Con∣sort;
who, together with their Il∣lustrious Ancestors, have held so considerable a Rank in the Kingdom, that the onely naming of them may suffice to convince the World of it. But it is not for that alone, they deserve the Esteem of all men, as being far more eminent for their great Piety and exemplary Virtue, than Nobleness of Bloud. Their great and unparallel'd Zeal for God's Glory, and unmovable Constancy in the True Religion, cannot suffici∣ently be commended and admir'd; Afflictions and Sufferings, which are the Lot of the Church-Militant here on Earth, having never been able to make them renounce the Doctrine our Saviour taught, and his Martyrs have seal'd with their Bloud: For they all-along made it their chiefest Business, more and more, to establish the Covenant of God, and knowledge of his Truth in their Family; and to the end all the Children God had given them,
might he Heirs of their Piety and Virtue, as well as Estate, their grea∣test concern and care ever was to afford them, together with a good Education, the powerful Example of an Holy Life. And though God has some time since depriv'd this Illustrious Family of Him who was the Head of it, yet by the Care of his most pious Lady, Godliness has no less flourish'd in it, than before; insomuch, that God being honour'd and fear'd, his Holy Name call'd up∣on, and his Sacred Word made the subject of constant Meditation a∣mong them, this Wise Mother al∣ways had the comfort and happi∣ness to see her Cares and Desires herein, answer'd by every one of her Children; and particularly by this Daughter of hers, whose Dying Words, are here rehears'd, who in the last moments of her Life, did in a special manner, shew how deep an impression those good Instructions had made on her, which she had
receiv'd in her most tender Age. THIS Pious young Lady, after some days indisposition, which day∣ly grew upon her, did on the 4th of May 1681. being Sunday, fall into such violent Fits, that as soon as she was come to her self again, per∣ceiving her Latter End was near, desir'd the Lady her Mother should be call'd, that she might receive her Blessing, and be comforted by her; who no sooner appear'd, but this Dutiful Daughter, stretching forth her Hands to her, with all the sub∣mission imaginable, spake thus: My dear Mother, now is the time God will call me to Himself. Let us put our selves in a condition of coming into his Presence. But alas! how unworthy am I to present my self before him! How weak is my Faith, and how disproportionate my Repen∣tance! Pray entreat God for me, that he would grant me the Pardon of my Sins, and speak Peace to my Soul. Oh, how unhappy am I, He does
not speak at all to my Soul! O beg of Him to have mercy on me! HOW much soever the Lady her Mother found her self mov'd at this Discourse, yet she had so much power over her self, as to return her this Answer: Dear Child, it's true,Psal. 143.2. that in God's sight no man living (but through his mercy) can be justifi'd. But has not the Sa∣viour of the World made an atonement for the greatest Sinners? Have not the sins of David, Manasses, St. Peter, the penitent Thief, and abundance of others, been forgiven them? JESUS CHRIST (as you very well know, my Child) did not come to call the Righteous,Mat. 9.13. but Sinners to re∣pentance. 'TIS true (repli'd the young Lady;) but such a repentance I do not find wrought in me, as God re∣quires of those he calls to him: for alas, he speaks not to my Soul. My dear Child (answer'd the Lady her Mother) since your heart is so sen∣sible
of grief for your Sins, it's a sign that your Conscience is not sear'd or stupifi'd; there is something that fights within you; And what can that be but the Holy Ghost? Always put your trust in God's Mercy, and the Merits of your Redeemer, who has said,Joh. 6 17. Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. At the hear∣ing of which comfortable words, the Patient, with her Eyes lifted up to Heaven, broke out into these: O Lord,Cant. 1.4. draw me then, that I may run after thee. THEN she desir'd to see their Chaplain Monsieur de Malnoe; who no sooner was acquainted with it, but he repair'd to her Chamber, in company of some Gentlewomen of the Neighbourhood he met at the door, to whom, as they drew near to her Bed-side to see her, she spoke thus: My dear Friends, I beg of you, pray to God that he would be pleas'd to have mercy on me. And then turning to the Minister, she
earnestly desir'd him to assist her with his Prayers and comfortable Exhortations. AND some few hours after this, she finding her self uneasie in her Chamber, desir'd to be (and was accordingly) remov'd to another; and she still growing worse and worse, requested to be recommen∣ded to God in the Prayers of the Church. In the mean time she would hear nothing but Godly Dis∣courses, and always was talking of the heinousness of her sins. Whereupon being told, that it was very pleasing to God to see us accuse our selves before him; 'Tis true (cry'd she) Whosoever does confess and for∣sake his sins, shall have mercy.Prov. 28.13. ALL the rest of the day she spent in lamenting and bewailing the weakness and imperfection of her Piety; and no sooner was fallen into a slumber, but she awak'd and call'd for the Chaplain; still conti∣nuing in Meditation and Prayer, and
frequently calling upon God, as par∣ticularly thus: With speed send help,Psal. 40.18. Old Transl. and set me free, My God, I thee require: Make hast with aid to succour me, O Lord, at my desire. Like a lost Sheep I've gone astray,Psal. 119.176. Patrick. But now to thee I come: Thy Precepts I resolve t'obey; Lord, bring thy Servant home. O Lord,Psal. 6.1. rebuke me not in thine in∣dignation, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.Psal 130.3. If thou, Lord, wilt be extream to mark what is done a∣miss.v. 4. O Lord, who shall stand? But there is mercy with thee, that thou mayst be fear'd.Psal. 51.2. Wash me throughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins.v. 3. For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever be∣fore me.v. 9. Turn thy face from mine iniquities, and put out all my mis∣deeds.v. 10. Make me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me. Lord, to my Prayer incline thine ear; Th' afflicted hear:Psal. 55.2. Sandys. Nor be thou deaf to my Complaint; For O I faint! Regard the sighs, the groans, the cries, Which from my pensive Soul arise. O wretched Creature that I am,Rom. 7.27. who shall deliver me from the body of this death! WHICH having said, she re∣main'd silent for a little while; and then began to speak again, saying, Draw near to me, O Lord, and I will draw near to thee; and purifie my heart, that I may appear before thee. To thee, O Lord, my God, lo I Do stretch my craving hands:Psal. 143. v. 6, 7, 8. Old Transl. My Soul desires after thee, As do the thirsty Lands.
Hear me with speed, my Spirit does fail, Hide not thy face me fro: Else shall I be like them that down Into the Pit do go. Have mercy upon me,Psal. 15.1. O God, after thy great goodness; according to the multitude of thy merccies, blot out mine offences.v. 12. O restore unto me the comfort of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit. IT cannot be describ'd how great her grief and disquiet was, when she reflected upon her weaknesses, and the little care she conceiv'd she had taken in the performance of her Duty to God; and in this dole∣ful condition she cry'd out, Lord God of health,Psal. 88.1, 2, 3. Old Transl. the hope and stay, Thou art alone to me: I call and cry throughout the day, And all the night to thee.
O let my Prayer soon ascend Ʋnto thy sight on high: Incline thine ear, O Lord, attend, And bearken to my cry. For why? with wo my heart is fill'd, And does in trouble dwell: My life and breath almost does yield, And draweth nigh to Hell. O Lord,Jer. 14.7. though my sins witness a∣gainst me, yet do thou pardon and put away mine iniquities, for thy Great Names sake (which I in∣voke.) For thy wrath endures but a moment:Psal. 30.5. and in thy favour is life. Behold my troubles, Lord, How they with baste advance:Psal 70.1. Patr. O do not stay, but come as fast To my deliverance. Like,Psal. 42.1. as the Hart pants after the Water brooks, so longs my Soul after
thee,v. 2. O God! My Soul is athirst for God, yea even for the Living God: When shall I come and appear before God? Look dawn to me, and be the samePsal. 119. v. 132. Woodford. As thou art us'd to be to them who love thy Name. 'Tis for thy favour that I sue,Psal. 119.57. Woodf. And hastning of that promise which thy Word makes due. ALL the night long she was rehearsing the most pathetical Ver∣ses of the Psalms; and in the morn∣ing (being Munday) a Roman Ca∣tholick being come to see her, about nine of the Clock, and expressing his grief upon the score of her sick∣ness, she answer'd his Civility, and withal gave him an account of her Faith, and the Hope that was in her; assuring him, she was resolv'd to die in that Religion, which she was brought up in, and always had profess'd. Some few days after
this, a Divine, by name Monsieur Boursault, being come to visit her, discoursed her a little while, and then pray'd with her; she instan∣cing to him, after his Prayer was ended, what part of it had most af∣fected her. This whole day (as the foregoing) she pass'd in con∣tinual sighs and tears; often cry∣ing out, Oh! how much weakness and infirmity, O my God, am I sensible of! Oh! how unworthy am I to appear before thee! If thou, O Lord, mark my transgressions, I shall not be able to abide it. But, O my God, I beseech thee speak peace unto me, and say to my Soul, I am thy Salva∣tion. Incline thine ear to hear my voice,Psal. 119.149. Old Transl. And pity on me take: As thou wast wont, so help me, Lord, Lest life should me forsake.
Since my sins do abound,Rom. 5.20. O Lord, so make thy Grace much more abound towards me.Psal. 69.16. Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good: turn un∣to me according to the multitude of thy mercies.v. 17. And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trou∣ble. O haste thee, and hear me. Draw nigh unto my Soul,v. 18. and save it, for thy mercies sake. WITH these she rehearsed also several admirable Sentences she had learn'd out of a Book intitul'd; [Comforts against the Terrours of Death;] which being slipt out of our mind, are not mentioned here. SHE having been from the Sunday-morning in continual frights and disquiets, occasion'd by the sense of her sins, and her apprehen∣sion of God's Judgments, found her Spirit calmed, and her mind much compos'd, about seven of the Clock in the Evening, when she felt the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and
was fill'd with that unspeakable Joy and Glory which God diffuses in their hearts, who are struck with a lively sorrow for having offended him. NOW at the time of these happy Inspirations it was, that she hearing them, who were about her, talk of giving her something to re∣fresh her body, said to them, All that is done to me, is to no purpose; for from my God I have receiv'd the onely Remedy my Soul so much long'd for.Psal. 118.5. I called upon the Lord in my trouble, and the Lord heard me, at large. I feel my God is on my side:v. 6. therefore I will fear no evil.v. 16. For the right hand of the Lord is exal∣ted: the right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass.Psal. 116.2. The Lord has inclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long as I breath.v. 3. The snares of death compassed me about, and the pains of Hell gat hold of me.v. 4. I found trouble and heaviness but I will call
upon the the Name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my Soul. Gracious is the Lord,v. 5. and righteous; yea, our God is merciful.v. 6. The Lord preserves the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me.v. 7. Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. HERE she making a stop, they gave her that which was pre∣par'd for her; and some of the Company telling her she should endeavour to take some rest, she answer'd, That the Rest and Peace she felt in her Soul, was her sole joy and happiness. And when it was farther said to her, that she ought to take courage, there being yet hopes of Recovery. Ah! (re∣ply'd she) tell me no more of li∣ving here on Earth again, now all my thoughts are fix'd upon Heaven. Neither does death affright me at all:Rom. 6.23. for though I know it is the wa∣ges of sin, I know also that the Gift
of God is Eternal Life. Onely pray to God for me, that he would be pleas'd to strengthen me more and more against the fears, which the sense of my sins may raise in me, to the end I may be enabled to fight the good fight,2 Tim, 4.7. and so obtain the Crown of Life. UPON which one saying to her, that the fears occasioned from sin, ought to be much less in her, than any body else, she having al∣ways liv'd a most pious retired life; she made this answer: How do you know I would not have loved the World, if I had been brought up as other people of my Quality are? Am not I more happy now, that my Sa∣viour will take me from it? Let us therefore pray him, that be would so dispose my Heart, that I may go to him with a full assurance of his Mercy. O Lord, this is the needful time; help me, my God, hast thee to my relief.
THEN another saying to her, But, Madam, suppose God would spare you to us—Here she reply'd, without giving the party leave to go on,Mat. 26.39. Phil. 1.23. Not my will, O Lord, but thy will be done. Nevertheless it is far better for me to depart and be with my Saviour. But, O my God, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in heaven. And so proceeded to the end of the Lord's Prayer; and af∣terwards rehearsed also the Apostles Creed. Which having done, she sate up in her Bed, and looking on her Hands,Gen. 3.19. Job 19.25. said, This poor Body must return to its Dust. But I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day.v. 26. And though after my skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.1 Cor. 15.53. For this cor∣ruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality.v. 59. And then shall Death be swallowed up in Victory.v. 55. O Death, where is thy Vi∣ctory? Where is that Sting where∣with
with thou wouldst piece me? My Saviour has broken it. After which, she making a little pause, did seem to fall asleep; but presently turn∣ing her self towards the Lady her Mother, with a chearful counte∣nance said to her, Dear Mother, give me up to God again, who thus long has lent me to you. Whereup∣on the Lady her Mother lifting up her Eyes to Heaven, with sighs and tears cry'd out, O Heavenly Father, into thy hands I commend both my self, and this poor Child thou hast given me: Make us (I beseech thee) partakers of thy ho∣liness, that we may be so of thy Hap∣piness also. THEN the Patient answer'd, I know whom I have believed,2 Tim. 1.12. and am perswaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. And looking on the Lady her Mother, with a ten∣der look, she said to her (upon occasion of a Dream she had) Dear
Mother, give me to drink again of your Consolations. Whereto the Lady her Mother answer'd, It is the Lord shall do that for you, my Child. Aye, (replied she;) yet have I received some by your means also. Then the Lady her Mother went on and said,Isal. 12.13. With joy shall you draw water out of the Wells of Salvation. To which the Patient answer'd, Tea verily, I am drink∣ing already of those Waters spring∣ing up into eternal life; and my Cup does overflow. Lord, break this Vessel of Earth that the Trea∣sure may appear which thou bast laid up in it. Take unto thee again the Breath wherewith thou bast animated this my poor Body. THE next night after, she dream'd that she saw two Lamps fasten'd to Heaven, which gave a most glorious Light, and that at last one of them was caught up and hid in Heaven. Which Dream she having told the Lady her Mo∣ther
the next Morning, she said to her, My dear Child, thou Virgin of Israel, Mystical Bride, go to meet thy Bridegroom, with thy Lamp full of that Oyl thy Saviour has given thee. Then the Patient cry'd out, Father,Luk. 23.46. into thy hands I com∣ment my Spirit: Yea, I am now go∣ing to the Wedding of the Lamb, who has married me to himself, in his tender mercies, and I shall sit down at his Table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. At which Conversation the Chaplain being present, was going to conclude it, with these words: [Well done,Mat. 25.23. good and faith∣ful Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.] But the Patient in∣terrupting him, cry'd out, Oh! this Joy of the Lord is my joy: adding, That Mercy rejoyced against Judge∣ment,Jam. 2.13. in her behalf. After this, the Lady her Mother, and one of her own Sisters, who remain'd a∣lone with her, heard her most fer∣vently
pray to God, and rehearse several Sentences of the 6.51. and 143. Psalms; which she deliver'd either in Prose or Verse, sometimes according to the Old, and at other times according to the New Tran∣slation. And thus applying her self to God, with a Zeal beyond expression, all her thoughts were now so rais'd, that she felt such ra∣vishing Joys, as no Tongue can ut∣ter. How happy am I! (repeated she often.) How surpassing is my Joy! How can I express it? It's so great, that is exceeds all compa∣rison. What thanks have I to re∣turn to my good God! You, my dear Friends (speaking to her Mother and Sister) help me to ascribe the Glory due to his Name, and to set forth his worthy Praise. THE Lady her Mother see∣ing her in this happy condition, call'd those in again, who were gone out of the Room, that they might be Witnesses of this her Joy and
Consolation, as they had been of her Sorrows. She was at this time sitting up in her Bed, with her hands joyned together, and her Eyes lifted towards Heaven; her looks being very lively and chear∣ful, and her countenance brisk, though modest. For the the space of six hours she spoke with a loud voice, and did express much in few words; using terms very empha∣tical to represent, sometimes her Happiness, and sometimes the Joy she was filled with; interlacing her discourse with several Sentences both of the Old and New Testa∣ment, which she utter'd so fast and fluently, that it was impossible to remember them all; and mixing her inspir'd thoughts with those written Dictates of the Holy Ghost, sometimes made her address to our Lord for the Redemption he had vouchsafed to her; and then again humbled her self before him. At another time she congratulated her
own happy state; and lastly, she return'd a thousand times her hear∣ty thanks to God for the accúmu∣lated favours she had receiv'd at his hand. BESIDES, She paraphrased several Chapters of the Holy Scri∣pture, as the 5th, 8th, and 12th of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Ro∣mans, and the 17th of St. John's Gospel; applying them to her self, much after this manner: My God, there is now no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JE∣SUS: I have therefore nothing to fear, for I do with all my heart lay hold of his merits, who is the Re∣deemer of the World. I am made free from the Law of Sin and Death, which does no more at all affright me; and I feel the Spirit of Eternal Life communicated to me by my Saviour. Yea, O my God, I know I am one of thy Children, since this thy Spirit so powerfully comforts me.
Arise, my Soul, and to th' Aimigh∣ty King,Psal. 104.35. Woodf. Sprightly, and chearful Hallelu∣jabs, sing! Oh! how great is my hap∣piness,Rom. 8.15. who have not received the Spirit of Bondage, but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby I can call Him Father, who is the Great God and Master of the World. Thou Holy Ghost, shalt always bear witness to my Spirit, that I am the Child of God, and. Co-heir with Christ.Rom. 11.33. O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out!v. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things; to whom be glory for e∣ever. Amen. Lord Jesu (ad∣ded she) thou said'st in that
Prayer thou didst put up fir thine Apostles.Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their words. I have believed on thee, through their words: Thou didst therefore, O Lord, even then, pray for thy poor Hand-maid. Lord, thou didst say,v. 24. [Father, I will that they also whom thou bast given me, be with me where I am.] O grant (I beseech thee) that where thou art, I may be also, to the end I may behold thy Glory to all Eternity. Then hearing some of the Com∣pany say, that she spake well; It is not I (answered she) that speak, but the Holy Ghost that speaks in me, to whom he has given the Tongue of the Learned. O Hearken to me therefore, and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul.
O joyn with me in returning him thanks for his unspeakable Gift.2 Cor. 9.15. IN the mean time she fre∣quently clapt her hands, and shouted for joy; often repeat∣ing these words: O the great∣ness of my Happiness! How can I express the content of my Soul? That blessed Com∣forter has overcome for me, and is sent to cohabit with me. He (I say) is come to me, who is the Fountain of Life, and in whose Light alone we can see light. How many won∣derful favours have I receiv'd from my good God!Psal. 116.10. What shall I render unto him for all the Benefits that he has done to me,Gen. 32.10. who am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which he has shewn to his Servant, and wherewith he has fill'd my Soul. Where∣fore
with joy and gladness my mouth shall praise his Holy Name. O Lord, how much inriched am I with those ex∣cellent gifts of thy Grace! Thou hast wiped away all tears from my eyes.Rev. 7.17. 2.17. Thou bast given me the white Stone, and in that Stone a new Name, which no man knows, saving he that has it. I shall be fatisfied with the fatness of thy House,Psal. 36.8. and thou shalt make me drink of the River of thy Plea∣sures.Psal. 23. The Lord is my Shep∣herd, therefore, can I lack nothing He shall make me lie down in green Pastures, and lead me forth beside the still Waters. He shall convert my Soul, and lead me in the paths of Righteousness, for his Name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the Valbey of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy Rod and thy Staff comforts me. Thou pre∣parest
a Table before me; thou hast anointed my heard with Oyl, and my cup runs over. Surely loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and I will dwell in the House of the Lord for ever. WHAT am I, O Lord, my Saviour? What am I, that thou shouldst vouchsafe to make my heart thy habitati∣on! I bless thee, I adore thee, I glorifie thee, I give thanks to thee for thy great mercy, O Lord, my God and heaven∣ly Father! And you, my dear Friends, (speaking to them that stood by) help me to re∣turn the thanks and praise due unto his Name. Which ha∣ving said, she cry'd aloud,Luk. 1.46. My Soul does magnifie the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoyced in God my Saviour; for he has regarded the lowliness of his Hand-maid.
How great is the goodness of God towards me, who has ta∣ken pity of me! O how ex∣ceeding charitable and loving is my Saviour, who has ex∣tended this his great love to∣wards me, even when I was an Enemy to him! yea, he did knock at the door of my heart, and enter in (even at that time when I would have shut it against him) and spake peace to my Soul. O the A∣byss of Mercy and Love, that He, very God and man, should suffer a shameful Death upon the Cross, to redeem both my Body and Soul from eternal Damnation! O my God, my heavenly Saviour, I see, as it were, Rivers of Bloud running out of those Wounds in thy Blessed Hands, Feet, and Side, which are as so many Rivers of Grace, that have made me
whiter than Snow. I there∣fore from a true heart, love, a∣dore, and embrace thee, be∣seeching thee, O thou Sun of Righteousness, to shine in my Soul, inlighten it with the knowledge, purifie it with the fear, and inflame it with the love of Thee; make it partaker of thy Holiness and happiness; and when it has put off this weak and frail Body, grant that at the last day, it may re-assume it in a glorified state, and both of them reign with thee for e∣ver and ever. Amen AS she was in those Tran∣sports of Mind, looking up sted∣fastly to Heaven, a Gentleman of the Neighbourhood, then pre∣sent, said to the Lady her Mo∣ther, That he thought her Daugh∣ter might very well say with Holy Stephen, Behold,Act. 7.56. I see the Heavens open'd, and the Son of
Man standing on the right hand of God. Which the Patient hear∣ing, cry'd out, Yea, indeed, I behold him, and like, St. Paul, am placed in the view of things that are unspeakable. And you, my dear Friends, how is it you don't see the same with me? This Mercy, which is not vouchsafed to every one, God will shew you one day. Then stirring up her self, she said,Psal. 103.1. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his Holy Name.v. 2. Praise the Lord, o my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits.Psal. 34.1. Yea, I will alway give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.v. 3. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnifie his Name toge∣ther.
Let the whole World, O God,Psal. 145.21. Woodf. sing praise to thee, And like mine, may their Songs eternal be. Oh, how much in love am I with my Saviour, for that he has heard my Prayer, and in∣clined his Ear to me! There∣fore I will call upon him as long as I live.Luk. 2.14. Glory be to God on high, and on Earth peace, good will towards men. Lord,v. 29. now lettest thou thy Servant, depart in peace according to thy Word. For mine eyes have seen thy Sal∣vation.v. 36. AFTER she had rehear∣sed these and several other pla∣ces of Scripture, with which she often mixt these words, [Oh! how great is my Happiness! how surpassing my Joy!] she did sit up in her Bed, and with an
admirable gracefulness, spake to the Standers-by, in this man∣ner. O taste and see,Psal. 34.8. Patr. as I have done; And then confess you must, That God is good, and thy are blest, That in his Goodness trust. Come to me with attention hear,v. 11. Sand. I will instruct you in his fear. O come and hear all ye that fear God,Psal. 66.16. and I will declare what he has done for my Soul.v. 17. I cry'd unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue. If I had inclin'd my heart to wicked∣ness,v. 18. the Lord would not have heard me.v. 19. But now he has heard me, and consider'd the voice of my Prayer.v. 20. Let us therefore praise the Lord, who has not cast
away my Prayer, nor turned his Mercy from me. WHICH having said, she then pray'd for the King, in these words:Psal. 72.1. Give the King thy Judg∣ments, O God, and thy Righteous∣ness unto the King's Son;v. 2. and grant that he may judge thy people according to Justice, and defend them that are opprest with wrong. Bless him, and all the Royal Family, with thy most exquisite Benedictions from Heaven above, and on the Earth beneath: And thou, O Lord, who hast the hearts of Kings in thy hands, inspire the heart of thine Anointed with tender Mercy, Pity, and Com∣passion, and incline him to be the Defender of thy poor di∣stressed People, that are his Ma∣jesty's faithful and loyal Sub∣jects.Psal. 20.9. Save them, O Lord, and let the King hear them when they call.
WITH which she also re∣cited that out of the 44th, 74th, and 102 Psalms, which was pro∣per in this place; and at the same time earnestly pray'd for the church in general; saying, among other things, O mer∣ciful God, vouchsafe in thy tender compassions, to look upon thy poor desolate Sion, whom thou hast chosen for thy Spouse; She is afflicted and grievously opprest:Psal. 102.13. It is time that thou have mercy upon her,Psal. 103.5. and renew her youth like that of an Eagle.Psal. 90.15. O Lord, send thy children prosperity; And com∣fort them again, now after the time thou hast plagued them, and for the years wherein they have suffer'd adversity. Alas, poor Church! there is no constant rest for thee on Earth: Here thou must, like thy Saviour, wear a Crown of Thorns; but
be of good chear, this will not last always; thy miseries shall have an end, and thy Saviour will replenish thee with eter∣nal Joy and Consolations, which he has given me a taste of al∣ready, and will further make us all partakers of, one day, in a more abundant manner, ac∣cording to the Riches of his infinite Goodness and mercy. And particularly she pray'd for the Church of Nantes; making it her humble suit to God, that He, who is the God of peace, would be pleas'd always to be with her, and keep Unity and Concord, Love and Charity in the midst of her. THEN she rehears'd the 133 Psalm; Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is for Bre∣thren to dwell in unity: And so on. And after that, this Exhor∣tation of St. Paul:Rom. 12.10. Be kindly af∣fectioned
one to another with bro∣therly love, in honour preferring one another. Which having said, she turn'd towards the Lady her Mo∣ther, and spake to her thus: Dear Mother, give thanks and praise to God all your life long, for his great goodness and bounty to you, in giving you a Daughter, whom (though she be but a wretched Worm) he has made the Temple of his Holy Spirit. May He, that good God, bless you with his choicest Blessings; may He also bless your Poste∣rity, and establish his Covenant with them for all Generations, as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. Then she pro∣ceeded to give her Blessing to the young Ladies her Sisters, (whom she call'd to her) and likewise to her Brothers, Brothers-in-law, Sister-in-law, and Niece, though they were absent. And after
this, desiring they would all come near her, who were in her Chamber, and had (in compa∣ny with the Chaplain) watch'd with her the night before, she in a most tender manner em∣brac'd and bless'd them all; speaking to every one of them according to their respective conditions, and that so perti∣nently and properly, that she was the admiration of all. AND in a particular man∣ner she shew'd a great deal of respect to Monsieur de la Colom∣brie, (who was Steward of the House) expressing her acknow∣ledgment to him for his great concern and affection for their Family, desiring him to continue the same. Then speaking to his Wife Mrs. de la Colombrie, said to her, Come and rejoyce with me, and take your share of these delights I am filled
with, as feeling my self the most satisfi'd and happy Person in the World. And afterwards directing her Speech and Exhor∣tation to the whole Company, said, My dear Friends, leave off sinning, I pray you: You see what cruel disquiets mine have caus'd me: Let us, according to our Calling, edifie the Church of God, and shew good Examples in our Lives and Conversations.Tit. 2.12. Let us (as the Apostle advises) live so∣berly, righteously, and godly in this present World:Phil. 4.8. And What∣soever things are honest, whatsoe∣ver things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any vertue, if there be any praise, let us think on these things. O how great is my love for you, my dear Friends; I love every
one of you alike in JESUS CHRIST; for I have no more affection to my own Mother, Brothers, and Sisters, than all other persons I know. I am in charity with all the World, and would e'en love my Enemies, if I had any. NOW she hearing some body weep about her Bed, said, Don't you mourn for me, but mourn for your sins. Then presently recalling her words, she thus express'd her self: Oh, let us lament and bewail our sins! And for a proof she was not mov'd at all with the tears they shed on her account, added,2 Cor. 5.16. That now she knew no body after the flesh. Which say∣ing of the Apostle she had learn'd of Monsieur Royer, to whom a pious Lady spoke it on her Death-bed. Whereupon she calling him to mind, wished him
all happiness, and gave him the character of a real good man; saying, He is a person whom I have always observ'd to be most piously and charitably inclined. I pray God bless him, and more and more in∣crease his Gifts in him. Would I could see him, I know he would speak comfortable words to me, and we would edifie one another. Here she re∣peated her earnest wishes for a Blessing upon Monsieur de Mal∣noe, whom she always call'd her good Pastor, and her dear Pa∣stor, and embracing him, hearti∣ly pray'd, that he might ever live quietly and in peace with his Brothers, and Prosperity ne∣ver depart from his Family; saying to him, I heartily beg of God to bless you and your Mini∣stry. And she at the same time expressed also a great desire to see
Monsieur de Brissac, praying God likewise to bless both him and his. Thus having spoken for a while to the Standers-by, she began again to return her thanks to God, with the same zeal and fervency as before; saying, with David, O God, the spring of all my joys,Psal. 42.1. Patr. for thee I long, to thee I look, No chased Hart does pant so much after the cooling water-brook. Blest be the Majesty above.41.13. Whom all true Worshippers adore; Let every Age consent, and say, Amen, till time shall be no more. Which latter part of the 41st. Psalm, she often repeated in Verse. And here remembring her Aunt the Lady de la Suse, who had taught her the same, she mightily long'd to see her,
saying over and over, O my dear Aunt, how much do I love you! How great would my Joy be now, had I you here with me; for you would assist me in giving thanks to God for his Goodness to me. O the great love I have for you, who have so well taught me to praise him!Psal. 46.1. Praise the Lord (therefore) O my soul: While I live I will praise the Lord; yea, as long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God. Thy Name, O Lord, will I laud continually for thy great love, who hast said to me, Call upon me in the day of trouble,Psal. 50.15. and I will answer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me.Psal. 91.16. I will satisfie thee, and shew thee my salvation. Yea, Lord, thou hast heard me and comforted my Soul, that did so much long for thee. Thou hast (I say) in a most won∣derful
manner, comforted me with thy holy Word and Spi∣rit, and rid me of all my fears. And now, Lord, perfect thou the good work thou hast be∣gun in me, and crown me with eternal Bliss and Glory in Hea∣ven. Yea, O my good God, I have already obtain'd this great felicity; I have seen thy salvation. THUS she took great de∣light in the paraphrasing of the Scripture; seeming, as it were, to have receiv'd a new Vocation from God, and above all, that of teaching every one their duty: Neither was she wanting in the stirring up of her self to the per∣formance of her own, who of∣ten rehears'd these words of the Psalmist:Psal. 34.1. I will always give thanks unto the Lord; his praise shall ever be in my mouth.v. 2. My Soul shall make her boast in the
Lord; the humble shall hear there∣of and be glad: and so on. Which Psalm she repeated eve∣ry day both in Prose and Verse, according to the New or Old Translation, and had this place very frequently in her mouth, Keep thy tongue from evil,v. 13. and thy lips from speaking guile. Af∣ter which she added, I will give continual thanks to my good God for his infinite Mer∣cies to me. I would the whole Church were here, and all let in, who have a mind to see me; but above all, I wish those of a contrary Religion were pre∣sent, that they might take no∣tice how good my Religion is, since it makes me die so well. If any man love not the Lord JESƲS CHRIST,1 Cor. 16.22. let him be Anathema. Oh, how vast is my Happiness! How great my Joy! How numberless are
the Blessings I have receiv'd. Praised, praised for ever be the name of my Lord and Savi∣our for all his wonderful Mer∣cies bestow'd upon me. IN the mean time they that stood by, looking on a Watch that was upon the Table, and perceiving thereby (it being now past Mid-night) that she had been speaking above six hours, were much astonished, considering the vehement pal∣pitation of her heart, and the difficulty she had to fetch her breath: Which made the Com∣pany desire her to leave off dis∣coursing, for fear of spending her self too much. But this advice was so unwelcome to her, that she presently, with some indignation, answered, I cannot hold my tongue, I must speak;Psal. 45.1. for, My heart is inditing of a good matter. O
God,Psal. 108.1. my heart is ready, my heart is ready; I will sing and give praise with the best member that I have. After which, she re∣maining silent for a little while, broke out immediately into these words: O what pain do I suffer in holding my peace! And indeed she had no sooner left off speaking, but they heard a Ratling in her Throat that was very troublesome to her; but she nevertheless continu'd still to entertain her self with God; when the Company with∣drawing, the Lady her Mother laid down her self by her, and both of them had a pretty good rest that night. THE next morning (being Thursday) after she had had some discourse with the Lady her Mother, she gave her hand to a Gentleman of the Neigh∣bourhood, that was come to visit
her; and observing him to weep, said to him, What, Sir, do you weep? Is it because God has a love for me, and will take me to himself? Here she alledg'd the Example of Jo∣siah King of Judah, whom God took out of the World, be∣cause he loved him, that he might not see those calamities that were to befal the city of Jerusalem, and the whole Jew∣ish Nation. Then she speak∣ing to the Lady her Mother, said, O dear Mother, how well compos'd am I at this time! I feel no pains at all; but am very easie, and do perceive my Saviour has deliver'd me from all my fears and trou∣bles: Therefore I will give him eternal thanks and praise. Whereupon she presently be∣gan to recite several Psalms (both in Prose and Verse) as
the VI. XXV. XXVII. XXXII. XXXIV. LXVI. CIII. CXVIII. CXLVI; insisting particularly upon those places that were most proper for her condition, and afforded her most comfort: which she uttered with so much zeal and devotion, that it made the Lady her Mother say to her, Well, dear Child, thou art a going to make one in the Quire of Angels and Se∣raphims, and shalt very sud∣denly sing the Song of the Lamb. Yes, (answered she) I shall make sweet Melody, and sing everlasting Hallelu∣jahs to his Glory. And per∣ceiving the Lady her Mother was very attentive to what she said, added, Good Mother, we must always endeavour to e∣difie our Neighbours by prai∣sing God; and administer such Comfort to them, as we would
be glad to receive our selves at God's hand. AFTER this, a Gentlewo∣man asking her, whether she would not take something, she answered, I have no will of my own; bring me what you will, and do what you please with me, it will be all one to me. Then she turn'd to ano∣ther Gentlewoman, that was just come into the Room, who expressing her self to have been much edified by the good things she had heard her speak the night before, this devout Pa∣tient reply'd, My dear Friend, don't you wonder at my speaking so long with so much boldness and freedom, who was ever bashful, and of few words? These are Gifts of God not to be forgotten. Which having said, she look'd about, and perceiving the Lady
her Mother weep, said to her, 'Tis not you, dear Mother, have cause to shed tears; 'tis Madam — (she meant a Gentlewoman, who was Mo∣ther to one that was turn'd a Papist) who has reason to bewail her Daughter. But as for yours, she is going to Him who is the Dispenser of true Glory, and not of Vani∣ties. SOME hours after this, the young Ladies her Sisters coming to sit upon her Bed, the Lady their Mother came and sate with them; and as she was saying to God,Isai, 8.18. Behold, Lord, here am I, and the Chil∣dren thou hast given me; the Patient answer'd, Dear Mo∣ther, let us yield thanks to God.Psal. 116.12. But what shall I ren∣der to the Lord for all his Be∣nefits towards me? Pray, my
dear Mother and Sisters, af∣ford me your assistance to bless my God, and never mourn for me; for I am too happy, in that my good god calls me to himself. How miserable (alas!) should I have been in the World, where we do nothing else but offend Him, go through a great deal of trouble (being our own Tormentors) and in a word, run after Vanities, and mind nothing but Pride. To which the Lady her Mother answered, My dear Child, thou wast very far from being worldly minded, and have a∣ny vain or proud thoughts. O Mother (replied she) you did not know the bottom of my heart: Certainly I had pride in me, and would fain have made a shew in the World; and (perhaps) if I
had remain'd longer in it, it would have prov'd my undoing. Pray God keep our Brethren, who are ex∣pos'd to great trials. Some of them she did name, and ad∣ded,1 Cor. 10.12. 1 Joh. 2 17. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest be fall. The world passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God, abides for ever. Then applying her self to the young Ladies her Sisters, she said to them, Dear Sisters, keep always constantly to God's Word, and store your selves well with it.Psal. 138.2. (Lord, thou hast magnified thy word above all thy Name.) And withal she charged them to learn the Psalms of the late Mon∣sieur Conrart's Translation, and Monsieur Gilbert's; picking out (first) such as afforded most comfort. As for her, she had
got twenty five of the former, and twelve of the latter, by heart, at thirteen years of age; and the whole Book of Psalms, according to the Old Transla∣tion, which she had learn'd at the late Lady Marchioness de Verac's, that was both her Aunt and God-mother, with whom she liv'd for a time. She had also several of them in Prose by heart, which she extreamly delighted in; and though she was very perfect in sundry Chapters, and most of the edi∣fying places of the Scripture, (which she could say without Book) yet she did oft complain of her want of memory. AFTER a little pause, she began afresh to speak, and applying her self to one of the young Ladies her Sisters, she exhorted her above all, to learn a certain Prayer out of the fore∣mentioned
Book, called [Com∣forts against the Terrours of Death] for God's Assistance and Grace to die well, and ad∣vised her to use the same daily; intimating, that God had gran∣ted to her self all the Petitions therein. She was also wont to repeat every morning the 90th Psalm. Lord thou hast been our Re∣fuge from one generation to ano∣ther; and so on, to the end. A GENTLEWOMAN of the Neighbourhood having brought her two Daughters to her, whom she had the night before desir'd to see, she said to them, My dear Friends, have always the fear of God before your Eyes, and never de∣part from that eternal truth which is in his Holy Scri∣ptures. Obey your Parents and Superiours;1 Joh. 2.15. And love not
the World, neither the things that are in the World; for if any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. AT the same time she re∣membred four or five other She-Friends of hers, wishing them with her, and one above the rest, whom she ever had a great kindness for, and recom∣mended her to the Lady her Mother, desiring her to take care of, and provide for her. And the Lady her Mother na∣ming her some others, she ear∣nestly pray'd God to bless them all, and in a particular man∣ner implor'd his Divine help and assistance for one, who lay under an extraordinary great affliction. WHEN she was in health, she was not more backward, than she was forward and de∣sirous
to speak now she was sick; delivering her self with a great deal of freedom, and o∣mitting nothing of what she knew to be edifying. After which, she fell into a little slum∣ber, and rested about an hour; and then awaking, one of her Physicians was surpriz'd to find her so well compos'd, she nei∣ther speaking, nor looking like one that was sick, but on the contrary having a serene counte∣nance, and a free and undistur∣bed mind. He did also won∣der to hear her talk so well, as she did, of her condition; but yet for all that, he now began to despair of her Recovery, considering her great shortness of breath and weakness of her Stomach, that was not able to bear any thing: Nevertheless, she took whatever he gave her, saying to him, Sir, I will do
any thing you shall please to direct and prescribe; for since you are called to look after me, and give me relief, it be∣hoves me to follow your Di∣rections. THE Lady her Mother, whose follow was greater than can be imagin'd, and who had no other comfort than what she receiv'd from her observing the Holy and Blessed Frame she was in, said to her, O dear Child, how edifying were thy Words to me last night, and are still! Aye, surely (replied she) my mind was then much at liberty, and I had a great deal more freedom in my utterance than ever before. I was speaking very eloquently and freely of the wonderful works of God; and my mouth did utter things I never knew before. I then
was made acquainted with the Mysteries of our Salvati∣on, which are not to be known here below. I cannot express them to you; for they are Things unspeakable; and through Mercy, I continue still in this heavenly condition. THE rest of the day she was very still, and felt almost no pains, except when they gave her something; for that did set her a coughing. her slumbers were frequent; and as she waked, always address'd her self to the Chaplain, and congratulating her happy con∣dition, rejoyced and triumph'd in the Grace she had receiv'd the day before. The onely subject of her Entertainment, was the HOLY SCRIPTURE, from whence she drew all her Comfort; and particularly she found much of it in the first
of the Romans, and often blessed God in several passages of the Psalms, such as these: Lord, I will bless thee,Psal. 34.1. Woodf. and thy praise Shall up to Heav'n my voice and numbers raise: Of thee my soul all times shall boast, Who sav'dst me when I gave my self for lost: And with us shall the humble joyn, Hoping thou wilt their refuge be as thou wert mine. To thee, my God,Psal. 138.3. I mourn'd in my distress, My doleful groans thy heart did move, Thou didst refresh me from a∣bove, And answer gav'st of thine own faithfulness
Lord,Psal. 18.16. thou didst send from a∣bove, thou tookest and drewest me out of many waters.Psal. 85.5. Thou hast been favourable to me.Rom. 5.20. For where my sins abounded, thy grace did superabound. Therefore when thou say'st to me,Psal. 27.8. Seek thou my face; my Heart shall 'answer thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek. Yea, O my God, thou wilt very suddenly un∣vail it to me in thy Holy Para∣dise. THEN she enter'd upon a most excellent Edifying Dialogue (which is intended to be publish'd by it self) with the Chaplain, who protests she therein open'd his Understanding in a most won∣derful manner; and after that, spoke to the Lady her Mother, thus: Dear Mother, my Soul is possess'd with that Peace of God which passes all understand∣ing. The Lord has sought,
and found me. O how good is my Lord and Saviour, that He the Just One should have given himself for the Ʋnjust. After which, she rehearsed several sen∣tences out of the 119th Psalm, and namely these: My soul faints for thy salvati∣on:Psal. 119.81. but I hope in thy Word. I am thine, save me:v. 94. for I have sought thy Precepts. How sweet are thy words to my taste! yea,v. 103. sweeter than honey to my mouth. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.v. 105. Ʋphold me according to thy Word, that I may live;v. 116. and let me not be ashamed of my hope. AND now reflecting upon her past sorrows and disquiets, she cry'd with David,Psal. 31.22. I said in my haste, I am cut off from before
thine eyes; nevertheless thou heardst the voice of my supplica∣tions, when I cry'd unto thee. Preserve me, my undoubted aid,Psal. 16.1. Sandys. To whom, thou, O my soul, hast said, Thou art my God, no good in me, Nor merit can extend to thee; But to thy blessed Saints that dwell On Earth, whose graces most ex∣cel. To the safe path of Life direct my way,v. 11. Woodford. Thy presence, where perpetual joys flow o're, Whose pleasure spring for ever∣more; By those clear streams let me de∣lighted stay, And melt away in love as well as they.
She often repeated, Come ye blest Saints,Psal. 34.3. and let us rise Together with our Songs, and reach the Skies! Praise him who my first groan did hear,v. 4. Yet with his hand seem'd to prevent his ear: And when like mine,v. 5. your trou∣bles be, But look to him, that hand shall save you which help'd me. And here she proceeded thus: Who shall in thy Tent abide,Psal. 15. Sand. On the Holy Hill reside? He that's just and innocent, Tells the truth of his intent. Slanders none with venom'd tongue; Fears to do his Neighbour wrong;
Fosters not base infamies; Vice beholds with scornful eyes; Honours those who fear the Lord; Keeps, though to his loss, his word; Takes no bribes for wicked ends; Nor to use his money lends. Who by these directions guide Their pure steps, shall never slide. THOƲ hast dealt graciously with thy servant,Psal. 119.65. O Lord, accor∣ding to thy word. It is that word that gives wisdom to the simple; therefore I will never forget it. To this she added also di∣vers other places of the Scri∣pture; and then meditating a little, she said, Now my fear is over,Rom. 8.1. and (with St. PAƲL) There is now no condemnation to me, who am in CHRIST JE∣SƲS.v. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of god's Elect? It is God that justifies:v. 34. Who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is ever at the right hand of God, making inter∣cession for us. Upon which the Chaplain taking occasion to tell her she had done like that prudent Merchant in the Go∣spel, who sought for and bought that Pearl of Price; she an∣swer'd, Aye, 'tis my Savi∣our has made me a Present of this invaluable Jewel! For, Sir, is it not true, that none can affirm JESƲS to be the LORD, but by the Holy Ghost? and that none can love him, but by the same Spirit? It is even He that has put this Word into the mouth of his Hand-maid. O the unutter∣able Comfort and Relief this Word administers to me! It is you, my dear Mother (speak∣ing to my Lady) who taught
it me. you have so well instructed us, and shewn us a good Example, which I wish I had better improv'd. By this you have procur'd our Family the favour of God, whom I heartily pray to conti∣nue it, and more and more in∣crease his Blessings upon you, and prosper all your ways. To which discourse the Lady her Mother made this reply: Dear Child, these Instructions and edifying words you now utter, I apply as so many Checks and Reproaches to my self, for my not having perform'd my Duty in all respects, as I ought to have done. I pray god give me grace to do bet∣ter for the future, according to my Calling;1 Cor. 3.6. and as it is in vain that Paul plants, and Apol∣los waters, except God give the increase; so I beseech him to
prevent and bless my endea∣vours with his Divine Grace, and Heavenly Benediction. THE rest of that day, and part of the following night al∣so, were spent in like Conver∣sations. But towards the mor∣ning the Patient took some lit∣tle rest; and as she awaked, asked what a Clock it was. To which they answering, that it was upon the stroke of three, she cry'd out, O my God! shall the Sun shine once more upon my Sufferings? Lord, thou couldst, if it were thy pleasure, make this the Dawn∣ing of the Day of my Deli∣verance and Eternal Sabbath; and then would I say with a holy transport of mind,2 Cor. 6.2. Be∣hold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of Salva∣tion.
UPON which the Lady her Mother said, I hope every one of us shall once see that Day, when we may say one to a∣nother,Isal. 60.20. Thy Sun shall go down no more, for the Lord is an ever∣lasting Light to thee; and the days of thy mourning are ended. 'Aye, dear Mother, (answered she) Yet a little while,Heb. 10.37. and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. This is the Day which he has made,Psal. 119.24. Woodf. Hosanna's now befit our voice; Come, let us in our God rejoyce, And in the Day which he has made be glad! That be prosperity may send, And to our troubles put an end. Set open unto me the Gatesv. 19. Old Transl. Of Truth and Righteousness, That I may enter into them. The Lord's praise to express.
O Death! thou that bring'st good tidings, how welcome wouldst thou be to me, by casting me into the Arms of my dearest Friend, who has loved me before the foundation of the World! THIS day she was visited again by one of her She-Friends, who being come to her Bed∣side, express'd an extream sor∣row to see her in this Condi∣tion, and with that gave her her hand, which the Patient squeezing in hers, reply'd to her, O my Dear, did you but know the Divine Consolati∣ons my God has bestow'd up∣on me, and how happy I am, you would confess with me, that I should have been mise∣rable, without this his gracious Visitation.
AFTER this, she had a∣bout an hour's sleep, out of which being awaked, she said, What is our Life?Jam. 4.14. Truly, it is even a vapour that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.Psal. 90.12. Therefore, O Lord, teach us so to number our days, as that we may apply our hearts to Wis∣dom.Psal. 8.4. What is man, that thou art mindful of him; and the Son of Man, that thou visitest him?Psal. 146.4. When his breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth. But we know,2 Cor. 5.1. that if our earth∣ly house of this Tabernacle were dissolv'd, we have a Building of God, an House not made with hands,Hag. 2.9. eternal in the Heavens. And the glory of this latter House shall be greater than that of the former.2 Cor. 4.18. For the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which are not seen, are e∣ternal.
THEN she said, Pray let my Chaplain be call'd in, that he may comfort me. O the comforts of the Holy Ghost are the refreshment of my Soul. LORD,Psal. 119.103. how sweet are thy words to my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my mouth! When the Chaplain was come in, she said to him, 'Come, Sir,Heb. 4.16. Let us go boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Whereupon he answering, Why don't you say, [Let us go and implore for Mercy] rather than say, (as with confidence you do) Let us go, that we may obtain mercy; She reply'd, Sir, it is because I find a Redeemer there,1 Cor. 6.20. Joh. 6.37. who has bought me with a price, and said, Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out; 'and I am perswaded,1 Joh. 1.9. He is
faithful and just, to keep his promise. Aye, Madam (an∣swered the Chaplain) this Pro∣mise he has made to your Con∣trition, Repentance, and Faith. DURING this whole day (which was Wednesday) she spake many other admira∣ble things, that could not, all of them, be remember'd. One would have thought by seeing her, that her Soul was set loose from the Body. She had quite forgot the Earth, and all Ties and Relations here; her onely thoughts being now to unite her self with her God by Me∣ditation, till she might be more perfectly united to him in Hea∣ven. ABOUT Evening she felt a great drought in her Throat, and was very thirsty; yet they durst not give her any thing,
by reason her Stomach could not bear so much as one drop of fair Water, without bringing of it up, and that with a ve∣hement Cough, accompani'd with a stoppage and shortness of breath; they therefore one∣ly call'd for an Epitheme, to allay her great palpitation of heart. But she little regard∣ing the Relief they were wil∣ling to give her Body, cry'd out on a sudden, LORD JESUS! thou my Heaven∣ly Physician, apply the Me∣rits of thy precious Bloud to me; for that alone can infallib∣ly heal my Soul. IMMEDIATELY after this, she fell into most cruel A∣gonies, which made her take very little rest all that night: But yet she continu'd to com∣fort her self in God; seeking no-where else, but in his Word,
for a Remedy to all her griefs. And in these circumstances she often cry'd,1 Sam. 3.10. Speak, O Lord, for thy servant hears. Speak thou, O my God, to the Soul of thy poor Hand-maid. WHICH having said, she asked a Gentleman that was opening the Windows of her Chamber, what time of the day it was; he answer'd, It was almost day-light; adding, Ma∣dam, why do you ask me this Question? have you a mind to do as David did, and rise by break of day to praise God? No, Sir, (reply'd she) I can't do that; but I will continually bless and magnifie him upon this my Bed of Lan∣guishing.
Early, my God, before 'tis light,Psal. 63. Woodf. And all the Stars are up, but that which makes the day, Whilst Heav'n alone with flames is bright, And all below is hurl'd in sable veil of night, Which they can neither draw nor take away; Early I'll worship, and one glance from thee, E're 'tis with others day, shall make it noon with me. And as this dry and thirsty Land, Where the ground, ready to expire for want of Rain, Gaping, and out of breath does stand, And shews its very bowels shrivled like its sand; And having drunk, gapes for more drink again:
The Wilderness and I in this a∣gree; For as that thirsts for Rain, so, Lord, I thirst for thee. I thirst thy glorious Power to see, As I have seen it in thy Temple heretofore; When ravish'd with thy love to me, To die I was content, could I but so love thee; And so to die, this Life would chuse no more: Those thoughts so high my faint∣ing Spirit do raise, That through my lips they force their voice in Songs of praise.
For this Pll bless thee, and on high, To thy Great Name send up my praises whilst I live; For since at present I enjoy A mind content, it shall prepare for more supply, Though thou at present onely that dost give; E'en that shall bring my fa∣mish'd Soul more good, Than what my body had from most delicious food. Marrow and fatness it shall be, And all the solid meats which please and feed the strong; For I shall come at last to thee, Who art the blessed End of all feli∣city, And the best subject of my hum∣ble Song:
And on my Bed when I revolve thy might, My Praises shall, instead of Wat∣ches, part the night. ABOUT four of the Clock her Illness so increas'd upon her, that she felt most intolerable pains; which was perceiv'd both by the sharp Shreeks and lamen∣table Cries she from time to time put forth, and by the vio∣lent Convulsion-sits she suffer'd, that distorted her Arms, and bent her Body double. But for all this, her mind was still the same, and lost nothing of its strength and freedom. IN one of these Fits she did cry to God, Lord, have mercy on me.Mat. 26.39. Let this Cup pass from me: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. In another Fit (which one would have thought would have thrown her out of
her Bed, so vehemently it toss'd her Body) she cry'd out, Thun∣der, lightning, bruise, break to pieces, and do what thou wilt with this poor Body; yet will I still love thee, O my God! Yea, I will always bless thee, for thy wondrous Love and Mercy to me. AT another time, as she felt a Fit a coming again upon her, said, Verily, Thine arrows have wounded me already; Yet, O my God, though thou shouldst multiply thy Plagues upon me to infinity, yet would that but the more increase my love to∣wards thee. Hear me, O Lord,Psal. 69.16. for thy lo∣ving kindness is good; turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.v. 17. And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble; hear me speedily: Draw nigh unto my soul.v. 18. And
thou,Rev. 22.20. LORD JESƲ, come; yea, come quickly. My soul out of this Prison bring,Psal. 142.7. Sand. That I may praise thee, O my King. I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, mitigate and allay my pains, and speedily place me with thee.Luk. 22.42. Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. Then she looking on the Lady her Mother, said to her, Dear Mo∣ther, I now suffer the cruel wounds and pangs of Death. AGAIN, at another time, when her violent pains seized her, she cry'd out, Pray to God for me, my dear Friends; pray assist me: I am quite spent. I am now a drinking the very dregs of the Cup of Affliction. Upon which the Chaplain said to her, Madam,
God deals now with you, as he did once with his only begotten Son, with whom he never was more pleased, than when he lay under his deepest sufferings. O (answered she) I do wholly submit my self to God's will. For when I am weak,2 Cor. 12.10. Phil. 4.13. then am I strong. I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. NOW the Fits returning very thick upon her, she cry'd to God, O my good Lord! How much do I suffer! But it is thy will, and it is mine too. Grant I may suffer patiently;1 Pet. 2.20. for that it is acceptable with thee. 'And I beseech thee, O Lord, set a watch before my mouth,Psal. 141.3. and keep the door of my lips, that I may not speak unadvisedly with my tongue, or murmur against thee. For it is my earnest de∣sire, always to bless and love thee, O my God.
AFTER a little pause, she turning to the Company, said to them, I pray God shorten your Agonies, when any of you shall arrive at your latter End. And then again she called upon God, in these words of David: O thou,Psal. 57.1. Woodf. on whom my soul for help relies, Let my distress find pity in thine Eyes. Mercy,Psal. 56.1. my God, on me thy mercy shew, And if thy pleasure does, my need says now. The sorrows of death compass me round about,Psal. 116.3. and the pains of Hell have got hold upon me. I find trouble and heaviness: Hide not thy self from me in the needful time of my distress.
Hearken unto me, answer me, and haste thee to help me. O my God! I spread my complaint, and make my trouble known unto thee. Have mercy, Lord, on thy poor Hand-maid. My heart fails, and my soul faints within me. All these Passages she re∣hears'd at several times, in the midst of her terrible pains: for she had not now breath to speak for a long time together. AFTER this, she sate up in her Bed, and with a tone that would have made one think she was not the same person, cry'd out, Why art thou troubled, soul,Psal. 42.11. Woodf. and and restless grown, As if forgetten through despair, As if thy God had left his care, And lower, than indeed thou art, cast down?
Trust in him still, for thou his Name shalt praise; And whom his absence has depress'd, his sight shall raise. Then the Lady her Mother saying to her, Like as a Father pities his Children,Psal. 103.13. so the Lord pities them that fear him. Aye, dear Mother, (answer'd she) your love is nothing in com∣parison of that my Saviour has for me. I know my God loves me: He speaks to his Hand-maid according to her heart, and heaps his mercies upon me.2 Cor. 12.7. Onely, lest I should be exalted above measure, he has put this thorn in my flesh. WHENEVER she had any intervals from pain, she sate up in her Bed, praising God for the relief and ease he gave her, saying, I will ever bless and love thee, O my good
God. And when her grief return'd, she held her sides with her hands, and excited her self to patience, with these words: Courage, my Soul, still bless thy God; Courage, my Soul, still love thy God.Rom. 8.18. For the sufferings of this present World, are not worthy to be compar'd with the glory which shall be revealed in us: 'Though indeed my pain is very grievous. And grief to th'Earth my soul so low does bend,Psal. 31.10. Woodf. That scarce in sighs I can to Heav'n ascend; Consum'd with care my soul and life decay, And in my wasted flesh unwillingly do stay. Now her violent pains return∣ing upon her, she cry'd out a∣gain, [I am quite spent.]
O let me gather strength,Psal. 39.13. Sand. before I pass away, and be no more. O my God, thy Correction is very severe; yet will I Kiss the Rod wherewith thou cha∣stisest me. Whereupon the Chaplain said to her,Heb. 12.8. If you were without cha∣stisement, then were you a Ba∣stard, and not a true born Child: for you know,v. 6. Whom the Lord loves, he chastens, and scourges e∣very Child he receives. To which she answer'd, 'Tis true, Sir, I am well perswaded of what you say: Why? My Sa∣viour has suffer'd for me; and if I suffer with him, I shall reign with him also. He had Vine∣gar and Gall given him to drink, and was wounded to the very heart for me. Lord! cover me with thy Merits;
impute thy Righteousness to me, and let those cruel pains thou enduredst upon the Cross for me, make me forget my own. As they gave her a little Wine to refresh her, she took the Glass, and said,Mat. 26.29 The hour is coming when I shall drink it new in my Father's King∣dom. IMMEDIATELY after this, her pains seizing her again, she cry'd,Psal. 42.7. All thy Waves and thy Billows are gone over me. Which the Chaplain hearing, said to her, But, Madam, you don't add, that the Waves of his Mercy, and the Billows of his Grace have over-whelmed you also. Aye, (reply'd she) 'tis very true, the Grace and Mer∣cies of my God, are greater than all the Miseries I under∣go. Do you think (continu'd the Chaplain, who heard her
still groan and complain of her being overborn with anguish) your Heavenly Father is an gry with you, and will let you sink under this temptation? No (answered she, sitting up in her Bed) No, Sir; I know that in all these things I am more than Conquerour through Him that loved me:Rom. 8.37. and that as my miseries and troubles a∣bound, so his Grace and Com∣forts abound much more. If the Daughter of Sion cries to them that pass by,Lam. 1.12. Behold and see whether there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow! Yet I will add [Come and see whe∣ther ever any joy were like unto my joy.] But O how much sorrow and solace meet together! Thou, O my sweet Saviour,Joh. 16.20. hast said, Your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
Here the Chaplain saying to her, Now, Madam, you experience what St. Paul af∣firms,2 Cor. 4.16. That though our outward man decay, yet the inward man is renew'd day by day; she an∣swer'd in the words of the Psal∣mist: On God's Almighty Word will I depend,Psal. 56.4. Woodf. On God I'll trust, who certain help will send. Come let us sing unto the Lord,Psal. 95.1. And all his deeds with thankful∣ness record. Ʋnto our God, come let us sing, And to his Courts with shouts our presents bring! He is our God, to Him our Verse we'll raise, And he who heard our Prayers shall now attend our praise.
AT the same time she also rehearsed the greatest part of the LXII Psalm, and often repeated these words:Psal. 62.1. Truly, my soul waits upon God; from him comes my salvation: adding, Where in∣deed rests this salvation of mine, but in him, whose pre∣sence is the fulness of joy?Psal. 34.5. They looked unto him and were lighten'd, and their faces were not asham'd. AFTER which, she fell in∣to a little slumber, and then putting her hand out of her Bed, said, O Blessed be the living Lord, Most worthy of all praise,Psal. 18.45. Old Transl. That is my Rock and saving health, Praised be He always. And to that added several o∣ther Verses of the same Psalm, and also of the XXXV, and other
Psalms; picking out such places as were most pathetical and per∣tinent to her condition, and more particularly insisted upon those that express'd a true and thorough repentance, thereby to move God to be more favoura∣ble to her. Every word of these Divine Hymns, was a Sacred Balm for her, which she apply'd to her Wounds with such success, that she presently found her grief give way to the virtue of it. And what is more to be wondred at, is, that the violence of her pains had not almost alter'd her at all; but she look'd as fair as ever. Her Eyes were brisk and lively; her Countenance gay, and her Speech strong: yet did she not think her self to be in this condition, when observing them, who were about her, to look upon her with mournful Aspects, she said to them, I
suppose I fright you. Pray, reach me a Glass, that I may see how I look. Which being brought her, and she having view'd her self in it, said, God be thanked, yet I look very chearful: And then in a kind of contempt striking the Glass with her hand, bad them have it away. THE Lady her Mother de∣siring nothing more than an op∣portunity to give this dear Daughter of hers some Token of her Tenderness, and let her see, that she was very far from af∣frighting her, as she suppos'd, did offer to kiss her. But the Patient withdrawing her self, and seeming to be as much scan∣dalized at it, as if her Mother had been going to commit Ido∣latry, said to her, Ah, Mother, what d'ye do? Sure you forget your self. And turning to the
other side of the Bed, where the Chaplain stood, said to him, Is this not a cruel thing? I am got loose from the World, and my Mother would tye me to it again! A little while after this, she also perceiv'd that her Sister the Lady De Ponthue, with whom she had ever liv'd in perfect love and union, look'd upon her with a very compassionate look; but without being in the least mov'd or concern'd at it. And now finding none of those kind and tender motions, which her great love to her Sister had formerly inspir'd her with, she said to her, Pray, dear Sister, forbear; you are no more to me now, than another. ABOUT seven a clock in the Evening, the doors of her Chamber being set open, she said to Monsieur de la Colombrie,
'Sir, that is the place (pointing with her hand to the Chappel, in which were the tombs of her Ancestors) where this my Bo∣dy is very suddenly to be laid up, till the Day of the Resur∣rection of the Just. Upon which, he taking occasion of ask∣ing her, whether she had any Commands to lay upon him; No, Sir, (reply'd she) my thoughts are no more emply'd about things here below, now my Soul is rais'd up to Heaven already; and if she still animates this Body, it is but to give con∣tinual praise to my God. And thus persisting to turn all her discourse to the concerns of Sal∣vation, she went on, and said, I have overcome all the fears of sin; I shall also conquer all my pains, though they be never so great: Yea, I shall be more than Conqueror through JESƲS
CHRIST, who has strengthen'd me. O how worthy is this Combat of my Courage! WITH these and the like Expressions, she either took out of the Scripture, or receiv'd more immediately from the Holy Ghost, she was entertaining her self and the Company; and would frequently say, I shall be shelter'd from the wrath of God; and often repeated these Ejaculations: O my God, I will ever love thee; I will ever bless thee! And thou, my Soul, be of good chear. Not my will, Lord, but thine, be done. Come, Lord JESƲ; yea, come quick∣ly. THESE were the words she us'd in her Complaints, and with which she appeas'd her grief. But for hasty and murmuring words, there fell not one from her mouth. And as some body was
once speaking to her of the tem∣ptations of the Devil, and his great Warrings against the Faithful, at all times, especially when they were at the point of death, she cry'd out, Tush, I fear him not.2 King. 6.16. They that he with me, are more than they that be against me.Joh. 14.30. The Prince of this World has nothing in me. The Prince of Darkness cannot pre∣vail against me.Rom. 5.1. For being ju∣stifi'd by Faith, I have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: And there is no condem∣nation to them, which are in Him. AS it drew towards Mid-night, she fell into a little slum∣ber; and her Friends, that were continually with her, were glad of this opportunity they had to take a little repose also: for as they had watch'd, suffer'd, and pray'd, so they were willing
likewise to take some rest, with her. The Lady her Mother, who had laid her self down up∣on the side of her Bed, heard her about an hour before day∣light, often repeat these words: '[Mercy, Lord, Mercy. Come LORD JESƲ, come quickly:] And she observ'd, that her Daughter's cries did not express any grief now, but a great deal of joy, which she took notice of to others. It was now Friday-morning, when the Lady her Mother seeing her enjoy a grea∣ter tranquillity, than she had since the preceding Wednesday at night, and that she look'd very chearfully, said to her, Dear Child, the Lord will suddenly put an end to our troubles. Wait for thy God with patience. Whereupon this young Virgin raising her self in her Bed, and with a serene plea∣sant
countenance, looking upon my Lady, said to her, Dear Mother, I shall not die: Death is but a passage to a more con∣stant happy Life.Joh. 11.4. This my sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God.Luk. 15.6. Come and re∣joyce with me. JESƲS CHRIST has found me, who was a lost Sheep; me, who was the lost Piece.v. 9. Then a little while after this, she with a loud voice cry'd out, as one coming out of a deep Meditation:Luk. 23.31. For if these things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? WHICH having said, she now spoke no more to any body; onely she once cried out, O how much sorrow and joy, how much grief and com∣fort do meet together in me! and then lay down, and fell into a slumber. In which she
had not long continu'd, but the Pangs of Death came upon her; she had vehement risings at her Stomach; her Counte∣nance was fallen; sweat pro∣ceed from her Body in abun∣dance; the Ratling in her Throat increased; and her Eyes grew dim and were distorted. And being in this condition, one of her Acquaintance, by name Madam Herault, touch'd her arm, thinking she was a depar∣ting: But she recover'd of this Fit; and these Agonies being somewhat over, her Eyes re∣assumed the same briskness and liveliness as before; she rub∣bing them with both her hands, to disperse the Clouds that had begun already to cover them. Her Countenance also was re∣stored to its former gaity and chearfulness; and she was heard to make a Melody, in singing the 84th Psalm.
How beauteous is the place where thouPatr. Thy presence, Lord, dost grant! O how long t'approach thy Courts, Impatient of restraint! And so on. THIS was a great surprize to many of them that were there; and yet, that was not all: For after she had took a little breath, and slumber'd (as before) a very little while, she stirr'd up her self anew, and began to sing the LXXXXII Psalm. O what a pleasant task it is,Patr. To praise the Lord above; Morning and Evening to proclaim His faithfulness and love.
THUS far onely she went, tuning it to the Treble of Clau∣din, with all the Ornaments and Graces that could be: And then falling again into the like slumber, she remain'd in it as long as the first time; after which, she tun'd the LXXX Psalm, whereof she sang these following Verses onely. Thou Shepherd of thy ISRAEL,Sandys. That, Flock-like, leadest, Joseph's Race; Who 'twixt the Cherubims dost dwell, O hear! shew thy inlightning Face: Exalt thy saving power before Manasseh, Ephraim, Benjamin: O from Captivity restore! And let thy beams upon us shine.
Great God of Battel, wilt thou still Be angry, and our Prayers despise? Bread, steep'd in tears, our stomachs fill; We drink the Rivers of our Eyes. Our scoffing Neighbours fall at strife Among themselves to share our Right: Great God, restore the dead to life; And comfort by thy quickning Light. AFTERWARDS being seized the fourth time with the Pangs of Death, she so remain'd for the space of four hours; and then being come to her self again, she sang this Stanza.
Into thy hands, Lord, I commit My Spirit, which is thy due;Psal. 31.5. Old Transl. For why, thou hast redeemed it, O Lord, my God most true! THE Lady her Mother hearing her sing with so much strength, said to her, My dear Child, since I have by God's Grace, put the first word into thy mouth, where∣with thou hast prais'd Him, let me put in the last also I shall ever hear thee speak in this World: And so she re∣hearsed these Verses. God, who my kind Preserver is, I will for ever blessPsal. 34.1. Patrick. My tongue and lips shall be em∣ploy'd His Goodness to confess.
Which the Patient sang with a strong voice; her Eyes be∣ing open, and her looks smiling all the while. Then her ago∣nizing fit coming again upon her, and the Lady her Mother not being able to see her expire, bad her farewel, with a most wonderful strength of mind: Adieu (said she) dear Daugh∣ter,2 Sam. 12.23. adieu; I shall go to thee, but thou shalt not return to me. We shall see one another a∣gain in that Blessed Day of the Resurrection of the Just. And thereupon she withdrew, and went and lay down upon her own Bed, till her dying Daugh∣ter had given up her Soul into the hands of her Heavenly Fa∣ther. But above three hours after this, the Chaplain, Mon∣sieur De Malnoe, being desirous to see whether she had any sense
left in her, took her by the hand, shook her arm, and called to her to clinch his hand, if she heard still, and with that, prickt her with a Straw; but she gave no sign of life. But as he was going out of the room, her Body was re-animated on a sud∣den; and sitting up again in her Bed, she sang the second time. Into thy hands, Lord, I commit My Spirit, which is thy due; For thy, thou hast redeemed it, O Lord, my God most true! THEN he drew near a∣gain, and laying his Ear to her mouth, heard her say to God,Luk. 2.29. Lord, now lettest thou shy ser∣vant depart in peace, according to thy Word.v. 30. For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Which ha∣ving utter'd, she, without stir∣ring in the least, breath'd forth
three Sighs, and so gave up the Ghost; there being seen at the same time, both in her Counte∣nance and Eyes (which remain'd half open) a signal impression of Joy, that shew'd her Soul had a taste of the Celestial Bliss, even before the Bonds, where∣with it was ty'd to the Body, were wholly dissolv'd. THE END.
Here follows the PRAYER Taken out of Mons. Drelincourt's COMFORTS Against the Terrours of Death, Which is mention'd in the 55th Page of this Book. O GOD of all Flesh, and Father of our Spirits, I know that any
Death of thy Beloved Ones, is precious in thy sight; and that whatsoever mine may be, thou wilt take care of my Salvation. I weighing every thing in the Balance of the Sanctua∣ry, do find it very little imports me, whether my Life be taken away by a Disease, or forc'd from me by Violence, provided my Soul enter into thy Glory, and be made Partaker of those unutterable Felicities that are with thee. To me it must be all one, whether my Lamp go out of it self, or be blown out by any contrary wind;
so it be but kindled again at the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness, and shine in the highest Heavens for evermore. Whatsoever Death I die, I shall be hap∣py, provided I die in the Lord, and enter into that Eternal Rest from all my Labours. O Lord, thou knowest all thy works from everlasting. Thou, with one glance, discover∣est the deepest Abyss, and seest to the very bottom of Eternity. As thou hast precisely appointed the Hour of Death, so hast thou been pleas'd also to deter∣mine the manner of it. O
Great and Living God! it is my Duty wholly to ac∣quiesce in thy Adorable Providence, and absolutely submit my self to thy wise Decrees. But, O my God, my Heavenly Father! if thou wilt vouchsafe me (who am but dust and ashes) the liberty of speaking to thee, and permit thy Child to pour [his / her] heart's desire into thy Fatherly Bosom, I do, with all the powers of my Soul, humbly beseech thee to grant me this fa∣vour, that I may know my End, and not be (like Job's Children) surpriz'd by a sudden Death: But, O
Lord, be thou pleas'd to give me notice of my dis∣solution, as thou didst to thy Servant Hezekiah. I do not sue for years, but some few days; or at least, a few hours Warning. I beg of thee, that my Mind may never be disturb'd by any malig∣nant Vapours, or affright∣ed with any false Repre∣sentations or Delusions of the Devil; but that I may end my Days with all qui∣etness and tranquillity: that I may always have the free use of my Senses, my Reason, and Under∣standing, and above all, the
Light of thy Grace, that so, I may glorifie thy Holy Name, and edifie my Neigh∣bours, to my very last breath. Finally, that my Soul may not be snatch'd away by any sort of vio∣lence, but that I may free∣ly commend it into thy Fa∣therly Hands. Amen. FINIS.
BOOKS SOLD By John Lawrence, AT The Angel in the Poultrey, Over against the Compter. AN Account of the Imperial Proceedings against the Turks; with an exact Diary of the Siege of New Heusel, and its Taking: As also a Relation of all the Noted Performances of the Imperialists in all Parts, from the beginning of this Sum∣mer's Campagne, till the 27th of
August. As it was taken by Mr. Travestin, an English Gen∣tleman, who was all the while Resident in the Army at New Heusel, and now in the Imperial Army, and by him sent, by way of Letter, to a Person of Honour of this Kingdom; with an exact Map of the Town, and the Works of the Besiegers. In Quarto. The Merchant-Royal: A Sermon preached at White-hall before the King's Majesty, at the Nuptials of an Honourable Lord and his Lady. In Quarto. Several Discourses: viz. 1. Of Purity and Charity 2. Of Re∣pentance. 3. Of seeking first the Kingdom of God. By He∣zekiah Burton, D. D. Late Rector of Barnes near London, and Pre∣bendary of Norwich. In Octavo. A Relation of the Invasion and Conquest of Florida by the
Spaniards, under the Command of Ferdinando Desoto. Written in Portuguese by a Gentleman of the Town of Elvas; Now Englished. To which is sub∣joyned two Journeys of the pre∣sent Emperour of China into Tartary, in the Years 1682, and and 1683. With some Disco∣veries made by the Spaniards in the Island of California, in the Year 1683. In Octavo. English Military Discipline: or, the Way and Method of Ex∣ercising Horse and Foot, accor∣ding to the Practice of this pre∣sent time. With a Treatise of all sorts of Arms and Engines of War, of Fire-work-Engines, and other Military Instruments, both Ancient and Modern. Enriched with many Figures. In Octavo. The Military Duties of the Officers and Cavalry: Contain∣ing the Way of Exercising the
Horse, according to the Practice of this present time: The Mo∣tions of Horse, the Functions of the several Officers, from the Chief Captain to the Brigadeer. Written originally in French by the Sieur de la Fontain, Engineer in Ordinary to the Most Chri∣stian King, and translated for the Use of those who are desirous to be informed of the Art of War. In Octavo. Clavis Grammatica: or, the Ready Way to the Latin Tongue, containing most plain Demon∣strations for the Regular Transla∣ting of English into Latin. To∣gether with Instructions how to Construe and Parse Authors. Fitted as a Help to such as are desirous to attain to the know∣ledge of the Latin Tongue, and accommodated to the Meanest Capacity. Also how to Vary or Compose Latin more Elegantly.
With necessary Observations for Epistolizing or Writing of Letters in English or Latin: And how to perform all kinds of School-Exercises that are usually practi∣sed in Schools. By J. B. School-Master in London. In Octavo. Humane Prudence: or, the Art by which a Man may Raise Himself and Fortune to Gran∣deur. The third Edition cor∣rected and very much Enlarged by the Author. In Octavo.
