T2553A R21352 12360465 60215
A True and Perfect RELATION OF THE ENGAGEMENT That happened between His Majesties Ship the KING's-FISHER, Cap, Francis Wheeler. Comr. AND THE GOLDEN ROSE OF ARGIERS, The 4th. of October 1681. Fitted from thence by the People of SALLY, Mounted with 22. Guns, and 22. Petereroes; wherein the Particulars of the Engagement, and taking of the said Ship, as it was Communicated in a Letter, dated the 6th. of October last, from Malaga Road, to the Secre∣tary of the Admiralty, are as followeth. AFter I had Carreen'd and fitted my Ship at Gibraltar, in Pursuance of Admiral Herbert's Orders, last Friday the 30th. of September, We went into the Gut to Cruise, between Gibraltar and Sutta, on Tues∣day the 4th. instant, being N. E. by E. from Gibraltar 10. Leagues off, standing to the S. ward, the Wind Westerly; We happened to stand stem for stem with the Golden Rose, fitted out of Argiers, (but it seems at the Charge of some People at Sally,) Mounted with 22. Guns, and 20. Petere∣roes; As soon as we made what they were, we gave chace upon a Wind, to the N. ward, and in less then one hour got into her Wake, and within Musquet Shot, at which time unluckily our Fore-top-mast came by the Board, which brought down the Main-top-gallant-mast; when he out-reached us, but seeing a Ship under the Spanish Shoar, he put astays, but the Ship refusing it, he put a way afore the Wind. When we had cleared our selves of our Fore-top-sail, and got our Main-top-gallant-sail on our Fore-top-mast-Stump, we had him so well under our Lee, that he could not clap by with∣out
out hazard of being run down by us; We bore away, and Out-Sail'd him, and with one of our Chase-Guns, Shot down his Fore-mast, and presently got Aboard fair along his side; but for want of his Rigging, my Bow-sprit could not get any hold, and being before the Wind, though our Courses were hawled up, and the Main-top-fail lowred down to the Slings, yet we could not keep a Stern, and mist entring my Men; We got Aboard twice after very well forward, but by the same reason could not keep fast; The fourth time we got up our Grapples on our Star-board-side, and intended to be fast on his Lar-board bow, but just as we were coming upon his Quarter, he skilfully put his Helm hard a Star-board, and had like to have been Thwart our Hawser, which we prevented by quick working, and got very well on his other side; But his Sails being all Torn, We could not come to make fast a Hawser to his Main-shrouds, but upon his falling off, We brought our Star-board-side, to bear and cut down his Main, and Mizon Masts; Upon which he yielded. Upon my Lieutenants going on Board, they found five Foot Water in hold, occasioned by seven Shot under Water, of which two were double-head, all Unplugged, the Pumps-Shot in peices, and before they could get the Boat out of the way to Bayl, the Water was within two Foot of the Gun-Deck: When the Water began to come in at the Ports, several of the Port-Lids being Shot away, and there being a great Sea, for want of Masts, She rowled so extreamly, as contributed much to her loss, though they got Her afore the Wind with all the dilligence possible; we got Her in a Towe, and by that time we had Her along our Quarter to save the Men; She went down Head formost, with abundance of Wounded Moors who were in the great Cabbin, Steerage between Deck, and in hold, with two of my own Men who staid too long below to Plunder. The main reason of Her loss was occa∣sioned by the Moors, who being so terribly frighted, did not stop the shot-holes; and although our People did it as well as the shortness of the time would permit, yet 'twas then too late, and 'tis not unlikely but that they mist find∣ing of some. Of our Men there were two Kill'd, three Wounded, and two Drowned. The smallness of the loss makes it reasonable to judge they did not fight very well; but this I am certain, that 'twas great courage in them to be so stub∣born as not to yeild, but to venture to take our Broad-side four times, so near as our low Guns touched his Ship-side, Loaded with Round and Double-shot, with thirty Musqueteers playing upon them, besides abundance of Shot sent them before, I really judge never beyond Pistol-shot. 'Twas near this place She yielded, so that it is not out of my way to come in to get up a new Top-Mast, Fish our Fore-Yard, which is dangerously Wound∣ed, and knot and fit our Rigging, and mend our Sails; as also in our way fill some Cask with Water, which will all be performed by to morrow night, and then to Cruise with our clean Ship, who we find Sails well large, and pretty well by. This Ship had when she came out of Argiers near 150 Men, whereof eight Christians and three Renegadoes, of which not above one half are to be found, and all of them we saved by Swimming, and our Boat; 28 are wounded, and a good part of them very dangerous; We began to fire our Chace-Guns near eight a Clock, Boarded Her the first time near ten, and Shee yielded at two, and Sunk at three a Clock, or past. Printed for Daniel Slater, and sold by Randle Taylor near Stationers Hall, 1681.
