T3356 R1549 12242127 56809
THE SPEECH OF Sr Edw: Turnor Kt Speaker of the Honourable House of COMMONS, To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, on February 9. 1664. AT The Passing of the Act, entituled, An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the Kings Majesty, of Twenty four hun∣dred threescore and seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds, to be Raised, Levied and Paid in the space of Three years. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and the Scottish unicorn LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1664. CUM PRIVILEGIO.
THE SPEECH OF Sr Edward Turnor Kt. Speaker of the Honourable House of COMMONS, To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, Febr. 9. 1664. AT The Passing of the Act, entituled, An Act for granting a Royal Aide unto the Kings Majesty, of Twenty four hundred threescore and seventeen thousand and five hun∣dred pounds, to be Raised, Levied and Paid in the space of Three years. May it please Your most Excellent Majesty, THE last Session of this Par∣liament, the Lords and Commons did humbly re∣present unto Your Ma∣jesty, the many Wrongs and Indignities that were done to Your
Majesty, and the many Injuries done to your Merchants, by the Subjects of the United Provinces; and did most hum∣bly beseech Your Majesty, that some effectuall Course might be taken for Re∣dress thereof. Your Majesty at the opening of this Session was graciously pleased to acquaint Your Two Houses, That in pursuance to their Desires, You had by Your Agent required Satisfaction; but that Way proved ineffectual, and many fresh Provocations were offered, whereby Your Majesty was necessita∣ted to a Warlike preparation; by the speedy Dispatch whereof, You had let Your Neighbours see, That You could defend Your Self, and Your Sub∣jects against their Insolence, upon the Stock of Your own Credit, before Your Parliament came together. And now SIR, Give me leave to say, Your Neighbours may see how a great King is made greater by His Parliament. Your Loyal Com∣mons, after they Convened, did not
suffer full Four and Twenty hours to pass, before they most chearfully gave Your Majesty more then Four and twenty hundred thousand pounds. Historians tell us, That in Biscay, a Signiory of Spain, when the King entreth into the Frontiers of the Coun∣trey, the Lords and Gentlemen there dwelling, proffer him some few Brass∣pieces, called Maravides, in a leathern Bag, hanged at the end of a Lance; but withal they tell him, that he must not take them. Great SIR, Your Lords and Commons will not only yield obedience to You with their Bodies, but with their Purses also: In token whereof, I do in the name of all the Commons of Eng∣land present unto Your Majesty this Bill; whereby we have given unto Your Majesty a Royall Ayde of Four and twenty hundred seventy se∣ven thousand and five hundred pounds, to be paid in three years by twelve quarterly Payments, to begin from
the Five and twentieth of December last. And we do humbly beseech Your Majesty to accept it as a pregnant Demonstration of our most unfeign∣ed Duty and Thankfulness to Your Majesty. FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1664.
