V75A 07896553 40319
THE Retired Mans Meditations, OR THE Mysterie and Power OF GODLINES Shining forth in the Living WORD, to the unmasking the Mysterie of Iniquity in the most Refined and Purest Forms. And withall presenting to view, I. The Riches and fulness of Christs Person as Mediator. II. The Natural and Spiritual Man, in their proper Distinction. III. The Reign and Kingdom of Christ, in the Nature, Limits, and extent thereof, as well in his Saints as over his Enemies. IN WHICH Old Light is restored, and New Light Justified, Being the Witness which is given to this Age, BY Henry Vane, Knight. London, Printed by Robert White, and are to be sold at the three Bibles, neer the West end of Pauls, 1655.
TO THE READER. THere is not any thing which lies more cross to the busie and bound∣less Spirit of Man, then that which takes him off the wing of his Na∣tural desire, and is as a bar unto that activity in him, which if permitted to run its course, makes his feet swift to his own de∣struction. For when such a power is assumed and delighted in by man, to direct his own steps; the more he is gratified by God with a scope and freedom herein, the more is he left alone and singled out in a self-sufficiency of wisdom and strength, to be at his own dispose, and reap the fruit of his many inventions. The springing up of this spirit in man at first, aspiring herein to be as God, was that that cast him
down from his excellency, and gave him his Fall; setting up in him that great Idol, SELF-INTEREST, which hath ever since so skilfully insinuated into the desire and heart of every natural man, that by its influence, the whole world seems to be govern∣ed, as well in Religion as Civil policy, being able to bring that gain and advantage to the observers thereof, which as a powerful bait the Devil makes use of to bribe the conscience, and by degrees to draw off the heart from God, and from sincere love to all righteous and good principles, as in the exer∣cise thereof they lie thwart to its designs. Self, thus considered, is no other then the Spirit of man, lusting after the doing of his own will and procuring his own glory more then Gods, (a frame of spirit in direct contrariety to Christs, Iob. 5. 30. & c. 6. 38.) which inordinate affection is the covetousness the Apostle calls idolatry, Col. 3. 5. as wel-knowing that the cherishing and upholding of this lust in its credit, strength and authority, is dearer to man then all other things: yea, then God himself. So as whilst Communion with God, and the fruits of his presence are found gainfull and supporting here∣unto, man is content to part with the filthiness of flesh, and be washed from his old darling sins, put∣ting on the form of godliness: but when the cross of Christ shews it self, and comes forth as an enemy against it, then God must be dethroned, the son of
God, and the true riches troden under foot; so that nothing must stand up, or be allowed competition herewith, but all must bow and do homage, or be∣come the objects of its fierce wrath and dis∣pleasure. If ever this spirit creep into the purest Forms of Religion, in conjunction with worldly Govern∣ment to back it, as the case may be, tis then got into its last strong hold and chief place of defence, where sitting as on a throne of iniquity, it frames mischief by a Law, and in casting the truth down to the ground, it pra∣ctises and prospers for a season against the Saints of the most High, and against the Prince himself of this heaven∣ly Host, magnifying it self, and bidding defiance to all adversaries whatsoever. Nevertheless the power and wisdom of the cross of Christ, is able to grapple with it, and in due time will visibly undertake it and triumph over it. But forasmuch as this selfish spirit is prophesied of, as that which shall be eminently in view in the last dayes, 2 Tim. 3. 2. as an immediate forerunner of Christs second coming (called, Mark 13. 14. The abo∣mination that maketh desolate, described as being gotten into the holy place, and standing where it ought not, even in the very Temple of God, clothed with a visibility of Saintship) it does therefore behove us to stand up∣on our watch, armed with the whole armour of God against it; this being indeed the foundation of all that hy∣pocrisie
and apostacy, which the last days shall be filled with. For this purpose, these Meditations on the WORD of Life are presented to thee; setting forth evidently before thine eyes Iesus Christ and him crucified, in whose grave this self-exalting spirit is found among the dead, as conquered, and slain, either through the power of Faith in the true Saint; or by the rod of iron, dashing and breaking in pieces all wil∣ful resisters, as a potters vessel. Christ, as he is this WORD of Life, is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last. In which dignity and preheminence, he is not only him that is true; but hath the property and way of being known by himself, as the first and original patern of all true knowledge and discerning. So as they that have been with this Iesus, trained up at his feet, under his immediate teachings, are able through him strengthen∣ing them, to give a reason of their hope, whereof they need not be ashamed. Being on this account encouraged, and having an opportunity ministred through the retiredness of my condition; I judged it my duty, amongst that variety of witness in the things of God, which is at this day given forth, to bear also my part, and stand up in my lot, taking this age to record, that I am here∣in free from the blood of all men; as not having shunned to declare unto them the Counsels and truths of God, that
have obtained a large entrance and reception in my heart, as a seed there sowen, which is springing up to a perfect day. The Warrant and Rule for this practice, is so ex∣press and undeniable, that it needs only the men∣tioning, Rom. 10. 10. where it is said, with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth con∣fession is made unto salvation. And Christ says of himself, For this cause was I born and came into the world, that I might bear witness to the Truth. And to this Paul exhorts Timothy, saying, Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession before many wit∣nesses: And this in imitation of Christ himself; who before Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good Confession. Yet how ungrateful a thing is it to flesh and blood, in the best of us, to be bearing that witness which seems to carry contention in it, with the whole earth? Jer. 15. 10. sending forth a fire upon all that is earthly, to consume the false Rests, wherein Pro∣fessors themselves are apt to take up, even in that wherein we are allowed only to be as Sojourners. Yea, what streights are we in, as streightned between two, either to render our selvs guilty of the blood of men, in the Age wherein we live by holding our peace? or else to endanger the making our selves a prey by speaking, so as to become hatred in the house of our God, Hos. 9. 8. and be accounted fools and madmen,
yea, spectacles and wonders even in Israel? But the precious faith here witnessed unto, teaches us to glory in tribulation, to endure great hardship, as good souldiers of Iesus Christ, and a great fight of afflicti∣ons (till men become weary of reproaching and wondering) as those to whom it is given, not only to be∣lieve, but to suffer for Christs name sake. Hereby the true Believer prevails over his greatest oppositions, and is born up when he fights with beasts at Ephesus; or with absurd and unreasonable men, who, not having faith, are in their encounters with that which they know not, compared to bruit beasts: with whom to maintain a right combate, the true witnesses of Jesus Christ, take not upon them to dispute out their faith into unprofitable janglings, from the nicety of words, and the wilfull mistake of sincere intentions; but do content themselves to be for the use, to which Christ designs them, as GOLDEN CANDLESTICKS to hold forth and bear that light which will by its own evidence and demonstration, clear up it self in its proper time; and in the mean season, shelter and defend those that own it, standing in very little need of the wit, eloquence and abilities of men, to back and sustain it: over all which, the power of the cross is by Paul brought in triumphing, when he says: Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the dis∣puter and great reasoner of this world? hath not God made
foolish the very wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. 1. 20. And indeed, experience in these days of ours (as well as what former times have afforded) hath set before our eyes in very legible & broad Characters, this generation of unreasonable men, 2 Thes. 3. 2. so long ago complained of by the Apostle, who not ha∣ving faith, are led by degrees, through the froward∣ness of their legal spirits, to oppose it, till they come in the way of Gods just Judgement, to lose the right use of their very natural powers of mind, as to sober and ingenious reasonings, and become ab∣surd, like those teachers of the Law, 1 Tim. 1. 7. who were famous for strife and jangling, but neither un∣derstood what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. These the same Apostle, Phil. 3. 2. stiles Dogs, evil workers, and the CONCISION: that are very keen and sharp in barking, biting and devouring, (wherein, if they find they cannot do hurt enough themselves, they will be calling out to others for assistance) but know not how to carry themselves like men or rea∣sonable creatures, towards those who are the true cir∣cumcision, and worship God in the Spirit, rejoycing in Christ Iesus, and having no confidence in the flesh, ver. 3. Of these the Scripture bids us beware; more to signisie to the Faithful witnesses of Christ before hand what they are to expect, then in the least to weaken them in the discharge of their duty; even to the offering up of themselves, if need be, in the service of
the faith which they profess. For truth hath least cause of anything to be discouraged by opposition; since it is able to cloath the lovers thereof with the whole armour of light, by way of defence, even against the gates of hell it self. And since the days are hastning fast, wherein there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid that shall not be made known; so as that which hath been spoken in the Closets and in darkness, shall be heard in the light, and proclaimed on the house tops, Luke 12. 2, 3. why should the true Believer and righteous man be afraid to present the most inward thoughts of his heart, in characters to be read and seen of all, in assured expectation, that the Lord will come to execute judgement, and convince the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds, and hard speeches against him? Surely, such a fear as this, belongs more properly to the hypocrite, who looks fair to the eyes of men: but God knoweth his heart, and seeth it full of blackness and corruption, who therefore by his own immediate stroke, will in his due time lay such open also to the sight of others, Iob 34. 26. To conclude then, Thou art desired (who ever thou art that shalt think fit to peruse this Treatise) not to be prejudiced at the first view, or by taking things in parcels, without a full and serious weigh∣ing of the whole; but by a diligent search and peru∣sal of the Scriptures, whereon the things here witnes∣sed
unto, are grounded, to examine whether they are so or no. And if then thou shalt finde a harmony and consistency resulting & springing up to thee, as well from the inward as outward Word; this leisurely Survey unto which thou art invited, will be found to have been of no small advantage to thee, in thy making a right judgement hereof. And if some of the Chapters that are more Theoretical, in the begin∣ing of this Treatise, (as well through sublimity of the subject-matter therein handled, as the narrow∣ness and insufficiency of expression) be thought knotty and abstruse: the other, which are more practical and speak directly to the works of God in the consciences of men (as the several draughts and copies of what was first requisite to be represented to thy view and contemplation, in Himself, the ori∣ginal patern, Head and root of all) will (I perswade my-self) be found very easie and familiar; specially, to those that are experimental; who as they travel farther into this discourse, will come out of the deep waters of the manifestation of Divine glory in God himself, into such shallows as are more suited to humane capacity; where not only the true Saint, but even the natural man, and that, under different dispensations (one coming over the head of the other, as superior and more excellent) and in the several measures and degrees of proficiency and growth under each, may not only finde his legs,
and feel the ground under him, but see his face as in a glass, finding himself represented to himself, as to his present state and appearance; or as to the proper principles, in the prevailing power and acti∣vity whereof, he lives. And if it be objected, that it were more suitable to the Laws of method, first to have propounded what is more obvious, in way of condescension to the lowest capacities, and so to have handed the Rea∣der along into greater deeps; The Answer is plain to any intelligent Reader, which is, that the matter requires and enforces this Method I have used, (which therefore I conceive to be more genuine and natural) besides that no true and right prospect can be given or taken of the Co∣py, till the original hath been first in our eye, as the top-stone whence only we may be enabled to a more safe and un-erring intuition into the whole Fabrick. If the newness of many things thou meetest with, offend thee, consider with thy self, what unsearchable riches are to be found in the WORD of God, whose best wine is kept for the last; when Christ shall be admired in all those that do believe, amongst whom, he that is feeble at that day, shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them, Zach. 12. 8. and this by the means of the WORD, who as a mysterie
has lain hid in God; from the foundation of the world, and is no new Commandment; but that which was in and from the beginning; the old Commandment, appear∣ing only new, because the darkness in which it hath been a long time veiled, is passing away and far spent, so as the true light now shines in Iesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mysterie, which was kept secret since the world began; but is now made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Pro∣phets, according to the Commandment of the everlast∣ing God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of Faith, Rom 16. 25, 26. Again, if thou findest the language rough, te∣dious and unapt to convey the discovery of such excellent glory, as is shining forth in the face of this living WORD of God; quarrel not with the treasure for the earthliness of the vessel through which it passes; but allow something, as remem∣bring that thy self also art in the body, and con∣fined: and be ready and willing in thy place to supply what is deficient, my design having been more to intend the knowledge of things, then the elegancy of words. Lastly, if in the opening of mystical and dark prophesies, that which principally is aimed at and applied throughout, in this Discourse, be the in∣ward and spiritual meaning of them: Know, that it is not to exclude thereby their literal and histo∣rical
sense, but to shew how well both may stand together. In which case, such Essays deserve to be born with, considering how much of the one sort is made extant by many pens already, and how little of the other. Farewel, I am thine, in the love and service of the truth, H. V. From Belleau, April 20. 1655.
A TABLE OF THE Chapters. Chap. I. Wherein is shewed, that the foundation and first Rule of all true and right knowledge of God is seated in Christ, the living WORD, as the blessed Trinity by their own im∣mediate operations do make themselves personally visible therein. Chap. II. Concerning the holy Scriptures, their authority and use, with the harmony and analogy which they hold with the living WORD. Chap. III. Concerning the creation of all things by Jesus Christ who is the mystery that lay hid in God from the beginning, and makes himself manifest, as well by the works of creation, as of redemption. Chap. IV. Concerning the creation, nature and ministry of Angels. Chap. V. Concerning the creation of man, on the sixth day. Chap. VI. Concerning the fall of man, the steps and degrees to it, with the bitter fruits and consequents thereof. Chap. VII. Shewing, that God on the seventh day ended the
works which he had made, and produced the Rest and fixed state, appointed to the first creation; which Christ the Medi∣diator, as he is the minister of Gods second appearance, is the Author and accomplisher of. Chap. VIII. Shewing the conviction and judgement that came upon men and Angels for their sin and disobedience, by the shining forth of the al-searching light of Gods second appear∣ance in the WORD; before which every creature stands na∣ked and discovered. Chap. IX. Concerning the WORDS being made flesh, for the performance of the whole will of God, in reference to mans redemption and salvation. Chap. X. Concerning the benefits that do inseparably accompa∣ny Christs person, where he is received, either by the first or second Covenant, according to the tenour of both which, there is vertue in his blood to reconcile and bring men to God. Chap. XI. Shewing the subordinate use that the elect Angels are of unto Christ, in his bearing up the pillars of the crea∣tion, that else had been dissolved through the fall; and the place which they have in the threefold general administrati∣on of his mediatorial Kingdome, set up in the world. Chap. XII Shewing wherein the three rules and formes of ad∣ministration in Christs mediatorial Kingdome do differ one from another, and maintaine an entire jurisdiction within themselves (but in due subordination and subserviency still, of the lower to the higher) over the respective subjects that live under them. Chap. XIII. Shewing the fixed enmity and warre that is main∣tained and kept up by Satan, against the Rule and Kingdome of the Mediator in the world, in order to make of none effect unto men, the inestimable price and usefulnesse of Christs blood in their fallen state. Chap. XIV. Shewing the continuance and progresse of the war between the subjects of Christ and Antichrist, and the terms and issues upon which they joyn.
Chap. XV. Shewing more particularly the bounds of that Rule and Government, which is set up by Christ in the natural con∣science, together with the answer of a good conscience there∣unto, in those that are under this first dispensation. Chap. XVI. Concerning the Rule and Dominion, which by the Law Christ exerciseth in the minde of those that are made children of the first Covenant, together with the answer of a good conscience thereunto, in such as are subjects unto Christ, under this second dispensation. Chap. XVII. Shewing the nature of that Kingdome and Rule of Christ in the Saints, which consists not in word and in the forme of godlinesse only, but in power, and in the life of sa∣ving faith, the first fruits whereof appear in those that are made conformable to Christ, in his death. Chap. XVIII. Concerning the Saints conformity with Christ in his death, particularly opened, and cleared from those mistakes which the enemies to the Crosse of Christ are apt to brand it with. Chap. XIX. Giving a general view of the counterworkings of Satan to the Government of Christ, in all the forementi∣oned administrations thereof. Chap. XX. Concerning death to sin and life to righteousnesse, considered as well in the distinct Branches and parts thereof, as in the full extent and comprehensivenesse; together with the discovery thereby, of that which is counterfeit, hypocri∣tical, or otherwise defective. Chap. XXI. Shewing particularly, the evil seed that is sowen in the natural conscience by Satan: through which he works men off from their subjection to Christ, in his first dispensa∣tion, and fixes them in rebellion against him. Chap. XXII. Shewing in particular, the workings of the my∣stery of iniquity, in the consciences of the children of the first Covenant, to the ripening of them unto perdition and finall falling away from God. Chap. XXIII. Concerning the common interest, wherein the
Devils subjects meet and correspond, under both the dis∣pensations before mentioned, which yet by the wisdome and power of Christ, comes at last to be dissolved, in the use which he makes of the one to destroy the other. Chap. XXIV. Concerning Magistracy, as in its primitive constitution and right exercise, it hath its place and beares its part in the Reigne and Government of Christ over men, in this world. Chap. XXV. Treating of the power which shall be given un∣to the two Witnesses, to prophecie and finish their testimony, when the suffering Saints of Christ must expect the visible protection of Magistracy to faile them, as exercised in a worldly way. Chap. XXVI. Treating of the time of the manifestation of the sons of God, their sitting with Christ on his Throne, Ru∣ling and influencing all things on earth, during the space of a thousand years. The end of the Table. ERRATA. PAge 20. Line 20. for which person of Christ, read, who p. 24. l. 26. for un∣loose, unloosing p. 30. l 4. for as, at p. 31. l. 17. for wings, rings p. 34. l. ult. for htah, hath p. 45. l. 32. for net, not p. 53, l. 31. for consequence, consequent. p. 65. l. 6. for account, account. p. 66. l. 12. for or, of p. 149. l. 5. for therefere, therefore p. 152. l. 13. for perpetual, personal. p. 209. l. 19. for fufilled, fulfilled. p. 230. l. 25. for em, them. for ch. 4. in the title, p. 290. & so on to p. 305. r. ch. 18. p. 294. l. 5. for heshly, fleshly ibid. l. 19. for necessiy, necessity, p. 326, l. 13. for wollowing, wallow∣ing p. 376. l. 25. for owerthrone, overthrowne p. 405. l. 12. for hiw, him p. 409. l. 5, 6. for raising him up and fitting, he raised him up and fitted. These and some other literal mistakes together with deficiences in the stopping (which possibly in some places may obscure or somewhat vary the sense) as also in putting the Roman letter sometimes for the Italica, or the Italica otherwhile for the Roman, thou artdesired, Courteous Reader, to mend in the perusal.
CHAP. I. Wherein is shewed, that the foundation and first Rule of all true and right knowledge of God is seated in Christ, the living WORD, as the blessed Trinity by their own immediate operations do make themselves personally vi∣sible therein. THe full knowledge of this WORD is indeed too wonderful and high to attain unto, and is therefore with much difficulty, if not im∣possibility, to be expressed by a sound of words, and the weakness of language, in∣cident to the best of our Pens. But although we cannot reach this WORD, nor have wherewith to describe his glory, he is pleased in great mercy to reach us, and become neer unto us, even in our hearts and in our mouthes, declaring his usefulness to describe and make known unto us Gods name, and his Sons name. For this living WORD of God is that whereby God speaks forth himself perfectly and distinctly, to the under∣standing
both of himself and of the creature. By it he speaks and describes the riches and fulness of his own glory, giving the perfect representation thereof to his own liking and de∣light. In it he brings to light the invisible things of his eter∣nal power and Godhead; shewing as in a three-fold face, the incomprehensible properties and vertues of the blessed Trini∣ty, who are herein the three that bear witness, 1 John 5. 7. se∣verally as well as joyntly; through whose first operation God is from all eternity the object of his own fruition and con∣verse; and through the other two is given forth a two-fold distinct appearance of God, wherein he becomes the proper and adaequate object of converse and fruition to the creature, upon the terms of the first and second Covenant. The WORD in the first sense is the similitude of God that is immanent and eternally abiding in him, and as so, is unexposed to any crea∣ture-discerning: The WORD in the second sense, is the si∣militude of God that proceeds and goes out of his mouth, to tabernacle in the creature, in a temporary ministration. And in the third sense, the WORD is that similitude of God which is the creatures Rest and final state of abode for ever. The WORD as thus considered, is not then to be taken for the second person (as it is 1 Joh. 5. 7. where the three that are said to bear witness, are the Father, the WORD, and the Holy Ghost) but for the witness it self, which is born by all the three, in the manner before expressed. The Word in this latter sense, is the brightness and express character of the Godhead, wherein all three are comprehend∣ed, and do seat themselves, to be seen and known, as in their own temple and visibility, appointed and prepared by them for that purpose. In which state of preparation, in order to creature-converse, the Trinity (as having brought forth them∣selves in Christ) are the subject principally treated of in this Chapter: And in this consideration Christ hath been a myste∣rie lying hid in God before the foundation of the world, and hath had the place and office of a Mediator, in reference as well to the works of Creation as of Redemption, Ephes. 3. 9, 10.
When therefore the WORD, in this common relation, which it hath to all the three, as their Temple and Sanctuary, is called Col. 1. 15. The image of the invisible God, we find subjoyned thereunto (as a further explication of the nature and kinds of perfection seated in it) these names, first-born of every creature, and first begotten from the dead, having in all things the prehemi∣nence, ver. 18. and prae-existence, being he that was before all things, ver. 17. and without whom was not any thing made that was made, Joh. 1. 3. containing in him the principles and life of a three-fold communion, which the blessed Trinity by their own immediate operations, are the authors and esta∣blishers of in Christ, as he is the WORD. The first is that which is eternally wrought and begotten by the Father, between all the three persons and their own image or witness, set up within the Divine nature, singly and simply considered (before the actual being of any creature, though in order to creature-converse by him eternally pur∣posed and decreed) in which they do see and are seen with common delight and satisfaction to one another: having Christ, this image of the invisible God, as one by them, that is brought up with them, and is no other then themselves in image and name, being daily their delight, Prov. 8. 30. In the exer∣cise of this communion between the Trinity and their own image, the WORD, they are pleased with all their own ex∣cellencies and perfections, as they are brought forth therein, putting honour and glory upon them there. Again, Christ (who in this communion is one with God, and is God) being the brightness of Gods glory, and express cha∣racter of his substance, values and delights in the same divine excellencies and perfections, as they are in his head, or in the invisible God, of whom Christ is the image; for God is in this sense the head of Christ, or of his own essential image, 1 Cor. 11. 3. (otherwise Christ were not God of God, very God of very God) and his desire is, to unveil his head. This Com∣munion, as it is the highest, so is it the fountain of all other communions, and the original pattern and rule to them.
In this communion, Christ, or the WORD was with God, before all beginning, (when the Godhead was only and alone, without and before the being of any creature) dwelling together in the unity and simplicity of the divine nature, mu∣tually enjoying and delighting in each other, both being but one and the same incomprehensible God, in the brightness of which glory they are not to be beheld immediatly by any creature: as it is written, Ye have not seen his shape at any time, nor heard his voice. In this communion is the love of God the Father. The second sort of communion is wrought by the second in the Trinity, as he bears his witness; wherein he exhibits also the image of the Godhead, but in a visibility to the crea∣tures natural discerning. And by the means of Gods image thus exhibited, there is the beginning of the creatures natural life, motion and being set up, called Col. 1. The first-born of every creature, which is that beginning wherein the WORD was, Joh. 1. 1. For no sooner did this WORD of Gods power en∣ter upon the exercise of this his ministry, but he did produce this sutable creature-reception unto the witness which he bears of God. And though this witness, which is proper to the second per∣son in the Trinity to give forth, were in its vertue and power from all eternity: yet it comes not into execution as to Crea∣ture-converse, but in pursuance of Gods decree for the pro∣ducing of that sort of communion, fore-purposed of God, ac∣cording to the tenor of the first covenant: And so doth lay the foundation, and is the author and rule of the Communion which is required between God and the creature, by that Co∣venant, which Christ is the head and minister of from the foundation of the world. In which state he also is the com∣pleat measure of all time, called therefore, Rev. 1. 8. he that is, by way of distinction from himself, considered as he that was, in the witness of the Father, and he that is to come, in the wit∣ness of the holy Ghost, being the same WORD or image of the invisible God, in all the three.
This second image of God, which is ministred by the O∣peration of the second in the Trinity, is that wherein God accommodates himself, and condescends to creature-capacity, abasing and humbling himself to be beheld, and as tis said, Psal. 113. to behold all things that are in heaven and in the earth. In which sense, Exod. 23. 20, 21. Christ is called the Angel in whom God had put his name, whom he sends before as the Mes∣senger of his Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. to prepare the way unto the true Rest; whose voice, being the voice of God, is according∣ly to be obeyed; he is not to be Provoked, for he will not pardon trangressions, if he be. This is the Angel that spake to Moses on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers in the Church in the Wilder∣ness, Acts 7. 38. and who, Isay 63. was afflicted, in all the affli∣ctions of Gods people, and is the Angel of Gods presence, that saved and redeemed them: he is the Lord that was among them in Sinai: in the giving of the first Covenant, in the holy place, having the chariots of God about him, twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, Psal. 68. 17. By this messenger of God, that name or similitude of God that is suited to creature-understanding, is Ministred and con∣veyed, and the foundation and means is laid therein, of all communion between God and the Creatures natural being: by which the second person in his witness goes forth (as it were) from God, and comes into the first creation, or into the head and root of it, the first-born of every creature, and there pitches his tent and dwelling place, setting up the first worldly sanctu∣ary, wherein divine service and worship is performed by the creature unto God, according to Gods will, declared in the first covenant. This first Ministry of God, executed by the second in the Tri∣nity, is the beginning of that Mysterie, which Rev. 10. 6, 7. is said to be finished, when time shall be no more, being the Mystical and veyl'd appearance of God, the first view he gives of him∣self to the creatures natural discerning: whereby the know∣ledge of God is had as by report, & by the hearing of the ear, as described by something that is not the very image and first
similitude of him: but secondary figures and shadows, types and veils, aptly representing him to the creatures natural ca∣pacity; by which, the full, compleat and immediate sight of him, as he is, is not to be attained; but is reserved to be en∣joyed in the end, upon the finishing of the mysterie, by the operation of the holy-Ghost. Of this mystical dispensation, the second Person in the Tri∣nity is the author and Minister, from beginning to ending, forming and bringing forth the first Rule of it in Christ, as he makes him the first-born of every creature, the Mother of all living, and womb unto the whole first creation. This living creature in the person of Christ the Mediator, Ezekiel saw, Chap. 10. 20. under the God of Israel: in which chapter the same living creature, ver. 11. is described, as head to the Angels that are his chariots, and so signified (as before) Psal 68. 17. and here, by the wheels, ver. 9, 10, 12. unto which Christ in this his first creature-being, is the spirit of life, Chap. 1. 21. the life that was in the WORD from the be∣ginning, in which was the light of men, and without which was not any thing made that was made: who in this capacity, was as a Lamb, prepared to be slain and offered up, upon the finishing of the works from the foundation of the world. The third sort of communion is that which is the ending and finishing of the second, (according to the holy and righ∣teous counsels of God, for the offering up of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world:) and is the beginner and bringer forth (upon the disanulling of the former) of a more excellent way of converse between God and the crea∣ture, then ever it was capable to have had, or attained, in the first building, and whilst the first Tabernacle was yet stand∣ing. In the exercise of this third sort of communion, God is said to rest from his works, and doth put that end and finishing hand unto them, which by him was fore-purposed and design∣ed, upon the disanulling of the first Covenant, with which he found fault, holding it needful to introduce in the place there∣of,
his new and everlasting Covenant, consisting in the Commu∣nion of the holy Ghost. In which dispensation, the Sons witness is not to be considered single as before, when he shined forth as the Bridegroom and comforter under the first covenant: but becomes the engraffed WORD, wherein both the names and ministries of the second and third persons, are joyned and knit together in everlasting agreement, love and peace, through the blood of the Lamb slain; so as the Sons ministry by the cessation thereof, as singly considered, leaves not the Creature for ever orphan or fatherless, but in this return of glory, visits it again with more abundant joy and consolation, never to be taken away more. This end Paul makes mention of, 1 Cor. 15. 24. whereby the Son delivers up all his kingdom and rule unto the Father, as willingly subjecting the exercise of his Ministry, in a subser∣viency and usefulness to the very Image it self, that God may be all in all, in the communion which is maintained between him and the creature, through the operation of the holy Ghost. This kind of communion between God and the creature, is the last, and that which is to continue without change: unto which all things under the Ministry of the first co∣venant must work, as to their end, and will hasten fast, the neerer this end approaches, which hath been witnessed unto from the beginning, and in its first fruits and dawnings partaken of. This is the communion of the holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13. 14. (which Paul wishes unto them, after the grace they had shared in from Jesus Christ our Lord, as the common salvation, Jude. v. 3. and as the fruit of the love of God the Father) which in the new creatures being, begins with that of the Sons work: and like Jacob, treads upon the heels of it and supplants it, serving it self of it throughout, to bring all things to this end; and to that purpose, makes the elder brother, or the ministry of Gods first appearance, serve to the bringing forth of this youn∣ger, or Ministry of Gods second appearance, in the hand of the holy Ghost, as the glory which is to follow, and be abide∣ding;
whilst the first, as single, is to be done away, that it may receive its finishing, as it stands in agreement and con∣sistency with this latter. Which work of the holy Ghost, in the person of Christ, from the foundation of the world, was that which finished all Gods works in the Mediator, Heb. 4. 3. or in the Lamb slain, who offered up himself, as the first-born of every creature, and Davids root, Rev. 5. becoming thereby, Col. 1. the beginning and first-born from the dead: (head unto the general assembly and Church of the first born, whose names are written in heaven) and is the same living creature, as before, which was seen under the God of Israel, changed and translated out of the first sort of communion with God, upon the terms of the first covenant, into this of the holy Ghost: losing thereby nothing of the good of that communion he had before, but having it fulfilled, and far more abun∣dance and exellency added unto it, being made to sit down now, on the throne with God, at his right hand, and to possess all power in heaven and earth, as brought forth in a glory that is above the firmament, over the head of the Sons dispensation, Ezek. 1. 25, 26. Through this witness of the holy Ghost is given the vi∣sion of God in both the former Images and similitudes, em∣bracing and reteining each other, in mutual harmony and agreement, and so, enfolding themselves as in one intelligible form and suitable appearance to the new creatures under∣standing, raised up and begotten from the moment of time wherein the holy Ghost in this his Ministry began to work and offer up the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, becoming thereby the author and Rule of this third sort of communion and converse between God and the creature, under the new and everlasting Covenant. In these openings of light and glory, and issuings forth there∣of upon the mind and understanding of Christ, (the Media∣tor and living WORD, or Sanctuary of the living God) by the operation of the Trinity, is he anointed with the name of God: and prepared (though a mysterie lying hid in God) to
perform the office of a Mediator between him and his crea∣tures in both worlds. For by the first, he is one with God (the Mediator and God are one) the brightness of Gods glory and power: unto which no creature can have the first and immediate access: where God seats himself too high, in name and similitude, to be conversed with by any creature: being the glory shadowed out under the law, as speaking from above the mercy seat, in∣communicable to any but the Mediator himself, and that, as he is God. By the second, Christ is one also with the natural being of the creature, in a changeable and dissoluble band of union: the spring and root of all creation & time the Author of all natural life, being, motion, and perfection: in whose face God beholds all the works of the first world, before he proceeds to the creation of them: and, as they answer the end and finishing by him appointed to them, liking and approving of them, notwithstanding all the changes from beginning to ending they are subjected unto, in that dispensation. This is that we mean by Christs being the first-born of every creature, in whom the nature of the creature (as in its root and head) is united unto the Son of God and second person in the Tri∣nity: in order to the finishing of that which is to be accom∣plished upon it by the Holy Ghost. Thirdly and lastly, Christ is one with God, and one with the creature, in an indissoluble and unchangeable Band of union, mediating such a unity and reconciliation between the two natures of God and the creature, as that the height of glory in the name of the Father, and the descent of glory in the name of the Son, may so peece up (as we may say) together, and become one, as to be one new name, wherein both meet as in a third, and so seat themselves, as to be mutually serviceable to the design of this third sort of communion, even the com∣munion of the Holy Ghost, which some are everlastingly taken into, and others everlastingly excluded from: in which, God is at rest with all the works of his hands, having brought upon
them that finishing work (he before purposed and ordained in righteousness and judgement) wherein he dwels & converses with the creature, after a far better and more excellent manner then in the first building: even to his own hearts desire and content, as well as to the content and desire of all hearts, whe∣ther of men or angels, that love him & find favour in his eyes. In this riches and fulness of perfection, the WORD is both Lord and Christ, from the beginning, set down at the right hand of God, expecting till his foes be made his foot-stool, Psal. 110. 1. And hath a government that shall never end, being King of righteousness and King of peace. Thus, in the face of the Mediator, doth God behold his works, as they are finished, to his full liking and approbation looking upon all things in Christ, as through a propitiatory head, covering, and true mercy-seat, wherein he is ever rejoyce∣ing over them, and well-pleased with them. Through this knowledge of Christ we are furnished with a true measure of knowing God, and no other way: for who hath been Gods counsellour? And when we see things in God, as Christ sees them, & things in Christ as God beholds them, we then come to know him that is true by the rule of all true know∣ledge, and that we are in him that is true: this is the true God and eternal life, 1 Joh 5. 20. little children, keep your selves from Idols. This order of things, thus shining forth in the face of Christ, (the very image it self, who in these last daies hath spoken to us by himself) we may find witnessed by Moses, and typed out under the Law, Exod. 25. 19. 21, 22. Compared with Numb. 7. 89. Where we find that God had his Oracle or spea∣king place provided for him above the Mercy-seat, and at the two ends thereof were appointed the two Cherubims to be made, between whom God told Moses, there wil I meet with thee & com∣mune with thee, from above the mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubims, which are upon the Ark of the Testimony, of all things which I will give thee in command, unto the children of Israel; and Numb. 7. 89. when Moses was gone into the Tabernacle of the congregation to speak with the Lord, then he heard the voice of one
speaking to him from off the mercy seat, that was upon the Ark of the Testimony, from between the two Cherubims. Where first, we may take notice of the Lord, as God and the Mediator are one, speaking from above the mercy-seat; then by the mercy seat, we may discern Christ, considered in his creature-nature, as the be∣ginning and ending of the creation of God, the head and root to both creations, through whom (as a propitiatory-covering, which he is to all those that are admitted into communion and con∣verse with God, either by the first or second covenant) God doth behold and look down upon all the works of his hands. Thirdly, at the two ends of the mercy seat, as between two Cherubims, the word of God comes forth in converse with Mo∣ses, or with men, by the means of Christs man-hood, consi∣dered in his natural, and spiritual perfection, in his first and se∣cond appearance, as he is the son of man, figured out by the two Cherubims of glory, shadowing the Mercy-seat. Thus we see, that to receive the full vision and similitude of God, in his own form, abstractedly and simply considered, is only the priviledge and incommunicable property of Christ the Mediator, as he and God are one: and, that God can only be known in and by his WORD: the WORD, that first is the writing of the blessed Trinity in Gods own na∣ture. The WORD, that secondly shines forth in Christs first and second appearance, as he is the first-born of every creature, and first begotten from the dead. The WORD, that thirdly in the fulness of time was made flesh. These things are testified by the holy Scriptures, which are ample in the witness they bear hereunto, as we shall shew in the following Chapter. And if it would please God by affording still fuller and clearer light in this great mysterie, to enable his witnesses to be declaring and testifying the same, it would suddenly put an end to those disputes and mistakes which the world is full of, between those that call themselves Orthodox, on the one hand, and the Socinian, Antitrinitarian, &c. on the other; neither of them giving a full witness herein, but maintaining
one part with denial of the other; so that by joyning toge∣ther what they unwarrantably put asunder, taking all that is affirmed and owned on both sides (the two-fold witness of the Son and Holy Ghost granted by the one, and their God∣head or the divinity of their persons asserted by the other) we have a compleat testimony in the present truth. For the one acknowledges them in the supreme exercise of a two-fold mi∣nistry of Gods appearance, in an eminency exalted above all creaturely perfection, as to their persons, assigning them the next place to the Father (their business being to communicate his name, and render it a sutable, intelligible object to crea∣ture-understanding) but denies them to be God. The other asserts their Godhead, but in effect, denies those their operati∣ons in which they come forth and minister the two-fold wit∣ness and appearance of God to the creature. The reconciling of this difference doth give occasion of further enquiry into this great mysterie. By the Trinity then we are to understand the essential pro∣perties whereby one and the same divine being eternally puts forth its operation, each carrying their own self-evidence in the witness which they bear. And though all the three, as well in the evidence that they give, as in their manner of sub∣sisting, be eternal; yet, to speak as men, they are in order of nature to be considered in a priority to the evidence and wit∣ness which they give of themselves, though both are in one pure act, the same, simple, absolute and incomprehensible God; whence it appears, that the Trinity are their own self-evidencers, and must needs be so, (for who hath been their coun∣sellour, or hath first given to them?) and the witness and evi∣dence which they give, the Scripture cals Col. 1. The image of the invisible God, even his essential image, in which the Trini∣ty come forth, as by name, declaring their hidden distinguish∣ing vertues, in the peculiarity of each of their operations. This essential image singly considered, is not properly the Trinity, but rather the personal appearance which all the three make in the WORD, by the witness which they bear of themselves.
For the Trinity, considered abstractedly from their image, are as truly and distinctly three, as when they personally appear in and by their own image and witness which they set up of themselves; but their personality, strictly taken, consists in the exhibition which each make of themselves, as by name, in and by the image of the invisible God; where coming forth as with a voice, and in the similitude of God, peculiar to each of them, they shew themselves in the distinction of their per∣sons and names of Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Nor are they in this any more then one Trinity, who, as abstract from their own image, are God, simply and absolutely considered; and as shining forth by their own image, are God the Mediator, as the Mediator and God are one; so as in the face of the Medi∣ator, as he is God, the Trinity in a proper sense shew themselves personally, in their proper similitudes, which they do not in the first consideration of the Godhead, where nevertheless they are as truly and distinctly three, but in an absolute invisibility, or (as we may say) impersonality. If this then be all that the Antitrinitarians intend or mean, that personality is not properly applyed to the Trinity in the first and abstract consideration of God, their opinion were in that not to be faulted by their opponents, any more then the applying of divine personality unto them, in the second con∣sideration of God, as he is God the Mediator, is to be blamed in them that acknowledge three individual persons in the same Godhead. Having thus occasionally opened in what sense the Trinity are three persons, coming forth in distinct similitudes, in which they are to be known (as it were) by name; we also affirm, that thus for them personally to appear and minister a distinct three-fold similitude of God, is absolutely necessary in God the Mediator, in order to the sitting him for that his Office, and to render him the sutable object of converse with the creature, either in the life that now is, or in that which is to come. If therefore the intent of the Antitrinitarians be, to assert
that God comes forth but in one manner of operation and personality, ministring but one single image of himself; they do thereby either exclude the creature from any converse with him at all, as leaving no other way of converse, but such as is improper and impossible for any in the capacity of a creature to obtain (and which to enjoy, is the only incommunicable priviledge of the Mediator, and that only as he is God;) or else they do so far debase the Majesty of God, as to rank him in an equality with the creature, confining his similitude to what bears proportion only to the creatures understanding and converse (as upon its first natural root) thus changing the glory of the incorruptible God into the image of a corruptible man. Hence then we conclude the necessity of three persons in unity of essence; The first ministring that similitude and ope∣ration which is commensurate to Gods own infinite compre∣hension. The second, that which is proportioned to the crea∣tures finite, natural discerning, springing up in the Mediator, as he is the first-born of every creature, the root and measure to all inferiour natural beings. The third, that which is adaequate to the new creatures capacity, formed also in the Mediator, through the offering up of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, in which he is the beginning and first-begotten from the dead, the root and measure unto the whole spiritual seed or general Assembly and Church of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven. In all these three similitudes of God, or personal ap∣pearances of the Trinity, considered in themselves, the Medi∣ator is truly and perfectly God, able to give them forth in him∣self, who therein is the image of the invisible God, in which sense he is frequently called in the Scriptures the WORD, the WORD of Life, the WORD of God. Now since the effects of this three-fold operation, (at least in what concerns the Mediators being made thereby a meet object of converse unto the Creature, in its creature-ca∣pacity, in any sort) must needs he owned by the Antitrinita∣rians themselves; why should they be unwilling to be led by
these, to the acknowledgement of the springs whence they flow, which are the three essential properties in God, that in the sense we have shewed, do very well agree and consist with the unity and simplicity of his essence? But as these are short-sighted in this great mysterie, so is it but too evident, that their opposers also are in other respects overseen; who by confounding these two together, which ought to be kept distinct, do little less then deny Gods essen∣tial image, under pretence of asserting the three persons or at least, entertain very mistaken notions thereof, wholly prae∣termitting the proper witness which the second and third per∣sons bear in the essential image, in order to cause their own reception in Christ, as he is the first-born of every creature, and first begotten from the dead. And having thus singled out the Fathers witness from the other two, they rank it under the notion of a person, between the first and the third, looking upon the second person, only as Gods essential image, making it his proper distinguishing character from the Father and the Holy Ghost; excluding him thereby out of the number of the three that bear witness, and confining the essential image to the Fathers operation on∣ly, as that which is peculiar unto him. They may be supposed to have been led into this mistake by that common description of the Trinity, in these expressions, the Father begets, the Son is begotten, the Holy Ghost pro∣ceeds, understood by them in an improper and differing sense from what the Scrpiture holds forth, 1 Joh. 5. 7. where it is said that there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one. So that here we find the three that are their own self-evidencers, or the head & cause of their own manifestation or witness, each of whom in this sense do beget & are begotten (each hidden property producing its own image) & so come forth in their distinct personal appear∣ances & peculiarity of witness wch all three bear in the face of the Mediator: which argues, that those who deny the Trinity in these their distinct operations & similitudes wherein only they
are to be beheld as in a glass by the creature) and yet pretend to own their persons, hidden vertues and properties, do seem rather to please themselves in an implicit faith and formal con∣fession of this high mysterie, then to have a due regard to the teachings and witness which the Trinity themselves give, as laying open the inward reason and nature of their three-fold operation. The first of which bears the name of Father; because the similitude of God, as it is witnessed by him, unto the increated and unbegotten understanding of God alone, is the first and the original glory. The second bears the name of Son; because the similitude of God, as it is witnessed by him, is proportioned to the natu∣tural mind of the creature, and as such, is begotten, as a secondary and figurative representation of the first. The third bears the name of the Holy Ghost; because the similitude of God, as it is witnessed by him, is the union and proceed of the other two, retaining themselves in perfect har∣mony and love, as the sutable object to the new creatures understanding. In this sense, we say, the witness of the Fa∣ther is unbegotten: The witness of the Son is begotten: The witness of the Holy Ghost is proceeding; as the record which the three in heaven are said to bear, which three are one, and their witness one, as well as three.
CHAP. II. Concerning the Holy Scriptures, their Authori∣ty and Ʋse, with the Harmony and Analo∣gie which they hold with the Living WORD. WEE have already shewed, how by the WORD is not only meant the second person in the Tri∣nity, in his distinction from the Father and the Holy Ghost, who bears witness as well as they; but that the witness it self, which is given by them all, as their living Oracles, that proceed out of the mouth of Christ the Mediator, is also called the WORD, ac∣cording to Scripturesense and acceptation, which yet will be more fully evident, by considering the Word of God in a third sense: to wit, as the holy Scriptures, coming not by the will of man, but by inspiration from God, in men moved by the Ho∣ly Ghost, are also called the Word and Oracles of God, containing in them the same Declaration and Testimony of the mind and will of God, as is to be found in the inward WORD, but dis∣pensing it in an outward form of wholsome words, taught and in∣spired by the Holy Ghost himself. Unto these words of the Holy Scriptures given by divine in∣spiration, no man may adde, Rev. 22. 18. or take there from, v. 19. Wherefore it is that they are not of any private interpretation, but require the inspiration of the living WORD, to open and declare the true and full meaning of them, which is near unto every true believer, being the WORD which dwels in the
heart by faith, the key of David, and that holy anointing, 1 Joh. 2. 27. that is truth and no lye, which abideth in the Saints, in such manner that they need not that any man teach them, but as the same anointing teacheth them of all things, taking of the things of Christ, and shewing them unto them, according to his promise, John 16. 14, 15. whose teachings nevertheless are also de∣rived and communicated from one Saint unto another, by the Ministry of outward words, and Exposition of the Scrip∣tures, as by being taught of God, they are fitted and prepared thereunto, and made able Ministers of the new Testament, who handle not the Word of God deceitfully, through any private inter∣pretations of their own, but by manifestation of the Truth in its own self-evidence, do commend themselves to every mans con∣science in the sight of God, not preaching themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and themselves servants for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4, 5. And Christ hath promised to send forth such a spirit of the Ministry as this, in all Ages, even to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. for the perfecting of the Saints, and edifying of the Body, the Church, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the mea∣sure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, Ephes. 4. 13. That then which doth enable to the work of the Ministry, thus considered, is the shining forth of the Truth in the face of Jesus Christ, by his indwelling presence in the heart, comparing it self in the mind and understanding of the Saint, with the testimony which is given of it self in the Outward Word: And by discerning the perfect Analogie and Harmony that springs up between both, answering one another as face an∣swers face, the believer receives such certainty and satisfacti∣on in the mind of God made known, as warrants him in the delivery and declaration thereof unto others. This, as the safest and best rule, in judging and declaring truth from the Scrip∣tures, hath been owned in a constant harmony of witness, by Saints in all Ages, against all the enemies (under one form or other) that have sprung up either against the holy Scrip∣tures themselves, or the Spirit and inward WORD that lives and breathes forth in them and by them.
Thus through the faith that is in Christ Jesus, the Holy Scrip∣tures are able to make us wise unto salvation, and to make the man of God perfect, throughly furnished unto every good work, being in this harmony and consent with the inward WORD, of the same Authority with it, and of the same divine and spi∣ritual nature, property, and use, able to save the soul, and pros∣per to the end for which they are sent, as a servant in the hand of the living WORD, to fulfil all his pleasure, and become either a savour of life unto life, as ministred in harmony with and sub∣serviency unto the living WORD, or a savour of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. as ministred singly, in opposition thereunto. The Scriptures then are not properly the inward and living WORD, but have a testimony and expression peculiarly their own, John 5. 39. search the scriptures, they are they which testifie of me, saith Christ; in which Testimony of theirs, they are either as a servant and preparer of the way un∣to the living WORD, as those that literally testifie of it, pointing at Christ, the life and spirit of them; or else they are to be considered as one and the same with the living WORD, in perfect analogie and harmony (both consort∣ing and dwelling together in an inseparable band of union) unveiling rather the naked beauty of the inward WORD, then bearing any different sense from it: professing themselves to be but as a dead letter or sealed book, Isa. 29. 11. any farther then the living unwritten WORD of God, as breathing into them, becomes their life, and is made use of as the key to open them; so that both together make up one and the same divine oracle; whereas if consideration be had of the Scriptures in the letter only, they are then capable of having a meer private interpretation and humane sense put upon them, and so to nourish up a way of prophecying that hath its rise out of the divination of mans own heart, or the sin∣gle ability of the natural mind, exercised in them; which is so far from being the true ministry, that it is but the vision of God that proceeds from man as he follows his own spirit and not Gods, Ezek. 13. 2. 3. &c.
Now if the body of the Scriptures deserve the name (as they do) of the word of God, their spirit and Original deserves it much more, and is much more eminently of authority and use, for the effecting of all that is or can be done by them; even the WORD that is nigh thee, that is in thy heart, and in thy mouth, the WORD of faith, Rom. 10. 8. the unseen and unwritten WORD which evidences itself to faith, which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things unseen, Heb, 11. 1. This WORD is described, Heb. 4. 12. where it is said, the WORD of God is quick and powerful, sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spi∣rit, and of the joynts and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. By being here descri∣bed as a person, the Holy Ghost signifies to us, in what sense we are to understand the WORD of God in this place; even for Jesus Christ, the Mediator (not simply considered as the second in the Trinity, any more then for the outward body of the Scriptures) which person of Christ is spoken of under the same name and description, Rev. 19. 13. where he is said to be clothed with a vesture dipt in blood, whose name is called the WORD of God: having on his vesture and on his thigh a name written KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS, v. 16. In the same sense is this WORD presented to the view of Ezekiel, Chap. 2. v. 9. 10. under the description of the roll of a book, which was written within and without: and Rev. 5. 1, 2. 3. A book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals, which none whatsoever amongst the Crea∣tures was able to open, or loose the seven seals thereof. In this book of God David was seen, Psal. 139. 15, 16. by the eye of God, in his creature-substance, yet being imperfect, and therein all his members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, whilst as yet there were none of them. The nature and use of this book, considered in the seve∣ral volumes of it, is declared, Rev. 20. 12. The books were ope∣ned,
and another book was opened, which is the book of life; and that we may know what book of life is here meant, there is mention made Rev. 13. 8. of the book of life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, having the names of all the Elect written in it, which are never to be blotted out. And Rev. 3. 5. we find another book of life belonging to Christ, from whence he threatens the hypocritical and corrupted members of the Church of Sardis to be blotted out; a like threatning unto which, we find, Rev. 22. 19. which compared with Psal. 69. 28. makes it yet plainer: Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous, or come into thy righ∣teousness, to wit, which is by faith. Thus we see the unwritten and living WORD of God, testi∣fied by the Scriptures, to be Gods writing and Gods book, as well as they themselves are; so that when we call this li∣ving WORD unwritten, it is but by way of distinction from the Holy Scriptures in the outward body of them, as they are written with Pen and Ink; for the WORD that is the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his glory, and the express character of his substance, may truly and properly be said to be the writing and engraving of the Trinity, the Living book and roll of God, that is all written within and without, consisting of three volumes, answering to the threefold power that is in the mind of Christ, to read and look thereon. We are therefore in both these respects, to acknowledge Christ to be the living WORD first, as he is he that speaks, or the person whose mind and discerning is formed and pre∣pared to look upon this Heavenly writing in all the volumes of it, in order to communicate and give forth unto others the reading thereof; And secondly, as he is the writing itself and doth contain the lively ORACLES OF GOD or witness of the blessed Trinity, representing God, as to and by himself he is seen, as also to and by both Creations, according to the two Covenants, unto which they relate: In which latter sense this book is to be understood, Rev. 5. 1. &c. where it is said,
that no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon: but it is the privi∣ledge only of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah to prevail to the opening thereof, and to make the right use that is intended thereby. The WORD in both these respects considered by us, is a most lively description of the fulness and perfection whcih dwels in Christs person, as he was set up in the office of his Mediatorship, by the immediate operation of the Trinity, before the world began; wherein he is the only begotten Son, in whom God is well pleased as he that is in himself both Priest and sacrifice, abiding a High-Priest for ever at the right hand of God, after the order of Melchisedech; which is no way proper to him as the second Person in the Trinity, simply considered, where he is purely and simply God, without the least mixture or composition of creature-nature, and without shadow of change. But now, as Christ is the WORD in the person of the Mediator, he hath the root of all creature-nature in him, (being the root as well as the offspring of David) and hath this given to him for sacrifice, therewith to prepare him to become a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. As thus he is the person of the Mediator, he exerciseth a threefold power of mind and discerning, by reason where∣of this living WORD is said, Heb. 4. to be the discerner of the thoughts & intents of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and opened unto him with whom we have to do, & of whom we are now treating. First all things are naked and opened unto him, by reason of the pure all-seeing eye and discerning of God that is in him: through which light of his, he knows how to read the inward writing of the book, or the book as it is all written within, in a character that is the form of God himself, in the very height of his glory; and therefore proper only for the divine eye it∣self to contemplate and be conversant in; requiring the same mind that is in God himself, to conceive and understand it, as simply and fingly exhibited. The Mediator, in the exercise
of this power of mind, is eternally seeing all that God sees, perfectly knowing Gods mind, and is his Wonderful Counsellor in all the decrees and purposes of his that concern the crea∣tures converse with him from beginning to ending. Secondly, All things are naked and opened unto Christ this living WORD, by reason of the highest and purest natural creature-eye and discerning that is in him, as he is the first-born of every creature, and is the discerner of the thoughts of the natu∣ral heart and mind of all creatures; so as Psal. 139. 2, 4. there is not a thought in the heart, nor word in the tongue, but this WORD knows it altogether and afar off, even before the World began. Through this second seeing power of Christs mind, he knows how to read the second Volume of Gods book, as it is all written without, in a manifestation and appearance of God, which is commensurate and proportioned to the crea∣tures judgement and discerning, as it is natural, and of the first building, and is the same form of God, abasing it self, and requiring no higher an eye then what is in the natural mind of the creature, to behold it and look thereon. This writing is called outward, or the book all written without, comparatively, and in reference to the inwardness of the first, whose eminen∣cy and height is such as is exclusive to the creatures natural discerning; not but that in its own nature it is inward and spiritual, being the witness that is given by the second in the Trinity. As Christ exercises this his creature-sight and dis∣cerning (to which this outward Volume of Gods book is pro∣portioned) seen and known unto him are all the works of the first Creation, in the order and manner wherein they are to be, and have their share and lot given forth unto them in continuance of time; yea, the invisible substances of Angels and Men, and all the life, motion and demeanour wherein they are exercised from first to last, upon the wavering, unstable and conditional terms of their standing and holding communion with God in and by the first Covenant; which communion being con∣ditional throughout, Christ doth therefore in this first book of life write down and blot out the names of those that are
interested in this Covenant, according as the condition is per∣formed, or not performed by them; as we have in this Chap∣ter already shewed, from those Scriptures that describe this first book of life of the Lamb. Thirdly and lastly, All things are naked and opened unto Christ the Mediator, by reason of that his Heavenly creature-eye, and most excellent way of discerning which is begotten in him, as he is the first-born from the dead; in which he is the quick and two edged sword, so sharp, powerful and piercing, that it is able to divide asunder soul and spirit, the joynts and marrow, or to state the true difference between the creatures natural mind in the first building, and its spiritual mind in the second, whose priviledge it is to be admitted to the sight of the glory that is within the veil, to hear the inward voyce, and see the hidden similitude of God, which no natural minds or discern∣ings, continuing meerly such, have ever seen or can see, in their highest attainments and improvements. Through this third seeing power in the mind of Christ, he is skilled and knowing in reading the third Volume of Gods book, which contains the former two writings, as well the in∣ward as the outward, so joyned and placed together, as that they are comparing themselves thereby in their most perfect harmony and agreement, as face answers face, serving them∣selves of each other in such manner as may best unriddle and interpret the full and entire meaning of God in them both; and herein unloose the seals that were upon the backside of the book, so as the glory within the veil or inward writing may thereby shine forth upon the new-creature-discerning, and yet keep the seals fast on still, as to all natural eyes. This writing and manifestation of God is his second ap∣pearance, as he comes forth upon the creature in life from the dead, and makes the Mediator the beginning, root and author thereof, unto the whole new and second building, the true Mount Sion, or City that hath foundations, (whose builder and maker is God) being founded in a new and everlasting Covenant, and upon better promises then the first, with which God found fault.
This second divine appearance is that which is so adaequate and fitted to the new creature-discerning, or eye or faith, which hath for object things unseen, that the eye of the natu∣ral mind single hath no skil in reading this book, but unto it the vision of all is become as the words of a book that is sealed, Isa. 29. 11. a sight which no man hath seen, nor can see, being the hidden Manna, and new name, which none knows but they that have it. This third writing is the witness which is given by the third in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost, being that whereby with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. The thickness of the outward Veyl is in this dispensation made so transparent by the loss of its own glory in the grave, that now it is made of use to hand out the glory of the inward writing, as that which is above and over its head, unto which it is made willing and content to be the footstool, and to rule only as an inferiour light, in subor∣dination and subserviency thereunto. By the third power of discerning in Christ, to which this third Volume is proportioned, he knows who are given to him of the Father, of whom he is not to lose one; whom therefore he writes down in this his second book of life, out of which they can never be blotted. Hereby also is seen and known to Christ the end of all Gods works as well as their beginning, in the or∣der and manner in which all things have their course and pro∣gress unto their final state, either in a way of everlasting ho∣nour, or of everlasting contempt. Thus we have considered him before whose sight all things are naked and opened, as he is the living WORD of God, and hath a three-fold power and exercise of mind suted unto these lively Oracles of God, in which he is made conversant by the witness which the Trinity bear unto the eye of his mind: Un∣to whose blessed and glorious person in this his three-fold perfection, fitting him to his office of Mediator, the Scriptures are exceeding full and plain in their testimony; as first, Prov. 8.
where we find him described in this his fulness and riches of glory, under the general term of Wisdom; so that ver. 30, 31. we may behold him as to his first perfection, in a co-eternity with God himself, and in the exercise of Gods own mind and discerning, as one by him, and brought up with him, his bosome-Counsellour from all eternity, in order to accomplish and work out the communications of God, by him fore-purposed unto Angels and Men. And of the two latter we have parti∣cular intimation in the same Scripture, where he saith, I was daily his delight, rejoycing alwaies before him, rejoycing in the ha∣bitable part of his Earth, and my delights were with the sons of men, even whilst he lay in his Fathers bosome. Again, ver. 22, 23. We have his perfection described as he is the first-born of every creature, and first begotten from the dead, who was set up from everlasting, that is to say, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was, whom the Lord possessed in the beginning of his way, before his works of old: intimating thereby the works not only begun, but finished in the Mediator, from the foundation of the world, when there were no depths, nor fountains abounding with water: before the mountains were settled; before the hils was he brought forth, v. 24, 25. shining in a two fold appearance, in which he contained all creature-fulness, riches, excellency and perfection: & so is described v. 6. where he saith, he will speak of excellent things, in the second Covenant: & the opening of his lips shall be of right things, as he is the King of righteousness, the Head & Minister of the first-covenant light & glory, in which he was the WORD by whom God created all things in righteous∣ness at first: And ver. 27, 28, 29. Was with God in the begin∣ing when he prepared the Heavens, and set a compass upon the face of the depth; when he established the Clouds, when he gave to the Sea his decree, when he appointed the foundations of the Earth, and was also the counsel, sound wisdom, understanding and strength, ver. 14. whereby all humane societies are governed, ordered and maintained in their natural capacities: For by me, saith he, ver. 15, 16. Kings raign, and Princes decree justice, the Nobles rule, and all the Judges of the Earth: and ver. 18. Riches and
Honour are with me, the perfection of all natural good whatso∣ever; yea, durable riches and righteousness, and ver. 19. His fruit is better then gold, yea then fine gold, and his revenue to be preferred before choice silver, the most excellent natural perfecti∣on whatsoever; whereby he causes those that love him to inhe∣rit substance, ver. 21. the enduring treasures of the new and everlasting Covenant, wherein he is the King of peace, and brings into the true Rest, ministred by Gods second ap∣pearance. Lastly, we may behold this Wisdom speaking unto men, as Elihu spake unto Job, Job 33. 6, 7. where prefiguring the Incarnation, he saith, I am according to thy wish, in Gods stead; flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone, formed out of the Clay, that my terrour may not make thee afraid, nor my hand be heavy upon thee. So this WISDOM puts forth her voyce, Prov. 8. 1, 2, &c. to you O men doth she call, and her voice is to the sons of men, in the top of high places, by the way, in the places of the paths, or common road, at the gates, at the entry of the City, at the coming in at the doors, unto men of all Nations and places, qualities and conditions, being found to this end in the form of a servant, and fashion of a natural fleshly man, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. And least we should think he were to be known only accord∣ing to the flesh, and in the first appearance of his manhood, he speaks to another sort of men, ver. 32, 33. whom he cals Children given him by his Father, made to have a new name, better then the name of sons and daughters under the first Cove∣nant, being those blessed ones that keep his wayes, whom he feeds with the hidden Manna (as the fit portion for those to whom is given a new name, that none do know but they that have it) speaking to them with his voice from Heaven, or by the voice of his heavenly manhood, in the exalted state of it at the right hand of God, who so findeth me, findeth life, and shall ob∣tain favour of the Lord, ver. 35. This is the Wisdom Solomon ac∣knowledged to be in Christ, as that person in whom it pleased God all fulness should dwel.
The like view of Christs fulness appears to have been given unto the Prophet Isaiah, in the 43, 44, 46. Chapters, com∣pared with the 48. Chapter. In the 46. chap. ver. 9. it is said, Remember the former things of old, witnessing me to be God, and that there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me: and ver, 5. To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal? for chap. 43. 10. Before me there was no God formed, or nothing was formed of God, neither shall there be after me. And he that thus speaks of himself, as he is God, proceeds to give the witness of himself, as he is also the Saviour and Redeemer, ver. 11. when he saith, I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Sa∣viour: and therefore chap. 46. 3, 4. Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel which are born by me from the belly, which are carryed from the womb, and even to your old age; I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you; I have made, and I will bear, even I will carry, and I will deliver you. And chap. 44. 6, 7. Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts; I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God: and who as I shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the An∣cient people, and the things that are coming and shall come? which he doth as Mediator, Saviour, and Redeemer, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; In which state; considered as the first born of every creature, and first begotten from the dead, he is declaring the end from the beginning, chap. 46. 10. and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, my counsel then taken shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure, according to what is written in those books and living Oracles of God that are abiding with me and in me; which causes him to say, chap. 48. 12, 13. Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and Israel my called; I am he, I am the first, I also am the last; my hand hath laid the foundation of the Earth, and my right hand hath spanned the Hea∣vens: the one, as he is the Minister of Gods first, the other as he is the Minister of Gods second appearance; so that when he cals unto them (even all concerned under either) they stand up together in his sight and presence, as in their Head and ori∣ginal pattern.
And as Christ was thus beheld by Solomon and Isaiah, so is he also testified unto by Daniel, where he is spoken of as the great Prince named Michael, or Gods equal and likeness, taken into union and society with God himself, and made the Head and prime Minister of Gods name and manifestation, wherein to be the Messiah to both worlds: In and by whom God ren∣ders himself the object of communion unto Angels and men, either under the first or second Covenant. In this likeness and equality which he hath with God, signified by his name Michael, he is the WORD that is with God, not considered properly as he is purely and simply God, but as together with that, he is the Word of the beginning, Heb. 6. 1. (according to the marginal reading) and the Word of the end, the final deciding Word, or Word of the Oath, Heb. 7. 28. which was since the Law, making the Son a high-priest, who is consecrated for evermore. He is the WORD of the beginning, as he is in the begin∣ning, the first-born of every creature, that is before all things, The Lord, descending from heaven with a shout, 1 Thess. 4. 16. with the voice of the Arch-Angel; with this trump of God, that Christ as the first-born of every creature, is able to sound: In which capacity he is the head of Angels, in their natural perfection: and therefore seems in this place to be called the Arch-Angel, or Michael the great Prince, in this first sense: and together with this, being considered as also made man, he may be the Angel spoken of, Rev. 22. 8. 9. whom John fell down before, to worship him, and who replied see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book; worship God: by which Christ describes himself to John, in his meer creature-nature: according to which he saith in the Gospel, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God. But secondly Michael is the great Prince, as he is the WORD also of the final decision of all things, the WORD of the oath, separating, in and by his last judgement and sen∣tence, between the sheep and the goats, as he is the first begotten
from the dead: Gods high Priest consecrated for evermore: Exer∣cising the mind of God and of the creature, made one in an undissoluble bond of love, peace and reconciliation: In which, of twain that they were as first, they become one new Crea∣tion, in which both minds are exercised in perfect harmony and peace (All enmity being slain and for ever abolished through the blood of the Cross) whereby Christs creature-nature is exal∣ted to be Gods associate or equal in his very throne, receiving a Name above every Name, even above that of Arch-Angel itself, or first-born of every creature: unto which all creature∣names and natures are to bow and do homage, as to him who being thus found in the form of God, counts it not robbery to be equal with God. A lively figure of Christ, the Messiah, or Michael the great Prince, thus considered, the Scripture gives us in the person of Melchisedech, Hebrews 7. Who in his name, descent and office, doth most aptly represent this great mysterie. First in his name, as he is King of righteousness, Head of all natural life and perfection: and then as King of peace, or author of true rest; in which he is Head of the new creatures righte∣ousness and everlasting life. Secondly, in his descent, which is most mysterious and in∣comprehensible; without Father, without Mother, without pe∣digree, or lineal descent from the creature; having neither beginning of daies, nor end of life: but made the likness or fi∣gure of the Son of God, who was in TRUTH all this through the first and immediate operations of the Trinity, bringing themselves to light in him. Thirdly in his office of High-Priesthood, comprehending the sacrifice as well as the sacrificer; and also the first and highest Sanctuary, wherein this divine service and holy sa∣crifice was performed to God, from the foundation of the world, by Christ, the Lamb then slain; and pas∣sing out of the state of perfection, as he was the first-born of every creature, into the life and quickning from the dead, whereof he was made the beginning and first-begotten, and in all
things to have the preheminence: In both which respects Christ is the Messiah, him whom God sends, the likeness of the ap∣pearance of whose glory considered as the WORD of God, whilst as yet he was not made flesh, was the subject matter of Ezekiels vision, Chap. 1. where he is most lively and expresly held forth, in this his twofold ministration. First as he is the spirit and voice of the Almighty, ver. 24. giving life and mo∣tion to the four living creatures, ver. 5. & 12. which four are but one living creature, Chap. 10. 15. comprehending in it∣self the variety and fulness, the glory and perfection of the whole first creation, from the four ends and quarters of it; answering therein, to the first-born of every creature mentioned Col. 1. 15. Who was before all things, and in whom all things con∣sist or stand up together as in their Head; which he is described to be in reference to Angels, Ezek. 10. 11. where the Mi∣nistry of Angels is typed out by the wheels full of eyes, whose wings were of such a height that they were dreadful, Chap. 1. 18. The same with those Chariots of God, Psal. 68. 17. that are twen∣ty thousand, even thousands of Angels; who, Psal. 103. 20. 21, 22, in the mightiness or excellency of their strength are ever doing the commands and hearkning unto the voice of this WORD as his Hosts and Ministers that do his pleasure in all places of his dominion; by reason whereof the motion of this WORD or voice of the Almighty, Ezekiel 1. 24. is compared to the noise of wings, and the noise of an host. Now of these wheels it is said Chapter 10. 11. that when they went, they went upon their four sides and turned not as they went; but to the place whither the Head looked, they followed it; they turned not as they went; mea∣ning the good Angels; contrary whereunto, the motion of the bad ones is described, Jude v. 6. by turning aside from this head, not keeping their first estate or principality: but leaving their own habitation, or dependency upon their head; whom therefore he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgement of the great day. Thus Ezekiel saw the Lord Christ, the true Messiah, in his ministry of Gods first appearance.
And to shew that Christ in this is but a preparer of the way to the glory that follows, and maker of the way for the second voice to be heard and attended unto in the end, as he hath been in the beginning; it is said, that when the first ceased from motion, and stood, they then let down their wings; where∣upon there was a voice from the firmament over their heads, when they stood and had let down their wings: and above the firmament that was over their heads, was the likeness of a Throne, and upon the likeness of the Throne was the appearance of a man, above upon it, Ezek. 1. 24, 25, 26. which Throne is more at large (as we shall shew by and by) opened, Rev. 4. plainly figuring out Gods second appearance, even those good things to come, which are opened by Christs entrance within the veil and sit∣ting down on the Throne, at Gods right-hand, expecting un∣till his foes be made his footstool, or as 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. untill he shall have put down all rule and all authority, and powers of the first Creation under his feet, that would be exalting themselves against him; and not be freely and willingly ready with the four Beasts and four and twenty Elders, to prostrate themselves with their Crowns before the Throne: saying, thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Created: Rev. 4. 9. 10, 11. which is the true broken frame of spirit, in Elect men and Angels, as they are built up a-new and brought forth from the grave, into the power of an endless and incorruptible life, even in their natural beings: who considered in that capacity, as so renewed, are ingraffed into a new stock, by life from the dead: and are so represented by the four beasts, but as withall, they have the addition of a better and higher principle of life, in∣stalling them in a Royal priesthood with Christ, and setting them on the Throne of his glory, they are represented by the four and twenty Elders, who both stand thus represented in Christ their head, in his being Minister of Gods second ap∣pearance, or the beginning and first-born from the dead, the High-Priest, presenting himself within the veil, in the immedi∣ate presence of God, bearing on his brest the names of the Chil∣dren
that God hath given to him from all eternity. And for as much as Revel. 5. 6. there is mention made of a Lamb, as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth, that John beheld in the midst of the throne and of the four Beasts, and of the Elders (which argues them to be distinct from them) let me therefore (as a further witness to the life and glory had and enjoyed by this true Messiah, the Ministring WORD of Gods first and second appearance, from the foundation of the world) endeavour to open to you the analogie that is between him (in the exercise of this twofold Ministry of his) and this description of a Lamb, as it had been slain, having seven horns and seveneyes; which is the power and light put forth by him, as he is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending of the whole Creation of God (which the number denotes) being in himself the perfect measure, line and original exemplar of both Creations, the spirit sent forth by God, as the light, life, and influencing power unto them both respectively: and so, having that in a far greater emi∣nency in himself, as Head and Mediator, then what they have in themselves. As first, he is King of righteousness, in the Mi∣nistry of Gods first appearance, and then King of peace, in the Ministry of his second: and in both, Melchisedec a High-Priest: that implies a sacrifice, a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Thus the eternal life and blessedness prepared by God, ac∣cording to the free and good pleasure of his will, to be com∣municated and imparted unto his chosen vessels, whether men or Angels, being too big and full, to be received by them, in their first make and fashion of building, there is a means prepared for a new make and fashion of Creation for them, whereby that which is in part is done away, as it stands single and alone, and yet is found again in the whole, when that which is perfect is come, and made to be their portion and inheritance: whereby Gods peculiar ones are made to have that which other natural beings at their best have in common
with them; and yet have over and above, that height, and bredth, and depth, and length of the enjoyment of Gods love and peace which all the wisdom and discerning of the most ca∣pacious natural understanding whatsoever, remaining upon the foundation of the first building, can not reach nor attain. Christ thus considered as Mediator, is described, Dan. 7. 9, 10. by the antient of daies, who is brought in fitting upon the same Throne, as Rev. 4. whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his Throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire: a fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: Thousand thousands ministred unto him, and ten Thousand times ten Thousand stood before him: the judge∣ment was set, and the Books were opened (even the Books of the Lamb, that was slain from the foumdation of the world.) And be∣hold, one like the son of man, came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the antient of daies, verse 13. Here the offspring and root of David meet in marriage-union, and the man Christ Jesus returns and ascends into the glory where he was before, or in the beginning: and they brought him neer before him, so neer; as both do make but one blessed Person of the Mediator, who laies hold on the seed of David, his own off-spring, thus to bring him neer to him, and gives him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages should serve him, whose Do∣minion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdome that which shall never be destroyed. That this Antient of daies is the Son of God, considered in the fulness and riches of his Mediatorship (as hath been before opened) is plain, by comparing this with Rev. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. where the same description is made (in most particulars) of him, as in this seventh of Daniel, adding this, that out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword (which is the proper cha∣racter of the Living WORD of God, Heb. 4. 12.) and his counte∣nance was as the Sun shineth in his strength. This compared again with Ioh. 5. 22, 23. (where Christ saith the Father judgeth no man, but htah committed all judgement unto the Son, that all men should
honour the Son, even as they honour the Father) doth import, that by this Antient of daies is meant that antient state of things and works of old, which was set up in the Mediator from everlasting, Prov. 8. 23. and was made manifest in the begin∣ning, when he became the first-born of every creature, and first-begotten from the dead; assuming in the dispensation of the ful∣ness of time into neerness of union with himself the man Christ Jesus, as the branch, his servant, the polished shaft, hid in the shadow of his hand, to accomplish his designs, and be in his use and service, the means of perfecting all that entercourse into which God thinks fit to admit the particular beings of men and Angels with himself: in which state he is prefigured by the two Cherubims, made at the end of the mercy-seat, for the shadowing of it: and by the two Olive-trees that stand by the Lord of the whole earth.
CHAP. III. Concerning the Creation of all things by Jesus Christ, who is the Mysterie that lay hid in God from the beginning, and makes himself manifest, as well by the works of Creation, as of Redemption. IT can never be sufficiently observed, how the WISDOM of God in the most difficult and knotty points to the reason of man, doth (with∣out gratifying at all the curiosity of flesh and blood) assert the truth of his own operations. Thus Heb. 11. the Holy Ghost (as taking for granted what he speaks of) doth in short down-right terms declare, ver. 3. That the worlds were framed by the WORD of God, and that by faith this is known to be so. In which light it is also discover∣ed, that those things which are seen by our natural eye, had a prae-existence in their proper head and cause, and so had also those things that are not seen (but to our spiritual discerning) relating also to their proper root. The method of which rela∣tive and radical being of things in their head, in gradations one above another (so as the inferiour subordinations of work∣manship are the typical significations of them that are above) is shortly and mystically, yet fully and admirably laid down by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 3. where he saith, that the head of the woman is the man, the head of every man is Christ, and the head of Christ is God; testifying hereby to faith (which hath
Christ for its object in all it receives) the method wherein God proceeds, as he creates all things by Jesus Christ; for, saith he, God is the head of Christ, or the Trinity by their immediate operation do first comprehend the person of the Mediator in God himself, and then do send him forth as the true Messiah, making him the Minister of Gods first and second appea∣rance to the creature, in the capacity of head and root to both creations. Thus, Secondly, Christ is the head unto every man, comprehending all mankind whatsoever (as well they that are of the earth, earthy, as those that are of the Lord from heaven) in himself, who is the root to both creations, and from thence causes them to flow forth and exist as his off-spring, in their particular nature and proper persons, in their several generations, from the begin∣ning to the end of the world. Lastly, Man is the head unto the woman in his creation; so made by God unto Eve, that therein he might as a shadow and figure illustrate, not only the truth and reality of being which Eve had in her head, but withall, the true end of her being so comprehended, that she might not abide single and alone, cut off from dependance on, and duty to her head, but be brought into compleatness of being, through her return into the neer∣ness and intimacy of marriage-union with him, yet without losing the property of being which she is made to have as the woman, in distinction from the man. This is the figure and resemblance of Gods method and proceeding, in creating all things by Jesus Christ; which haply the wisdom of man will carp at (thinking to find absurdities in it) through the deceits of Philosophy and worldly rudiments, that are not after Christ; but faith sees through all these Clouds, and if need be, interprets the riddle; shewing, that the truth which is spoken in Gods word, hath also its testimony from humane principles, so far as they have any rectitude in them. It is plain, That the worlds were made by the word of God, that is, God from eternity gives being unto the WORD, as image of the Trinity, and the WORD through the excellency of
power and glory which he hath in and with God, was able out of nothing to create both worlds, giving them their beginning and foundation in himself, as he became the first-born of every creature, and first-begotten from the dead. In which state, he that thus was the first, and was also the last, did with his call cause all things in both to stand up together, as by name, in his sight and presence, when he took notice of them, recorded them in his books (whilst as yet they were not fashioned) and did behold them in the particular forms wherein afterwards they were to be. Thus in the beginning was the WORD & the WORD was with God, and the WORD was God, & in this WORD was life, even the life of both creations, and therefore also of the man Christ Jesus, that was fore-appointed the head and original pattern, unto which as well the natural as spiritual man were to be conformed; who did, as the truth and substance it self, at last appear and minister the true sanctuary which God pitched and not man; accomplishing all that was written in the Volume of Gods book for him to perform, for the abolishing of sin and death, and the bringing forth of life and immortality to light. In this his Angelical and spiritual state, wherein the man Christ Jesus stood comprehended, in the root of David, before the world began, he was figured out unto the children of Israel by the two Cherubims of glory, covering or shadowing the Mercy-seat, Heb. 9. 5. and by the two Olive-trees, or the two anointed ones, standing by the Lord of the whole earth, Zech. 4. 14. which com∣pared with 1 Kings 6. 23. will make it appear that Solomon was not ignorant of this great mysterie, in that he made the two Cherubims (when he was to build the Temple, and set them up therein) of Olive trees, or trees of oyl, to signifie the mediation of Christ in spirit, in his head, as these two Olive-trees were the two golden pipes that emptied out the golden oyl, Zech. 4. 12. of all Gods communications unto the works of his hands in both worlds. This is that Jesus, who whilst comprehended in his head, and for a long time shadowed and typed out as the promised seed that was to come in the flesh, had notwithstanding all the
actions of his head and root attributed to him, as much as when in the very image it self he was made manifest, and therefore is said to be that Jesus by whom all things are and were created, and are of him, and to him, and for him, in subordi∣nation to the Word. Thus is Christ the son of man in heaven, before he descended and was made flesh: and in this heavenly state of his man-hood doth not actually exercise his humane life, but his life is the same with the life of the Word, all whose actions are im∣puted unto him, as Abrahams were unto Levi, who is said to have paid Tythes to Melchisedec in his fathers loyns; so Jesus Christ may be said to comprehend in him and the actings of his mind, the particular forms and life of all in both worlds, to be manifested and brought forth in their proper seasons, into their visible appearances in the worlds by him, and at his pleasure for whom they are and were created. And when we say that the particular life and form of every creature is thus com∣prehended in the heavenly manhood of Christ, the meaning is, either immediately or mediately. For he that is thus be∣fore all things, is not created alone: but in and with this head, they all consist or stand up together, as in their head: capable to exist in themselves in their heavenly & invisible part, at the pleasure of their head, before they be brought forth into their mortal and visible frame and fashion, in this world. In which sense, all of them are Christs off-spring and seed, known to him by name, whether such of them as are given to him, by the Father to be trained and brought up by him, as children of the second, new and everlasting covenant, or those of the first: whether they be inhabitants of Mount Sion, or Mount Sinai, of the heavenly City that is above, or of the earthly and fleshly Jerusalem, whether they be men, or Angels, they are all his off-spring, in one of these two respects, and are to receive their natural or spiritual perfection from him, as he is the Minister of Gods name, in his first or second appearance unto them: whence it is that Christ saith to his Father, Heb. 2. 13. Behold me and the children which thou hast given me, in distinction
from the rest of the world; the former of these are the heaven∣ly, spiritual seed, and from above, measured out with a line of life as adopted children and friends of God: the latter are the earthly or fleshly seed, and from beneath, measured out with a line of death, as chusing the state of a servant, or to remain single and alone, in their natural principles, enemies to the cross of Christ, and resisters of the grace whereby the other are saved: which saving grace we shall find, 2 Tim. 1. 9. was conferred freely on the Elect, without condition, according to Gods pur∣pose, and given them in Christ Jesus before the world began. So Ephes. 1. 3, 4. They were blessed with all spiritual blessings in the heavenly, in Christ, according as they were chosen in him before the foundation of the world, to be holy and without blame before him, in love. Thus we see in what sense the particular beings of men and Angels are the off-spring and seed of Christ, children of the first or second covenant, frequently so called in Scripture, although none but those that are called according to his purpose, to be heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ of the Fathers glory, ministred to them in and by the new and everlasting Covenant do truly deserve the name of Sons or Children, who have a name better then that of Sons and Daughters by the other Covenant. From this general consideration therefore of Men and An∣gels, as all are the seed and off-spring of Christ, we must come to several distributions of them. For, First; Here we have the general Assembly and Church of the first-born, which are written in heaven, the inhabitants of the true Mount Sion, and City of the living God. Secondly, we have the innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12. 22, 23. who are made ministring Spirits to these heirs of sal∣vation, Heb. 1. 14. Thirdly, we have the Legions of wicked Angels, that made themselves such by their fall and disobedience, reserved in chains of darkness to the judgement of the great day.
Fourthly, we have the whole race of mankind in one lump or mass, as considered in their natural life and being, bearing the image and similitude of God, according to his first ap∣pearance, wherein all are brought forth in the beginning, as a state for them not to abide in, but from whence to be passing into an endless and immortal state of honour or dishonour. All these by name are created, and have their invisible, im∣mortal substances brought forth by the WORD, as his off-spring, made to stand up together in and with the man Jesus Christ as their head, and are committed to the charge of the Mediator, to assign unto them all circumstances, for their be∣ing brought forth into their visible bodily appearances in this world, together with the means and method of bringing them upon the stage of this first creation, and the lot there, wherein they are to stand and serve in their several places, uses and re∣lations, according as he hath received command from the Father. So that from the time that the man Christ Jesus began to be in the WORD, as in his head and root, standing up in the sight and presence thereof, as the promised seed to come, we are to date the beginning of dayes unto the invisible sub∣stances of Angels and Men; who then also began to be in their head, and were ever beholding, or rather beheld by their Fa∣ther in heaven, untill they were made actually to exist in con∣tinuance of time, in their own proper persons and beings.
CHAP. IV. Concerning the Creation, Nature and Mini∣stry of Angels. IT is said Gen. 1. 1. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. In what sense Christ is the beginning, hath been already opened, and how, as the Messiah, he is the Minister of Gods first appearance; in which he is head unto the Angels, the Lord amongst them in Sinai, by whose voice the Law or first covenant was given: where he was compassed about with these his fiery Chariots, who receive what is spoken by Christ, of the mind and will of God, to speak it forth again as the Word they are to publish unto men, in the Ministry of the first covenant, Heb. 2. 2. In this sense it is said, Acts 7. 53. that the Law was given by the disposition of Angels. They therefore do obtain the first order and rank of all natural be∣ings, in the first creation, and are endued with an instrumen∣talness of being and motion, to this use and service of their Head: as also, to be the subordinate means of all converse, which by Christ is maintained between God and the first world, unto whom it is put in subjection, as Heb. 2. 5. com∣pared with Psal. 8. 5. do evidence. These in their creation are described by the light which God made on the first day, Gen. 1. 34. when he said let there be light, and there was light; and God saw the light that it was good: approving this first work of his hands in the beginning of that day: and God by his divi∣ding the light from the darkness, signified the heavenliness of their frame and constitution, as they stand exalted and sepa∣rate in their beings from all sensual life, in the form of invisible spirits, whereof the material heavens in their crea∣tion
are the first shadow; which are called, Prov. 8. 26. the highest part of the dust of the world; as David also (giving ac∣count of both their creations together) Psal. 104. ver. 2, 3, 4. saith, who coverest thy self with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain: who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariots, who walketh upon the wings of the wind; who maketh his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flaming fire: in which posture and preparation, the Psalmist describes the WORD as he proceeds to the rest of the creation, ver. 5, 6. &c. intimating, that as man in his bodily state was made dust of the ground, so the Angels were made a flame of fire, in their natural constitu∣tion. In this their natural frame they excell in strength and power, Psal. 103. to execute the commands of their head: and in their motion and actings, are exceeding high and dreadful, compara∣tively with all other parts of the Creation; and therefore these Morning-Stars, considered as they are together, in one socie∣ty and corporation, amongst whom there is a chief, and prince, called Lucifer the first son of the morning, are the image and glory of Christ, as he is the first-born of every creature, in like service, use and relation as the woman is to the man, whose image and glory she is. A view of these angelical spirits in their nature, ministry and use, is lively set forth and represented in the vision Ezekiel had, Chap. 1. compared with Chap. 10. as the body unto Christ, who is there described by the living creature, which the Prophet saw, under the God of Israel; which living creature is said to have the likeness of a man, and is also called four living creatures, from its four faces: signifying, Christ himself there∣by, as his life is in the WORD, and as in that life he compre∣hends the very form of the son of man, and is the root to the whole first creation: unto which, through the Ministry of Gods first appearance, he gives life, being & motion: & in the exercise of this his creating power, he is the head of Angels, and they are the body to him, that he makes use of in his ser∣vice,
Ezek. 10. 11. Whose voice they hearken unto, as ready to execute all his commands and pleasure in this his first dominion. The spirituality of motion in the head and body is such, that they are said to run and return like a flash of lightning, and to the place whither the head is to go, they go and turn not, and their like∣ness or appearance was like burning coals of fire: and the work∣manship of this body was like a wheel within a wheel; four wheels, Chap. 10. 9. that were but one wheel, ver. 13. & Chap. 1. 15. answerable to the four living creatures, that were but one living creature: and the rings of the wheels were so high, that they were dreadful, and were full of eyes. in which wheels was the spirit, or WORD of life riding as in his Chariot, Psal. 68. These cha∣riots of the Lord are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place. In a like re∣presentation they were beheld by Elishaes servant, 2 Kings 6. 17. when he saw the mountain full of horses, and chariots of fire round about Elisha, as the invisible guard and protection, which were with them to defend them from the Syrians. By what hath been said, we have a little view into the na∣ture and use of Angels, in the hand of Christ from the be∣ginning, of these sons of the morning that shouted for joy at the beholding of Christ when he was revealed to them, to be the corner-stone of stability and fixedness, even to the very first creation. In general then, we may perceive that the office and use of Angels is, to be ministring spirits principally sent forth to Mi∣nister unto them that shall be heirs of salvation: in which mi∣nistry they are perfected, by being made immutable and brought into the best and highest rank of servants, transform∣ed into a likeness in life and principles with that which is found in the glorified natural man of the Saint, whose service and subjection is made perfect in love, as the tongue that readily confesses, and the knee that willingly bows, to the glo∣ry of the Father in the Sons new name, in which glory the Saints are co-heirs, and so obtain by inheritance a more excellent name then the Angels, Heb. 1. 4. who therefore confess that they
are not the Son, nor the true Bridegroom, or Bride: but ser∣vants and friends to the marriage union: esteeming it a po∣sture becoming them, to hide their faces before the unveil∣ed glory of the Son: to stand still in silence, and to let down their wings, Ezek. 1. 24. that the glory of the Son sitting on the Throne may shine forth, from the firmament that is above, over their heads: and the heavenly voice of his second appea∣rance may be heard, & obeyed: accounting it their blessedness to be neer the Bridegroom, and to be servants and friends to the marriage of the Lamb, as a guard of fire round about the Throne, on which the Lamb and his Bride sits; swift executio∣ners of vengeance, 2 Thess. 1. 7, 8. upon all those which shall en∣deavour to put those asunder, whom God hath thus joyned together. These are described, Rev. 4. 8. to be they that rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, giving glory, and honour, and thanks to him that sitteth on the Throne, and lives for ever and ever. As thus they are this heavenly building, they are the first heavens, the Tabernacle and clouds of heaven, or the air, for the day-break and glorious sun of Gods first appearance, to run his race and finish his course in; whereby to enlighten the ends of the earth, and all things under heaven. These sons of this morning are the first light-bearers to the Inhabitants of the first world, & therein are covering Cherubs unto the Son in his own pro∣per glory; & that they may be enabled to bear light, or the si∣militude of Christ in his first appearance, unto others, they are first the receivers of that light in themselves, in a spirituality of being and form, fitted and suited thereunto, which accom∣modates them with the exercise of senses meerly spiritual and inward, exceeding high, intuitive and comprehensive: a manner of life, shadowing out the divine life in the name of the Father, whose voice is net heard at any time, nor shape seen, but is like a consuming fire, to burn up and slay whatever natural Organ is coversant about it, or stands before the beams and raies of its most pure and invisible glory. In a shadowy imitation of this the angelical spirits, when
they come forth in the nakedness of their own invisible sub∣stance, and glory of their own being, they are flames of fire, consuming and dissolving all objects of outward sense, to the very disinabling as to the exercise of all such life of sense, any living creatures whose life consists therein; whereof the whole fabrick of this visible world, in all the parts of it, which is reserved to be destroyed by the flames of this fire, will be a most undeniable demonstration: and death it self is a daily witness hereof in every man; who no sooner is deprived of the exercise of his bodily life, and departs this world, but is brought into a state of life, wherein he is an equal and associate to Angels, good or bad: for in the world to come, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, saith our Saviour, but are equal with the Angels. And as thus Christ, by the angelieal ministry, doth gather in mans breath, and leave his body to the dust, whilst they return with his spirit to God that gave it (in which service they are employed by Christ at mans dissolution, Luke 16. 22.) so also they have service to perform, in their place under Christ, in bringing in and continuing the exercise of all bodily life throughout the whole fabrick of the first creation: yea, even in man himself, the abridgement thereof: in which operation of theirs, they seem not unfitly to be compared to the influ∣ence and generating power of the Sun: that is it self but a creature, and yet effectually co-operates to the production and conservation of bodily life, in pursuance of those orders and laws of second causes, established by God himself, res∣pecting his creation, and continuance of the first world. The Angels then, in their receivings of light and life from Christ, have for object, the brightness of Gods first appea∣rance, shining forth through him, as the root of all natural perfection, and so are hearers and receivers of this voice of Gods WORD, in the best and highest capacity of any particu∣lar natural beings whatsoever. And as their natural capaci∣ties are high and vast in their receivings from Christ: so their readiness and exactness in conforming themselves to the
will of Christ, is unimaginable; and their power to execute is most strong and mighty, nothing under Christ being able to resist them, or stand out against them in their ministry, that is according to the will of Christ. And as thus considered, they are those that in the hand of Christ are made use of to bear the light or image of Gods first appearance unto all the inhabi∣tants of the first creation: so as not only man himself is made lower then they, but with the whole world is put into sub∣jection to them and their ministry, as we have before expres∣sed. Thus in the beginning, when God created the heavens and the earth, he first set up the heavenly fabrick of the angelical nature: and in that, as in a subordinate head under Christ, comprehended the whole earth and visible world, as a mass without form, and void through the darkness which was as yet upon the face of this great deep, as it stood in the waters, untill by the brooding of the spirit of life in the Word upon them, (making his Angels chariots, and flying upon those wings of the wind) he caused the earth to stand out of the waters and be∣come a glorious visible fabrick, adorned and beautified by the remaning works and products of the six daies, as is at large de∣scribed in the first of Genesis.
CHAP. V. Concerning the Creation of Man, on the sixth Day. WEE have already treated of the excellency and raisedness of being, given unto Angels, who in their invisibility shadow forth the glory of the Father. And we have considered them as repre∣sented under the light of the first day, as it stood divided from the darkness, like a glorious heaven; which light God called day, in comparison of that darkness which he called night. This darkness or night seems by the coherence of the verses fitly to represent the Earth, considered as that Chaos or confused lump, without form, and void, from whence God produced the bodily and visible frame of the first world, with all the hoasts and generations thereof (precedent unto, and ushering in the creation of man) after he had set up the An∣gels in a separatedness of being from it; which visible frame of things so produced, was to serve as an outward book of the creatures, to make intelligible unto man the invisible things of God, even his eternal power and Godhead, through such earthly characters (as so many kinds of voices in the world, none of which wanted their signification, or proper use for the service of man, in his dutiful serving of God) shadowing out the witness of the second in the Trinity, which is the image of God in a vi∣sible administration to the sense and discerning of the natural being of the creature. Forasmuch then as by the progress made by God as yet in the creation, whilst the intellectual life of Angels, and sensual life of other parts of the creation were brought forth and continued in so vast a distance and separation as heaven and earth, so that the harmony and con∣sistency
of both seemed yet to be wanting, God in his in∣finite wisdom (to shadow and type out the finishing and compleating work which the operation of the Holy Ghost gives to the witness of the Father and of the Son) was plea∣sed on the sixth day to create man, and in his constitution and building to provide a joynt consistency of both these excel∣lencies and perfections together: for man in his rational soul was made an associate to Angels, and in his bodily or animal life, equal to beasts that perish: and in the joynt, harmonious exer∣cise of both these in one, was that in a total sum, which the other two were in a separate and divided condition. Hence it is, that man by his creation is so made in the image of God, as to answer and represent the operations of the Tri∣nity: who put forth (as it were) a holy and divine combina∣tion in their workmanship to draw the earthly shadow of their perfections upon man in his creation, who is made by them to consist of spirit, soul and body, 1 Thess. 5. 25. But man con∣sidered as thus bearing the image of God, is made simply to be, receiving those properties and operations that are essenti∣al to him as a man: and therefore is in another sense created in Gods image, when he is made naturally righteous and holy in all the operations of this his being. This we are taught by the Scripture, Gen. 1. 26. 27. com∣pared with Gen. 2. 7. (if carefully minded by us) where we may find man created in Gods image in a twofold respect; First, in the essential properties and operations that are inci∣dent and appertaining to him as he is a man, consisting in the life of spirit, soul and body: wherein he is made to bear the simi∣litude and resemblance of God in the divine essential proper∣ties and operations, so as in a creature-being to be the earthly figure and similitude of the Trinity, who therefore said, Let us make man in our image: and let him have dominion and sove∣raignty over the creatures, bearing our likeness in his very make and constitution, retaining this shadow of us, as that which he can never quite lose, without ceasing to be a man. And for this reason it is that God saies, Gen. 9. 5. 6. he will
require the blood of mans life at the hands of every beast and at the hand of every mans brother: for in the image of God made he man; which, if it should only refer to that image of God which man bears as he continues holy and righteous, it would expose men in their corrupt state, to the same fear which Cain, that whosoever found them might kill them, and be unaccountable. Secondly, man, by the same act of Gods workman-ship, is the image of God as he bears the similitude of Gods righte∣ousness and holiness (shining forth in Christs first appearance) rendering him meet for communion with God: in which con∣sisted the puritie and perfection of the first Adam (who was the figure and type of Christ himself according to the flesh, the promised seed that was to come, and to be made like unto us in all things sin only excepted) and as such he was the sha∣dowy Temple and first Sanctuary wherein divine worship and service was to be performed according to the tenor of the first covenant. This was effected, when God breathed into him the breath of life, and made him to become a living soul, as appears Gen. 2. 7. compared with 1 Cor. 15. 45, 48, 49. The image of God in this latter sense, set up in man, may (as experience shews) suffer change in a twofold respect, ei∣ther as that which (as it ought) will wax old, vanish away, prove as the morning dew, yea, have no glory at all, in comparison of that which excels and is to follow, 2 Cor. 3. 10. or else as that which will be swallowed up of corruption, and changed into a body of sin and death, is the wages of mans disobedience, and fruit of Gods displeasure for the same. In this sense we are to understand man to be made in a mu∣table and corruptible state, as having that set up in him and given to him, through the well or evil ordering whereof, he may either lose and justly be deprived of it, in a way of Gods displeasure, or exchange it for a second and more excellent appearance of God, the glory that is to follow, wherein this also is comprehended; and made perfect and durable. And that we may the better understand the nature of this changeable state, wherein man is found under the first Cove∣nant,
and see the weakness and faultiness thereof, comparative∣ly with that which is designed by God unto man, wherein to fix and rest, it will be needful for us to be more particular in describing, first, what man is in his essential properties and operations, in that make and constitution communicated to him by the Trinity, in his creation: and then to shew what was the nature of the communion and converse with God, which he was thereby fitted and qualified unto, in order to grow up to be perfected in by the means for that end given him by God, if the fault were not his own, as it is written, Thy destruction O man, is of thy self. Man then, as he bears the image of the Trinity, is consti∣tuted of spirit, soul and body, as his essential parts: which, what∣ever suspension of exercise or temporary alteration any of them may have, do never suffer annihilation, but make up the proper discriminating form of man, by which he stands distinguished from all other the works of Gods hands in both worlds. And thus, first, man is created spirit, and made to subsist in his head, Christ Jesus, before the foundation of the world, as we have already shewed, where he stands comprehended in the life of Christs natural perfection, as he is the Father of spirits; in like manner, by way of comparison, as in reference to his fleshly seed, all the posterity of Adam stood in the loyns of their common parent, from the time of his creation. Yet this is not the state of mans spirit made perfect, but is only a first degree of his being, which is the foundation laid by God to mans exercise of a bodily and spiritual life and operation, in∣cident and essential to him as a man, whether he become a vessel of honour or dishonour: So that in this state of a created spirit, man had a being in his head before he was brought forth in the exercise either of his sensual or rational life: and is rather comprehended in his head, then actually and perfectly apprehending or enjoying: in respect of which first state and invisibility of being, he is a dark shadow of the wit∣ness of the Father.
Secondly, man is to be considered in his bodily frame, as he is made, of the dust of the ground, and had the breath of life breathed into him by God, through which he became a living soul. This breathing of the breath of life by God into mans nostrils, doth declare first, Gods bringing the soul of man into the actual being and exercise of its sensual life (which till then lay hid in mans spirit) by the means whereof he is furnished with a capacity of receiving and taking in, by the organs of sense, the knowledge of things proper to him as a man: which though it be his weaker and inferiour part, yet is first in moti∣on, in order to yield its service and subjection to the rational and superiour part. This life, which the soul leads and manages by actuating and informing the senses, & serving herself of them, is that where∣by the report of things from without is let in upon mans rea∣son, which is for the most part so prevalent, as if the soul were absolutely and intirely dependent upon and necessitated unto the use of the senses, in respect whereof some have thought very groundlesly, that it hath either slept or ceased to be, upon the laying down of the body. By this first exercise of a living soul in man, is figured out the witness of the Son. Thirdly, the spirit of man is the foundation and spring un∣to a rational, spiritual, or intellectual exercise of life, wherein he is capable of associating with Angels, and becoming their equal, even in his natural capacity of a man: which also was actually set up in Adam by that act of Gods breathing into him the breath of life, and was as the superiour, ruling part in man, obtaining the place of Lord, Ruler, and Husband unto his first, inferiour, and sensual part, which in its actings was to be dependent upon and subservient unto this, in all useful∣ness and harmony. Thus in a mystical sense man was made Male and Female in the same person, through the setting up this two-fold exercise of life and operation of soul in him, sensual and rational. This second sort of operation is mans higher and nobler part, and shews most the man in it; the other distinguishes
the man very little from the beast, but that the countenance of man looks upward, and the face of the beast downward. The exercise of life in this higher and more raised part of man, Adam obtained at first in perfection, and had it in its compleat stature, so far as it was capable, during its association with its mortal body, and while it was on this side the state of being made perfect in spirit, and equal to Angels, Luke 20. 36. by laying down the body in the grave; either to good Angels, when they become the spirits of just men made perfect; or to evil Angels, when they are the spirits of wicked men, grown up to the height of their natural stature in spirit; and by ver∣tue of that perfect exercise of the rational and intellectual part which Adam had in the body, he had a capacity to take in the knowledge and discerning of things immediatly from the in∣ward vision represented to him by the ministry of Angels; he had also an intuitive prospect into the nature of all visible and bodily things in their causes, without being beholding to the report given by his senses; and as a fruit hereof, we do find Gen. 2. 19, 20. That Adam gave names to every living crea∣ture according to their nature, by vertue of this his intuitive knowledge which he exercised in a way independent upon his sensual part, the property of this his spiritual and rational part being to act, as in the body, or as out of the body, that is to say, to serve it self of the use of its bodily senses, or not, ac∣cording as they conduce to the furthering and bettering him, in his true and right discerning of things; man then hath a perfect, compleat, intellectual and rational life springing up in him, which is so far from being lessened or interrupted by death, and the laying down of the use of his bodily life for a time, that it never comes to its full and mature perfection un∣til then, and as a consequence hereof, the body be re-assumed incorruptible. In this property and operation of humane life, man bears the figure and image of the witness of the Holy Ghost. Thus we have described what man is, in his essential parts and operations, in order to fit him for that communion and
converse with God, designed unto him by the two Covenants; unto the first of which he was actually and perfectly qualified, as he became a living soul, and did bear the image of God, in and upon his natural man, as the first Adam, being of the earth, earthy. But unto the other, man by his creation was no otherwise qualified and prepared, then as he was set up in such a being as was capable, by a farther workmanship of God to arrive unto and attain the glory and everlasting perfection of the new and second covenant: without which, all that was done unto him yet, by what he had received from God in his crea∣tion, if left to his own freewill, would but redound to his grea∣ter misery, and more righteous condemnation, before the judgement seat of Christ, through his own default. This finishing and compleating work of God upon man was reserved to be Ministred to him on the seventh day, whereby a far higher and more exalted capacity of mind and operation was to be added to him for the enabling him unto an everlasting happy and compleat communion with God. This is that which in his first state was wanting, and could not be obtained by him but as the free gift of God, then propoun∣ded to him in the tree of life. This second and last state of perfection held forth unto man from the beginning, in the tree of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God, is described by the Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. where he sets it up in contra-distinction to the first and earthly make of man by his creation (shewing it to be that life and immortality which is brought to light in Christ as the last Adam, the Lord from heaven and quickning spirit) calling it the spiritual body (as that in which the power of this endless life was comprehended) comparatively with the natural body, wherein the perfection of Adams mutable and corruptible life consisted, saying plainly, that there is this spiritual body and heavenly image in the last Adam, as well as that natural body and earthly image in the first: howbeit that is not first which is spi∣ritual but that which is natural, and afterwards that which is spi∣ritual: the first being the life of perfection that was found
in the earthly Adam: the other being that which was brought to light in the heavenly by his resurrection from the dead: and therefore as is the earthly, such are they that are earthly; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And in reference unto such as are the right heirs of salvation, it is said, as they have born the image of the earthly, so shall they also bear the image of the heavenly, and have their natural or vile bodies changed and fashioned like unto his glorious body, by him who through his mighty power is able to subdue all things uno him∣self. And if we desire to be satisfied how this change and tran∣slation out of the one perfection and image into the other is to be effected; he positively asserts, that it is brought upon man as the fruit of Christs resurrection, or Ministry of Gods second appearance, by and in him, which rends the first veil, and brings down the first Tabernacle of the natural body into the grave with Christ, whence it springs up clothed upon with this house from heaven, its spiritual body, by means whereof, this corruptible puts on incorruption, and this mortal puts on immortality, and death and the grave are swallowed up in victory. This change and translation was (as we have said) pro∣pounded unto Adam as the end of his creation, and was fi∣gured out to him in the tree of life; and by the twofold exer∣cise of life and ability of mind, set up in their perfection in in him by creation, he was indued with a power improveable in the use of the means God afforded him, to be at least in a tendency unto so glorious an end, and disposed in such a po∣sture and frame of spirit as God required in him by the first covenant, in order to this farther work which on the seventh day God would make known and impart to him. What God herein required from man, was signified unto him by the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and the prohibition ac∣companying the same, which was, not to eat of the fruit of that tree. In this tree of knowledge of good and evil man had the sight of
himself in the exercise of his natural life and operations apper∣taining unto him as he became a living soul; in the well or evi use whereof he might arrive unto the experience of the su∣pream good held forth to him as the end of his creation, the endless life that was to follow; or else he might come by the forfeiture of the present good he enjoyed, to know the evil of a much worse condition then at first he had: for the avoi∣ding of which, and to continue in a posture meet to receive the other, God required him in the state of innocency to abide in a waiting frame of spirit, as a sojourner and stranger in the midst of his present enjoyments in the earthly Paradise, that so through his patient forbearance from taking up his Rest, or terminating his delight in seen things, he might preserve in himself an unengaged, unprejudiced spirit to what was yet be∣hind of the counsel of God to be communicated to him, as to a more excellent attainment and inheritance to be exhibited to him in the light of the approaching day of the Lord, the beamings forth whereof, as considered in type, were already present.
CHAP. VI. Concerning the fall of man, the steps and de∣grees to it, with the bitter fruits and con∣sequents thereof. BY what hath been said of mans Creation, it is undeniable that God made him perfect, though the perfection of his estate was muta∣ble or subject to change, and therefore not the Rest from all eternity designed him by God: so that man in this first perfect state had that still wanting which was the finishing and compleating work to what he at present enjoyed: howbeit, that which was wanting unto man, did no way cause or necessitate his fall: but that (as we shall shew) proceeded from the suggestion of Sathan and enticing of his own lust; which lust when it had conceived, brought forth sin: and sin when it was perfected brought forth death; although man in this estate was well and sufficiently armed and provi∣ded against it, if he had followed the directions given him by God. For in this natural constitution of spirit, soul and body, which man obtained by creation, his understanding, will and affections were all placed in their true rectitude and proper subordinations; his rational and his sensual mind were set in right tune and harmony together, disposed and fitted to the bringing forth of all manner of righteous and holy operati∣ons answerable to the image of God wherein he was created: which contained as much of divine light and manifestation, as
man, in his earthly capacity and first make, could take in; amounting but to a shadowy representation of Gods mind, and a sight of it, but in part; in order to prepare him to re∣ceive more, by a second and new creation on the seventh day, when he should have been admitted within the veil, to have be∣held Gods very similitude open, and bare-faced, conversing with him as friend speaks with friend. Now man (being thus furnished with a reasonable soul and all the excellencies of its operations before described, with freedom of will to choose the good and refuse the evil, honoured also with a soveraignty over the creatures) in this fair posture of preparation to receive more, was nevertheless seduced, ensnared and made a prey of by Sathan, sin and death, to the rendring (as it were) abortive all that work which was already passed upon him, and to the letting in of sin and death, with the deserved curse and wrath of God, through him, as through a door, upon all his posteritie. The occasion of this was twofold: First the present enjoy∣ment of good from God under the ministry of the first cove∣nant, the fruit of which, to the eye of flesh and blood even at its best, was so glorious, and appeared so beautiful and desire∣able, that man was easily perswaded that it was the best and highest attainment hee needed to look after; and thereby, through Sathans subtilty, rendred secure and negligent as to the use of means given by God to carry him on, pass him through and conduct him out of this his corruptible state, as from glory to glory, into the power of an endless life (without the intervening of sin) to the full and perfect securing of mans nature from all prevailing power of fins assaults for ever; which was not done by creation. The second occasion of mans fall, was the freedom of his will, wherein the judging and desiring faculties of his mind were entirely committed by God to his own free motion and operation, upon the terms of the covenant he was brought into with God; which was, to be dealt with according unto his works, to be rewarded with life or with death, as he should
rightly order or abuse this liberty of action with which God had invested him by way of tryal and probation. That man had such a power of free-will as this, First, the nature and tenor of the Covenant he was taken into, doth demonstrate; which is conditional in reference to the works of man; And God throughout deals with man under that Covenant according to his works, strongly there∣by asserting them to be mans own; so as the very reward which comes thereby, is accounted to him of debt, even the thing which his own action (as left alone unto himself there∣in) hath brought upon him, and entitled him unto. Secondly, without such a power of free-will, mans first estate could not have been mutable, at least could never have changed into corruption; for if it had been necessary to him to have stood, he could not have fallen; and if it had been necessary to him to fall, God had thereby made himself the Author of sin, which could not be. Now the power itself wherein mans free-will consisted, was the free use and exercise of his judging and electing power of mind, either in reference to good or evil, as it should be presented to him, and come before him in a way to be by him decided and determined as his deliberate act and resolu∣tion, which Paul calls, 1 Cor. 4. 3. mans judgement, or mans day. Adam had then this honour given him by creation, to exer∣cise his humane judicature, or mans day, not only upon all the works of Gods hands already made in the six daies, and pre∣sented before him in Eden the garden of God; but he had also as in prospect and contemplation, what was yet behind and to come: both which being the object or subject matter that Adam was to pass his judgement upon, God was pleased by way of precaution and premonition to forbid him to fix his eye and his desire upon things seen, which are temporal and fading; there being a reserve of unseen things, as an enduring substance, to be imparted and communicated to him on the seventh day. That which Adam was forbidden, was not simply to for∣bear
the use of his free-will, but the evil and unlawful use of it, as (through an unwise discerning, and erroneous judging between the present temporary good which he saw, and the future durable excellency of the things unseen, and but in hope) there did spring up an inordinate coveting and desire in him after the retaining of the first, to the despising and re∣jecting of the second; preferring the vision of God in part, and as under a vayl, before the full and compleat view of his glory unvayled. To induce man unto this, the Serpent employed all his power and subtilty, contributing all the influence he could from his and the fallen Angels example herein; which (to∣gether with the aptness in the natural desire of man to be en∣ticed this way to serve his own belly, rather then the Law and Command of God, and to gratifie his natural appetite, rather then shew his obedience to Gods voice) did prevail with him to eat the forbidden fruit, whereby the door was set open for sin and death to enter upon himself and all his poste∣rity. That which remains yet to be declared on this subject, is the possibility which Adam had in the state of innocency, to have made a right use of his free-will, so as thereby to have done what God required him to do, by the first Covenant. And (by the way) when we speak of this Covenant in refe∣rence to the state of innocency, it is to be understood for the same thing with the law of nature, under which Adam was created, and hath this difference in it from what it was after∣ward (when dispensed by the name of the Law under Moses ministry, and called, Heb. 9. The first Testament; receiving its renewal from the blood of Christ) that as it is the law of na∣ture, it requires mans personal righteousness and holyness to be continued in, even the preservation of mans nature in the sinless state wherein he was created, as the condition of keep∣ing up and maintaining that sort of union and communion between God and him; though not therein to rest, but to be ready to be carried on by God into a sure, unmovable and fix∣ed
state of life, from whence there is no possibility of falling: Whereas the same Covenant, as it is the Law or first Testa∣ment, though in effect it requires the same thing of man, yet it is in reference to the sacrifice of the Redeemer, by the vertue of whose blood the Covenant is not only renewed, but kept from being broken, until through wilful provocati∣on there remain to man no more benefit by that sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. 26. That then which was possible for Adam to have done in the state of innocency, was so to have made use of the power given unto him by his free will, as to have walked faithfully with God, according to the light he had received; and there∣in to have abode in the earthly Paradise of his sinless nature, as Christ commanded his Disciples to do in the earthly Je∣rusalem, until the further effusion of the Spirit, or pouring out of the Holy-Ghost upon them: which further ministry was figured out unto Adam in the tree of life, and the true Rest reserved by God yet to be more fully revealed unto him on the seventh day, when the marriage union between Christ and him upon the terms of the new and everlasting Covenant, was to have been contracted and celebrated; whereof the institution of Marriage in the beginning, was also unto him an earthly figure. So that this we say as the result of all; That by the power of pure and incorrupt nature in the first Adam, he could never have wrought himself into the state of salvation, nor have entred into the true Rest, or procured an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, this being reserved to the work and power of faith, that was yet to be revealed to him, as the means to tran∣slate him out of his holy, corruptible and mutable state of the first Covenant, into the most holy, incorruptible and im∣mutable state of the second and everlasting Covenant; and this without sin (or forfeiture of the good he had in present possession) to the advantage of himself and all his poste∣rity. But if it be here objected, That if the power of nature
could not do this, it could do nothing, and was of little avail to Adam; the Answer is, It was of great profit and avail to Adam, if he had made the right use thereof. For first he might by the power thereof, have kept out the entrance of sin for the present, until by being armed with a higher & greater pow∣er, he might have for ever shut the door upon it and excluded it. Secondly, he might have preserved in himself an unenga∣ged and unprejudiced spirit against the approaching dawnings and breakings forth of further and higher light; and in that ready, silent, waiting posture, have diligently attended upon the means that were to be exhibited to him on the seventh day to lead him into rest; which was the further preaching and holding forth of the Word of life by the voice and ministry of Gods second appearance, which did bring its own saving power along with it, to have begotten that preci∣ous faith in Adam, that should have interested him in those precious promises, whereby he might have been made partaker of the divine nature, and have had the power given him to have become the Son of God in the new Covenant through be∣lieving, and so heir of that salvation which by nature could not be obtained. But Adam neglecting the opportunity by God put into his hands, and hearkning to the voice of his wife, and seduce∣ment of the Devil, did justly fall under Gods displeasure, and was made a sad spectacle thereof in himself and in his po∣sterity, who are now by nature children of wrath and disobedi∣ence, a habitation of Devils, a hold of every unclean spirit, and Cage of every unclean and hateful bird; yet not left in such a desperate state, but that by the blood of Christ there is re∣mission of sin to be obtained, and a restauration capable to be wrought out.
CHAP. VII. Shewing, that God on the seventh day ended the works which he had made, and produced the Rest and fixed estate appointed to the first creation; which Christ the Mediator, as he is the Minister of Gods second appea∣rance, is the Author and Accomplisher of. THis Sabbathism or Rest of God was a state of glory and exaltation, which was remaining un∣to the first works (whereof the principal are men and Angels) to be made partakers of, and into which they were capable to be led and ta∣ken, or from which to be denyed and excluded, as in righte∣ousness they should be judged by God, to have rendred themselves worthy or unworthy by the deeds done by them in the natural body or state of life. The extent and latitude where∣of as to men, is declared by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15. where he comprehends under that term the whole life and operati∣on of the natural man as he is a living soul, in comparison with the whole life and operation of the spiritual man or hea∣venly Adam, as he is made a quickning spirit, and contains in him this glorious change under the term and expression of the spiritual body or heavenly image to be wrought out in man, through the resurrection from the dead, in conformity to the perfection or glory of this last Adam. This change, as well in reference to Angels and men, as the
rest of the creation (which are also to be brought from under the bondage of corruption, by the means hereof, into the glorious liber∣ty of the sons of God) is the effect of the ministry of Christs second appearance, which hath been in operation from the be∣ginning, dispelling the night, which did precede it, which is now far spent, so as this day of the Lord is at hand, ready to be revea∣led in the compleat victory and conquest it hath obtaind over all the opposition and resistance, with which Angels and men have gone forth against it from the time of their first defection from God, unto this day. That which in this place is proper for us to treat of in re∣ference hereunto, is only to shew what change might & would have been wrought upon the righteous and holy beings of angels and men by the influence and power of this second ap∣pearance of God in the face of the Mediator, actually shining forth on the seventh day, if the fault had not been in them∣selves: by reason whereof, instead of this glorious and blessed change, they brought upon themselves a state of sin and death, wherein by the power of this all-searching light and presence of Christs second appearance, they were detected, convinced, judged and condemned. The effect which is produced by the power of Christs se∣cond appearance upon the natural body or first constitution of being in Angels and men, is called in Scripture a new creation (and doth indeed require the putting forth of an exceeding mighty power, Eph. 1. 19. for the effecting thereof; even beyond (if it were possible) that that was declared and exercised in the first creation or the making of all things out of nothing) which consists in a change and translation that is given unto Angels and men in the beings they have already received, through the power of a resurrection; wherein their first beings are not annihilated, but altered and made other then they were at first, as they are rarified, exalted and made to receive by way of su∣perinduction, a better and more excellent form and glory, in harmony with which, they are so far from losing what they had, that they receive their own again with usury. Therefore
it is described by the putting off the old, and putting on the new, without being found naked or destitute of the being and righte∣ousness they had. In it old things indeed pass and are done away, as they are corruptible and mortal, standing single upon the first root: but they are brought forth and restored again, upon a new account, without having totally or finally ceased to be; as it fares with the natural body, in the lowest and most literal sense it can be taken in; it is not so properly new created at the resurrection as raised up and exalted into a better tenure and exercise of the same life and operation, then at first it had, as is evident in the body of Christ himself, giving the demon∣stration thereof fourty daies together, whilst he was upon earth, between his Resurrection and Ascention. This is the END which comes and takes its place, after that to the natural eye of Angels and men, all things appeared to have had their finishing, by reason of the good estate of being, which they judged themselves to be already brought into, and in possession of: And indeed this was so truly and really a state of good and of perfection in its kind, that God himself acknowledged it to be such, by a general approbation of all those first works of his hands. However, as good as it was, it was mutable, fading, wearing off, and vanishing away, in the prin∣ciples of its natural body, and first visible constitution, as it is said, Heb. 1. 10. 11, 12, Thou, Lord, in the beginning, hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands. They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they all shall wax old as doth a garment; and as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: evidently asserting the change they were subjected unto by God from the beginning: not (as we may say) willingly but in hope, or in reference to a bet∣ter state of being intended of God through this change to be brought upon them by Christ, considered in his second ap∣pearance, sitting on the Throne, as is in the same chapter de∣clared, ver. 8, 9. unto the Son he saith, Thy throne O God, is for ever and ever; a scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy King∣dom; thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity: therefore
God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladness above thy fellows. So that it is not without cause, that the A∣postle Paul saith 1 Cor. 15. that the natural body is sown in cor∣ruption, in order to be raised in incorruption. Where corrup∣tion signifies no more then that mutability or changea∣bleness which the first creation was sowen in, in its inno∣cent and good estate of being, capable to be made better by being clothed upon with what is more excellent, or to de∣cline and sink down into a sinful corruption and in that to become unchangeable, in which as in chains of darkness, the wicked are detained unto the judgement of the great day: no more place or change or repentance being left unto them. And in this, as in one chief particular, the weakness of things in the natural body or first creation doth appear (not∣withstanding the good and perfection it was set up in) which was common and universal to all that was made in the six daies. But secondly, there was a faultiness and weakness, which the Scripture acknowledges incident to this innocent state, which properly and only refers to Angels and men (as made under the first covenant) respecting the operation of their minds and inward powers, wherein they were fitted and pre∣pared for meetness of converse with God, under that cove∣nant: which faultiness is spoken of, Heb. 8. 7. 8. in the case of men: which compared with Jude ver. 6. shews that the An∣gels also were comprehended under the same. This faultiness sprang up partly from the terms of the first covenant requiring the creatures continuance in all things commanded, under pain of the curse: which terms though good and just to be imposed by God upon them, yet were capable of being ill made use of by the creature; as it is said, 1 Tim. 1. 8. The Law is good, if a man use it lawfully; importing, that what was good in itself, and in its first institution, might by the unlawful and contrary use made of it, become evil to them who so abused it. 2ly This faultiness sprang up also from the creatures weak∣ness,
as not long able to bear the glory of its first state with so∣briety of mind, occasioned by the good and perfection already received, which it thought could never be valued at too high a rate; so that it judged itself enabled thereby to do all that God required and commanded, in the wisdom and sufficiency already communicated and imparted to it; which weakness and mistake in the creature was not caused by its creation, nor came necessarily from it, but occasionally and accidentally, by the creatures voluntary overvaluing and over-trusting in the strength and power received, putting more stress upon it then was meet, and putting it to other use then God intended it. Whence it is said, Rom. 8. 3, 4. what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, it pleased God to fulfil, by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinfull flesh, and for sin condemning sin in the flesh. For through this weakness sin made its entrance, which weakness and faultiness therefore in all the respects before mentioned, was that which God thought requisite to provide against, and supply, by the en∣ding and finishing hand which he reserved to put unto the work he had made on the seventh day, by translating the creature (without the intervening of sin) into that Rest and incorruptible state, which was the true end for which the first creation was brought forth, and unto which it was appointed to serve and be subject, in the changeable condition it was at first set up in, as the means to bring all things into their ever∣lastingly good or bad estate, fore-known unto God from all eternity: who therefore in his wisdome thought meet, that the natural body should be first, and then the spiritual and that the natural body should be sowen in weakness, corruption or mutability, that it might be raised in power and in incorruption, and so be made a spiritual body, and brought into its true Rest, if through the creatures own default it fell not short, & came to be excluded. For though it may be objected; that God, who did eternall, foreknow all events, and who those were that should be everlastingly saved, or everlastingly perish, would seem by this way of his ordering of things in the
first creation, to be very accessory to the sin and fall of An∣gels and men, seeing it was in his power to have made them otherwise, not at all subjected to this weakness; it is very true, God could have made them otherwise; but when both in wisdom and justice, he thought fit to make them thus, who art Thou, O man, that repliest against God? And how unseemly is it for the vessel to say to the potter, why hast thou made me thus? (that is subject to such mutability and weakness, as may end in everlasting contempt and misery?) seeing that God puts no influencing necessity upon thee, either by his decree or otherwise, but leaves thee to the free motion and choise of thy own mind and will herein: and for this very rea∣son made thee a creature indued with free will, that no turn∣ing of the scale towards thy misery and ruine might proceed from him, but from the moving and enticing of thy own hearts lust; which state also ministred occasion to thee by the weak∣ness and mutability thereof, to have looked after that bet∣ter state that was provided and was approaching, even rea∣dy to be revealed, whereby all the faultiness of thy first state might have been remedied, and such a change attained unto, as was more worth then all the hazard and loss that lay in the way of coming to the enjoyment of it, amounted to. The wisdom and justice then of God is very perspicuous in ordering that state of things which by creation was first brought forth, as a preparatory and fore-running dispensation to the glory of the spiritual body, that was to follow and suc∣ceed. And the folly and weakness of Angels and men is ve∣ry inexcusable, that in this estate made so bad use of those gifts and communications of God, so freely received from the hand of a bountiful Creator, as to make him weary of giving more, and repent (as it were) of what he had given already, in that it was so shamefully abused by the receivers thereof, as to reproach the maker, and provoke him to exclude them for ever from the true Rest. Now what this second and more excellent state is, into which the creature is to be translated, may partly be under∣stood
by the opposite weakness and faultiness in the other, that hath been already opened, forasmuch as it contains in it the full cure and remedy thereunto, and in general doth pro∣cure a full redemption unto the natural body, out of its first bondage of corruption and mutability, in all respects, which therefore the whole creature waits for, Rom. 8. 19. but as for the manner and particulars of that glory wherein they shall be brought forth, we are to wait till those times of refreshing that shall come from the presence of the Lord for this restitution of all things do themselves give the explanation thereof in vi∣sible characters. But that which lies most properly before us in the matter we are now handling, is the consideration of what that change is, in reference to the inward, intellectual, and rational powers in Angels and men respectively; who having received at the first, immortal and invisible substances, as hath been shewed, are not in the essential parts of their first constitution to be annihilated, but the Angels are still spirits and flames of fire, and men do still consist of spirit soul and bodie, retaining the powers and operations incident and proper thereunto, after that they have passed by a considerable and irrevocable change, through the resurrection from the dead, into everlasting honour, or everlasting contempt. That the perfection of Angels and men, which was commu∣nicated to them by creation, was mutable and corruptible, is generally confessed and experienced; likewise is it as little to be doubted but that the instability and change in both by their sin and fall did proceed from that freedom of will & pro∣per motion of their own which they were enabled to exercise according to the first constitution and natural frame of their minds and spirits, wherein they possessed an arbitrary, inde∣pendent and free exercise thereof without any interrup∣tion by God, who was pleased to suffer this for his own most wise and holy ends, intrusting them with what they had received, to use and employ it for the glory, and in the service of their Creator, and not to serve their own private lusts and interests therewith.
In this honour and trust received from God, it would well have become as well Angels as men, to have found them∣selves not a little burthened under the straits and difficulties attending the right managing such soveraignty and arbitra∣riness of power, which seems so much above the weakness of meer creature-beings, that until God take them into such in∣timacy of union by the second Covenant, as not to leave them alone in the exercise of this power, they are every mo∣ment subject to miscarriage in the use thereof. God therefore was willing to take a Rise from hence to dis∣cover to the creature the needfulness of its being taken out of this wavering state, and translated into the permanent glory that was to follow; whereby to secure it in the midst of all its present excellency and perfection, from destroying itself by forfeiting and losing all that it had already attained; and to set up in the creature a house and an abiding place for himself, wherein he may rest for ever, Esai. 66. 1. when all things that his hands had made, and are said by him to have been, by virtue of the first creation, came short of so glorious an end and use, as left to themselves, and were by him laid by as unregarded. That then which God had in his eye, and which his heart and regard was set upon, consists in a frame of spirit and mind reserved by him to be brought upon Angels & men, that stood in direct opposition and cross constitution unto this, eminent∣ly shining forth in the crucified spirit of Jesus the last A∣dam, which God by the vertue and means of his death and resurrection, designed to superinduce upon the natural be∣ings of Angels and men, as in the way of a new creation, be∣fore which the old should vanish & wear away. This, Isa. 66. 2. is lively set forth, where, to those expressions, all these things hath mine hand made, and all these things have been, the Holy Ghost subjoyns, but to this will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my word. The like is to be found, Psal. 109. 16. where Judas and such enemies unto Christ are prophesied of, as persecuted
the poor and needy man, that they might even slay the broken in heart. This poverty, neediness and brokenness of spirit, is that which Christ cals blessed (Mat. 5. 3. saying, that theirs is the kingdom of heaven) being ever accompanied with a purity, and a purifying through faith, whereby they come to see God, v. 8. This was that which Christ told the young man was yet wan∣ting to him, that had kept the commandments from his youth, and is the strait gate that all must enter at, that come into the true Rest. This is effected only by believing and partaking with Christ in conformity with him in his death, and is a making of us weak with Christ, amounting in the end to a perfect disenabling of the mind (wherein this spiritual and blessed change is wrought) to exercise that arbitrary, independent, free and proper motion of its own, before mentioned (in the single light and life of the creature-excellency and perfection, com∣municated and enjoyed by the ministry of Gods first appea∣rance under the first covenant) which is apt to puff up, and lead the creature to an unwarrantable boasting and glorying in the first light and voice of God, Isai. 40. 3. the word of the BEGINNING. Heb. 6. 1. without staying for the glory of the word that comes in the end, and is to follow by the ministry of his second appearance: which second voice cries, Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it; surely the people is grass. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth; but the word of our God shall stand for ever. Through this puffing up and heightning property that is in∣cident to the natural frame of mind in Angels and men, so soon as they come to the use of this shadow of divine sove∣raignty, set up in them by the exercise of their own free-will, their lust presently finds something to work upon, and is ready to conceive and bring forth sin: whereas the contrary poor and needy frame of spirit, is set up by God in Christ for the cure and remedy hereunto: by reason whereof as we
may find John 14. 30. when the Prince of this world came, he found nothing in him. The effects then of Christs second appearance, caused by the dawning light of that day upon the natural beings of Angels, are, First, the hiding and covering of their faces, as those with whom God might justly find fault, if they should by any thing they had received glory in his sight: and, Secondly, the sense of the weakness and fickleness of their first estate, and thereupon a waxing weary of the burthen they were under, whilst they were left by God to such an arbitrary independent exercise of mind as they were intrusted with in their operations under the first Covenant: and there∣fore, Thirdly, it did cause them to sing and shout for joy, to see the remedy and cure which was brought hereunto by God, through the power of the Cross of Christ; when they came to discern, that upon this corner stone the foundations of the first creation were fastned, and the instability thereof healed and helped. This they found to be the Lords doing, and it was marvellous in their eyes: the sight whereof they obtained on the seventh day, the day which the Lord made, in which they did rejoyce and were glad, Psal. 118. 22, 23, 24. Here was the joy of the good Angels, when (by the ma∣nifestation of the true Rest, revealed in the face of the Medi∣ator, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world) they came with a holy curiosity to pry into the sufferings of Christ and glory that was to follow; who though he were not yet exhi∣bited but in promise, & seen by them, as subsisting in his head, the word of life: yet by a discerning agreeable to that of faith in man, they had a sight of him as the seed of the woman, that was to come, and knew him to be the Son, by whom God made the worlds, and who was the brightness of Gods glory, and express image of his substance, who upheld all things by the word of his power; and through the sacrifice of himself, was to sit down on the right hand of the majestie on high, and thereby obtain a more
excellent inheritance then they, concerning whom as the first-be∣gotten they had received this charge from God, Let all the Angels of God worship him. So then through faith in the death and Re∣surrection of Christ, as the Mediator, set up from everlasting, the Angels by the power of Christs second appearance came to the sight of the heavenly Image and perfection of the last Adam: unto which they were in their places to bear a con∣formity in the true Mount Sion and heavenly Jerusalem: where the Elect and holy Angels are to have their residence, how∣beit in station inferiour to the Church or general assembly of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven, and who are the Lambs Bride and wife, whilst the Angels are but friends of the Bridegroom, and admitted into the secrets of the Bride-cham∣ber; whose conformity to Christ in this his spiritual body or heavenly Image, changes their natural frame of minde into the like spiritual & heavenly-mindedness with their head, where∣by there is consumed, taken away, wholly removed and abo∣lished, the power and exercise of their first, arbitrary, and self∣disposing property of mind: which now being quitted through voluntary resignation, they have in the room and place thereof, by a translation and engrafture into the spiritu∣al life, will and mind of their head, the life and motion of all their natural powers more excellently then before, in a state of life, incorruptible and unchangeable, being now through∣out partaking and co-operating in a joynt way of life with their head, who before stood single and alone in their natural moti∣ons and operations. Through the refusal and want of this change to have been wrought out in them, the wicked angels fell and set up for themselves, in a fixed enmity and opposition of spirit here∣unto. And this shall suffice to have been spoken, in reference to the change that is wrought out in the good and Elect Angels. In the next place, we are to consider the change that is hereby wrought upon the natural being of man, considered as a living soul, which Adam should have experienced without
falling, this being appointed by God as the only effectual means to bring him into a fixed and durable state, which stability is said, Rom. 11. 20. to come by faith, through the ope∣ration whereof man ceases from the power of standing on his own bottom, for the ordering and directing of his steps, by the motions of his natural mind (which he is enabled to by the first Covenant, considered either as it was first given at his creation, or as since renewed by the blood of Christ) and is made the subject in his understanding and will (now crucified and resigned) wherein God himself joyns in the exercise of this power with him, working in him both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, in stead of leaving it to the good pleasure of man, who nevertheless is a free and willing co-worker with God, in this day of Gods power: whence it appears that Adam fell through unbelief, and for want of being kept in his inno∣cent state through the power of faith, unto salvation: without which the Scripture saith it is impossible for any to please God: no, not for Adam himself in innocency. For though whilst he stood, he did that which was just and right, as the righteous man, Ezek. 18. yet in all this he was conversant only about natural good and righteousness, the acceptation whereof de∣pends upon its continuance, and is such (by way of compari∣son) as renders any acceptable to the Magistrate that keep his laws; whereas the filial obedience that is performed to God through beleiving, answers the very love and compla∣cency of God in a way of intimate friendship, as proceeding from the man that is made after Gods own heart, and is blessed in himself and in his deed. But as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse, as it is written: cursed is every one that continu∣eth not in all things wch are written in the book of the law, to do them. And as thus it was with Adam in his righteous and holy state wherein he was created, so is it since with all those sons of Adam that are of the works of the law, and are made living souls again, in their measure and degree, by the renewal of the first covenant upon them, in the blood of Christ, through which they are brought into that which Jude cals a state of
common salvation, obtained as through the ransom which Christ was made for all, v. 3. and which v. 5. the children of Is∣rael were said to share in, when they were brought by God out of Aegypt, and were made to live unto God, by the first Cove∣nant, Ezek. 16. Deut. 32. Isai. 63. 10. yet many or most of them God destroyed, and was not well pleased with, through their unbelief, having discovered them to be cursed children, in whom was no faith, or who, under all the light received, proved bitter enemies and resisters of the work and voice of the Holy Ghost, calling them to believe and receive the change that was to be wrought out in them, and so enter into Rest. This change is comprehended in the life and perfection of the new creature and glory of the spiritual body or heavenly image of the last A∣dam. For so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickning spirit; and again, it is not circumcision that availeth any thing, or uncircumcision, but that which is required, is to be the new creature, having a new name better then that of sons and daughters by the first cove∣nant: through which we are made pillars in the house of God, never to go out more, and are written among the living in Jerusa∣lem, whose names shall never be blotted out, dwelling on high, even upon a munition of rocks, where bread, even hidden manna is given, and the waters of the sure mercies of David that will not fail. And if we desire to know what this new creature is, it is called faith, that works by love, which faith translates man out of the natural into the spiritual body, and is his new-creature-state, wherein the operative powers of his mind, are so formed as that he is enabled not only to exercise his natural judgement and will in a crucified and resigned frame, in conformity with the dead body of Christ, and as quickned together with him through the Resurrection from the dead, and made incorruptible, but, Secondly, the believer hereby receives a raisedness of discer∣ning and enlargedness of his natural mind, answering that effusion of spirit upon him, surpassing all natural knowledge of the uncrucified mind, causing him to see as he is seen: and
to apprehend that for which also he is comprehended in Christ Je∣sus: rendring him a co-partner and co-heir with Christ in the vision of Gods proper and naked similitude, as admitted to behold the glory that is within the veil; in which capacity, the spiritual seed are the bride and wife of the Lamb, that are called to sit down on the Throne with him at the right hand of the Majesty on high: and who by the means of this their heavenly part, do so influence and quicken their natural, as that thereby they are enabled to sing both the song of Moses and of the Lamb in perfect harmony together, and to do the will of God in earth as it is done in heaven. According to their heavenly part or spiritual capacity they sit down at meat with Christ, in the Fathers kingdom, & in the other they are as them that serve, in a state equal with the holy Angels. This marriage union between Christ and believers, is said Rom. 7. to be their marrying unto him that is risen from the dead, and this through their becoming dead to their first husband the Law: and Ioh. 3. 29, 32, 33. is said to be the hearing the Bridegrooms voice, in what he hath heard and seen from the Fa∣ther, and the receiving that testimony which no man in his natu∣ral capacity receiveth: through which the Saints do set to their seal that God is true, and partake with the Bridegroom throughout in his most intimate communications of glory from the Father, as it is written, Ioh. 17. 21. That they all may be one in us, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee. Thus we have briefly intimated the change, which, by way of a new creation, is set up in Angels and men, through faith in Christ the promised seed, as he is the last Adam, and was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, putting on this spiri∣tual body in his own person as the first fruits of life from the dead: in conformity whereunto every true believer is in his own order clothed upon with the same heavenly image (for as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly) which though they do not so attain as to be perfect therein whilst in the natural body, yet they have the mark in their eye, and are pres∣sing forward for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
CHAP. VIII. Shewing the conviction and judgement that came upon men and Angels for their sin and dis∣obedience, by the shining forth of the All-searching light of Gods second appearance in the WORD; before which every crea∣ture stands naked and discovered. BY what hath been already evidenced in the precedent Chapter, it may appear that they certainly do very much derogate from the glo∣ry of Christ, and proclaim their short-sighted∣ness into his fulness and rich grace, that look upon the coming of the Lord Jesus, the seed of the promise, as an accidental provision only that God had in reserve, in case of the entrance and coming in of sin; ne∣ver considering that through faith in him, sin from the first might and was to have been kept out; and that there was from the beginning no other way, nor name, nor means where, by the creature could obtain a sare, sare, incorruptible and immortal life, but by faith in Jesus Christ, who was from the beginning the right object of faith unto Angels and men, to have lead & translated them into the true Rest & Eternal life, without the coming in of sin between, if he had been re∣ceived and believed on, when he caused his second voice and heavenly testimony to be heard on the seventh day. But forasmuch as the word then preached to them did not profit them,
because it was not mixed with faith, Christ (finding this his testimony thus sleighted and resisted by Angels and men) resorts to the other part of the power that is in this heavenly voice, which is, to judge and condemn in righteousness those that shewed themselves disobedient to it and neglecters thereof. And here behold the goodness and severity of God; severity to them that fell, and fell wilfully, as did the Serpent and the wicked Angels, by plain direct disobedience and down-right opposition to their Head (as also yet further by enticing and seducing man also to his sin and fall) but goodness to man, unto whom he made sin and the judgement declared by reason of the same, to be the occasion in all likelyhood of his and Eves conversion; and the reason is given why God thus distinguished his way of dealing with Angels and men. For the Angels in what they had done, sinned wilfully, moved by their own malice in a self-hardning fixed way, manifestly quit∣ting their Head, and their fellow Angels that followed him to the place whither he looked or intended to go, whilest they forsook and turned off from him. But for Adam and Eve, they were seduced and beguiled as over-reached by the Serpent; wherefore as the Apostle Paul said in the like case, when in zeal he persecuted the Church, The Lord was merciful unto me because I did it ignorantly; so aso the Lord was merciful unto our first parents that were seduced and beguiled by the Serpent, and was pleased to renew his Covenant with them in that blessed and most excellent remedy, the blood of Christs sa∣crifice, whose vertue now appeared to be as well of force to make up and restore what was lost by sin and the fall, as to bring man into a better state then he had at first: which might (as we have shewed) have been done without sins ever en∣tering or making of this breach: and so the instability of those first principles might have been removed, that wavering con∣dition might have been fixed against all the assaults of sin or Sathan whatever, and secured from all danger of mis∣carrying, through the comming of the same Jesus in the flesh
and his entring within the veil by death and the resurrection from the dead, without being exposed to the shameful and accursed part of the death of the cross, which was properly that which was occasioned by the Fall. And although it be the secret counsel of God which makes the true and general discrimination between the objects of his mercy and his severity, wherein he freely hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and shews severity on whom he will shew severity, yet in the revealed and declared dispensation of his will herein unto Angels or men, when he comes to deal and proceed with them either in the way of his mercy and favour, or severity and displeasure, he alwaies observes a method of proceedings with them, most exactly consonant unto his justice, and consistent therewith: so as he proceeds not actually to a final rejection and casting off the vessels of wrath, till they have ripened themselves for the same through their own un∣worthiness and long abuse of his patience, under full and suf∣ficient means of light, disswading and warning the contrary. Nor doth he suffer those that he intends for objects of his mercy, to sin the sin unto death, or to arrive at that height of unworthiness as willfully to resist the light of his love, but alwaies prevents this extremity of sin in them with season∣able discoveries of mercy and manifestations of his free grace: which surely was the meaning of the aforesaid place of Paul when he said, because I did it ignorantly, I found mercy; as much as if he should have said, The Lord in mercy would not suffer me to come to that height of sinning for which he swears in his wrath, those that do arrive thereunto, shall never enter into his Rest: which is, to do that which all those in some sense or other are guilty of, whom God hath determined for ever to exclude from partaking of that union through which only they can enter into the true Rest, forasmuch as they have thereby wilfully rendred themselves unworthy and uncapa∣ble thereof. We are therefore to acknowledge righteousness and truth to be the pillars that bear up the judgements and determina∣tions
of God in his most secret counsels, when from all Eter∣nity he predetermines and designs Angels and men to their use and service in his house, either as vessels of honour or disho∣nour, as objects of his love or hatred. For God is true and righte∣ous altogether, and will appear and be found so when he is judged, and when he comes to declare and lay open the grounds of his proceedings toward his creatures, shewing himself wil∣ling to be argued with concerning the same: but however the secret of these things belongs to God who is best able to give his own account of them in his own time: yet what he hath already revealed, and so made appertaining unto us, to cast our eyes upon, we may and ought to take notice of, the better to settle our minds in duty and subjection unto him who is the Father of our spirits. This then he gives us to understand, that he hath supplied and provided against the faultiness and waveringness of the crea∣tures standing by the first covenant, in the seventh daies rich grace that was to follow; so that what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God by giving the promised seed in the light and power of the new and second appearance, fulfilled that which the first was not able to carry through, by reason of the weakness of the flesh, or readiness which is in all natural beings to prefer the light and glory of Gods first appearance before his second, and to refuse the hard condition which appears to flesh and blood in the observation of the duty of the true Sabbath, or cessation from its lawful works, when ever it is called thereunto: though the penalty annexed in case of wilful refusal and disobedience, be the utter exclu∣sion of the creature from the blessed end for which it had any being given unto it at all. Upon this consideration it is, that God who from all eter∣nity doth foresee all things, and foreknow how universally all Angels and men will conclude themselves under sin, and do as much as in them lies, utterly to exclude and debar them∣selves from the priviledge and mercy of that manner of conversing with him and enjoying of him, which is accepted
and well pleasing unto him) doth fore-determine within him∣self those Angels and men by name, that shall taste of his free mercy and love, notwithstanding all they do to make them∣selves unworthy thereof, resolving, not to suffer them to de∣stroy themselves by their own will, but to apply an effectual remedy to them, whereby they shall be saved to the utmost. And for the others, known also to him by name, he doth de∣termine not to shew them the mercy and kindness which he is pleased of his bounty to afford his Elect; but upon condition, leaving them to the righteous rule set up in the first Covenant, to be proceeded with, according to their works. Wherein notwithstanding he is pleased of his own free accord and good will, to give them all the helps and means incident to that dispensation, that are requisite to en∣able them to the discharge of such a condition: shewing there∣by, that he takes no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. So that God having thus given a righteous rule to all, which neverthe∣less would be fulfilled by none, through their own voluntary default: if he left all to stand or fall by that, he did none any wrong. And who is there now that can reply against God, for freely doing with his own what he himself pleaseth? and for distributing that which is matter of his love and free bounty, upon whomsoever his own good pleasure leads him to? In pursuance of these eternal decrees was the righteous judgement of God revealed from heaven against the Serpent, and upon fallen Adam and Eve: exactly answering unto what was contained in the books or law of the first and second Co∣venant, set up in the person of Christ, declaring wrath and se∣verity against those that were found despisers of the riches of his goodness, and after the hardness and impenitency of their hearts, had been treasuring up, of wrath against the day of wrath: but shewing mercy to those that sinned ignorantly, and were beguiled; setting before them the sight of the son of man that was to be lifted up upon the Cross, and have his heel bruised by the Serpent,
that whosoever believeth upon him, should not perish but have ever lasting life. This Christ did, First, by revealing himself to them, as he that was to de∣scend out of that state of glory wherein he now lived in and with the Word of life, and was to be made flesh, or the seed of the woman, by being born of a woman, and made uuder the law: in which state he was to be subjected to the death of the Cross, and to the enduring all that could be brought upon him from the power of the devil or his instruments, for the bruising of his heel, the putting of him to death in the flesh. Secondly, by declaring the woman (as he was to be her seed) the mother of all living, or rather by manifesting him∣self to be him that was to spring up out of her womb, to be the new root, seed and head to all living, or of all natural and spiritual life that was to be derived to the whole creation of God, upon a new account and tenure, the first having failed, and being through sin and disobedience lost (so as the whole fabrick thereof might have been dissolved and sunk down into ruine and desolation) if Christ now, made this seed of the woman, had not born up the pillars of it, by vertue of his becoming the first born from the dead, and had not sent forth his spirit upon the face of the first world, to renew it again upon the terms of the first Covenant into fellowship and communion with God, as well as from his spiritual headship derived life and being unto his Church, the spiritual seed, in and through whom, he was to make warr with the devil & his seed, & perfectly to overcome them. Christ therefore, as the head and root unto both these seeds, (as well that by the law and renewal of the first co∣venant through the blood of his Cross, as that by promise and the making or constituting the new covenant in the vertue and power of the same blood) is preached and held forth unto man, in the work of the seventh day, as the free and volun∣tary workmanship of Gods hands, wherein Adam had cause to rejoyce, when the works of his own hands miscarried and failed, Psal. 82. 5. For this is the Lords doing, and it is marvel∣lous in our eyes: this is the day the Lord hath made, we will rejoyce
and be glad in it, Psal. 118. 23, 24. even to see the stone which the builders refused, to be made the head-stone of the corner, ver. 22. both Lord and Christ: Lord of the first creation, and Gods anointed one, made higher then the Kings of the earth, in his spi∣ritual head-ship. This day is the day-spring from on high, that may seem to have visited our first parents, to make them Children of the day and of the light of Gods new creation on the seventh day: who else were like to have sunk irrecoverably into the lower∣most hell by their works of sin and disobedience, in a manner as soon as they were created. And as a type or figure of these two seeds, the natural and spiritual, springing both of them up in the beginning from the same womb, Cain and Abel are recorded for us to take notice of: who for a while, were both worshippers and servants of the true and living God, approaching unto him by sacrifice, in testimony of their owning and relying upon the blood of Christ; but the one doing it without faith (though he were a man gotten from the Lord) acting only upon the account of a life derived from Christ as head of the natural man, and restoring him to the exercise of the same life in kind (upon the tenure of the first covenant which was conditional, Gen. 4. 7.) which Adam had before his fall: the other doing it through the obedience of faith, Heb. 11. 3. or participation of that higher and better union with God in the new and everlasting covenant, for which he was envied and hated by his brother; who by taking in a bitterness and enmi∣ty from the devil against Abel the seed of the promise, became thereby the seed of the serpent, whose latter end was worse then his beginning, and who proved the subject wherein the first enmi∣ty was managed by the natural and fleshly worshipper and servant of God, against the true spiritual worshipper, and son and heir of eternal life: and who in that state of fleshly life, was permitted to rule over his brother, and bring him into sub∣jection unto him, as to the exercise of worldly power, as it is written: unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him, Gen. 4. 7.
Unto both these seeds, Christ, as the Redeemer and Saviour prophesyed of, to come into the world and be born of a woman, is, in his own person, the begetter and deriver of life. And both come as worshippers of him by sacrifice, for cleansing and perfecting their consciences, and maintaining union and communion between them and God, which through the fall was lost. And he that is thus prophesyed of, as one to come, Mich. 5. 2. is also prepared and set up from everlasting (His goings forth having been of old) though he takes occasion by the fall of man to reveal himself more fully who is the WORD that hath been heard from the beginning, and hath caused the sound of his voice, and the power of his Rule and domi∣nion to go forth and be obeyed, from the rising of the sun to the set∣ting thereof, in all ages. For the government of Angels and men is upon the shoulders of this great Councellor and Prince of peace; Who as he had the bounds of his Kingdoms, and the confines of his dominions set out by the Father from all Eternity: so was it now high time to declare himself in the administration and exercise thereof, upon this foul miscarriage of the fallen Angels, with all mankind in Adam, and to shew himself to be He that is the possessor of all power in heaven and in earth, and that hath the chief administration thereof. This is he spoken of, Isa. 49. 2. whose mouth the Lord hath made like a sharp sword; who was hid in the shadow of his hand, and as a polished shaft in the quiver of the living WORD, before the Lord called him from the womb of the virgin, and from the bowels of his mother, ver. 1. and to whom God said, ver. 3. &c. Thou art my servant, whom I have raised up in righteous∣ness, and in whom I will be glorified; Ask of me and I will give thee the utmost ends of the earth for thy possession: for it is a light thing for me that thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel, I will also give thee for a light unto the Gentiles that thou maist be my salvation to the ends of the earth. Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee (who, as a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, was with God) and
I will preserve thee, and give thee as a covenant of the people: to establish the earth, and cause to inherit the desolate heritages: to say to the prisoners, go forth; and to them that are in darkness, shew your selves: to give bread to them that are hungry, and waters freely to them that thirst: for he that hath mercy on them, will lead them, even by the springs of water will he guide them, and he will make all his mountain a way, and his high way shall be exalted. Be∣hold these shall come from far, and these from the North and the West, and these from the Land of Sinim. Thus is this polished shaft that is hidden in the shadow of his hand, and in the quiver of the Living WORD, provided from the beginning, with all the power of a mighty Saviour and compleat Redeemer, and is bringing of it into exercise upon the first occasion, promising the familiar and plain discovery of himself, to the very outward as well as the inward senses of man, by the Words being made flesh, and born of a woman, whereby that which was in the beginning, might be heard with our ears, seen with our eyes, & handled with our hands, of the WORD of life which was with the Father, and who from the Creation downward, during Moses his ministry, was spoken to the Fathers by the Pro∣phets, at sundry times and in divers manners, till at last he came himself to speak in his own person: through whom, as in A∣dam all died, all are again revived and made to live.
CHAP. IX. Concerning the Words being made flesh, for the performance of the whole will of God, in reference to mans redemption and salvation. THE WORD in the sense here treated of, is not to be understood simply, as he is the second in the Trinity, but as he is also the root of David, the ancientness of whose dayes is spoken of, Dan. 7. 13. whose goings forth were of old, and from everlast∣ing, Micah 5. 2. in order to come forth unto God, a Ruler in Israel, by his being made flesh, and so is as well the root as off-spring of David, in the same blessed person of the Mediator, Rev. 22. 16. having power in the fulness of time to bring forth his servant the BRANCH, Zech. 3. 8. or to bring forth himself in the form of a servant, as he is that righteous BRANCH, Jer. 23. 5. which is promised to be raised up unto David, to sit upon his Throne. Christ, as he is the root of David, and head unto both crea∣tions, is the WORD that was in the BEGINNING, the image of the invisible God, the first born of every creature, and first begotten from the dead: in which mysterie, that from the be∣ginning hath lain hid in God, all men are called to see and know what fellowship is to be had for them, by means of the union that is between the man Christ Jesus and the WORD, between the ROOT and this BRANCH of the Lord, Isa. 4. 2. which is beautiful and glorious, and whose very earthly fruit is excellent and comely to them that are escaped of Israel.
Hereby that which was from the beginning kept as a secret, is now made the object of open and familiar converse; even that which we have heard which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the WORD of life; (for the life which was in the WORD, was there the light of men) which as a mysterie or secret with the Father does by becoming the BRANCH, make it self manifest unto men, in their particular beings, so that they see it and bear witness, and shew that eternal life, which was with the Father, before the world began, but is now made manifest unto us by the appearing of Je∣sus, our God and Saviour, God manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. Here we find the progress of this great mysterie of godliness, for the making it self manifest unto Angels and men, by the means of Christs incarnation, life and death in the flesh, and final taking up into glory, through the power of the resurrection from the dead. And as this Jesus in the dispensation of the fulness of time appeared and descended into the lower parts of the earth; So we see that he had a heavenly place in his head and root, where∣by he was found in union with the WORD of life before the world began, lying hid in God, and was even then as a polished shaft in this quiver of the WORD, ready to be sent forth as the servant, the BRANCH, in his proper sea∣son. This union, though it was mystical, heavenly and invisible, yet it was so real and influencing, that the BRANCH may truly be said to have lived in this his root, the Father of Spirits, as properly as the seed of the first Adam may be said to have lived in the loyns of him their common parent, who was the Father of the flesh. Christ the BRANCH, considered as thus living in his root, is said and accounted in Scripture phrase, to act, live and perform all that which was the action, life and performance of the WORD. For by Jesus God is said to create all things, and to make both worlds: who is said also to be before all things, and in all things to have the preheminence.
And in this heavenly place of residence and abode, which Christ the BRANCH hath in his root, the whole spiritual seed, Eph. 1. 3. are blessed with all spiritual blessings from the foundation of the world, and received grace before the world began, 2 Tim. 1. 9, 10. forasmuch as Christ had the same union then con∣tracted between his humane nature and the WORD of life, vertually and radically, which afterwards by the incarnation flowed forth actually, to the making of him, not only a living soul, after the pure image of the first Adam, but a quickning spirit, as the original pattern unto the heavenly and spiritual seed of himself, the second Adam. This praeexistent union between Jesus and the WORD, before the WORD actually was made flesh, Christ asserts up∣on several occasions: as John 3. 13. where he saies, No man a∣scended up into heaven, but he that descended, even the Son of man which is in heaven; that is, in his head and root, where, as a mysterie, he lay hid in God before the world began: interpreted thus by himself in effect, John 6. 62. when he saies, What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? like∣wise, Phil. 2. it is said, that he that was found in the form or WORD of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, made himself of no reputation, and was found in fashion and ha∣bit as a man: as if to come forth as the servant the BRANCH, were rather a diminution then advance to him (simply considered) who was before in that exalted state where he though: it no robbery to be equal with God. And John 8. 58. he asserts this ancientness of his daies unto the Jews, say∣ing unto them, before Abraham was, I am; and Mat. 22. 42, 43, 44, 45. he unriddles this mysterie to them; where he affirms that he was as well Davids root and Lord, as Davids son and off-spring; saying, that so he was acknowledged by David himself, when he was seen unto him in spirit, as the Mediator, called Lord, unto whom God the Father spake, Psal. 110. 1. where tis said, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stool; which expression can no way suite or agree with the second person in the Trinity, sim∣ply
considered, but must necessarily be understood of the Lord, the Mediator, the WORD of life, as he is the first born of every creature, and first begotten from the dead, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, to whom, as risen from the dead, the right hand of God is most fitly to be assigned. This witness is also given by John Baptist, John 1. 30. when he saith, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me; for he was before me: the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world; both as he is the root and the BRANCH: in the former capacity as the root, he became the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. 8. In the other capa∣city, as the BRANCH, he was carried as the Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before the Shearers, Isa. 53. 7. in the dayes of his flesh. For though what is said, Heb. 9. 27, 28. (As it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judge∣ment, so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many) may seem strongly to confine the death of Christ to his offering up in the dayes of his flesh, so as to exclude the other; yet if this be compared with v. 26. it will appear to be so far from exclud∣ing, that it rather asserts it, by shewing how both these do well stand and consist together: For (saith the text) he must then often have suffered since the foundation of the world; taking that for granted which was performed before or from the foun∣dation of the world, in his mystical and heavenly state, as he was Davids root: But now, once in the end of the world, hath he appeared, to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. That which he did after an invisible manner, in his heavenly and mystical state, wherein he was the Lamb slain from the founda∣tion of the world: the same thing in the end of the world, he doth in a visible manner, in mans nature, when he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; which sacrifice in his humane nature was but once offered, nor could be, forasmuch as it is ap∣pointed for man but once to die; therefore Christ also in offering up this sacrifice as man, could offer it up but once, as Heb. 10. 12. It is said, But this man (Christ, considered as the BRANCH, or off-spring of David) after he had offered one sacrifice for sins
for ever, sate down at the right hand of God. In which action, he that is the BRANCH and off-spring, ascends up into the glory, wherein he was before as the ROOT, the first born of every creature, and first begotten or beginning from the dead. Indeed Christ by being the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, did but lay the needful foundation and preparation to the one sacrifice, to be once made by him, as man, in the end of the world, for the putting away of sin; So as in effect, both are but one and the same sacrifice in its compleat consideration and full extent, and the obedience also to the will of the Father but one; performed now in earth, as from the beginning it had been done in heaven. Without such a glorious and blessed counsel and contri∣vance of God, preceding the very creation it self, and the en∣trance of sin upon it, how can God be said to have finished his works in the person of the Mediator, from the foundation of the world, and to be entred into his Rest, Heb. 4. 3, 4. if sin by entring in upon the creation or works of God after they were made, should be able to disturb them, and bring a deso∣lation upon the whole Fabrick? as it ought to have been dealt with in way of Justice, if this Lamb slain had not born up the pillars of it; who by standing up in the office of Mediator and High-Priest (by whose sacrifice the atonement was a∣ctually made, and remedy provided, before the evil and dan∣ger did happen) did immediately set all things straight again between God and the works of his hands: judging and con∣demning the wicked Angels for their disobedience, reserving them in chains of darkness unto the judgement of the great day; and taking the holy and obedient Angels into participation and fellowship with himself in the life from the dead, by him obtained and possessed, as the Lord to whom God spake to sit down at his right hand from the beginning, until he made his foes his foot stool: through whom as through a Propitiatory covering, he did look down upon all the works of his hands, and was at rest, and well pleased with them, as wrought in the Mediator, notwith∣standing all that had been done by sin or Satan, to
effect a breach, and alineate his mind from them. Hence, Job 38. 6, 7. it is said, that God fastned the founda∣tion of the first world, and laid the corner-stone thereof, viz. in the person of the Mediator, by way of provision and preparation against all the power of sin and Satan, in their attempts up∣on it. At this the good Angels, those morning stars and sons of God rejoyced, prying into this mysterie, which made them sing and shout for joy: as on the same occasion it is said, Psal. 118. 22, 23, 24. This is the day which the Lord hath made, we will rejoyce and be glad in it: to see thereby the Devil and his Angels disappointed in their wicked designs; who by the bringing in of sin, were in hopes to have hindred the growing up of Je∣sus the BRANCH, that was to spring out of this ROOT: But Davids ROOT, sitting as Lord at Gods right hand, had before obtained that power which was to subdue all enemies, and lay them flat at his foot-stool: Davids OFF-SPRING there∣fore was in no danger of having his course stopped, or race hindred, wherein as a mighty Saviour and Redeemer he was to go forth, and rescue the whole spiritual seed out of the hands of sin and Satan, to bring them unto the true REST, and ob∣tain a gracious reprieve and forbearance for the most obstinate and rebellious also. And as this was the end of Christs coming in the flesh, he is accordingly fitted and qualified thereunto, enabled in every particular to fulfil and accomplish the same. But that we may the more clearly and distinctly understand and come to see wherein Jesus Christ, as man, is made this mighty Saviour and Redeemer unto men, we shall consider this in three chief parti∣culars, all which were the product and consequents of the Word's being made flesh. As first, the seeds and principles of a two-fold holiness and righteousness (formed and set up in the mind of Christ, as he is a man) answerable to both Covenants. For by the Word's being made flesh, the man Christ Jesus was taken into a twofold union and communion with God, through the over∣shadowing of the Holy-Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin; be∣coming
thereby in his own person the substance of both Covenants, Isa. 42. 6. and ch. 49. 8. The true Abraham or Father to both seeds, as well that of the Law, as that of Faith. In both which considerations of his man-hood, he was sub∣stantially or personally united with God, or with the WORD: (he and the WORD making but one Person and one Me∣diator) which no man whatever besides himself is or can be; and by vertue hereof he is qualified both as Priest and Sacri∣fice, to pay that ransom and make that atonement for sin which God required. The first of these unions he had as made under the Law or first-covenant, which produced in him suitable, righteous and holy principles unto the rule and tenor thereof; enabling him to fulfill all that kind and sort of righteousness therein and thereby required and commanded. In respect of which union and the image of God thence springing up in him, and adorning of him, he was truly and properly made a living soul, and in this fashion and habit of a man, was to taste death for every man, as being in a state subjected thereunto, called the natural body, in distinction from the spiritual body. For 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45. there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body, as it is written: the first man Adam was made a living soul, and the last Adam was made a quickning spirit. Through this first union, Christ had an exercise of life as meer man, and in common with all men, sin only excepted, by reason whereof, the workings and operations of his mind, though they were in their kind most perfect, yet were but those of the first Adams righteousness, in the highest purity and perfection thereof. The second union and communion then, which is contracted between the WORD and Jesus the Son of Mary, made him a quickning Spirit, and brought him under the Law of the Spirit, or of the second and everlasting Covenant, as it is written, Isa. 59. 21. Thus saith the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth
and for ever. Through which union, Christ, as man, had the Spirit poured out upon him without measure, and above the mea∣sure, according unto which he was the receiver of it, as he was under the Law (singly considered) as him whom God the Fa∣ther seals, and on whom he confers his new name, or second image, feeding him with hidden Manna, and admitting him into the glory within the veil: setting up in him the exercise of spiritual senses, suited and prepared to converse with the very substan∣tial brightness and similitude of God, face to face, even apparent∣ly, in which Moses was the figure of him, Numb. 12. 8. In this exercise of life, Christ as man, is made higher then the heavens, exalted to a name above every name, far above all prin∣cipalities and powers, having herein obtained a more excellent name and inheritance then the Angels, unto whom nevertheless as he was made under the law, he was made inferiour for the tasting of death. In respect of this his exalted state of humane nature, he is called Gods first begotten, Heb. 1. 6. by reason of whose hypostatical or substantial union with the WORD, the Angels of God are appointed to worship him, and to acknowledge him in this glory, one and equal with the Father, alwaies doing that which is pleasing unto him. The seed of this union and communion was sown in the humane nature of Christ, in the very womb, the former and this both together making up that holy thing born of the Vir∣gin, that child Jesus, who is said to grow in grace and in favour with God and with man (like the vine, whose fruit was refresh∣ing to the heart of God and of man) having the principles and exercise of life springing up in him, that were most suitable & agreeable to the heart of both: being a man of God, after Gods own heart, as well as a righteous and holy man according to the Law, and so agreeing with the pure natural heart of man. In the exercise of this second and new-covenant-life, Christ was enabled to offer up himself in the flesh, through the eter∣nal spirit, as a Lamb without spot and guile unto God, to bring in everlasting righteousness, and that subjection of heart and bro∣kenness
of spirit in man, which God requires by the law of faith or tenor of the second and new-covenant, answering to the law of the new-creature-being and life, whose original pattern was hereby set up in Christ as the first fruits, in that image of the first-born from the dead wrought out in him, unto whom all the rest of the adopted children (whose names are written in the Lambs book of life, from the beginning of the world) were predestinated to be made conformable. Jesus being thus qualified in the same nature and person, even as the son of man, to be as well a high-Priest as a sacri∣fice, proceeds to fulfill the will of his father, that is herein gi∣ven him to do, even to perform that obedience that is re∣quired of him as Surety and Mediator of both Testaments, standing in force by vertue of his death. This obedience is the second general particular which we have propounded to treat of, consisting in the right use and mannaging of those powers and senses of mind, that by the WORD were formed and set up in Christ, for the performance of the will of God, as to all that he required from man in and by the Rule and law of the first and second covenants; the righteousness of both which laws he was to fulsil, even all righ∣teousness; which accordingly he did, as himself declares, Heb. 10. 7, 9. where he saith, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God: and this, by taking away what was faulty in the first covenant, and establishing the good and righteousness of both in the second. For he came not to de∣stroy the Law, but to fulfil it: so as the very righteousness of the Law (which (as upon its first bottom) passeth away as a morn∣ing dew, and waxeth old) is fulfilled in the new-covenant-obe∣dience, by those who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: and was so fulfilled to the utmost, in and by the man Christ Jesus, who as the second Adam, did all that was needful, and which God required to be done for the remission of sin, and the utter abolishing and removal of it out of mans nature, with an absolute incapacity of ever returning more upon the true and right heirs of salvation. In respect whereof it is said,
Rom. 5. 19. That as by one mans disobedience, many (that is all) were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, many (that is all) shall be made righteous: Having that ransom paid, and means provided in him to make them righteous: so that there shall be no necessity remaining upon any to perish, forasmuch as sufficient provision is made to bring all men to repentance, and to the knowledge of the truth: that as in Adam all died, so in this sense all again, in Christ, are made alive, (that is) capable of receiving life from God, upon the terms of one of the two Covenants. For if through the offence of one many be dead, and judgement was by one to condemnation; much more the grace of God and gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath aboun∣ded unto many, to the justification of many offences, v. 15, 16. God esteeming it just, that by the righteousness and obedience which is performed according to his will, by one man, Jesus Christ, the free gift should come upon all men unto justification of life: as well as that by one mans offence and disobedience, death should raign over all. This one righteousness and obedience, performed by Christ, is that which not only answers, by way of satisfaction, unto all that was occasioned, and brought forth by the offence and disobedience of Adam: but where sin hath abounded, grace hath abounded much more; that as sin raigned unto death, grace might raign through righteousness, unto eternal life, by Iesus Christ, the second Adam. Which eternal life, sin shewed it self able to hinder the first Adams attainment of, upon his first principles. The obedience then which Christ performed, we are to consider under a twofold respect. First, that which is usually called his active obedience, whereby he was in his own person legally righteous, and per∣fectly holy, according to the tenor of the first covenant, as made under the Law, and rendred in the natural powers of his mind exactly conformable thereunto. This conformity in Christ to the righteousness of the Law, qualified him to be the Lamb without spot or blemish, which
God required to be offered up and slain as a sacrifice for sin: which conformity may be considered either as inherent in him, qua∣lifying him thus for sacrifice; or Secondly, as coming into actual exercise by the proper activity of his living soul, or na∣tural man, if left alone therein: or Thirdly, as being brought into exercise by the Fathers indwelling presence & teachings, not suffering him to speak or do any thing of himself, or in the single activity of his natural principles, as himself saith, Ioh. 14. 10. The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwelleth in me, doth the works. In which third and last consideration Christ was made active through the exercise of a newness of life and operati∣on set up in him, in the way of faith, flowing from that second seed and union begotten in him by the WORD, as we have already shewed. In which activity he did not only perform the righteousness and obedience required of man by the Law or first covenant, but that also which is required of him by the new & second covenant. Without which second branch of his active obedience there could have been no sacrifice nor shedding of blood, no Lamb slain, nor feast of passover (as it is written 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ is our passover who was slain for us) for there would have wanted the priest or sacrificing power, to offer up the same, according to the will of God declared in the new and second covenant, Heb. 10. 9. For though it be most true, that Christ through the righ∣teousness of the Law, and this considered chiefly as inherent in him, is thereby the pure and spotless Lamb of God, the male of the flock without blemish, which it was needful for him to be, as prepared for sacrifice, and to be offered up, it be∣ing requisite not only to be, but to continue Holy, harmless and separate from sinners throughout the whole course of his life and sufferings in the flesh, yea and in the grave iself not to see corruption (otherwise he had not answered and fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, nor been in his own person legally righteous, such an one as justice it self, upon that ac∣count, could take no exception against) yet this made him
not high Priest, nor qualified him with the power of sacri∣ficer, whereby the spotless Lamb was to be slain (become a pass over, meat, and a supper to feed on, in order to nourish the tru∣believers unto everlasting life) and to have the blood thereof shed, poured forth and sprinkled upon the houses, or hearts of his chosen ones, for God to see, as a token where∣upon he promiseth to pass over them, and that the plague of his eternal wrath shall not be upon them, to destroy them: Exod. 12. 13. Through the sprinkling of the blood of this passover it is then that they shall be secured from that destroying ven∣geance (which overtakes and slaies the first-born, the very chie∣fest dignity of the fleshly and natural seed) that it touch not them or come neer their dwelling, Heb. 11. 28. Hence then we say that Christ was active in the working out another sort of obedience, then that wherein a meer conformi∣ty to the law of the first covenant consists: which stood in his obtaining a perfect victory over the principles of his first acti∣vity, answering to the voice of the Law, which saith, he that doth these things shall live in them; so as by bringing these his fleshly principles into the cessation and rest required by the law of the new covenant, he attains the end for which they were at first given him; arriving at that most neer and intimate union with the Father, which only by faith or the exercise of a newness of life and operation can be attained: in which union God finds his Rest, as well as the creature his, and which is entred into, or fallen short of, by believing or not be∣lieving, Heb. 4. 1, 3. These second sort of works are called, James 2. the works of faith, as the obedience of the second covenant: and in the case of Abraham, are there said to consist in the offering up his Isaac upon the Altar: by which act was declared the power of his faith, as it wrought with his works, and as by works it was made perfect, prevailing with him to present the life of his fleshly seed or first activity in sacrifice upon the Altar; as discovering that so to cease from his fleshly works or activi∣ty in the exercise of that newness of operation, wherein as
by a resurrection from the dead, his first works (though laid (as it were) to rest) were to be fulfilled and established. Thus we see how the activity and workings of Abrahams faith mastered and overcame the workings and activity of his fleshly seed and principles, in the sacrificing whereof God de∣clares himself so well pleased, Gen. 22. 16. that he saith, By my self have I sworn, because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee, and thy seed shall pos∣sess the gate of his enemies, and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice. Abraham then in obeying this voice of God, and not fpa∣ring the life of his fleshly seed and principles, had the bles∣sings of the new-Covenant established upon him, evidenced and confirmed to him upon this act of his faith: all which we are to understand, not as principally relating to the person of Abraham, but Christ the true Father of the faithful (where∣of Abraham in this was but the type or figure) who by per∣forming this condition in himself, did it on the behalf of the whole seed, as surety unto them of the better Testament, establish∣ed upon better promises then the first, Heb. 7. and in this act of his obedience to them imputed, presents them righteous and without blame before the throne of God, and makes them capa∣ble of the blessings belonging to this new and everlasting Covenant. Thus was faith imputed to Abraham for righteousness, that is to say, the righteousness of faith, wrought out by Christ him∣self in his own person (as performing the condition of the new and everlasting Covenant, and so becoming the Father, root or common parent to all true Believers) is imputed unto Abraham in stead of his own personal righteousness (whether that of the Law, or that of his own believing) and exhibited to the eye of his faith as the matter of his Justification, and the sole and only obedience wherein he stands accepted, whereof he hath to glory before God, Rom. 4. as found spotless, and without blame in his sight.
This was conveyed to the faith of Abraham, as in a live∣ly figure and type thereof, in his act of offering up his Son up∣on the Altar. Unto which type or figure, the antitype or truth doth most exactly answer and agree in Christs own sacrifice, when he offered up himself through the eternal spirit, without spot unto God; actually sacrificed the true Isaac, crucifying in him∣self the life of his fleshly seed and legal principles: volun∣tarily laying aside the use and ceasing from the exercise there∣of as single and alone, that in the room thereof he might not only bring into exercise and use the newness of life and operation set up in him by faith, but compleat these cruci∣fied fleshly principles as single and alone in their operations, by bringing them forth again through the regeneration, with greater vigour, beauty and perfection then ever, in subjection to, and harmonious co-operation with the life of faith: to the fulfilling thereby all righteousness, as well relating to the first as second Covenant. This second sort of activity in Christ, flowing forth in new∣ness of life and operation, and becoming perfect through the ceasing of his first, is the exercise of that faith by which he and the whole spiritual seed enter into Rest, fighting through all opposition, to the removing of every thing that lets and lies in the way thereof; and therefore is in Christ the true Abra∣ham or Father of the faithful, offering up the true Isaac or the fleshly seed in Christ, in the principles and activity thereof. In which also he is the true Joshuah, leading the natural man in∣to the true Land of Canaan or heavenly Country, into which the principles of Moses or of the Law could not bring him. In this, as in the performance of the true duty of the Sab∣bath, Jesus our God and Saviour went before us as our example, in thus ceasing from his works, Heb. 4. that we also might not think it much in imitation of him, to be ceasing after the same manner from ours, since we stand obliged to the same Sab∣bath-observation as we desire to enter into Gods rest. Through this working power of faith in Christ, he was
taught this new obedience; suffering himself to be taken off his first activity or works, with so advantageous a change as to have a higher and a better spring of operation set up in the room thereof, through the Fathers witness and teaching; wherein the disability or weakness that is brought upon the first principles and their activity, as to their single exercise, is abundantly recompensed with admission of them, in a sub∣ordinate and subjected way, to be inseparably harmonious co-workers with that second and better activity of faith; which blessed association of these two in the last Adam, is much better then the one that is single and alone in the first, making up of twain that one new man, and new name, which is better then the name of sons and of daughters, in the children of the first Covenant. Hence it appears that Christ in his active obedience did not only conform to the Law, as a legally righteous and holy man, doing the work of a servant in the spirit and life of the Son, fulfilling the righteousness of the Law, by faith: but that he did also perform the proper works required by the Law of the new-covenant, consisting in the holy observation of the true Sabbath, and bringing his fleshly principles into subjecti∣on unto, and useful co-operativeness with his heavenly and spiritual, in the exercise of faith. And so Christs active obe∣dience we see distinguisheth it self into the works required to be done by the first and second covenant. This hath brought us to the second sort of Christs obedi∣ence, which is called passive, as consisting in that wherein he was a sufferer; which also is capable of a twofold considera∣tion. First, in respect of that which he suffered under the power and activity of faith, carrying his natural judgement and will into a voluntary captivity to the teachings of the Father, that trained him up to the doing of his Fathers will, with the denyal or not doing of his own, as properly his, in the activity of his fleshly or legal principles: or secondly, as re∣lating to that, wherein he was made a curse for us, appointed and delivered up by the Father, (though still with his own
consent) to bear the punishment due unto sinners, and per∣form that in his own person, wherewith Gods Justice might be satisfied, and sin expiated, as it is written: by his stripes we are healed; the just is punished, and the unjust is set free. Christ was in the first of these respects, truly and proper∣ly a sufferer, as he that submitted himself to be bereaved and deprived of the exercise of these principles, in and upon the operation whereof (in the judgement of the natural man, as single) depended the performance of the condition of the first Covenant, wherein all mankind was concerned, as it is written: He that doth these things shall live in them: So as the weakness and disability which he suffered to be brought upon himself in this his operation, might seem to be the way to ex∣pose him to the curse and wrath of God, threatned upon non-performance of the condition of the Law, (as it is writ∣ten: Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them) and therefore was hard even for Christs natural man to undergo, costing him many a tear, groan and cry, before his natural judgement was fully silenced and made to yield to it, as gi∣ving full credit to this report of faith, calling for obedience hereunto as to the voice of God, Isa. 53. And as this seemed hard to Christs natural judgement; so nothing was more bitter and cross to the inclinations and desires of his natural will, then to have his natural spirit thus broken, abased, hum∣bled and laid low, in such a poor, destitute and weak conditi∣on as to become a worm & no man; unable to make resistance or defence for himself, by the exercise of that activity that was properly his own, which is hereby taken out of his single dispose, in order to be brought forth in newness of operation, through the power and activity of faith, or the seed and prin∣ciples flowing forth from his second union, wherein he and his Father are one; and the life he lives, and the will he does, is not his own, exercised single, but in conjunction and association with that of the Father. Howbeit, in this we are not to understand the natural man
of Christ as meerly passive, or violently bereaved of the use and exercise of this his first operation and activity: but are to consider him herein, as convinced in judgement, and gained in will, to the forbearance thereof, and cessation therefrom; and so voluntarily submitting his own hands in this regard to be bound, and his feet tyed, upon undeniable reasons, and clear demonstrations to the eye of his faith, of a far greater good to be redounding to him by the same. This Christ asserts, Joh. 10. 17, 18. Therefore doth my Fa∣ther love me, because I lay down my life that I might take it again; no man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self (who might keep it and exercise it if I would) for I have power or freedom to lay it down, and also to take it up, according to the command∣ment which I haveh rein received from the Father, and because I do it in the way of choice, and freely, not by compulsion, there∣fore it is, my Father loves me. Thus also Christ testifieth of himself Joh. 8. where he saith, I am one that bear witness of my self, or I have a principle in me that can declare it self in the proper life and operation of a natural righteous and holy man, as one made under the Law, and walking in all the ordinances and commandments of God therein blameless. Yet saith he, Joh. 5. 30, 31. to come forth in the single exercise hereof, is not my manner of acting; for of my self I can do nothing (or, I am taught by my Father to do nothing, but in association with him) as I hear, I Judge, and I am thereby instructed not to do my own will, or go forth in the single exercise of my first activity, but to seek the will of the Fa∣ther that sent me, even to the offering up in sacrifice my own proper will and desire. For, if I should bear witness of my self, my witness single were not true, or authentique, to make out truth according to your law, which, Ioh. 8. 16, 17, 18. requires two witnesses for the establishing of every truth; therefore saith he, there is another with me in association, that never leaves me to my single actings; and I know that the witness which he gives of me is true, and that the testimony which I give, flowing from that anointing, is truth, in the full and compleat evidence thereof.
That then which in this first sense Christs natural man was a sufferer in, consisted in the weakness and disability which was brought upon the fleshly mind to resist the powerful wor∣kings of his faith or spiritual mind, unto the obedience where of it is voluntarily made captive, as the only way and means to be brought into the Rest and Cessation required by the Fa∣ther; in respect whereof it is that he saith, he can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for whatsoever things he doth, these doth the Son likewise; and so is no loser by this kind of weakness and inability, but rather a rich gainer, experi∣mentally finding that when thus he is weakest, then he is stron∣gest, as brought into such a frame of spirit wherein he is disa∣bled to do any thing against the truth, and thereby qualified to do all things for the truth. This profitable weakness and disability came not all at once upon Christs natural man, but gradually, growing up at last into the perfect Rest and Cessation from his own works wherein the true sabbathism consists; and in which Christ sets forth himself a pattern for his Saints imitation, Heb. 4. 10. This made him say, Joh. 8. 28. when ye have lift up the son of man, then ye shall know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self, but as my Father hath taught me I speak these things, and he that hath sent me is with me, the Father hath not left me alone, but is ever bringing the natural powers and senses of my mind into perfect subserviency and subjection to my spiritu∣al, which through faith are alwaies exercised in unity with my Fathers will, so that I do alwaies those things that please him. In this blessed association consists the life of the new creature, when of twain there is made one new man by the blood of this sacrifice. In this new frame of spirit, and newness of life and opera∣tion, Christ delights to be taken notice of, Joh. 7. 28. where he saith, ye both know me, and whence I am: I am not come of my self, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not, but I know him; for I am from him, and my doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: under the power of whose teachings I am so absolute∣ly
and intirely brought, that I do not so much as speak of my self (much less think or act) for he that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory; but he that seeks the glory of him that sent him, the same is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him. And he it is, Joh. 5. 20. whom the Father loves, and sheweth all things that himself doth, and who will shew him greater works then these, that ye may marvel; for as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickneth them, by his immediate witness in the Son; so the Son quickens whom he will, even the whole spiritual seed, by making them one with him, as he and the Father are one. Thus in this first part of Christs passive obedience, he through the law becomes dead unto the law: through the law of the spirit of life in the second Adam, becomes dead unto the law and life of the first: fulfilling the whole law of righteousness, by being ren∣dred utterly unable to perform one tittle of it in mans first activity and sufficiency, or as left alone to the grace and strength received by the first-covenant principles. Thus we have seen Christ not only as the Lamb prepared without spot and blemish, in order to be offered up, but as he be∣came our passover, actually sacrificed for us, being in one per∣son, as well the priest as the sacrifice, fulfilling the righteous∣ness and conditions of both covenants, in that newness of life and operation which sprang up in him through faith, or the unity of operation he was begotten into with the Father. Through this twofold obedience of Christ (which in him (strictly considered) is but one, as the obedience of one man or last Adam set up in ballance against the disobedience of the first) he was that, and did that in his own person, wherein (after a peculiar manner) he is made of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption unto the right heirs of salvation; and is become the ransom and propitiation for all sinners; not for those only who so believe as that they shall be eternally saved, but for the whole world, as upon the terms of the first cove∣nant renewed in the blood of Christ, they are reconciled unto God, and admitted again into converse and fellowship with
him, that by doing the things therein required, they may live, and so be put upon a new proof and trial whether they will live unto themselves, or unto Christ that died for them and rose again. Righteousness is hereby capable to be deri∣ved, yea, is more or less derived upon all the seed, as well those which are of the law, as those which are of the faith of Abraham (respectively) who is the father of us all, or the type and shadow of Christ, as he is the common parent unto both by his incarnation; through which he had a twofold union wrought out in him, becomming therein the head and root unto both these seeds, and so to all mankind whatsoever, who in one of these two respects are all made alive again in the last Adam that died in the first: and this by the law of the first-fruits and root unto which the Olive branches do respectively refer: for so it is said, Rom 11. 16. if the first fruits be holy, so is the lump; and if the root be holy, so are the branches: where the branches are described as of two sorts: the one such as may be broken off after they are engraffed in, as also John 15. 1. &c. having their union by the first covenant only: the other, those that stand by faith never to be cut off, as having their union by the second and new covenant. Now the first sort of these branches, in right of their union and relation unto their head, Christs natural man or living body unbroken and uncruci∣fied, have one sort of benefit by Christs sacrifice, which is con∣ditional and may be lost. The second sort, in right of their union and relation to their head, Christs crucified natural man, or dead body, have all that the other have, and over and above, an additional benefit by the same sacrifice of Christ (which the others have not) and so the full and whole benefit of his death, and that absolutely and without conditions. This benefit unto each of the seeds from Christ their head is twofold; either such as by way of imputation is their justi∣fication, or such as by way of inherency is their sanctificati∣on respectively; there is derived to the one such a justificati∣on and sanctification as answers in kind to what is required by the first covenant from him who doth those things, there∣by
to live in them: to the other there doth flow such a justifi∣cation and sanctification as answers exactly to the Law of faith or second covenant; unto whom faith is imputed without the works of the Law, singly considered: and in whom faith is operative, to the purifying of the conscience, in conformity to the purity and poverty of spirit, found in Christs crucified and broken natural man. They only that are justified and sanctified in this latter sense, shall eternally be saved: it being out of the power ei∣ther of life or death, or Angels, or principalities, or powers, or things present, or things to come, or height, or depth, or any other creature, to be able to separate them from this love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. But the justification and sanctification recei∣ved upon the terms of the first covenant, which are conditi∣onal and depending upon the creatures continuance, are sub∣ject in a time of tryal to fail the persons concerned therein: unto whom (through the common relation which all man∣kind is taken into with Christ, as he is flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted) there is given (as in a way of common grace and salvation) first, a relative holiness and righteousness (in ballance to the relative unho∣liness and unrighteousness, derived to the first Adams posteri∣ty, as they stood related to him their common parent in his fallen state) which is freely conferred upon them, with offer and promise to bring them out of the bondage of corruption they are in by nature, if they will hear and obey. Secondly, there is an actual exercise of long-suffering and patience put forth towards them freely on Gods part, by ver∣tue of the satisfaction he hath received on their behalf, in the sacrifice of Christ: by reason whereof he declares himself willing not to impute unto them sins past or present, if through obeying Christs voice they shall render themselves capable of such benefit, and shall not by their wilful personal sinning against the grace offered them, and persisting therein, so far abuse the benefit of Christs sacrifice as wholly to ren∣der themselves unworthy thereof.
Thirdly, there is an actual imputation of Christs legal righteousness to all such as obeying his call in the first-cove∣nant, are thereby made the seed which is of the Law, born af∣ter the flesh, and become actual members of his natural body. From what then hath been said concerning Christs active and passive obedience, we may discern how far Christ there∣in wrought out mans redemption, as he stood in the relation of a common person and parent to both seeds, and as their surety, undertook on their behalf, to fulfill the righteousness of both Covenants in himself; and this after such a manner as to be able to derive and communicate the benefit thereof unto them in a way of the Justification and Sanctification re∣quired by either of the two covenants respectively; and this either singly and apart each from other, or joyntly and toge∣ther, to the rendring those righteous in him that were help∣less sinners and wretched ones in themselves. Christs obedience then hitherto treated of (in the two fore∣mentioned branches of his active and the first branch of his passive) though it doth procure all that which is needful to make man righteous and holy, according to what is required by both covenants: yet it is not that properly which expiates the guilt of sin already committed, nor frees from the curse of the Law, in order to which Christ was made a Curse for us, and did bear the punishment due to our sins, which without blood could not receive remission at the hands of Gods Justice, Heb. 9. There is then yet remaining a second part of Christs pas∣sive obedience to be opened, wherein this did consist; and in respect of which, it behoved Christ to suffer as a Malefactor without the Gate, a reproachful, accursed, bodily death, with all the heightning circumstances accompanying the same, from God, Angels and men, to the bruising of his heel, in which al∣so the Scriptures are very plain and express, saying, that up∣on him God laid the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53. who were as sheep gone astray: and 1 Pet. 2. 24. he himself bare our sins in his own
body on the tree: and chap. 3. 18. it is said that he being put to death in the flesh, but quickned in the spirit, hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust: and 1 Tim. 2. 4, 6. Who gave him∣self a ransom for all, as willing to have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Christ by being made thus a curse for us, redeemed us from the curse of the Law; or did that in way of satisfaction to Gods Justice, by reason whereof God thinks fit and finds it just to acquit and discharge sinners from the curse and wrath of God, due unto them by the Law. Which benefit is either renewed to us conditionally, and in reference to the first Covenant∣obedience, by us engaged in to live and be tryed by: or is given unto us absolutely and in reference to the second Cove∣nant-obedience, as living by faith; and interested in the sure mercies of David that never fail. Those that partake of this benefit in the first sense, are spo∣ken of Heb. 10. unto whom (having been once enlightned, and then sinning willfully after the knowledge of the truth, to the tread∣ding underfoot the Son of God, accounting the blood of the Cove∣nant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing, and doing de∣spight to the Spirit of Grace) there remains no more sacrifice for sin; but they fall again not only under the first curse, but the second death, or final ministry of Gods fiery vengeance, which no sacrifice of Christ will be admitted to atone on their behalf for ever, Psal. 49. 8. but like sheep they are laid in the grave for death to feed on; they go to the Generation of their Fathers, and never see light. But those that partake of this benefit of Christs sa∣crifice in the latter sense, have at once a perfect and absolute remission of all sins vouchsafed to them, never to be recalled more, as it is written, Their sins and their iniquities I will re∣member no more. This being laid down, we shall now proceed to shew, first, the particulars wherein Christ did undergo Gods wrath, and was made a curse on our behalf, by way of satisfaction and ran∣some for the sins of all mankind, which properly was our due to
have undergone in our own persons; and secondly, to open the nature of that wrath from God, which Christ was capable of undergoing, and that was thought meet and required by God to be executed upon him, and undergone by him in the work of our Redemption. For the particulars wherein Christ underwent the wrath of God, and did bear the punishment which was due only unto sinners, the Scriptures declare them to be these. First, Christ was exposed as a mark which was aimed and shot at, all the daies of his flesh, by the rage and malice of wicked Angels and men; and as a spectacle of open scorn and reproach, to be trampled upon by his insulting adversa∣ries, as if he had been a worm and no man; unto all which God was thus far contributing, as to suffer it and sit silent as a Spectator, (yea by his providences and outward dispensati∣ons, rather furthering then hindring it;) and this in persu∣ance of his declared mind herein, even unto the Serpent himself, Gen. 3. 15. when he told him (speaking of Christ the seed of the woman) he shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. For the exercise of all this rage of Devils and men against him, did bring to pass no other thing but what his hand and counsel had before determined to be done. For they that dwelt at Jerusalem and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets, they have fullfilled them in con∣demning him. Acts 13. 27, 29. And when they had fullfilled all that was written of him (to be done by them upon him, as in∣struments of vengeance) they took him down from the tree. In all which proceedings of God, Angels and men, Christ the just suffered for the unjust; the innocent and righteous had the due reward of the guilty transgressor; so that he being thus made the punishment for our sins, it seemed good unto God to make us righteousness in him, and to become capable of the reward contained in the promises due unto the same upon the terms of the first or second covenant. Secondly, (whilest thus the wrath and rage of man, in all the circumstances thereof, was as it were armed by God, to
shew it self in open violences and injuries against him) God was also in a more immediate way exercising him inwardly with all manner of desertions and withdrawings of his pre∣sence with the fruits and comforts thereof, from his natural man, denying and with-holding the reward due to him as a righteous and holy man according to the Law; and instead thereof, recompencing unto him the punishment due unto the worst Malefactor: appearing to the eye of flesh and blood in him, and to the judgement and perswasion of him as he was a natural man, in the posture and with the face of an ene∣my, lively declared to be so apprehended by him in those dying words of his, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? which is also most affectionatly and prophetically expressed, Lam. 3. 1, &c. not only in the person of Christ, but also of his suffering Saints, who drinking of the same cup of spiritu∣al desertions and sufferings with him, are those that in a sense also do bear the indignation of the Lord, Micha 7. 9. not by way of satisfying Gods Justice, and atoning his wrath (which is peculiar only to Christ in his own personal sufferings) but as such sufferings are requisite to the bruising of their heel, sub∣duing their natural man to a conformity with Christ in his death, and to the filling up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in their flesh. The Prophet in the place mentioned on this account, Lam. 3. 1, &c. complains after this manner, I am the man (saith he) that have seen affliction by the rod of his wrath. He hath led and brought me into darkness, but not into light. Surely against me he is turned, he turneth his hand against me all the day. My flesh and my skin hath he made old, he hath broken my bones. He hath set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old. He hath hedged me about that I cannot get out, he hath made my chain heavy. Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer. He was unto me as a Bear lying in wait, and as a Lyon in secret places. He hath turned aside my waies, and pulled me in pieces, he hath made me desolate. He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow. He hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my
reins. I was a derision to all my peeple, and their song all the day. He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath made me drunken with wormwood. He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath covered me with ashes. And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat prosperity. And I said, my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord: remembring mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall. My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled, bowed or bruised in me. The remembrance which Christ had (under all this dis∣pensation of wrath from God, to the sense and discerning of his natural man) of what was due unto sinners, and what they had done, to whom he was given for a Head, Surety and Redee∣mer, added (as it were) the sting to all these his sufferings, setting before him the very form and ministry of that wrath from God (which man fell under by reason of sin) contain∣ed in that threatning, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye. Thus we are come to the second thing, which is, to open the nature of that wrath from God, which Christ was capable of undergoing, or that was needful to be poured out upon him, in reference to the work of redemption. Wrath properly is not to be found in the nature of God, simply considered, for God is love; who therefore saith, Fury is not in me: but wrath, as God is capable of exercising it, consists in that posture of an enemy and face of displeasure wherewith he cloths and arms himself in Christ the Mediator, in his intercourse with the creature, Angels or men, as the contrary form, visage and appearance to that wherein he comes forth towards them as he is their God and husband, upon the terms of either covenant, first or second. The ministry of which wrath is exercised therefore by God, in a suitableness to the nature of the covenant it accompa∣nies, and is annexed unto; and accordingly admits of a differ∣ing consideration. For, the ministry of Gods wrath, contain∣ed in the threats of the first covenant, is but temporary and conditional, admitting of atonement, remission and reconcilia∣tion,
by sacrifice, ransome, and intercession: which being pro∣vided, & the benefit thereof obtained and applied, redeems the sinner from under this curse and displeasure of God, which is therefore called, Gal. 3. 13. our redeeming from the curse of the law, through Christs being made a curse for us. Secondly then, there is a higher and more fiery ministry of Gods wrath, contained in the threats of the new and ever∣lasting covenant, which is eternal, final and irrevocable, never to be drawn in again, when once gone forth, because it never comes forth till the sinner hath been tryed and pro∣ved to the utmost, and having abused all Gods patience and long-suffering, treasuring up unto himself wrath against this day of wrath, fixes at length in that remediless posture of defiance and enmity against God, as is exclusive to all sacrifice or in∣tercession of the Mediator as to any benefit thereby to him for ever, Psal. 49. 8. called Rev. 20. the second death, which is everlasting: for there remains no more sacrifice for his sins; nothing now but fiery indignation reserved for implacable adversaries and wilful obstinate sinners, Heb. 10. This ministry of wrath is mentioned also 2 Thess. 1. 8. as that flaming fire, wherein ven∣geance is taken on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel (or new Testament) of our Lord Jesus Christ. Gods wrath in this second sense, the damned and reprobate Angels and men are the objects of. This is the lake of fire and brimstone they shall be cast into, which shall never be quenched: and therefore that, which Christ in no sort or sense was capa∣ble to undergo, being every moment of his sufferings the most perfect object of Gods eternal love, doing that all along which was most perfectly welpleasing and lovely to the Fa∣ther, even whilst his natural man was the object of his tem∣porary wrath and displeasure. But Gods wrath in the first sense, hath for its object, all sinners whatsoever they be, whether elect or non-elect, whe∣ther such as shall be finally saved or finally damned: con∣sisting in that discountenance and rebuke which God hath resolved to put upon sin wheresoever he finds it, yea though
in his own dear children (which therefore is consistent with his peculiar love) as himself saith (speaking of the spiritual seed, to whom the sure mercies belong, and with whom his co∣venant stands fast for ever) Psal. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgements: if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments: then will I visit their transgression with the rod (that is, of this wrath) and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. With this rod and with these stripes was Christ himself smitten (and we healed) Isa. 53. to the marring of his visage more then any mans, and his form more then the sons of men, Chap. 52. 14. leaving in him no form or comeliness to the eye of the natural man; who therefore when he thus seeth him saith, there is no beauty, that we should desire him, Chap. 53. 2. &c. looking on him as despised and rejected of men, and therefore hiding the face from him, as not valuing or esteeming him at all, but judging him as one stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted, or as as one whose name is blotted out of Gods book: a phrase usual in scripture to describe those that are under this first dispensation of wrath, as accursed and separated from God, Rev. 3. to whom God doth in this temporary ministry of wrath, attending the breach of the first covenant, declare himself as an enemy. Thus it was with Christ, not only to the judgement and discerning of others, whether of his own people the Jews, or of the heathens, but thus he stood represented to himself in his own natural judgement and sense as a meer man, who lay really under this wrath of God, as the object of it, for the sins and on the behalf of all mankind: which seems to be intima∣ted by Moses, when in the person of Christ he was media∣ting with God, Exod 32. 32. in behalf of the transgressing children of the first covenant, bringing this as his last argument; Blot me (saith he) out of thy book, if thou wilt not forgive them: as if he should have said, Am not I willing to be blotted out of thy book that thou mightest forgive them? have not I thus been wounded for their transgressions, that by my stripes
they might be healed? under this wrath or curse, Paul also in imita∣tion of Christs affection, declares himself willing to fall if thereby he might benefit his brethren, his kinsfolks according to the flesh. This then is the only sense, wherein Christ is ca∣pable of bearing Gods wrath, and of being made a curse for us. And now, how innocent and spotless is this precious and most profitable doctrine of Christs sufferings or passive obe∣dience, as to the calumnies and unworthy reproaches of those who take upon them to brand it with Popery & Socinianism? and how unjustly doth this proceed out of their mouths who state the point of justification so as to make it little other or better then that of works or of the first covenant; having the imputation of no higher an object then Christs active obedi∣ence or legal righteousness singly considered for the matter of it? whereas, by this doctrine of Christs death and passive obe∣dience we see something farther required by the law of the new covenant, over and above the former, which as a higher and more acceptable object of imputative righteousness is given to the true and right heirs of salvation, viz. that of Christs broken, meek, crucified spirit (the true Isaac, as offered up) which is before God of great price. In this everlasting righteousness, all the spiritual seed obtain at once an absolute remission and freedom from sin, standing before the throne of God without blame in their spiritual Head, the spotless Lamb, in whom is no guile, to the obtaining an eternal re∣demption, peculiar to themselves, from amongst all others, the sons of men. And forasmuch as herein is asserted, that the sinner is thus justified in the spirit and righteousness of his head (imputed to him as soon as he is made actually a believer and of that one blessed seed) it doth avowedly decry Socinianism, which makes the personal obedience of the Saint in conformity on∣ly to the death of Christ as his pattern (and this but litteral∣ly also understood) to be that alone which is thesinners justi∣fication which withall excludes the secondbranch of Christs passive obedience here asserted, as it is the satisfaction
to Gods justice and the atonement for the appeasing of his wrath on the behalf of sinners. And as thus the true believers have a higher and more ex∣cellent objective righteousness offered and imputed to them: so have they also a more excellent and precious faith then the other to receive and apply it, founded in the spirit of true son-ship and adoption, as the spring of that newness of life and operation which the law of the new covenant requires. This faith, we say, is saving: and to be of it, is inconsistent with our being of works, singly considered: so that to be and live by this grace, is no more to be and live by works: otherwise grace is no more grace: and if it be of works, then is it not of grace: otherwise work is no more work: Rom. 10. 6. which with what else hath been said on this subject of Christs obedience, doth suffiicently bear witness against the Romish doctrine of works. Thus we have treated of the obedience of Christ both active and passive, through which he fulfilled all righteousness, and underwent all things written of him, needful to be by him performed and suffered for the compleating mans redempti∣on and salvation, without having inflicted upon him the pain of the damned, or the wrath of God, in that sense as some groundlesly and without warrant from Scripture do affirm. And as thus we have seen Christ mystically as well as litte∣rally laid in the grave, and rendred obedient to the death of the Cross; so in the third and last particular he remains to be con∣sidered as through the progress which the witness and tea∣chings of the Father made in him, he comes at length to be de∣clared the Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead: the holy one which was so far from being left in the grave or suffered to see corruption, that his crucified natural man or dead body is hereby quickned and brought forth as into its maturity and ripe age, in a fulness of stature, agreeable to this his raised and exalted state (his corruptible having put on incorruption, and his mortal having put on immortality) to the bringing to pass in himself the saying that is written: death is swal∣lowed
up in victory: O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? And now, the same Jesus that was crucified and slain, by ver∣tue of the compleat exercise of his spiritual senses, enters within the veil, converses with him that is invisible, and sits down at Gods right hand, retaining withal, in perfect use, the exercise of his natural senses, powers and faculties of soul and body, in a glorified state, as being in one and the same person, the ful∣ness of Jew and Gentile; the perfection of the spiritual and of the natural man; joyning them both together in one sheepfold, whereof himself is the one great shepheard and overseer. This reconciliation Christ hath wrought through the blood of the Cross, making in himself of twain one new man; having slain the enmity thereby, broken down the partition wall, and removed that which else would have letted the bringing of life and immor∣tality to light. This is the form or fashion of Christs heavenly manhood, wherein is to be found the perfection of both seeds, built up together in perfect love, usefulness and peace; and this hea∣venly image thus wrought out in Christ, is the law that shall go forth out of Sion, prophesied of Isa. 2. 3. and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem, that shall establish the mountain of the Lords house in the top of the mountains, and exalt it above the hils, cau∣sing all nations to flow unto it. This is the pattern of the house, spoken of also Ezek. 43. ver. 7. and 10. wherein was the place of Gods Throne and the place of the soles of his feet to dwell in the midst of his people; which was to be measured by the house of Israel, to make them ashamed of their iniquities and Idols. And v. 12. this is the law of the house upon the top of the mountain, the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy.
CHAP. X. Concerning the benefits that do inseparably ac∣company Christs person, where he is received, either by the first or second Covenant, ac∣cording to the tenor of both which there is vertue in his blood to reconcile and bring men to God. CHrist in the 42. and 49. Chapt. of Isaiah is called The Covenant, said to be him that God gives to be a COVENANT to the People, to establish the earth, and cause to inherit the desolate heritages; to say to the prisoners go forth, and to them that sit in dark∣ness, shew your selves. The way wherein Christ given as a COVENANT to any soul, is by becoming the received Lord and Christ in that heart, ministring a participation and fellowship with him in spirit, by the power and presence of himself there, either in his first or second appearance, and changing that soul into the likeness of himself, more or less, in one of those his appearances. Thus according to the first Covenant he visited the Chil∣dren of Israel in Egypt, brought them out of the house of bondage, and baptized them unto Moses in the cloud and in the red Sea; causing them to eat the same spiritual meat and to drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of the ROCK which followed them, which ROCK was Christ; yet with many of them God was not well pleased: but (as he saith) Jer. 31. 32. That my COVE∣NANT they brake, though I was an HUSBAND unto them:
and Isa. 63. 8, 9, 10. he saith, Surely they are my people, children that will not lye: and so upon that condition he was their Savi∣our, admitting them to the benefit of his sacrifice; In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them; in his love and in his pitty he redeemed them out of the house of bondage, and carried them all the daies of old; but they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit: therefore he was turned from the way of love and pitty he exercised towards them before, be∣came their enemy, and fought against them. Thus also Ezek. 16. he ministers life to them, decks them with excellent orna∣ments, yea with his own comeliness, and spreads his skirt over them. After all which they provoke him with greater abominations then ever before, and then he and they part again, and he becomes their enemy. It is evident then, that upon such conditional terms as are comprehended in the tenor of the first Covenant, Christ can and doth cause his own reception in the hearts and consci∣ences of men; and that there are inseparable benefits attend∣ing and accompanying this manner of reception of, or be∣lieving in Christ, which is begotten and held but upon the wavering principles of the first Covenant, which in respect of its uncertainty is found fault with by God, Heb. 8. 7, 8. First, they that are thus made receivers of Christ, are called out of the world, to come out of that heathenish state wherein men live as without God and Christ in the world, and so are made of the number of those many that are called, whereof there are but few chosen and endued with the wisdom from above which will make their calling sure. Secondly, Christ is made unto such, RIGHTEOUSNES in a way of Justification, who having made himself a sin∣offer∣ing for fallen man, is pleased even upon the tenor of this Co∣venant to make them the RIGHTEOUSNES of God in him; that is, to afford unto them the benefit of his legal righ∣teousness whereby he satisfied the Law, so that the Law hath nothing to say against such; yea to make them that in him which God in righteousness (imputing the benefit of his sa∣crifice
unto them) doth accept, and is the justifier of them by, in declaring Christs righteousness unto them as a propitiation for all their past sins, and so to be continued to them as long as they shall do well: In which sense God argued with Cain, Gen. 4. 7. Whilst thou dost well shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou dost not well, sin lieth at the door. Through this Propitiato∣ry-covering of Christs blood they are under SANTCUARY, and in a City of refuge from Gods wrath and the avenger of blood: kept unto the faith to be revealed, till by their wilfull sinning and making themselves unworthy of further or more grace, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. This Justification the world hath in common with true believers as well as the first faith and calling before mentioned. Thus tis said, 1 Tim. 2. 3, 4. that God our saviour will have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth: who ver. 6. gave himself a ransome for all, to be testified in due time. The third benefit inseparably accompanying this kind of Christs giving himself by the first convenant, is that which we call sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. consisting in a real and actu∣al change of the heart, which lieth in our conformity to Christs legal righteousness, and is communicable unto men by this covenant in degree and measure, so as through this knowledge of Jesus Christ men come to escape the pollutions of the world, and to live in a conformity of mind to the holy command∣ment delivered and exhibited to them in the glory and perfecti∣on of Christs flesh or natural man; unto which righteous and holy operations man is called by the law and rule of the first covenant; wherein when Christ was set up as he was made under the law, he was like unto us in all things, sin only ex∣cepted. This sort of holy and righteous operations in men, and of holy and righteous principles according to this cove∣nant, is at large described, Ezek. 18. wherewithal Christ de∣clares that in the day they turn from this their righteousness, and commit iniquity, they shall die, and their righteousness be no more remembred. These may be heightned to such measures and degrees of
life and light in this first covenant, as to know all mysteryes, to have faith so as to remove mountaines, and to speak with the tongue of men and Angels, taste of the heavenly gift and powers of the world to come, and yet be as sounding brass and a tinckling Cymbal; yea, may become the more deeply fixed thereby in irrecoverable enmity against Christ and God: which comes to pass by their having received Christ thus in part only, and looking no farther then to the perfection through him attainable on this side his grave and resurrection; whereas the true spiritual seed and chosen ones of God receive Christ not in part only, whereby they have in common with the other all the forementioned benefits; but in whole, whereby they have over and above, that which excels, possessing and enjoy∣ing the riches of both covenants, and all this not conditio∣nally and upon the slippery tenure of the first covenant, but absolutely and unchangeably in the second, Isa. 59. 21. As for me, this is my covenant with them saith the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith the Lord, from henceforthand for ever. In this new and everlasting covenant Christ is given and received in whole, answerable to what himself received from the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost in the womb, from whose ful∣ness they receive grace for grace, in both those sorts of principles and operations which we have already described in the fore∣going chapter: according to one of which he is alwaies one with the Father, acting in unity of mind with him throughout: and according to the other of which he is a righteous man in all his operations after the tenor of the law. This then is that which we mean: where whole Christ is given to any soul, both these sorts of principles and operati∣ons through his indwelling spirit and presence are communi∣cated unto it: which two perfections are far better then that one that is given single and alone by the first covenant: for here when one is ready to fall, the other is neer to help him up: but
woe be to him that is alone, Eccles. 4. 9. 10. Now Christ by this entire gift of himself, begets in and together with that which he communicates single by the first covenant, a further capacity in the mind of man to be of one heart and one way with him throughout, built up in this unity of the faith of the Son of God, so as to make the Saint alwaies do that in a way of true Evangelical obedience, which is plea∣sing unto him: as he was alwaies in the daies of his flesh (when he was offering up himself in the eternal spirit) doing that which was pleasing to the Father. When Christ thus bestows himself upon any, forming his own reception in them, they do obtain thereby the power and dignity to become the sons of God, as those that are not born only of blood and of the will of the flesh, and of the will of man, but of God: through which seed of God abiding in them, they are made uncapable of sinning wilfully, or of so provoking God as that he should swear in his wrath they shall never enter into his Rest; be∣ing once taken thus into Gods everlasting covenant, and made Gods first-born from the dead, and co-heirs with Christ, higher then the Kings of the earth; A seed with whom his covenant shall stand fast, and for whom he keeps his mercy for evermore: who shall endure for ever, and their throne as the daies of heaven; who yet if they walk not in Gods law, but for sake his judgements, if they break his statutes, and keep not his commandments (as they may do) then saith God, I will visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from them, nor suffer my faithfullness to fail, but will keep them from the great transgression, that presumtuous sins get not dominion over them. These are described, Rev. 14. 3, 4, 5. as those that were enabled to sing a new song before the Throne, which none could learn but those that were thus redeemed from the earth, who are not defiled with women, but in this unity and sim∣plicity wherein they are espoused to Christ, are kept as chaste Virgins to that their one husband, and are followers of the Lamb whithersoever he goes, as those that are redeemed from among men and made the first fruits unto God and unto the Lamb; In whose
mouth is found no guile, as they are found in this unity with Christ, and considered as that one seed, Gal. 3. 16. that are without fault before the Throne of God. From the consideration of which Scriptures, the further benefits that do inseparably accompany Christ, as entirely and absolutely given by the new and everlasting convenant, are likewise plainly to be taken notice of as the peculiar pri∣viledges of these, besides those that they have in common with the others; as, First, that calling which those few chosen ones are called with, that shall be saved, consisting in this spirit of adoption and son-ship which makes them one spiritual seed with Christ, as brought forth into the same unity with him which he is in with his Father; whereby they become heirs, and are Lords of all, perfectly distinguished from the servant, or children born after the flesh, under the first covenant. And that we may the better understand what is meant by this unity of the faith of the Son of God, into which all the spiri∣tual seed are begotten, we are to take notice of three spiritual unions witnessed unto by the Scriptures. First, between God and Christ, in the WORD that was in the BEGINNING, and was with God, and was God; in which union Christ the Mediator is God. Secondly there is an union between the Word and Christs manhood, as we have already shewed in the precedent Chapter, & that in a threefold respect: according to one of wth his manhood is found in the form of God, and as the son of man, he accounts it not robbery to be acknowledged equal with God: the man that is his fellow. Thirdly, there is a union between the manhood of Christ (who in the sense before declared, is made Gods equal and fellow) and the whole spiritual seed in general, and each of them in particular, who are as the Bride and wife to this Lamb, and so in a sense are his fellows and consorts, heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ (where the Spirit and the Bride say, come) living together in this unity as Bride and Bridegroom: and so intimated, Eph. 5. 32. where the natural marriage is made a type of it, and the Apostle saith, this is a great
mysterie, But I speak concerning Christ and the Church. And now what is more evident, then that the Saints by this union with Christ are not deifyed nor Christed, but have the place only of his Bride and spouse, as the Queen who is all glo∣rious within, and who is one, the only of her mother? To be therefore a member of this Heavenly City, a living stone in this divine building, is that which we are to understand by this se∣cond sort of calling, wherein our Election is made sure to us, and a new name given us that none can read but those that have it. Secondly, through this unity of the faith of the Son of God, whereby those that are called are placed in the relation of members to Christ as he is the Head of the Church and the first-born from the dead, they are for ever justified, receiving this further benefit as they stand related to Christ in this his second Headship, beyond those that are singly related to his first, and obtain thereby but the common and conditional justification. For this everlasting justification extends to sins past, present and to come, absolutely and at once discharging from all sin, that their iniquities may be remembred no more: and presents them faultless and without guile before the Throne of God, as the ob∣jects of his eternal love and favour, unto which they are en∣titled in right of their being made his first-born from the dead whose names are written in heaven; adopted into his own line, family and descent, by this their marriage-union with Christ, who according to his heavenly manhood is the immediate off-spring of the WORD, and eternal Son of God: without Fa∣ther, without mother, without descent, other then that of the very Son of God, into which he is adopted and taken by marriage-union; which dignity and grace he freely bestows and conveys in a secondary way upon his whole spiritual seed, and in this neer union keeps them from ever departing from him. Thirdly, these unto whom Christ is thus made their righte∣ousness and justification, he is made also their sanctification, to the purifying of their hearts through believing, and cleansing them from all evil conscience, as well that which consists in the filthi∣ness of the flesh, as that which lies in the filthiness of spirit; re∣newing
them in their minds, through the putting on of the new man, to the exercising as well their spiritual senses (in like∣ness and conformity to Christs actings and life in that unity wherein he and his Father are one, whereby he crucified and kept under his natural man) as to the exercising of their na∣tural powers and faculties in likeness and conformity to the actings of Christs natural man; making them herein subject to the Father of spirits, and to live acceptably and work holiness in his sight as renewed in knowledge after the image of him that crea∣ted them, or according to the pattern of the new man, in the ho∣ly and righteous actings thereof set up in the person of Christ, where Christ is all and in all: which good works the Saints are fore∣ordained of God to walk in, as their true Evangelical and new-covenant obedience. Fourthly, and lastly, those unto whom Christ is thus made sanctification, he is made also redemption or glorification, to the changing them throughout, in spirit, soul and body into a likeness with his spirit, soul and body, as he is declared the Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead, at such time as our vile bodies shall be made like unto his most glorious bodie, by that mighty power of his whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself: which is to be brought to light in his times, when he shall be admired in all them that believe, and answer the expectation of the creature, in delivering it from the bondage of corruption in∣to the glorious liberty of the sons of God, at their manifestation and the compleating of their adoption by this redemption of their bodies. These are the benefits in short and in general, that insepara∣bly accompany the guift of Christs person to the soul as he ministers himself in the two Covenants respectively: and are the fruits of his presence there: Which will serve as a key to open many things in the following discourse, when we come to speak of the practical conscientious part that is begotten in, and exercised by the subjects of Christ, as they live under his Rule and dominion in the world, and are therein contesting and warfaring with the adversary, the devil and his instruments.
CHAP. XI. Shewing the subordinate use that the elect An∣gels are of, unto Christ (in his bearing up the pillars of the creation, that else had been dissolved through the fall) and the place which they have in the threefold general ad∣ministration of his mediatoriall kingdom, set up in the world. THough sin entred upon all men, and death by sin, through the act of one mans disobedience, and judge∣ment came upon all men, because in one man all had sinned: yet by the obedience of one and his righteous∣ness the free gift came upon all men unto justificati∣on of life, Rom. 5. and where sin abounded grace did abound much more: by reason whereof, the whole first creation in all the parts of it is made Christs by the price of his blood, which was made Sathans and sins by the fall; that as the soul of the Fa∣ther is Christs, so also is the soul of the Son, and he only that perso∣nally transgresses shall die, Ezek. 18. 4. God having been plea∣sed to find a ransom in Christ for atonement and propitiation, to the forbearance of sins that are past, and to the admitting of man to a new treaty of reconciliation and trial by vertue of the first covenant renewed in and through the blood of Christ, whereunto the ministry of the good Angels serves and is made use of by Christ the KING OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, who employs these his ministers of justice as the higher
powers over the world, committed by him to their charge, to mannage order and govern in all the affairs thereof un∣der him (having put all its Inhabitants in this sense in sub∣jection unto the government of the Elect Angels) to be a ter∣rour unto evil works, and a protection and refuge to them that do well; who therefore, Eccles. 5. 8. are described to be those that are higher then the highest ministers of justice in this world, or then the supreme powers here below, and yet saith the text, there be higher then they: which are Christ the WORD of God, and the blessed Trinty. In reference to the Angels therefore in this their office and administration of justice under Christ, it is said, Deut 32. 7, 8. The most high divided unto the nations their inheritance, from the daies of old or the beginning of the world, when he separated the sons of Adam according to the number of the Angels (as the Septuagint renders it) or under their rule and government, as he separated the day from the night in this visible world by two great lights that he set up in the material heavens, the grea∣ter to rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night, Gen. 1. 14. 16. typifying this office and ministry of Angels as to the govern∣ment of the sons of Adam; all the nations whereof in their earthly state God made of one blood, to dwell on all the face of the earth: but thought fit upon the fall and sin of the first Adam, to set the bounds of their habitation according to the number of the Angels or measure of their natural perfection, as subjected & made sub∣servient to Christ their head, being in this respect the shadowy image of Christs first appearance, in which they are able to proportion suitable manifestations of Christ to the natural dis∣cerning of men, in what state or condition soever they are found, whether such as are without law, or such as are under the law. The first of these know no higher rule at present, then this shadowy image of Christs natural perfection reflected and beamed forth upon them from the face of angelical glory, where the sound of the Scriptures hath not yet been heard: who therefore as heathens, are said comparatively to abide in dark∣ness,
as under the rule of the lesser light, typifyed by the moon the ruler of the night: these are the uncircumcision in the flesh, living remote from, and (as it were) without Christ and God in the world, as aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and stran∣gers to the Covenants of promise; yet in a capacity to seek the Lord, if haply they may feel after him and finde him, though he be not far from every one of them, being that light that enlight∣ens every one that comes into the world. The second sort of men are those sons of Adam that are higher enlightened, by being brought beyond this first sha∣dowy image of Christ, unto the Ministry of the Law, and pla∣ced under the dominion thereof, becoming actually thereby of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, being made par∣takers of the first Covenant, renewed in the blood of Christ, and so called the circumcision in the flesh; and in that sense, Is∣raelites, children of the first Covenant, to whom pertains the A∣doption and the glory, and the Covenants: who are called Jews, children of God, or visible Saints, resting in the Law or taking up their station in Christs first appearance or natural perfection; making their boast of God, as knowing his will and approving the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law (whether considered as ministred by Moses, or by the flesh of Christ, who therein is the head-perfection of it) who are con∣fident that they themselves are guides unto the blind, lights unto them that sit in darkness, instructers of the foolish, teachers of babes, which have the form of the knowledge and truth of the Law or first ministry of Christ, whose praise is of men, Rom. 2. 29. who in one word are made the children and off-spring of Christ, according to what he is as head and root unto the perfection of the natural Creation single; yea even unto himself accord∣ing to the flesh, considered as a meer man, or in the fashion and likeness of the first Adam in his sinless and incorrupt nature. Both these sorts of men being still but the sons of the first Adam, or of an earthly descent and birth, fall properly under the Ministry of Angels in the hand of Christ, whom
he hath appointed in a twofold dispensation, serving in the one to veil, and in the other to unveil him in his first appearance, as he is KING OF RIGHTEOUSNESSE, being in the witness they give herein, as two great lights in the firmament of the spirits of men, the greater to rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night; In this latter they are as the Moon, to rule the Kingdom of darkness, whereinto all mankinde in their fallen corrupt state are plunged, renewing and setting up something of that light in the natural spirit of man, with which every man is enlightned that comes into the world, however degenerate his condition be in all other respects; in the other, they discover the Sun that is to rule the day of mans further enlightned judge∣ment, when he is separated from amidst all the corrupt world, and is clothed with a visibility of Saintship & profession, where∣in he hath the praise of men that measure themselves by themselves, and compare themselves amongst themselves, without having the true Spiritual light of Christs second appearance to help their discerning therein, 2 Cor. 10. 12. and so, are not wise; but are such children, Deut. 32. 20. in whom is no faith; who, not∣withstanding all the commendation they assume unto them∣selves, are not they whom God commends. This generation of men are Israel according to the flesh, whe∣ther under the Law or under the Gospel; which are not to pass away till the sufferings of the whole spiritual seed be fulfilled: but shall be found in that great city Jerusalem, mentioned Rev. 11. 8. which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified, and amongst whom the dead bodies of his witnesses must lie unburied three days and an half, ver. 9. Thus the most High divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam not only into their seve∣ral countries and local habitations, but into the day and night of his administrations of Rule over them and communicati∣ons of light, life and power to them after their Fall, when he set the bounds of the people according to the number of angels, made by him ministers of his Kingdom of natural righteousness, as hath been declared.
The third sort of people in that distribution of the Sons of Adam, are the true Jacob or Spiritual Seed, that are of the Faith of Abraham, whether Jews or Gentiles, and right Heirs of God according to the promise; that are not only Sons of Righteousness, as the former, in the perfection of the natural man: but SONS OF PEACE, where of twain springs up one new man, through the blood of the cross, and life from the dead. These are the hundred fourty and four thousand, spoken of Rev. 14. 1. which were redeemed from the earth, ver. 3. or out of all that was earthy; and had learned to sing a new song before the throne and before the four beasts, and the four and twenty el∣ders, which no man could learn but themselves, ver. 3. These are they which were not defiled with women, but are virgins, induced from the simplicity that is in Christ, to follow the Lamb whereever he goeth; who, were redeemed from amongst men, be∣ing the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb, v. 4 In whose mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault before the throne of God, able to sing the sing of Moses and of the Lamb. These are the Jacob that are Gods portion, Deut. 32. 9. or his peculiar people and treasure, the lot of his inheritance, reserved for the immediate shining forth of light from the face of the Son himself, whether in his first or second appearance. These are they, of whom the Israelites after the flesh (that were not of the faith of Abraham, nor born after the spirit, but children only of Mount Sinai, and of the bondwoman) were only the types and figures; and as such, were cast off when the true seed came and appeared, calling the Gentiles home unto himself; even as the worldly Church and fleshly seed of Professors among the Christian Gentiles shall be dealt with, when the Jews are grafted in again upon a Spiritual account, and shall be made known to be the fulness of the Gentiles. Thus in brief we have made way unto the stating, first, the subjects of that threefold kingdom of Christ, which we pro∣pounded to treat of; secondly, the rule set up over each of them, appointed by Christ to govern judge and condemn those of them that walk not in conformity thereunto, in these
several, distinguished conditions of men. Thirdly the distinct nature and kind of these several administrations of Christs Kingdom and Government, kept on foot and upheld by him in the world. Which three particulars we shall first give you the view of in a clear witness from the Scriptures, and then apply our selves to a distinct treating of the things and per∣sons relating to each of these three Dominions or Kingdoms of Christ, or rather distinct administrations of the one Go∣vernment of Christ, which he is heir and possessor of, over men and Angels. First then, we are to consider the subjects that are bred up under the three administrations of Christs Government and Rule over men, in their proper distinguishing characters, names and descriptions wherein the Scripture presents them to our view. But that we may be the better understood what we mean when we speak of these subjects, it will be needfull for us to premise, that there are two sorts of subjects under each ad∣ministration; either first, such as are willingly subject for con∣science sake, whom Christ rules by the power of his light, by them received, owned and walked in. Or secondly, such as he rules over by force and with a rod of iron, as his enemies, breaking those that will not bend, when they fall by their mis∣carriage and demerit under the power of his revenging Justice in any of these branches of his Government. First then, these two sorts of subjects under Christs first administration of Rule, we shall find comprehended in those general Scripture expressions which distinguish all the Nati∣ons of the earth in their Gentilism and uncircumcised state from the Jews, that are a higher enlightened sort of the sons of Adam, in a separate and divided state, as planted wholly a right seed, Jer. 2. 21. a noble vine; whereas the other are said to be alienated from the life of God, delivered up to vile affecti∣ons, having their understandings darkned, and walking in the va∣nity of their minds, who (as compared with the Jews) are those that live without Law, are sinners without law, and perish
without Law, Rom. 2. 12. who are also said in this sense to be without God and without Christ in the world: Such as have little or nothing of the first Image left in them, but are carried away unto dumb idols as they are led. This is the state wherein we are all by nature, dead in tres∣passes and sins, walking according to the course of this world, ac∣cording to the Prince of the power of the air, the Ruler of the darkness of this world, working in the children of disobedience; having our conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires thereof and of the mind, as children of wrath, Eph. 2. 1, 2, 3. working all uncleanness with greediness. These are further described by the uncircumcision in the flesh, the corrupt natural man or the heathen, in Scripture phrase, that is to say, the nations, kindreds and people of the world, that through the fall, are turned into a degenerate plant, a wild Olive tree, having their place and habitation in the WICK∣ED ONE, who Rules, acts and influences them at his pleasure. In this sad. helpless, forlorn and wretched state, Christ the Mediator finds all mankind by the fall, and is pleased not here to leave them, but through the ransom by him paid for all, to bestow freely upon them the benefit of this first light and Rule under which he places them (by the means of the mini¦stry of Angels) with which he enlightens every one that comes into the world: begetting in them a capacity to sek the Lord and to feel or grope after him in the midst of their darkness; and setting up a work in their conscience to do and perform the things contained in the law, if they wilfully desise not and neglect the means of light provided for them in this state: which some of them do make a right and good use of, and so are led for∣ward, by further enlightnings and quicknings to the saving of their souls, whilst such as refuse or despise this, are hardned and seared in their rebellion, and reservea with the wicked Angels in chains of darkness to the judgement of the great day. These willing captives of Sathan were typed out by those servants under the law, who refusing their liberty offered in the years of Jubi∣lee and seasons for their redemption, were boared in the ears
in token of the just and perpetual servitude that belonged to such, as so little valued their liberty when freely offered to them, and when the having or not having thereof, depended meerly upon their own acceptance or refusal. Secondly, The two sorts of Subjects under Christs second administration, consist of those sons of Adam that are purified, quickned and enlightned, whose bodies are washed with pure water, cleansed from the filthiness of their natural man by ha∣ving that done to them which was done to the Jewish nation or seed of Israel, when called by God into a distinguished state from among the Gentiles, Ezek. 16. ver. 5. to the 15. when she was as a cast-out among the Gentiles to the loathing of her person in the day of her nativity, then God passed by her, loo∣ked upon her, and made it the time of his love, saying unto her when she lay in her blood, Live; and causing her to multiply as the bud of the field, till she encreased and waxed great and came to excellent ornaments: to have her brests fashioned, and her hair grown, who was naked and bare: for God had spread his skirt over her, covered her nakedness and entred into covenant with her, so that she became the Lords. And he cleansed her with water, washing away her blood from her, anointed her with oil, decked her with ornaments and jewels, and caused her to eat fine flower and hony and oil, and she was exceeding beautiful and did prosper into a kingdome; in which glory of hers she was visible to others, so as her renown went forth among the heathen for her beauty which was perfect through the comeliness which God had put upon her. This is farther enlarged Deut. 32 4. &c. where this work of God upon these Israelites is also called perfect, flowing from their rock, or from Christ that had been a Father to them, and had bought them, and made and established them, and had thus divided and distinguished them from the rest of the sons of Adam. Yet there were amongst these, an unwise generation, in and under all this: those that had no faith, and who considered not their latter end, but corrupted themselves, and had a latter end worse then their beginning: so as their grape was the grape of So∣dom, and their vine was the vine of Gomorah, and their spot
shewed itself not to be the spot of Gods children, declaring them to be a very crooked and perverse generation. The first of the same principles with these, was Cain, whom Eve received as a man from the Lord: then those sons of God in the old world, who corrupted themselves and left a rebellious race of Giants or men of renown for enmity against God, with which fleshly seed the Lord would not suffer his spirit any longer to strive in the daies of Noah, Gen. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. Then Ishma∣el the son of Hagar the bond-woman, figured out this genera∣tion under the first covenant: after him Esan; then the whole nation of the Israelites brought out of Aegypt: who were all of them baptized unto Moses, in the red sea, and did eat the same spiritu∣al meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, yet with many of them was not God well-pleased. And so Israel after the flesh, all along from them downward, as they are described in all the Prophets, to be righteous men and a holy seed, yet such as Ezek. 18. 24. turned from their righteousness, and committed ini∣quity stumbling at the stumbling stone, being leavened with the lea∣ven of the Pharisees, and in whom sprang up a root of bitterness to their defilement: so as after all their enlightnings and enlive∣nings from God, they miscaried, being such as Elias interce∣ded against, saying, Lord, they have killed thy Prophets, and digged down thine Altars, and I am left alone, and they seek my life, Rom. 11. 2, 3. and concerning whom Esay is very beld, saying, All the day long I have stretched forth mine hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people, Rom. 10. 20, 21. who also saith of them, Rom. 9. 29. except the Lord of Sabboth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, and had been made like unto Gomorah; which frame of spirit they fully discovered at last, when they crucifi∣ed the Lord of glory, and were the Jerusalem in whom was found the blood of all the Prophets. Nor are we to think that this generation of men passed away with the Jews, since Christ himself in the very Gospel may be known after the flesh, and doth beget an Israel after the flesh, in and under Gospel-ordinances and ministrations: who by the knowledge of Jesus Christ and the holy commandment de∣livered
unto them, in his fleshly manifestation, for their Rule, may clean escape the pollutions of the world through lust, and yet return with the dog to the vomit and with the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2. 20. &c. yea, who may by the word of the beginning Heb. 6. 1. or first ap∣pearance of Christ, pass through the great enlightnings and quicknings from Christ there spoken of, to the tasting of the heavenly gift and partaking of the Holy Ghost, to the relishing of the good Word of God and powers of the world to come, and yet fall away and draw back unto predition, being void of that faith that failes not, wherewith we are to believe to the saving of the soul. This sort of men the Apostle Paul in all his Epistles takes notice of and distinguishes the true believer from: ha∣ving had his warrant for it from Christ himself who said, Ma∣ny are called, but few are chosen: and again; of the labourers in the vineyard he saith, there are first that shall be last in Gods accep∣tance, and last that shall be first: and that these children of the kingdom shall see many come from the four parts of the world, to sit down with Abraham, I saac and Jacob, in the kingdome of heaven, and they themselves be thrust out with those that say Mat. 7. 22, 23. Lord, Lord, have not we prophecyed in thy name and in thy name cast outdevils, and done many wonderful works? unto whom Christ will answer, Depart from me, ye workers of in iquity, I know you not. These are they Rom. 4. that find whereof to glory in the flesh of Christ, or in their own holy flesh, as the seed of Abraham, that are by the law or first covenant: who are righteous workers according to the law, in the most Gospel-like administration of it: but at the bottom, are still upon the tenure and account of debt; for so is their reward accounted to them by God, as looking upon them still under the first covenant, till they be brought to be of the faith with blessed Abraham. These in 1 Cor. the 12. and 13. Chapters, are intimated under the title of spiritual men, in distinction from the heathen, as having the manifestation of the spirit given them to profit with,
by means whereof they may come to great attainments in spiritual gifts; and excellent operations of mind, so as to speak with the tongues of men and Angels, know all mysteries, have all faith, so as to remove mountains, give all they have to the poor and their bodies to be burned: and all this but upon the first root and single seed of natural righteousness, remaining yet unex∣perienced of the more excellent way of enjoying and doing all this in union and harmony with a higher and better princi∣ple of life by participation of the divine nature, which the true heirs do obtain, and which is there called by the name of love. Again, 2 Cor. 10. 11. These are described under the names of those, of which number Paul said he was not, who measuring them∣selves by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst them∣selves were not wise; but justly comprehended under the rank of foolish virgins, over whom the Apostle was jealous with a godly jealousie, hoping to have presented them as a chaste virgin to Christ, but now fearing lest they should be beguiled and sin after the simi∣litude of Adams transgression, through the subtilty of the de∣vil, transforming himself into an Angel of light. These among the Galatians were they that Paul stood in doubt of, as discerning in them principles that would carry them no higher then the first Covenant; before whom therefore he laid the distinction of the two Covenants and the two seeds, even under the Gospel; those that might be born after the spi∣rit, and those that might be born but of the flesh only; one of the free woman, the other of the bond. And among the Philippians this sort of Professors were so prevalent, that the Apostle was very sharp, ch. 3. v. 2. & v 18, 19. calling them, those of the concision, dogs, and enemies to the cross of Christ, whose God was their belly, and whose glory was in their shame, minding earthly things; walking in a quite different strain from them, who forgetting what is behinde, press forward to the mark ver. 14. of perfection, brought to light by the death and re∣surrection of Christ, worshipping God in the spirit, rejoycing in Christ Jesus, and having no confidence in the flesh. It would be endless to rehearse the several passages in the
remaining Epistles of Paul and the other Apostles, decipher∣ing this generation of Professors in the times they lived, Tea∣chers of the Law, that knew not what they said, nor whereof they affirmed, as to the lawfull use of the very Law it self; who, by not holding faith and a good conscience, which is interpreted, Heb. 10. 23. a not holding them fast, but in such wavering, uncer∣tain principles as the first Covenant ministers, concerning faith made shipwrack, and so lost their good conscience too at last, drawing back into perdition; Like the Jerusalem complained of, Ezek. 5. 5. &c. where they were so far from walking up to the light of the Covenant with God which they were under, that in their walkings they fell beneath the very light and principles of heathens, not doing according to the judgements of the nations round about them, but becoming adulterers and adulteresses, such as defile the Temple of God, and therefore such whom God would destroy. Lastly, as once for all, we may see this generation of men in their holy profession and visibility of Saintship, incorpora∣ted together with the true spiritual seed in every one of the seven Churches, mentioned Rev. 2. and 3. chapters: which are usually accounted to be typical, inreference to the state of the Church under the Gospel, from the Primitive times to Christs second coming. In every of these churches, Christ makes the distinction between the Spiritual Seed that had the spiritual ear, and the carnal Seed that had it not; but who in and under those very Church-forms were the Nurseries of all hypocrisie, apostasie, and other Spiritual uncleannesses and defilements there, and were not of the faith, nor in the faith of those that overcome; but were such as from whom the Candlestick and light they had from Christ, might be removed, verifying therein that say∣ing of his, speaking of this generation, as they should con∣tinue under Gospel Ordinances (when he was foretelling the end of the world, under the type and figure of the destructi∣on of the material Temple in Jerusalem:) Verily, verily, saith he, This generation shall not pass away till all these things be ful∣filled;
his mystical meaning herein being, that this crooked and perverse generation, mentioned Deut. 32. 5. who were always resisting the Holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51. (and were to succeed in that enmity which they bear unto the true Spiritual Seed, to the very end of the world, according unto what God declared from the beginning, when he said, I will put enmity between the Seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent) should continue till the serpents head be wholly broken, and he trampled under foot: and the Saints heel wholly bruised, or the measure of Christs sufferings re∣maining to be wrought out in his whole body, the Church, ful∣filled. These are they which call themselves Jews, but are not, in spirit and truth, though they pass currant in the judgement of mans day for the only visible Church of God, excluding the hea∣thens on the one hand, as Sathan appearing in his own like∣ness, and the true spiritual believers on the other hand, as the same evil spirit transformed into an Angel of light. The third sort of subjects, belonging to the last administra∣tion of Christs kingdom, are they, who in faith and patience do possess their souls, following the Lamb whither soever he goes, not loving their lives unto death: but through the blood of the Lamb, being received into the unity of the faith of the Son of God, have the use of spiritual senses set up in them, enabling them to hear and obey what the spirit saith unto the Churches: and so are wor∣shippers of God in spirit, rejoycing in Christ Jesus, & having no con∣fidence in the flesh; enjoying within themselves the witness of a better and more enduring substance then what is experienced un∣der the first-covenant-ministry: & through this law of the spirit of life which the spiritual sied are made under, have that over∣coming power of Christ ever present with them in the actings of true and saving faith, which overcomes the world, and gives them the victory over all opposition: not but that they also in walking as men, have the same common weaknesses as other men, & are liable to many failings and miscariages, but as they are born of God, and walk and live in that spirit, sin hath no more dominion over them, to make them fulfil the lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 16, 18.
These therefore are distinguished from all the earth-born sons or children of the first covenant, by their higher and more divine birth, as born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1. 13. not but that they are born also of all the other principles as well as othermen, & possess them in common with others, something of the corrupt nature with the heathen, and something of the renewed nature with the Jew or worldly Christian: but they have over and besides, a birth of God, which none of the other two have, living thereby in that light and life which no man hath seen or can see: wherein they are a sort of heavenly seers and men of God, that enter with Christ within the veyl, and are admitted into the sight and enjoyment of God in the very brightness of his glory and express character of his person, shining forth in the face of Christs second appearance; and herein are heirs of God, and co-heirs with Christ, partaking after this manner of the divine na∣ture it self, wherein they see God face to face in his own similitude, apparently; conversing with him, as friend speaks with friend: ha∣ving the natural powers & faculties of their mind (which they still possess in common with other men) so subdued and made subject to this higher birth of the divine will, and presence in them, that they are taught to do the will of their father in earth as it is done in heaven, and to be the fulfillers of all righteousness, not only of that which is according to the rule and law of the spirit of life that they are under, exclusive to the rest: but what is according to the law and rule of Gods judgements, given either to the Jew & worldly Christian, or to the heathen in the right way of subordination wherein they ought to be practised and observed according to the will of God: when we are so made one with Christ as he is made one with the Father, ever doing that which is pleasing and acceptable in his sight. These are they then in the general, whom we mean by those that are born after the spirit and of the free-woman: that are from above, of the Jerusalem that is above, the heavenly City, whose builder and maker is God, by his own immediate hand forming and setting it up for that end, in the person of the mediator,
as that wherein Christ as the first begotten from the dead, might become the head to this whole seed of spiritual believers, whose names are written in heaven. This divine birth is that through which we believe to the sa∣ving of the soul, and therefore is described, Heb. 11. 1. &c. under the name of faith, and is said to be the substance of things hoped for, and evidence of things unseen: giving the sight of him that is unseen to every natural eye, and bringing the soul to the knowledge of the inward living WORD: through the knowledge of whom we come to understand that the worlds were framed, and how they are since upheld and governed. By the power of this divine birth, Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain; and the famous men of God in old times (whose genealogy, as all partaking of this spiritual seed, is derived in that Chapter from Abel downward through all the old Testament) obtained a good report, or lived that life which was in repute with God, and which he owned as wel∣pleasing and acceptable unto him. These are they that throughout the new Testament also are to be understood for the seed of true believers, there spo∣ken of: unto whom, as their pattern in spirit, these worthies Heb. 11. are propounded: that they might run the same race, having so great a cloud of witnesses set before them, looking also to Jesus, not only as he is the author and beginner of our faith in the ministry of his first appearance, but as he is also the finisher of it, making it the faith that fails not, which is attained in and by the new covenant or ministry of his second appearance: through which he doth not only appear a King of righteousness, conveying a seed of righteousness answerable to the perfecti∣on commanded by the law; but also a King of peace, convey∣ing a seed of everlasting peace and absolute reconciliation between God and the soul through the blood of the Cross, where∣in the perfection of the life of faith consists. For wherever the single seed of righteousness is in any without this other seed of peace, blessing will not stay or long abide in that heart: nor will the profession of faith and a good
conscience be held fast and without wavering and danger of falling away. But where both these seeds are cast in together, to live together, as brethren in unity, the elder serving the younger, they are the two that are better then one, mentioned, Eccles. 4. 9, 10. who shall have a reward for their labour; and when one falleth, the other shall help him up: but woe to him that is single and alone. For the wavering unstable principles of the first holy and righteous seed are never rightly fixed nor made durable, or abiding unto life eternal, but by this higher divine birth; where∣by the first hearing of the word becomes mixed with faith, and produceth in the heart that ground which brings forth the good seed in abandant fruitfulness, without any danger of miscar∣rying. This new-creature-life and glory is signified by the white stone and new name that none can read but those that have it: who feed upon the hidden Manna, and are admitted to sit down at table and meat with the Son in the Kingdom of the Father, having the seal of the living God in their foreheads, by which they escape out of all trials and spiritual dangers, and are brought forth as gold refined by the fire. These are they that are baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire, into the name of the Father, Son and Spirit, in the truth of the thing, in the living WORD; and not only in the shadow and figure held forth in worldly rudiments and carnal ordinances; being the chosen vessels which God selects out of those many which he hath called, causing them to bear his own name, his new name, whom he makes pillars in his house, never to go forth more. These are the true seed of the promise, as it is written, not to seeds, as of many, but that one seed, which is Christ: who are now sons, though for a season under the veil and form of servants, unseen in their true and proper appearance: yet at last they must be like unto Christ their head in their heavenly, glorified man-hood, as saith the Scripture: we shall be like him, and see him as he is. And as thus the spiritual seed, considered as living by the faith that fails not, are one sort of the subjects under this third
dispensation of Christs Rule: so there is a counterfeit spiritual seed that are described Jude ver. 12, 13. who are to be num∣bred under this third rank of subjects, as the second sort un∣der this third administration, intruders into this spiritual soci∣ety of true believers, being spots in those feasts of love wherein they feast with them, sporting themselves with their own deceivings, feeding without fear, clouds they are without water, carried about of winds, foaming out their own shame, wandring stars; and 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15, 17, 18, 19. having eyes full of adultery, and that can∣not cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls, cursed children, who have for saken the right way and are gone astray, who speaking great swelling words of vanity, allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that had clean escaped from them who live in errour; being themselves the servants of corruption, whilst they promise liberty to others: unto whom is reserved the mist or black∣ness of darkness for ever. Thus man, in a threefold respect, is the subject of these three kingdoms and dominions of Christ: and is so vastly distinguished from himself in these three states, that he seems to have (as it were) a threefold nature and spirit, proper to each of them. In one of which, all the nations of the world live and walk, as they are distinguished from the earthly Jerusalem, the children of Mount Sinai, or the first convenant. In the second, the fleshly seed of Israel or the worldly Church lives and walks, distinguished both from the nations of the world, and from the heavenly Jerusalem, or the true Mount-Sion. And in the third, the spiritual seed or children of the Jerusalem that is above, do live and walk, distinguished from both the for∣mer: each of them therefore are placed by God under a seve∣ral Rule and law, according to which their lives and actions are to be fashioned and conformed, and by which they are to be tried and judged at the last day, when the secrets of men of all sorts shall be judged by Christ Jesus according to the Gospel, which is of that large comprehension, as to take in all the three dispensations.
First, for the nations of the world, they have judgements gi∣ven them by God, Ezek. 5. 6, 7. with which Israel is reproch∣ed, as having walked short of them; so that the uncircumci∣sion did out-doe the circumcision in the righteousness, the effect whereof was contained in the law, as in a much superiour and more excellent administration. These the Apostle cals Rom. 2. 12. such as sin without law, and perish without law, but yet are acknowledged as such, that though they have not the law as it was given to the Jews, yet have a law given them from God, the work and effect of which sheweth it self in their consciences, accusing or excusing them, as they walk up to it, or short of it; even the law of na∣ture, in which they are a law unto themselves, having that within them that shall witness for them or against them before the Throne and judgement seat of Christ: that is to say, the law of natural right and just, exhibited to them through the mini∣stry of Angels, that are invisible Thrones, Dominions, Principa∣lities and powers, set up by God for this very end, as his mini∣sters for terrour unto evil works, and as encouragers and Protectors of them that do well, as will presently more fully be evinced. The second Rule or law containing the judgements and ordinances of God given unto the fleshly seed or children of the first covenant, is the WORD of God coming forth in his first appearance, or the law proceeding from Mount Sinai, witnessed unto by the Scriptures of truth and Oracles of God, that were com∣mitted to the Jews first, and afterwards to the Gentiles; which in all the degrees and steps of its administration, answers the true measure and proportion of Christs natural righteousness and perfection, as he is (and so hath been here described) the head and root thereof to Angels and men, being that holy command∣ment that either may be turned aside from (leaving them that have been under it, to a far worse state then it found them in, and rendring their latter end worse then their beginning, as 2 Pet. 2. 20. &c.) or else be kept without spot and blameless through the power of faith, by the true Saint or spiritual seed. The third law and Rule, is the law of the spirit of life in Christ
Iesus (the WORD of God, in his second appearance, which comes forth from Mount Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem) consisting not in meats and drinks and worldly rudiments, but in the power of an endless life and an everlasting righteousness, written out in fair characters in the death and resurrection of Christ, when he ceased from his own works, and became the beginning and author of life from the dead, as the first-born among the many brethren, whose names are written in heaven, and upon whom God hath written his new name, and the name of the new Ierusalem. The perfection and righteousness of which second appea∣rance, is brought to light fully by the brightness of Christs com∣ming the second time: the first-fruits whereof are already given and set up in the hearts and spirits of the children of promise and of the free-woman, being the hidden Manna which they feed on; the new name which they can read, and the holy anointing whereby they judge all things, whilst themselves are judged of no man.
CHAP. XII. Shewing wherein the three Rules and forms of administration, in Christs mediatorial Kingdom, do differ one from another, and maintain an entire jurisdiction within them∣selves (but in due subordination and sub∣serviency still, of the lower to the higher) over the respective subjects that live under them. THE first of these is the law and Rule which is given by God to all nations, even to the whole world, in their corrupt, degenerate and fallen state, occasioned by the entrance which sin made by Adam, overrunning his whole posterity like a spreading leprosie, whereby man, that by his creation was made a temple of God, became a habitation for Dragons, a court for owls or birds of the night, a hold for every foul spirit, and a cage for every unclean and hateful bird: so that although there was a natural being, life and motion left unto man, it was in the next degree to no being at all, if not, in some respects, far worse. Yet how great soever this desolation was, and how thick soever the darkness be in this howling and barren wilderness-condition of mankind, the blood of Christ is of vertue to make the heart of man again rejoyce and blessom as the Rose; and the voice of the Mediator can make it self to be heard in
the remotest and darkest corners of the world, to the opening of the eyes of the blind, and unstopping the ears of the deaf, to the making the lame to leap and the dumb to sing; to the causing the waters of his manifestation to break forth and stream in this desert; in one word, to the letting in the sound of the Gospel it-self, in the shadowy & dark appearances thereof upon the very ends of the world, in pursuance of the extent of the reconciliation made through the blood of his Cross, by whom all things are reconci∣led unto God, whether they be things in earth or things in heaven: so as the very creation it self is made capable to serve unto the ministry of the Gospel; the heavens to declare the glory of God, & the firmament to shew his handy work; day unto day to utter speech, and night unto night to shew knowledge: by means whereof there is no speech nor language where Christs voice is not heard, their sound going into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world, as Psal. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. compared with Rom. 10. 18. doth evi∣dence. Thus the invisible things of God, even his eternal power and Godhead, shining forth in the face of the Mediator, may be seen by the things that are made, Rom. 1. and that either inwardly, by the influence and operations of the holy Angels, maintaining and keeping up the witness of Christ in the manifestation of natural justice and righteousness, by way of counter-ballance to the works of the devil, and his kingdom of darkness in the world; or outwardly, by the books of the creature and daily discoveries of Gods provi∣dences, that are teaching and instructing to the lowest and meanest natural discernings of men. And to enable them to the receiving hereof, they have a further taste of the bounty of Christ the Redeemer, who doth freely renew and continue their life, breath and all things unto them upon a new tenure, even by the ransom procured for them in his blood, by vertue of which, none of them do fail of partaking, in a common en∣lightning from him, when they receive their beings in this world, and have the lamp or cale of the Lord set up in them, to be as a witness for or against every man, according to his
works, being a light which searcheth the inward parts of the belly, Prov. 20. 27. Over the nations then and people of the world, thus con∣sidered, we say, Christ doth dispense his Rule and government, and gives unto them judgements and ordinances according to which they are to walk, Ezek. 5. and in the doing or not doing of them, their consciences are accusing or excusing of them; and Christ in this his government shews himself by his ministers, to whom he hath committed the mannaging thereof, either in wrath and terrour against all evil works, or an Encourager and Protectour of all them that do well. The prime Minister of God on this behalf, is Christ. The hands in which this government is betrusted by Christ, are the invisible Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and powers of the ho∣ly Angels (as we have already declared, and shall yet further enlarge) made by Christ and for Christ the chief Lords and Rulers of the first world and all the inhabitants thereof. Regard seems to be had to this administration of govern∣ment, Iob 2. 1, 2. where the sons of God or these holy Angels, in their administration of this kind of government, presented themselves before this Lord Christ; and Sathan came also among them, having been his circuits, walking to and fro in the earth, and up and down in it; unto whom the Lord propounds the case of Iob, as of a perfect and upright man, so as there was none like him in all the earth; and who accordingly had found Christ owning, encouraging, and protecting of him, as the devil himself al∣ledged, Chap. 1. at the same kind of meeting between God and the Angels, then held also; for saith Sathan to God, hast thou not made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath? on every side thou hast blessed the works of his hands, and his substance is encreased in the land: intimating hereby the reward that is administred as to the kind of it, by the holy Angels under Christ, to the very heathens themselves; and the punishment of wrath to consist in the contrary dispensa∣tions of God hereunto, when he declares himself outwardly a terrour to wicked works, and puts forth his hand therein: for
which purpose these excellent spirits are invested with power, might and dominion over all the works of Gods hands in the first world, to execute Christs commands, as the Hosts and Ministers that do his pleasure in all places of his dominion, and are alwaies at∣tending and hearkning unto the voice of this WORD, speaking to them as he is the root and head of all natural good and per∣fection. Under these invisible Thrones and higher powers, there are visible ones also set up, and are Christs ordinance and instituti∣on, in an inferiour and subordinate ministration of this govern∣ment of Christ over men; which are called the higher powers of the world, whether contracted in one universal Monarch, as in the time of Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 2. or dispersed into ma∣ny several and distinct forms of Magistracy in the world, ac∣cording as the most high is pleased to set them up, pull them down, or change them, in reference to the present work which he hath to do in the world, and to the state and condition of his own people in it: either for their bringing into bondage and captivity under the worldly powers; or for the leading them out of the same into the glorious liberty by him designed unto them in the last of daies; whereof Nebuchadnezars image was a noti∣fication, once for all, and was so interpreted by Daniel him∣self, when he said to Nebuchadnezar; the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength and glory, and whereso∣ever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and fowls of the heaven, he hath given it into thy hand, and made thee ruler over them: who therefore art this head of Gold. Which government, in the succession of it, shall be disper∣sed, decline and corrupt, until it quite break asunder, and split in pieces before the everlasting kingdom, which is intended by God to be set up in the room thereof. Which compared with Cap. 4. 17. makes it yet more evident, that this visible go∣vernment in the hands of the higher powers of the world, is superintended, over-ruled and influenced throughout, by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones or Angels; to the intent that the living may know, that the most
High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men; evidently decla∣ring that promotion cometh not from the East, or West, or South; but Christ who bears up the pillars of the earth, when else through sin and the fall the earth and the inhabitants thereof had been dissolved, he is the judge, he puts down one, and sets up ano∣ther, Pal. 75. 6, 7. And if then in the inferiour visible administration of this government over men, in the hands of men, the Rule is given and declared, whereunto the governed are to be subject, not only for wrath but conscience sake, Rom. 13. how much straight∣lier is every soul obliged to the same Rule, as it is administred in the hands of the invisible Thrones, at the judgement seat of Angels, who next under Christ the supream Minister of God, are exercising their Ministry in a way of wrath and terrour against all evil workers, and in a way of encouragement and protection unto all those that do well and walk uprightly in the earth? Thus according to the orders and decrees of these watchers and holy ones (whether declared by their inward ministry in the spirits and consciences of the men of the world, or out∣wardly by the wholsome laws and ordinances of man, as the product and fruit of the light by them dispensed, or by the vi∣sible providences of God) is the first administration of Christs kingdom managed and upheld throughout the whole earth and over all the world, even the nations that are yet aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise. And because it is very cleer from Scripture, that the holy ones, or Elect Angels are intrusted under Christ with the dis∣pensing of natural just and right, and are invested with power to see their decrees and orders herein, from time to time by them published and declared, either inwardly or outwardly, to be observed and conformed unto throughout all the earth or visible world, either voluntarily by those that do well, or by way of penalty, compulsion and terrour, by those that are
evil doers; It may be worth our while to enquire, in what ca∣pacity it is, that the holy Angels, as thus ministers of God and Rulers and governors of the world, do take this administrati∣on upon them, and how they are qualified for the dispensing of the same. We are therefere to remember that the Angels before their fall, had a subordinate usefulness unto Christ for the production of the visible world, and were his Chariots wherein he descended for the effecting thereof; covering him∣self with their light as with a garment, and flying upon the wings of this wind, being the top perfection of the first world, where∣in man was made inferiour to them: and wherein they had a superiority and rule over all the works of Gods hands, that were of this first building. This Rule or dominion the good Angels (that held close to their head and obeyed the voice of his word, in becoming servi∣ceable to him in his second appearance, ceasing from their na∣tural motion and workings to reassume their life through the power and tenure of the resurrection from the dead) were so far from forfeiting or being disabled unto, and deprived of the use thereof, that together with, and over and besides this, they received an addition of life and power (in a far better capaci∣ty then what they had by nature) wherein they were made Ministers to the Heirs of salvation: and through the Testimony they then were made to have and bear of Jesus, in the change that came upon them, to fix them in eternal blessedness, when the others fell, they do contribute unto the unveiling of the Son, and are prepares of the way unto his shining forth im∣mediately in his natural life and perfection, as reassumed by him through the power of his resurrection. In which second capacity they are made use of by Christ as mediate instru∣ments under him, in the giving of the law, or renewal of the first Covenant at Mount Sinai, when the word was spoken by Angels, and conveighed in figures and types under Moses Mi∣nistry, pointing out Christs coming in the flesh; and so Christ himself considered as the WORD that was to be made flesh, was ministred by the disposition of Angels, and the descriptions by them given of him, Act. 7. 53.
We are then to acknowledge, that the holy and elect An∣gels are in a two-fold capacity of usefulness unto Christ. In the first of which, they are as his shadow and image, standing singly in themselves, and shewing forth unto the world the natural justice and right that shines forth in their natural be∣ings, made unchangeable by the vertue of Christs resurrecti∣on; wherein they are still as they were at first, a garment of light, or a veyl wherewith Christ covers himself, in his converse with the world and Nations of the Earth in their corrupt na∣tural state, keeping up hereby some light and Rule, even in this night-condition of the world, which is but as a region of dark∣ness in comparison of that day-break from Christ, that shews it self to those that are children either of the first or second Covenant. The second capacity wherein the elect Angels do stand, is, as they bear the image and similitude of Christs natural life and perfection, in unveyling and uncovering their Head, and hiding their own faces before it, with the four and twenty Elders, Rev. 4. that cast their Crowns to the ground before the Lamb, cry∣ing day and night, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. In the first sense, they are as the Moon that rules the night: and in the second, as the bright morning stars, or SONS OF THE MORNING, ushering in the day-break, and ministring therein unto the birth of Christ in his first appearance, in and under the first covenant. The second form of administration, wherein the Kingdom and government of Christ is dispensed and exercised over men, is that which is set up over the children of the first co∣venant, Israel after the flesh, or the earthly Jerusalem: A holy City that God sets in the midst of the Nations and Countries round about her: figured out by the Jerusalem placed in the Land of Canaan: unto which people or generation he is a Saviour or deliverer out of the house of bondage, and a leader towards the Land of promise and true Rest. But through their high provo∣cations of him, and refusal of his Judgements and Statutes which he gives them to walk in, distinct from the rest of the Na∣tions,
and through their resisting of the Holy Ghost, or second appearance and voice of Christ, as him that speaketh from heaven, to which, Moses and the voice on earth at Mount Sinai pointed and directed them; he swears at last in his wrath, that they shall never enter into his Rest, so as they all fall short thereof, that herein abide single, and are made partakers of no higher birth. These have had their general characters given them al∣ready, who by the neerness of union and communion which they are taken into with Christ himself, as their Husband and Bridegroom under the first covenant, are a great, a wise, and a holy people in the sight of all the Nations of the World, having Sta∣tutes and Judgements so righteous and excellent, as is to their admiration; living under the first presence or appearance of Christ (with the fruits thereof, discernable to the natural ca∣pacity of man) owning him, and owned by him, who dwels among them as in his sanctuary and holy temple, therein distin∣guishing them from all other Nations, who in respect of them, are living, as it were, without God and Christ in the world. None are brought or do come into this Kingdom of Christ, but such as accept and answer their call out of the first, through which they become transplanted out of the wild Olive tree of de∣generate nature, and become engrafted into the good Olive tree; receiving as from a new root, a new nature; or rather, from Christ, as he is the root of all natural purity and perfection, a renewing of the same pure nature for kind, wherein man was at first created: and in that state, are fed and nourished up at Christs own table (with those Luke 13. 25, 26. who will say, Lord, Lord, open unto us, we have eaten and drunk in thy pre∣sence) eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, to the growing up into one living body with him, and to the partaking of the root and fatness of the good Olive tree, yet never come to a spiritual discerning of the Lords body, as crucified and raised from the dead, but taking up their Rest in a knowledge of Christ that is but according to the flesh, through which they clean escape the pol∣lutions of the world, and then turn aside from the holy command∣ment
delivered unto them in the ministry of this first covenant. These are they that are under the dominion of the law, or of Christ, as he is the Minister of circumcision & of Gods first ap∣pearance, exhibiting himself to the eyes of their mind in the righteousness of his natural man (as he is God manifested in flesh, and so witnessed unto by the Scriptures) as a holy commandment, unto which he begets and requires conformity in them. Here he is to be seen and conversed with, as on Mount Sinai, in the holy place or worldly Sanctuary, where his Angels are his chariots, even thousand thousands of Angels, to administer the glory of this kingdom under him, and as his forerunners to prepare the way whither he himself intends to come, and vouchsafe his own perpetual presence and abode. So then, until Christs coming in the flesh, into the true Tabernacle, which God pitched and not man, the Word, Law or Rule of this kingdom also, was spoken, given, and admini∣stred by Angels; called the law and Ministry of circumcision or of Moses, contained in the two tables, together with the Judi∣cial laws, and fleshly rites and ordinances of divine service (those relating to the second table, these to the first and to the ma∣terial temple-worship) which were to contiune till the time of reformation, at the comming of the true Temple it self, when the WORD was made flesh. But Christ being come, and having in the body prepared for him, fulfilled the will of the Father in offering up himself in the flesh without spot unto God, through the eternal spirit, and with his own blood entred into the holiest of all, he thought fit no longer to dwell in Temples made with hands, Acts 7. 48. but abolishing all the former fleshly rites and worldly ordinances, belonging unto the Temple-worship that was then, he did build up out of the ruines thereof, a spiritual Temple, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. which Temple, saith the Apostle Paul unto the Corinthians, are yee; which yet is but such a kind of building, for permanency and abiding, as the former: For whosoever of you (saith Paul) shall defile this Temple, him shall God destroy, whoever you be, that after your being enlightned, and having received the knowledge of the
truth, shall not hold fast your confidence unto the end, but become such servants as are to be cast out of the house, making shipwrack of faith and a good conscience. Thus there is an Israel after the flesh, kept up and continued under the Gospel, as well as under the law; who are now un∣der Christs immediate government by his spirit, in the mini∣stry of his first appearance, and according to the tenor of the first covenant, as they then were under the law, and had the word spoke unto them by Angels, in the Mosaical ministration: both being but one and the same earthly Ierusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children; in which it is most true still, that they are not all Israel that are of Israel; neither because they are the seed of Abraham, the Father of the faithful, & so pre∣tending to be believers, are they all children; but in Isaac, cru∣cified, offered up Isaac, shall thy seed be called: that is to say, they that are the children of the flesh and of the living and natural body only, are not the children of God; but the children of the promise are counted for the seed, that were raised out of a womb as good as dead, and sprang up to Abraham (after that he had re∣ceived the promises, as they respected his fleshly seed) by Isaacs restauration as from the dead, the figure of Christs death and resurrection. This earthly Jerusalem is the worldly Church under the Gospel, the incorporated body of visible Saints, called out and separated from the world: who for their Law and Rule, own and profess the written word and the spirit of Christ, received and held forth in no higher a ministry then that of Christ, as he is the head and root of all natural purity and perfection, singly considered; declaring themselves herein a holy or a separated people, by a manifest self-distinguishing profession (according to the measure of their receiving from Christ, and growth up unto him) from all heathenish worship, yea and corrupt Christian professions or practises: walking in all the ordinances and judgements of Christ (held forth to them from the Scriptures in the various forms thereof) which their light leads them to receive.
This visible temple or worldly sanctuary of God, is a true Church (as they walk in the light, and according to the truth of this Law, under which they are) and (as shall be shewed) the nursery or womb of all the true spiritual seed, Rev. 12. 1. &c. Where it is described by the woman cloathed with the Sun, the day of Christs first appearance, and having the Moon, or heathenish Gentile state under her feet, being exalted into a glory far above them, and made use of by God to bring forth the manchild or heavenly seed, that are to rule the Nations with a rod of iron, which in their divine birth are caught up to God and to his Throne, and so, much farther exalted above the earthly Jerusalem, then she is above the rest of the Nations. This earthly Jerusalem, in the times of the Law, had judi∣cial Laws, for the heightning of a civil Magistracy into a su∣tableness unto the divine service of this worldly sanctuary. But since Christs ascension, and the spirituality of this very temple to be continued under the Gospel, till the fulness of the Gentiles come in, and the mysterie of God in Christs fleshly dispensations shall be finished) although many attempts have been made, and endeavours used to revive a like Magi∣stracy again, in conformity to the judicials of Moses, in the very letter of them, there hath seldom been found any considera∣ble progress or success herein; forasmuch as Christ is rather pleased to detain his people in subjection and captivity under the powers of the world, and the Magistracy kept up by him over men as men, during the season of sufferings allotted to them: in which, as souls under the Altar of persecution, they cry out, How long Lord holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwel on the earth? and are enabled by faith to see through and above the visible powers and thrones of this world, into the ministry of Christ by his Angels, who are, all the while, Magistrates and Rulers in a higher sphere and capacity then the others; and who (as the times of Christ draw near, who is the only Potentate and KING OF KINGS) shall shew themselves to be his servants, taking vengeance in flames of fire upon all ungodly men, that are his and his peoples implacable enemies.
By what then hath been said, we may see how consistent this second branch of Christs Rule over men, is with the first; as that wherein this second sort of men that make up the earth∣ly Jerusalem, have all things in common with the first, as to their being benefited by the dispensation of natural right and justice; enjoying withall, much more then all this amounts to, even the comfortable warmth and life that is found in the day-light of Christs first appearance, and by immediate and fruitful converse with him in the same, which is far to be pre∣ferred before the night of the Gentile world. The third and last form or administration of the Kingdom of Christ which is exercised over men, is that whereby the true spiritual seed of Abraham, according to Gods promise, Gen. 22. 17. do possess the gates of their enemies; and shall in their proper season be manifested to be the seed, wherein all the Nati∣ons of the earth shall be blessed: which is farther explained, Dan. 7. 18. 22. where it is said, that the Saints of the most high shall take the Kingdom and possess it for ever, even for ever and ever, in fellowship and society with Christ their Head, sitting upon the Throne with him, having a dominion, glory, and a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed. The supreme Lords and Rulers then in this kingdom under Christ, are the Saints, or general assembly of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven, Children that Christ will make princes in all lands, giving them the honour written: to bind even Kings in chains, and the Nobles in fetters of iron: unto whom as unto the right heirs of salvation, the elect Angels will be constant ministers and attendants, in their charge and office of administing natural right and justice, and executing vengeance on all the enemies of these Saints of the most High, who come not to the attainment of this high glory and dig∣nity suddenly, or one before another, but by a general gather∣ing of them all together by their head: first, into one dead body with him, as planted together in the likeness of his death or offering up in the flesh: which is a needful preparation to the bearing and right managing the honour and preheminence
of that Crown and dominion, which they are called unto, over all the works of Gods hands. Secondly by their being gathered together unto him, in one heavenly and glorified body, as planted also in the likeness of his resurrection, in the glory wherein he is set down at Gods right hand: which is expected to be fulfilled at his return, when we shall see him coming from heaven, in like manner as he was seen to ascend up thither. This third sort of Christs subjects are compared by himself, Luke 8. unto the good ground: on whom Christ the word and seed of life fell, as into honest and good hearts, that having heard the word keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience: having such a faith as is mentioned James 1. 3. that under manifold temptati∣ons, approves and justifies itself to be found durable and saving, in and by the fruit of patience, which it works: obtaining a free passage and course for the WORD OF CHRISTS PATIENCE in the soul, till it hath had its perfect work, and made the mind per∣fectly conformable with Christ, in his death, 1 Pet. 4. 1. to the ma∣king the believer perfect and entire, wanting nothing: and to be of the number of those that do overcome, and are made pillars in the house of God, never to go out more. These are the true Heirs of salvation, that as princes may be found walking on foot, here in this world, whilst servants are ri∣ding on horseback: and are in faith and patience possessing their souls, albeit they be killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter, Rom. 8. 36. slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they hold, Rev. 6, 9, 10, 11. unto whom white robes are given, even garments washed in the blood of the Lamb: in which patient posture they are appointed to wait and rest for a little season, untill their fellow-servants also and brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fufillled. We find not only this third sort of Christs subjects, mentio∣ned and comprehended under that parable of the sower, Luk. 8. but the second and first also, very lively described to those that have ears te hear, yea, and Christ himself as the universal seeds∣man, the living WORD OF GOD, who scatters the seed of his
searching light and life into all hearts and consciences what∣soever, enlightning every one that comes into the world, and set∣ting up that in them, which is a discerner of their thoughts and of the intents of their hearts: who therefore is held forth in that pa∣rable first, as he sows his seed by the wayside or high waies, interpre∣ted by himself, Mat. 22. 9. to be the visits and communications of light and life, sowen by him among the Gentiles. For so he saith, when he would intimate Gods intention (upon the Jews rejection of him) to bring the Gentiles into the knowledge of himself; Go ye therefore into the High waies, or un∣to the Gentiles, and as many as you shall find, bid them unto the marriage: shewing evidently, that by the high-waies on which the seed fals, he means the Gentiles; as appears, Luke 8. 12. where it is said, that in this state, the devil comes (or may come) and take away the Word out of their hearts, lest they should be∣lieve and be saved: that is, before it come up to the birth of faith in them, so much as of a temporary faith (for oommon salvation, which appertains to the second sort properly, repre∣sented by the second and third, the stony & thorny groud) much less a saving one, being only a seed of light or work of Christ in the conscience, teaching to feel after faith and sal∣vation, but not actually entring them into it: and so is a most lively description of the subjects of Christ, and hearers of the word under the first dispensation. Now that which remains, is to shew how the children of the first covenant and earthly Jerusalem under the Gospel are also held forth in this parable, who are temporary believers, arriving at, and attaining through the power of the WORD, a state of common salvation, with those of the Church of Lao∣dicea, Rev. 3. who thereby became rich and increased with goods, needing nothing, being ignorant that they were miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; in a condition that would abide trials, no more then those represented by the stony and thorny ground, who when they heard, received the Word with joy, and for a while believed, but in time of temptation fell away, as unable to resist and avoid the abuse of lawfull comforts and enjoyments
vouchsafed unto them by God in the first convenant, but ready every moment to over-charge their hearts with surfeiting, drun∣kenness, and good things of this world, (the sweet whereof was relished and esteemed by them in such excess, as to work in them an undervalue and disrellish of Christ, in his heavenly glory) to the choaking of the true spiritual seed, in its approaches to them, by the means of the riches and pleasures of this life, working death in them by that which is good, so as no fruit in them comes unto perfection, or is brought forth in duration & abundance, as by those that bring it forth with patience under the teachings and disciplinings of the Cross, whereof such as are bastards and not sons do not partake; and for want of which, they at last fall away, and draw back unto perdition. Now saith Christ, in what he subjoyns to this parable; think it not sufficient therefore to be those that have light, and are hearers, yea and receivers of the WORD; for so, in some degree or other, all the world may be (as we have shewed) but consider how you hear, or what use you make of it: for those that use it lawfully, and are faithfull in little, or in the least partakings of it, unto them more shall be given, till the seed spring up unto a perfect day: but those who shall use it unlawfully and unworthily, so as to cover it with a bushel, or hide it under a bed, so as to detain it in unrighteousness, or take up their Rest in that which is short, and but in part, from such shall be taken away ever that which they have, and seem to hold upon such a tenure, that it will not fail them, but abide unto life everlasting.
CHAP. XIII. Shewing the fixed enmity and war that is main∣tained and kept up by Satan, against the Rule and Kingdom of the Mediator in the World, in order to make of none effect unto men, the inestimable price and useful∣ness of Christs Blood, in their fallen state. WHen the Devil found by the just and irrevocable sentence of God, which was passed upon him and the wicked Angels, the desperatness of his and their condition; and understood the power of a mighty Saviour and Redeemer, discovering it∣self in the Mediator, to obviate and break in pieces all his devices and evil designs (together with the way whereby this should be wrought out and brought to pass by the promised Seed that was to be born of a woman, whose heel he should have the liberty to bruise, before his own head should be to∣tally broken, and himself and instruments troden under foot) he is presently enflamed and breaks out into implacable rage against the woman and her seed (in whom all mankinde are again made alive) and such of these with whom he cannot prevail to continue his subjects (but despairs of bringing them to his Lure, or making them to serve his ends) he sets at open defiance, not being idle in the mean time, by his utmost en∣deavors, to keep off as many as he can from closing with the free and gracious offer, tendred to all men in the blood of
Christ; and where that hath had any influence or prevalency to bring over men unto Christ for a season, he makes it his bu∣siness to beguil and seduce them back again unto him not∣withstanding, if it be possible. And thus increasing and strengthening a party to himself, from within the bowels of the Mediators own Kingdom, he declares himself in an open war and absolute enmity against the true and faithful Subjects and Witnesses of Christ, which he puts in execution (by vertue of the general Commission received from God, wherein liberty and power is given to this Serpent to bruise their heel) not only to the depriving them of all that might be hopefull or desirable to them in this life, and making the world to become a barren wilderness to them in all respects, as far as he may; but also to the incensing and arm∣ing all the visible Powers and Thrones of this world against them, to keep them in a kinde of temporary captivity and subjection. In which posture we may finde the faithful Subjects and Witnesses of Christ, from Abel downwards, to the last fini∣shing of their testimony, Rev. 11. patiently bearing all the brunts of this war between Michael and his angels, and the devil and his angels, from its first rise to its last conclusion, untill the measure of Christs sufferings in them be fulfilled in the ut∣most extent of them, as the whole seed is therein concerned; by means whereof their faith and patience is exercised to the end, even till the time come that they must be crowned with glory and honour, and be set above all the works of Gods hands. Hence then we may perceive the race of patience, that on the one hand is set before the true believers, in conformity to their head, making the world and present life in it, as an irk∣som wilderness unto them, whereinto they are led to be tempted and proved to the utmost, in the obedience of their faith: and the race of prosperity, earthly glory and power on the other hand, which the wicked are likewise brought into, as their reward in this life in the service of the god of this world: who are permitted to have their hearts desire, and for a season
to bring their wicked devices to pass, even against the righ∣teous. For both their sakes therefore it will be needfull to take as exact and particular a survey of the whole matter on all hands as we can (which in the following chapters our inten∣tion is to do, and therefore in this we shall but give some ge∣neral glances thereat) that we may come the more clearly to see the end of the Lord, and stand astonished at the wisdom of his Counsels, and excellency of his Workings, in the wind∣ing up. This method of Gods proceedings, being that which is chalked forth to us by the Scriptures of truth, from the be∣ginning to the end, may through Gods blessing become the means of explicating many dark and difficult places thereof, and minister a fit occasion to lay open the power and work∣ings of Satan, as influencing the judgement and wills of men, whilst the free motion and managing thereof is in their own keeping, unsubdued and unbroken by the cross of Christ, that takes this arbitrary and self-directing power out of their hands, bringing it down to a perfect silence and cessation in all those that by believing enter into the true Rest; of which (by being left alone to the use of their freedom) those do come short (even after all their attainments in a state of com∣mon salvation) who for a while do appear the subjects of Christ, whether under the first or second dispensation, and afterwards prove to be of that prevailing power and interest which Satan wins from Christ, and works over to himself, fixedly engaging them to take part and side with him, as that Serpentine brood and viperous generation, that treads so hard upon the heel of the true Saints in all Ages, with a bloody cruelty, and fixed implacable enmity against those precious witnesses of Christ, for their exact likeness and conformity unto their Head; which is such, as that Rev. 11. 4. they are described by the same two Olive branches, which Zach. 4. are applied unto Christ himself, to signifie, that they are planted with him into the same likeness, in Gods twofold name, figured
out thereby, and so have that twofold name and witness wrought out in them, which distinguishes them as well from the children of the first Covenant (who bear conformity but with one of the Olive branches, as singly communicable, with∣out the other) as also from all that are called Gentiles, whose very light is but as darkness, to the shining forth of the single witness only, in the children of the first Covenant. Thus we are to understand by the two OLIVE TREES and the two CANDLESTICKS, mentioned Rev. 11. 14. the whole Spiritual Seed (considered in their exact conformi∣ty to their Head, as well in his second as in his first appearance) who are the two witnesses, that from the very beginning of the world, successively, in their several generations, have been the slain ones of the Lord, the slaughtered sheep of Christ, for the word of God and testimony of Jesus. Yet we are not to rest and content our selves only with this general sense of the place, which is true, and doth give the proper character of the true Saint, possessing and inheri∣ting whole Christ, and bearing upon him his whole name or his new name, wherein of twain they are made one, inseparably communicated, as the twofold witness, wherein the true heirs of salvation must be found, to the glory of God the Father: But we may farther take notice of a more restrained and par∣ticular consideration of these two witnesses (which will be but a small digression from the matter in hand) as they are spo∣ken of in that place, Rev. 11. where they are also to be look∣ed upon as a particular number of the true Seed, living and standing up in the world, in that age and season foretold by John, and qualified with an extraordinary Spirit of prophesie, in reference to the justifying (before the eyes of the world) the truth of this twofold witness, being clothed with power suitable, in a way of working wonderful things, during the time of such their prophesie: whereof Elijah was the type in his days, who by praying to God, shut up the heavens for three years and an half, that it did not rain (the like is prophesied to be done by these witnesses, ver 6.) and brought down fire from
heaven, to prove that he was a MAN OF GOD, and that his God was the true God; yet after all this was forced to flie for his life, to get from under the cruelty and oppression of his enemies, and was at last taken up visibly into heaven, in a cha∣riot of fire, Elisha beholding and looking upon him. In which Spirit of Elijah some of the true Spiritual Seed are reserved by God to be brought forth in the last days, and to give a most spiritual and remarkable witness unto the truth of Christs first and second appearance in his Saints, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. In which dispensation they shall serve as the immediate forerunners to the bright∣ness of Christs second appearance for the restoring of all things, preparatively, by this their Ministry of fire, as John Baptist served unto the coming of Christ in the flesh, by his Ministry of water; and in that sense was owned by Christ to be as Elijah already come, to wit, in the shadow or figure of this Elijah that is to precede his second coming. By what then hath been said, we may perceive who are meant by the Spiritual Seed; and how they are described in the Scripture as the two witnesses of God; first, in a more ge∣neral acceptation, as in all Ages they are to have their heel bruised, and to be slain for the word of God, and then in a more particular and restrained sense, as some of them are to come forth in the latter days, in the Spirit and power of Elijah, to pre∣pare for Christs second coming, and then to have their dead bodies for three days and an half remain unburied in the great Ci∣ty, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt: which city, as the mo∣ther of Harlots, hath been extant in its spirit and principles from the beginning, as well as the prophane heathenish world with the powers thereof, embodied together upon differing grounds and interests by the Spirit of the old Dragon, and in∣fluenced by him as suitable instruments of War and Engines of battery, for the bruising of the heel of the true Spiritual Seed, and keeping them under, in all generations, as spectacles to men and angels: who are weak, despised, thirst, hunger, are na∣ked and buffeted, have no certain dwelling place, but labour,
working with their hands; who being reviled, bless; and being persecuted, suffer; and being defamed, entreat; are made as the filth of the world, and off-scouring of all things to this ve∣ry day. To this War between the Seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, all things tended and wrought from the very moment that Christ did accomplish and finish the se∣venth days work; discovering thereby Gods true REST, as it was set up in his own Person, as the Mediator and Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, when he offered up that in sacrifice, according to the will of the Father, wherein he rejected and cast under his feet the purest, choicest excel∣lency and perfection of all natural beings (as they stood single in themselves, unperfected by the union and subjection they were to be taken into by his second appearance) necessarily conducing to the breaking of the serpents head, and top glory in his Angelical nature, and to the trampling it under the feeet of the Saints. In like manner, the Devil, that old Dragon, perceiving that to be done in Christ the Mediator, which he could by no means rellish or bear; that which was totally cross and de∣structive to him, as fixed in that selfish spirit or single state of natural perfection, wherein he lusted to Rule and Reign, as god in the world; and propounding the greatness of a King∣dom and glory to himself (in which to enjoy his own will, think his own thoughts, do his own works, and speak his own words, which were not lawfull for him in the Sabbath of the true Rest to the Lord) he wilfully and maliciously quitted his head, Christ; left his own habitation (choosing rather to become the Father of lyes, then to remain the son and servant of truth) and so fini∣shed and compleated that root of enmity against Christ and the Spiritual Seed, in himself, whose off-spring they are that have this root of gall and bitterness springing up in them (notwithstanding the life and perfection of their natural be∣ings, wherein either they were at first created, or unto which, in the principles thereof, they are again renewed in the blood
of Christ) by which they strike in with the devils interest, in downright opposition to Christ, taking part with that King Apollyon, Rev. 9. 11. to destroy him, what in them lies, as himself plainly tels this sort of men, Joh. 8. 37. acknow∣ledging them to be Abrahams fleshly seed, but (saith he) ye seek to kill me, and therefore, ver. 39. he denies them (in effect) to be Abrahams spiritual seed, or of the faith of Abraham; for if ye were thus the children of Abraham (saith he) ye would do the works of Abraham, and this did not he: he did not become an enemy and seek to kill men for speaking the truth, which they have heard of God, ver. 40. If therefore you desire to know what Father youbelong to, I tell you plainly, you are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do; he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him; when he speaketh a lye, he speaketh of his own: for he is a lyar and the father of it, ver. 44. So then, although God gave to Angels and men at first the goodness and perfection of natural beings, and doth free∣ly offer a renewal of the same to men, in the blood of Christ, by the first covenant, made again in force by vertue of his death, as the first Testament, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18. yet this image and likeness of God, wherein they were made, and whereunto they are again renewed, as it stands single and alone without the other, is a mutable and corruptible seed, the children whereof are therefore capable to turn again into degenerate plants, and into the wild olive tree. For God comes down in the ministry hereof as under a veil, to the creatures sight and enjoyment, in which man fixing and taking up his abode (waiting for no further discovery, nor expecting or listning after that second voice of him that speaketh from heaven) may for ever stand excluded from entrance into or converse with the glory that is within the veil, where God is to be seen and enjoyed by the creature, face to face. By the blood of Christ then, man is first made capable to be taken out of the wild degenerate state of nature, and to be planted into the good Olive tree (the flesh or natural man, in
the person of Christ) and when he comes to partake of the fatness thereof, as it singly gives forth Christ in his first ap∣pearance, or a knowledge of him only according to the flesh (which Paul grew a stranger to, as he came to be more acquainted with the Cross) he is still but in a capacity to stand or fall again, as upon his second proof and trial, in the renewed ex∣ercise of his free will and rectified natural abilities of mind, he demeans himself: according to which he proves the womb whereinto is received either a divine seed and birth, whereof the mediator in his death and resurrection is the author and parent; or else a devilish seed and birth, whereof the Serpent and old Dragon is the Father, growing up into a wilful and fixed enmity against the Cross of Christ. One or other of these two seeds all sorts of men do become, by the evil and unworthy, or the good and worthy use of Christs blood, and the benefits of his death: and so are either the seed of the woman and of promise, or the seed of the Serpent, lying children, born from beneath of the father of lyes, in comparison of the di∣vine birth of the true seed that in the other sense are born of God and from above. This latter is attained unto through Gods bounty and free love, the Mediator adopting them into oneness of seed with himself, as he is the only begotten Son in whom God is well-pleased. The other, through Gods just permission, and Satans pre∣vailing power and influence upon their lust and natural will at its best, are changed and corrupted into likeness and oneness of seed with the old Serpent. By reason of which different dispensations, the innocent, good, righteous and perfect state of mans nature, communicated to him by vertue of the first covenant, comes either to grow up into that which is much better, even into the power of an endless life, or else to degenerate and sink down into that which is much worse, even eternal enmity and opposition of mind unto God, which is the second death. That then which fixeth man in his unchangeable and
permanent state of everlasting blessedness or misery, is the bringing him forth out of his first wavering and changeable state into oneness of seed with Christ the Mediator, in his second appearance, wherein he is made to bear the likeness of his death and resurrection: or the leaving him to be transfor∣med into oneness of seed with the destroyer, and thereby to become a child of perdition. The first of these changes, mans natural will at its very best, lusteth against, as the greatest cross that can be brought upon it, until by regeneration and the baptism of fire, it be prepared, broken and subdued into a meet subjection thereunto. And the latter change cannot be obtruded by the devil, or forced upon mans will, but is brought upon him by and with his own free consent: which was not found difficult to be gained in the state of mans innocency and purity in Para∣dise, and is not more, since. Here then we see the seat and original of this enmity be∣tween the two seeds (springing up in the manner before ex∣pressed, in their respective heads and roots) who are thus to be found, as they are in their heads and first principles, before they flow forth in the off-spring, and are discerned in their distinct operations, in the particular beings of men here in this world, as deeds done in the body, whether they be good or evil: for which all men are rendred accountable, when they come to stand before the judgement seat of Christ. In order therefore to their own voluntary actings herein, they are endued with the exercise of a freedome of will, which by creation was perfect, absolute and uninterrupted; and which (by the ballance that God since the fall, keeps up by the ministry of the holy Angels, with their influence and impres∣sions upon the natural enlightned conscience, as also by the work of the spirit himself, upon those farther illuminated minds, under the first covenant, against the power and influ∣ence of the devil upon mans corrupted and depraved state) is so far and truly exercised by man in the several measures and degrees thereof, as will render him inexcusable for not
hearkning to the light and means tendred and afforded to him through the blood of Christ, revealed by the Gospel, in one or other of the three forementioned branches of his king∣dome. So that now, upon Gods making man on the sixth day of the creation, forming the first Adam of the dust of the ground, and breathing into him the breath of life, he became a living soul, was set up in the first image of God, brought forth in the same kind of mutable perfection with the Angels, and in all the glory and accomplishments of this first state, was a fit subject brought upon the stage, capable to be attempted by both these great Captains and competitors, Michael, in the person of the blessed Mediator, and the old Dragon, in the person of the devil. And this last seems to get the start of the other at first on set, forasmuch as by means of the womans weakness, who was first in the transgression, he makes a great advance towards his design, supposing he had neer attained his end; for he had prevailed so far, as to bring Adam and Eve into the transgressi∣on and forfeiture of all the natural good they were by crea∣tion made possessours of. And then further, in prosecution of the same design, upon this breach made between God and them, he endeavours to cast in the seed of alienation and fixed enmity between them and God, in order to set up his abiding Throne and seat in the fallen nature of man, whereof the first Adam was the earthly head, in whom the door was set open, whereby sin en∣tred into the world, and death by sin. Thus things were brought into a most hopeful way, in the eye of the devil, to disappoint and defeat the design of the Mediator, as to the safe conducting the promised seed, through all this disadvantage and opposition, into the desired place of the true Rest. Whence it is that the Mediator and Lamb slain from the beginning, did hereupon think it high time to make discovery of himself, and of the means for the accomplishing and bringing of his designs to pass, in despite of the Serpents subtilty, and in downright opposition to the very gates of hell.
By way of promise therefore he declares and engages himself to set up another man, a second Adam, Jesus the Son of Mary to be born of the seed of the woman; who, by being brui∣sed in his heel, and undergoing all the rage and enmity that the devil and his instruments could exercise upon him, should arrive at such a neerness and intimacy of converse with God in the glory within the veil, as that by the joy thereof set before him (and the power thereof conveyed into him, in the seed of it, when he was laid hold on by the WORD, in the womb of the Virgin) he should be enabled to offer up himself in sacrifice to the Fathers will, without spot to God, through the eternal spirit; enduring the Cross and despising the shame: and so through his suf∣ferings entring into the glory that was to follow, he is for ever set down upon his Throne, at Gods right hand, expecting till his foes be made his foot-stool. Hence it is, that as through man came death, so also by man comes the resurrection of the dead; and the same man or first A∣dam, who was of the earth, earthy, becomes the subject matter for both these seeds to work upon, the seed of the promise and seed of the Serpent, both being to be sown in this earth, influenced and managed by these two grand competitors, Michael and the Dragon; in order to engage and fix the particular men and women of Adams posterity, either in their true Rest, or in an everlasting enmity thereunto, and exclusion from it; as they are either begotten of God and born of the spirit, whereby they become children of the promise and heirs of salvation; or left in the state of their natural beings, voluntarily to drink in the seed of the Serpent, and thereby to become hardned and prove finally children of wrath, and sons of perdition, as born after the flesh, and as by a fair shew in the flesh they do exercise and manage the fiercest persecution against the true spiritual seed. So then, according to the birth which they are of, they are either measured out with a line of life, unto life; or a line of death, unto death: answering the two great ends, whereunto we shall find all things serve in this world and in the kingdom thereof.
This is that being of this world or from beneath, spoken of by Christ in the Gospel, which though in its rise and beginning, as hath been shewed, it be of God; yet in its progress and end, through the unlawful use thereof, it comes to be of the devil, who is the head and father unto that state, spirit, and interest, which stands in direct contradiction and enmi∣ty to that of Christ and the promisedseed, as they are the Jeru∣salem that is from above, and are not of this world. For in this Ser∣pentine seed, there is comprehended an irreconcileable enmi∣ty and opposition to the power and excellency of the Cross of Christ. In which contrariety and opposition to the Cross, all natu∣ral perfection and goodness is looked upon by God, as con∣sidered only in its single seed (and as the enjoyers and pos∣sessors thereof are left by God to their own natural senses, capacities and powers of mind, assisted with all needful helps and means, proper and suitable to that state) without the addition of a higher and more excellent birth, reserved by God as a fruit of his bounty and free grace unto his chosen and be∣loved ones. By what hath been said, we may plainly see, that although Gods own chosen vessels are determined from all eternity, and fixed in such a neerness of union with God in their head, that they can never be moved, but are preserved by the power and influence thereof, from all possibility of miscarying, so as to fall short of true blessedness: yet those that are in the num∣ber of the non-elect, are not necessarily determined so much as in the means leading them to their destruction, but have the free use of their own natural abilities to prevent the same, assisted with all suitable, requisite helps and means from God to keep them from it; who omitteth nothing that is to be done on his part, conducible hereunto, which is consistent with the freedome of mans will, and doth not offer violence to the principles which himself chooseth to joyn issue with God upon; besides all which, he that is faithful and cannot deny him∣self, is pleased to be in the posture of one that is not yet risen
up to shut the door finally upon them, but leaves open a possibility of graffing them into an oneness of seed with the right heirs, if at his coming he shall find them making a right and lawful use of the blood of Christ (required by that first covenant, renewed thereby upon them since the fall) and not voluntarily rendring themselves uncapable of such favour by their needless provocations, in hardning their hearts against the voice and teachings of the Cross, and rejecting that coun∣sel of God against their own souls. God then is so far from looking upon the fall of man in the first Adam, and the act of disobedience by him committed, as the fixing of him and his posterity in an incapacity of re∣turning unto God, and of being made the true and right heirs of salvation, that he is pleased through the blood of Christ, to declare himself reconciled to the whole race of mankind, as beholding them in a new head, in the seed of the woman, or second Adam, a truth at large discussed and held forth, 2 Cor. 5. as also Jer. 31. compared with Ezek. 18. where Christ chal∣lenges all souls to be his, as having obtained the non-imputing of sins past unto them, in order to put them upon a new trial of per∣sonal obedience unto him who is the Lord that bought them, and hath renewed life in them, that they should henceforth not live unto themselves, but to him that died for them. Yea, this is so evi∣dent, that the creature itself, Rom. 8. 19, 20. earnestly groans and labours, expecting a restauration by this price of redemption paid by Christ, from under the bondage of corruption, so as to be brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. In summ therefore, there are these two great and general benefits, flowing forth from Christs death upon all men. The first is, a common enlightning of spirit, whereby there is set up in them in some degree, more or less, the candle of the Lord, shewing the work of the law in their consciences, to the accusing or excusing them in all they do, and enabling them to such improvement thereof, as to attain the answer of a good natural conscience unto the Rule set before them, under the first administration of Christs kingdom.
The second is, Gods not imputing to them sins past (as also the often renewing of his pardon to them for sins present, Psalm 78. 38. exercising therein his forbearance for the sake of his own justice, as pacified and atoned by Christs sacrifice) accompanied with protection and encouragement which thence also is afforded them by the hands of the good Angels, as his ministers of justice unto all such as by approving themselves faithful in that little they have received, are found in the number of wel-doers. by which we see the extent of the vertue of Christs blood, even to the ends of the earth, wherein he hath prepared as large a remedy for the fallen seed of Adam as the dise ase required.
CHAP. XIV. Shewing the continuance and progress of the war between the subjects of Christ and Anti-Christ, and the terms and issues upon which they joyn. THis war first discovered itself in the two brothers, Cain and Abel; where the devil comes off equal with Christ, so as to gain and prevail with Cain, as Christ chose and accepted Abel: yea, for suc∣cess in the combate, seems to have the better; judging probably, that in this murther of Abel, the promised seed might have been wholly extinct, and so have finally mis∣carried: God therefore supplies Abels room with another son; through whose line the PROMISED SEED might be yet figured out, and carryed on; as through Cains line, the SEED OF THE SERPENT were shadowed forth, and continued. But the world coming to multiply, and the generations of men to increase, the subjects now of Christs three king∣domes, distributed as before we have set down, are upon the stage at once. The first sort of men are those in a corrupt, degenerated state, whose daughters the SONS OF GOD went in un∣to, Gen. 6. and so begat Giants, or men of renown. The second sort are typed out and comprehended in this race of GYANTS, or men of fame and great repute, ha∣ving the name of sons, and God for their Father; but being weighed in the ballance of the sanctuary, were found to be too light: a
fleshly seed only; though such as therein did bear the first image of God; yet who in process of time, did so corrupt themselves, that God refused to strive by his spirit any longer with them, but gave them up to the destruction of the flood, as those who became in the imaginations of their hearts, alwaies evil before him, and in the works they did perform. The third sort were found in the family of Noah, who was righteous in Gods account, and typed out the true spiritual seed. Thus we see the distribution of mankind before the flood: but after the flood, it became much more evident and appa∣rent, not only in the three sons of Noah, that afterwards peo∣pled again the whole earth: but in the time of Abraham, with whom God renewed both his covenants: making him the Fa∣ther of many nations, or indeed, of the two great nations, one of the law, the other of faith: Ishmael, born of Hagar, the bond-woman, figuring out the children of the first covenant, that were born after the flesh: and Isaac the son of the free woman, who was by promise, typing out the seed born after the spirit. These two seeds were distinguished by their births, and dis∣pensations they were under, from all the nations of the world besides, who were in an open idolatrous, heathenish state, out of which Abraham was called into the land which God should shew him. And in process of time, when God made good the promises to Abrahams seed, in giving them possession of the earthly Canaan, he still continued this threefold distribution of man∣kind, chusing the fleshly seed of Abraham from among all the Nations round about them, and placing them in the midst of them; and then by his Prophets and the true ministry of his Word, subdividing again the spiritual seed from the carnal. Into this threefold distribution, God was pleased to sort and rank fallen mankind, and so to continue them unto Christs second coming, in order to accomplish and fulfil the whole counsel of his will upon them, which he had fore-purposed and determined within himself; and had chosen the Lord Jesus
as a polished shaft in his hand, to bring to pass accordingly, by what he reveals of himself in the Gospel and word of TRUTH: wherein first he is declared to the Captain and Author of salvation unto the whole spiritual seed, the many sons that are given him by the Father, to bring up to eternal glory (in the same way he came to it himself, who was made perfect through suffer∣ings) of whom he is not to lose one, but to raise them up all at the last day, into everlasting life. Secondly, he is declared the Redeemer and Ransomer, so far, of all mankind, from under the power of sin and Satan, as to disable them to keep off the good things contained in the promises of this life, or of that which is to come, from any that shall fulfill the condition of them, or at least keep themselves (as they may) from such high provocations and wilful resistance, for which God swears in his wrath they shall never enter into his REST. But when man finds such work before him, as he cannot go through with by the strength of nature, he will not resign up himself in such case (though he see there is no other way) that God may do it for him by bringing him to Christ that he may have life; but sits down in a sullenness of spirit, resisting the Holy Ghost, and rejecting the counsel of God, against his own soul. In direct opposition to both these declared branches of Gods will, in the Gospel, the devil and his instruments set themselves. First, to attempt by all the power that is in the gates of hell, to prevail against the very elect themselves that are built on the Rock, and are out of his reach to annoy, in reference to the cer∣tainty of their salvation: finding therefore little hopes or likelihood to frustrate them in that, he makes it his business to render them of all men most miserable, as to any hopes or en∣joyments in this life; wherein he finds latitude given him, in the power allowed to him, to bruise their heel. Secondly; he useth all the means-that lie in his power, by subtilty or force, so far as Gods permission gives way to him, to assault the will and judgement of man, how highly en∣lightned,
and how far quickned soever, upon his single natu∣ral root, in order to entice and draw him away from his subje∣ction unto God, in the natural service and worship that is due from him, never leaving till he hath prevailed with and over him; to provoke God so highly (notwithstanding all his good∣ness, patience and long-suffering to him extended, through the blood of Christ) as thereby to render himself unworthy of any further love or favour, and to move God to swear in his wrath, that he shall never enter into his REST. Under these two general heads, we shall find, as in a con∣stant track, throughout the whole Scripture, the workings and counter-workings that are kept on foot and maintained between the MAN CHRIST JESUS, who would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth; and the MAN OF SIN and grand deceiver, Satan, who would have no man to be saved, but all to be made children unto him, who is the father of lyes. The means used by Christ, to produce, renew and main∣tain the workings and operations of light and life from him, in the hearts and consciences of fallen mankind, is by setting on foot, as hath been already shewed, the threefold law and go∣vernment, given and erected by him at the beginning, over all the sons of Adam, upon the fall: through the power and exer∣cise whereof, First, he doth that to and in the hearts and consciences of the very heathen, which fits and qualifies them to live answer∣able (if the fault be not in themselves) to the law and govern∣ment they are under, according to the measures of attainment which the meer natural man may have. The like he doth un∣to the children of the first Covenant, unto whom he is much more bountiful, sutably to the state he farther leads them into. And thirdly, he exceeds what he doth to both these, in the communications of himself unto the spiritual seed, whom he suffers not to destroy themselves, but takes a course to cross their own wils and desires, when they are hearkning to the temptation of their own lust, or Satan, to draw them away.
This threefold conscience and spirit of man, in the proper principles and operations of each of them, whether they are to be found single, or all of them together, as in sweet harmony, thus set up in the spiritual seed, our purpose is to treat of: and that, as particularly and distinctly as we can, to fall in with the experiences of all that may be therein concerned: look∣ing upon this as the best method we can take, for the clear opening and stating the several dispensations of Christs three-fold government and Kingdom, already entred upon. And therefore we shall consider the principles and operations of each of these consciences; either, First, as they are Christs own workmanship in and upon the heart and spirit of man, as the beginning and foundation of those holy and righteous actings by him required under the dispensation, whereinto each of them is brought by God. or, Secondly, as they are the lawfull and righteous workings of the spirit of man, enabled hereunto by free gift from Christ, and in dependance upon him, yet as the fruit and travel of his own proper judgement and will rectified, in the use of those means, prepared and laid before him by Christ, to bring him to the right end of all motion, which is the true REST, whilst as yet he is under works, and not under grace; or, Thirdly, as they are the unlawfull and forbidden fruit of mans spirit, qualified and enabled from Christ as before ex∣pressed, when through his own lust he is enticed, and through the subtilty of Satan he is ensnared; so as lust, when it hath thus conceived, is the root of all evil operation, bringing forth fruit unto death, even death eternal, in the end, if the Lord upon the grounds of his new and everlasting Covenant, do not pluck such souls out of this danger, and lead them to such a state, as contains in it a perfect security and freedom from the re-entry of sin, with its prevailing power over them. Through the right and distinct consideration of these prin∣ciples and operations of conscience in the sons and daughters of men, we may come to find our selves, where we are, and whose subjects, whether Christs or the Devils, and to what
Kingdom or dispensation we belong, in reference to the one or the other, to the Kingdom of Christs marvellous light, or to the power of Satans accursed darkness; and upon what terms we stand, in the one or the other; whether in a wavering state, consisting in a capacity and possibility of removal out of the one into the other; or in a fixed, determined state, upon which it is impossible for any change to be brought, either in a good sense, or in a bad; in which men are reserved and kept fast, either in the bonds of perfect love, light and freedom, that casteth out fear, as the elect: or in chains of darkness and cap∣tivity, unto the judgement of the great day, as the non-elect, who will be destroyed by the brightness of Christs coming, when he shall appear the second time, without sin, to the salvation of his People. And this we shall do, if God permit, as a service to these present times, wherein like little children, most are tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby men and devils lie in wait to deceive, and lead on the ignorant to the Chambers of death.
CHAP. XV. Shewing more particularly the bounds of that Rule and Government, which is set up by Christ in the natural conscience, together with the answer of a good conscience thereun∣to, in those that are under this first dispen∣sation. IT is most evident by the Scriptures, that amongst the nations who are said to be without law, as distinguished from the Jews that were under the law, there were found doers of the law by nature, who shewed the work of the law written in their hearts, their consciences bearing them witness, and their thoughts mean while accusing or excusing one another, Rom. 2. 14, 15. Of such Peter speaketh, Acts 10. 34, 35. where he saith, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in eve∣ry nation, he that feareth him and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him: according as David also expresseth, Psalm 34. 12, 14, 15, 16. What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many daies that he may see Good? let him depart from evil and do good; for the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry. But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth; and this without re∣spect of persons; for as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law, Rom. 2. 12.
And on the contrary, as many as have approved themselves faithful unto God without law, in a dutiful and chaste obser∣vance of the judgements, which by him are given to all nations, Ezek. 5. 6, 7. are alike accepted, Acts 10. 35. as those that un∣der the law have approved themselves righteous, in walking in all those commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 6. and are equally rewarded by God, according to their answerableness to the light they live in, who will punctu∣ally perform what lies on his part, in giving to the righteous man, the righteous mans reward; according to the tenor of the promises, covenant, and light they live under. For the Lord is a God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible one, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward, but judgeth righteously the whole world, and all the nations in it; Deut. 10. 17. though he was pleased to delight so far in the fa∣thers of the Jewish seed, as to chuse their seed after them, above all people of the world besides, to take them neerer to him and make them a habitation, more immediate for himself. Yet, as to the main, which is the grace of being made new creatures, the Scripture saith expresly, neither circumcision nor uncircumci∣sion availeth any-thing, or hinders at all either of them, from being taken into the RIGHTEOUSNES OF FAITH, and life of the new and everlasting covenant. The nations then of the world, considered as those that are without law (comparatively with the Jews) are not left by Christ without a witness of God, kept up amongst them, nor without Judgements, Ordinances and Laws proper to them in that state, ordained by God to bring them unto life, and to the know∣ledge of the truth: accompanied also with suitable and suffi∣cient means, to lead to that end. And therefore immediately after the flood, God declares himself, as making a kind of stipulation and covenant with all nations, in the person of Noah, and his family, giving them statutes and ordinances, upon the observance whereof, he pro∣miseth his reward and blessing; referring the sum of all to this, that in the image of God did he make man: which perfection, he
requires and expects still, that man should be aiming at, and en∣deavouring the attainment of, in all his operations; as intima∣ting thereby, the obligation under which all men are by nature (especially considering the extent of Christs death) to yield obedience to that law, which was written out in mans nature at first: the seeds and principles whereof, are renewed freely by gift from Christ, in that enlightning wherewith he enlightens every man that comes into the world; making the spirit of man, in a lesser or higher degree and measure, the candle and lamp of the Lord, that is fed with oil out of the holy candlestick from Christ (through a work in their natural conscience by the ministry of Angels) enabling them to a discerning of good and evil, according to the light and principles of that natural righteousness wherein they were at first created; and requi∣ring them to exercise and improve this talent and ability of mind, freely given unto them, promising to have his eye for good upon them, in their being faithful according to that little they have received, and to accept them according to what they have, and not according to what they have not: and to keep his ears open unto their cry, if they want wisdom or strength to go forward and improve what they have received; causing them also to meet with protection and encouragement under the ministry of the good Angels, in counter-ballance to the discouraging assaults of the wicked ones; to the end that by being thus assisted and strengthned, in willing and resolving on a holy and righteous course of life and operation, and putting the same in practice, they may the better bear up against the degenerated part of nature in them, and all the power and influence of Satan joyning therewith, until the fault mani∣festly appear to be in their own free-will and determination, by rebelling against the Rule and government which Christ hath given them to walk by, and detaining the manifestation of the truth communicated to them, in unrighteousness. And besides this inward strengthning and encouragement, afforded by God unto them: there is also a visible and out∣ward Testimony of his acceptance accompanying them,
as in the case of Job; where the devil takes notice, that as a reward unto Iob in his faithful and upright walking with God, in fearing God, and eschewing evil, God made a hedge about him, and about his, and about all that he had, and blessed the works of his hands, giving herein his Angels charge over him, being as yet but under this first dispensation, though withall he had a seed of immortal life underneath. The sum then of what God requires, by the Rule and judge∣ments he gives unto all nations, is, that they depart from evil and do good, in the exercise of the natural abilities of their mind, rectified and enlightned through the benefit of Christs blood, and so made improveable by the use of the means which he affords them in present, and is yet further willing to reveal to them in future, in order to their growing out of all natural filth and pollution of flesh, in conformity to that primitive purity wherein man was at first created: and to their being delivered out of the kingdom of Sathan and power of darkness, in which the design of the devil is, to fix and detain them for ever. Now the good answer of this natural conscience unto this Rule and these judgements and ordinances of Christ, consists first, in the fear and aw of God which such have in them, that keeps them from sinning against him, or thwarting the dictates of their own enlightned judgement, shewing itself in accusing them for evil doings, and excusing them in good, especially when strengthned herein by inward good motions and impres∣sions, that are the effects of the ministry of the good Angels, to perswade and encourage hereunto. Secondly, in a vigilant care and industry to walk up faith∣fully to this light, not slighting or neglecting any proper and suitable means conducing thereunto. Thirdly, in an experimental sense of the emptiness and insufficiency of the good works by them done, to justifie and present them faultless before God (before whom the Angels them∣selves are ashamed and hide their faces) which made Iob to say; if I justifie my self, my own mouth shall condemn me: if I say I
am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul, I would despise my life, Iob 9. 20, 21. Fourthly and lastly, In a forwardness and readiness of mind to forget and leave behind all their present attainments, and to be in a posture to receive words, whereby they may be saved: with which Peter came to the Centurion, who seems to have had all these four particulars very visible and eminent in the good conscience he exercised, whilst as yet he was neither under the law nor a believer, but in the top-perfection (as it were) of this first dispensation, waiting for that greater light and mercy to be revealed and communicated to him, words whereby he might be saved. Through the exercise of this natural good conscience and use of the means accompanying the same, there is no man that comes into the world, wherever he be born or educated, but is in a capacity of being respected by God, as a natural righteous man, and so to be accepted with him in his alms and prayers, which with the Centurion, he may put up to God, and thereby be taught how to escape the filthiness and gross corruptions of nature, and to arrive at that state wherein he may find the like grace from God, which the Centurion did, that is, to have the means sent unto him, whereby he may be saved. Thus by Christ, is every man in the way of seeking the Lord, if peradven∣ture feeling after him he may find him, who is not far from every one of us. By this work of Christ in the conscience, there is set up an enlightned moral principle of judgement and will, opposite to, and warring with the corrupt and degenerate part: according to which, Paul, Rom. 7. said, that he was alive once, to wit, in the exercise of such a moral good conscience, and therefore in the Acts made it a part of his Confession, that he had lived in all good conscience to that day; that is to say, in all the sorts of good conscience, which men may live in. First, in such a one wherein he lived before the Law came to him, in the life and power thereof. Secondly, in that, where∣in
the life and power of the Law consisted. And thirdly, in that, which is the obedience of Faith, which Paul experienced, after that blameless righteousness he lived in, according to the Law. And though the first of these be the lowest and weakest, yet it brings, forth a very beautifull and good change in naturall men, under this first dispensation, heightning their faculties and operations according to the measure of light and life they have attained unto, and keeping up such righteousness which God thinks fit to reward, and to carry himself favourably and propitiously towards those in whom it is found, through the blood of Jesus the Mediator; wherein, that sort of men at this day that go under the name of Quakers, are a most notable in∣stance and lively witness. For through a diligent and faithful improving of this very light within the conscience, it is said, Rom 2. that those that were without law, did so become doers of the law by nature, that they outstript the formal Jew and visible professour of God, under the law. In which case the uncircum∣cision are accounted by Paul, when they keep and fulfill the righte∣ousness required by the law, to be equal with those that are under the law, yea, so far to surpass, as to judge such of them, who by the letter and circumcision becoming formal, do transgress the law and not answer the end of it. And indeed, in the judgement and acceptation of God, the natural man, that is found by God, doing the work of the law, by nature, working the righteousness and good therein required, is (according to his measure, and answerable to what he hath received) as much respected and regarded by God, as he that is under the law, serving and walking with God, according to the ordinances and judgements thereof. So the Apostle con∣cludes, Rom. 3. 28, 29, 30. when he looks upon both these states, as comprehended under the law, and equally falling short of the glory of God, and righteousness that is by faith; which comes alike to the one and to the other, making no difference. And yet, comparing one with the other, there is a very great difference, by reason of the dispensations they are re∣spectively
under. For, so considered, the Jew is first, and then the Gentile: the Jew is above and is neer, the Gentile is below and afar off. The Jew hath the ORACLES OF GOD committed unto him, hath Gods visible sanctuary and presence: to Israel pertains the adoption and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises, and of them, as concerning the flesh, Christ came. Through the want of all these priviledges, the rest of the nations are called Gentiles, aliens from the Commonwealth of Is∣rael, and strangers to the covenants of promise, so as the light of the witness shining amongst them, is but as the inferiour light appointed to rule the night, in comparison of that by the law, which is the greater light that rules the day. In respect whereof, the difference between these two generations of righteous men, and sorts of good conscience, under this first and second dispensation, is very material and considerable. For those that are doers of righteousness by nature, as the former, are not trans∣planted out of the first Adam, but are rather healed of their deadly wound, restored in principles to some measure and degree of the exercise of right reason and free will expecting in the way of their own personal righteousness and holiness, as Adam did before thefall, to live and please God, until they be admitted unto such farther manifestation of his counsel, as he yet reserves to communicate unto them. But those that are doers of righteousness by the Law, and as they are made under the power of the Law are taken out of that stock of the first Adam, transplanted into the good Olive-tree (the man Christ Jesus) and made to partake of the fatness thereof, Rom. 11. becoming thereby wholly a right seed, Jer. 2. 21. a holy and righteous fleshly seed, in the principles and opera∣tions of their mind, answerable to the holy and righteous flesh of Christ, and are taught to see the need of coming to God, and of being accepted with him in the sacrifice or death of Christ, who considered as coming in the flesh, is given to them for a new head or root, (and so, the root being holy, in like manner are the branches; and the first-fruits being holy, so is the whole lump) yet
hereby they have no more security or freedom from the dan∣ger of falling away, and being broken off again, then the Gentile, but still abide under works, or the righteousness required by the Law, wherein they may, not only be ignorant of the righteous∣ness of the faith of the Son of God, but become opposers of it, and exalters of this their legal righteousness against the excellency of the knowledge of the cross of Christ, which brings in his everlast∣ing righteousness. The sons of Adam then, which we are to acknowledge under this first dispensation of light and righteousness, are all mankind, one or other, amongst all the Nations of the world, in their measure and degree, from the lowest to the highest, from the smoaking Flax to the most shining Flame of that wit∣ness which God and Christ think not fit to leave themselves with∣out, in the very region of darkness, and night condition of the world, under the first administration of Christs Kingdom: which witness in the natural conscience, is in order to lead men unto the true day-break and dawnings of Christ, either in the face of his first or of his second appearance. Examples of the gradual measures and growths unto which men may arrive in this state (besides what we have mentioned, as appearing in our times) have been very obvious in all ages (as well from the record of God in the Scriptures, as from other testimonies) who, whether they came to the knowledge of the letter of the Scriptures, or not, did approve themselves faithful to the light they had, in fearing God and eschewing evil, exercising themselves in righteous operations, to the con∣demning of the corrupt evill world wherein they lived. Some of these have been so eminent in their times, as hath been to the shame and reproach of many visible professors, as well before the coming of Christ in the flesh, as since. As for those since Christs coming, there hath been nothing more familiar to observation, then such a generation of men, who have walked in a practical witness of morall righteous∣ness, and exercise of right reason (even under the formal name and profession of Christians) which, however branded
with reproachful names, and slighted by professors, whose knowledge puffs them up, yet they are those for whom Christ dyed, and unto whom they may live under their dispensation, as to the Lord, and therefore ought not to be judged and cast off with this saying, stand by your selves, we are holier then you; since they are in a lawfull and acceptable way of working righteousness unto the Lord, as well as others that are but under works, and not un∣der grace; and to their own master they stand or fall. Who there∣fore art thou that judgest another mans servant? or, that condemn∣est another, and dost the same things?
CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Rule and Dominion, which by the law Christ exerciseth in the mind of those that are made children of the first Covenant, together with the answer of a good conscience thereunto, in such as are subjects unto Christ under this second dispensation. THE Apostle Paul, Rom. 7. speaking unto those that in their experiences understood what it was to be under the Law, saith, that the Law hath Dominion over a man as long as he liveth. And in the further explication hereof, doth shew what he means by that expression, as long as he liveth: interpreting it to be under∣stood of those that live unto Christ as their BRIDE GROOM and HUSBAND under the first covenant, ver. 2, 3. and are, as it were his married wife under that dispensation, Isa. 54. 1. bearing children, or becoming fruitful unto Christ in this state: intimating unto us hereby, the marriage uni∣on which every child of the first covenant is taken into with Christ, when they two are made one flesh, and that the particular person so united is taken out of the first Adam as a corrupted root and wild olive tree, and made a member of the first Adams image, natural righteousness or perfection, in the new root of it, that springs up in the person of Christ, as he is born of a woman, made under the law, and is the minister of the true cir∣cumcision in his flesh, for the truth of God, to confirm the promises unto the fathers, who expected such a coming of Christ in
the flesh, the true Tabernacle, which God pitched and not man. This is represented, Rom. 11. by that good Olive tree, where∣of the Jews under the law were the natural branches, though ca∣pable to be broken off and rejected, in order to the Gentiles coming into their room, and taking their place and station there, even upon the same terms of uncertainty, (if not estated upon firmer principles in the new covenant) for, saith the A∣postle to the Gentiles, If thou who wert cut out of the Olive tree which is wild by nature, wert graffed contrary unto Nature in∣to a good Olive tree: how much more shall these which are the natu∣ral branches, be graffed into their own Olive tree? Whence it appears plainly, that by the ministry of circumcision and of the law, the fleshly seed of Israel had the sign or seal of the righteousness of faith, or had, under the types and figures of the law, the signification of that glory which was to be revealed in Christ as he was to come and be God manifested in flesh, and in that flesh was to perform that obedience, and offer up that sacrifice unto God, which should bear away all their iniquities, as into a land of forgetfulness, never to be remembred more; figured out unto them by the scapegoat, and the daily sacri∣fices offered up in the Temple, at the slaying of which they laid or imposed their hands upon the Head of the sacrifice, in to∣ken of that their belief and expectation: and that they presented not themselves before God in their own personal righteous∣ness, as did the Gentiles (which God winked at during the time of their ignorance) but that they looked for Gods acceptance and drawings near unto them in and through the blood of Christs sacrifice, and as the flesh of Christ was a new head or root in∣to which they were implanted, so that by his righteousness and not by their own, were all the branches made righteous, and in him, as in the first fruits, the whole lump was rendred holy. This is the circumcision in the antitype & truth, whereof that in the flesh & outward man was but the shadow & seal, through which, the good thing to come, even the image itself, Christs natural righteousness and fleshly perfection, was exhibited
to the eye of the children of this first covenant; and therein was signified the cutting off, which is made without hands, by the circumcision of Christ, to the taking of man out of the corrupt natural body of the first Adam: and planting him into the pure natural body of the second: whereby the body of the sins of the flesh is put off (at least in the seed and principles) so as those that were dead in their sins, and the uncircumcision of their flesh, do hereby become quickned with Christ, and have a conditio∣nal forgiveness of all their sins, upon the terms of the first co∣venant, whilst the true Believer, by vertue of a higher union in the new covenant, obtains as in common with the other, the very same benefit, absolutely and unchangeably. Of this generation of men in a state of fleshly Saint-ship, Paul speaks, when he intimates Rom. 9. that they are not all Israel, which are of Israel, neither (saith he) because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but in Isaac shall thy seed be called: that is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed, v. 6, 7, 8. The true seed, even according to the flesh, must be com∣prehended in Isaac, as he is the figure of Christ, coming in the flesh. And not only this, but when Rebecca also had con∣ceived by one, even by our father Isaac, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, ver. 10, 12. the one representing him that was born after the flesh, the seed and children of the earthly Jerusalem, engendred from Mount Sinai: the other, him that was born after the spirit, the seed that are begotten of the Ierusalem that is above, which is the mother of all the right irs of the promise. By this there is presented to our view, First, the natural fleshly seed of Israel, that were only so outwardly, whose circumci∣sion was that only which was outward in the flesh, which Rom. 2. is counted as no circumcision: nor were the persons thereby, real∣ly differenced at all from Heathens; but were inferiour to such of them as by nature were doers of the law, ver. 25, 26, 27, 28. Secondly here is described to us, the true seed of Israel, as they are the children of the first covenant, and make up the
earthly Jerusalem, the proper subjects of Christ under this second dispensation, as he hath Rule and Dominion over them by the law, and is a husband to them by the covenant of works. These are at large set out and particularly described, Ezek. 16. ver. 1. to the 15. Thirdly here are made known to us the true Iacobs, those that like Princes wrestle with God and prevail, who are the seed that overcome, and though they be the younger in birth, yet supplant the elder, and of last do become the first, being preferred before the children of the first covenant, how glorious and excellent a shew soever they may make in the flesh; for they are circumcised with a further circumcision made without hands, in the death of Christ, to the taking them out of the life of Christs natural body, as it is the keeping up the first Tabernacle or Sanctuary, and to the planting them into similitude with him in his dead and cruci∣fied body, to open thereby unto them the way into the holi∣est of all, the glory that is within the veyl, and life that is from the dead. Which circumcision Rom. 2. ver. 29. is said to have its praise of God, in distinction, by way of eminency, from the two former. Now the second sort of Israelites, whose Circumcision is inward, to the doing away the filth of the flesh only, and whose praise is of men, are those the Scripture intends by the children of the first Covenant; those upon whom the living WORD of God hath had such effect, as to write out in the fleshly tables of their hearts, a conformity to that image of God, that shines forth in the flesh of Christ (wherein his natural righteousness and perfection, singly considered, doth consist) as the Rule and holy Commandment which they are to follow, and be conformed unto, for their sanctification; whilst he himself is made their head and covering as to their justification, through their actual implantation into the same living natural body or flesh with him, or by the marriage union with him, into which they are taken by the first Covenant: Through which opera∣tion and change of condition brought upon them, they are ve∣ry much differenced from the doers or workers of righte∣ousness
by nature under the first dispensation: for these are taught, as to their justification before God, and drawing near into communion with him, to look at themselves as repre∣sented in their head, and as having their plantation and abode in him, which was figured out by the Shew-bread under the Law, & by their laying their hands on the head of the sacrifice, upon which God had laid all their sins; so as they are made righteous, not in themselves thus considered, but in another, even through the Mediatorship of the Man Christ Jesus, as their Head, in whose natural righteousness and perfection they stand blame∣less before God, wherein all their peace is founded, and the comfort of all their communion. And secondly, as thus they are differenced by this state of their justification, which the others are not acquainted with; so also the image of God unto which they are to be conform∣ed for their sanctification, to the likening them in all things unto the pure and spotless natural man of Christ, is that which exceeds and is superiour to the righteousness and perfection of the first Adam, as the original pattern is above and before the first Copy, though it be of the same nature and kind with it. And such is the glory and excellency of this state, that God thinks fit to lead the true heirs through this, into the glory of their inheritance that is to follow, and to give it them in common with those that are children of the first Covenant; suffering them for a season to remain together with them as fellow-servants in the house, and to live in the form and fashi∣on of servants, undifferenced in any thing from them, though they be Lords of all. Yea farther, this first work and change, as it is accompany∣ed with the seed of saving faith, Heb. 6. 9. is the beginning of the new creation, in the true heirs, unto whom Christ is not only the beginner, but the finisher of their faith, not only the WORD that begins with them, in the glory of his first ap∣pearance, but the WORD that ends with them, in the glory of his second: whereas those that are the children of the first
Covenant, singly considered, as left alone, without the things that accompany salvation, as Heb. 6. 1. to 9. though by the word of the beginning they attain great reformation and enlightnings, yet after all, they prove as the ground that is near to cursing, whose end is to be burned; falling away after all such enlight∣nings, so that it is impossible to renew them any more unto repen∣tance: according to what is also spoken by Jeremiah, Chap. 11. 15, 16, 17. What hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath wrought lewdness with many? And the holy flesh is passed from thee: the Lord called thy name A green Olive-tree, fair, and of goodly fruit: but now, he that planted thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, and kindled a fire upon thee, and thy branches are broken. So then, to such there remains no more sacrifice for sin; but the very justification it self, which they were admitted in∣to, is denyed them by Christ, cutting them again off from his living body, as unprofitable branches, fit to be cast into the fire, Joh. 15. 6. These are they, considered in the exercise of this kind of life and holy operations, that are as the fruitful married wife unto Christ under the first Covenant, and over whom the Law hath dominion while they are in this life, short of, and unacquainted with an implantation into Christs dead body, not having the similitude and conformity unto his death, so much as in the seed of it, brought forth in them. The answer which these have, of a good conscience towards God, under the Law, is particularly stated Rom. 7. where they are in Pauls own person represented, as having that workmanship set up in their hearts and minds, which stands in an exact con∣formity to the Law, or image of Christs natural righteousness and perfection, which is holy, righteous, spiritual, and good: and so having that heart-work in them, whereby they adhere to, and approve the Law, and the goodness and righteousness thereof, in opposition to the contrary body of sin and death, which is still in being and exercise in them and with them, ready upon all occasions to return with prevalency, whilst they are but upon this tenure of the Covenant of works, and
in the wavering unconstant principles thereof; by reason of which, they find by experience no good thing dwelling in their flesh, that is, abiding and of a continuing residence with them; but such as comes to them as a stranger or a sojourner for a night, or short duration, and is ready, upon their miscarriage, to be gone, and leave them again, estating them but in such a wa∣vering condition, as whilst with their mind they serve the Law of God, they are ready with their flesh to serve the law of sin: and the good that they would do, that they do not: and the evil which they would not do, that they do. By all which uncertainty and slipperiness of this their state, Christ would teach them to see the need of following the Lamb whither soever he goes, and to experience themselves to be most miserable, if they advance no further, but abide here, thinking themselves rich and encreased with goods, and wanting nothing, whilst they are ignorant, that they are miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, as wanting that top-stone, which must com∣pleat the whole building. And therefore the right frame of spirit in the faithful sub∣jects of Christ, under this dispensation, is to find no Rest here, but to see that this Earthly Jerusalem is no abiding City, and to cry out, miserable man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? wherein is not only comprehended the cor∣rupted, but the corruptible state of mans nature, after that he hath been renewed in this life of COMMON SALVATI∣ON, by vertue of the blood of Christ. From this experimental sense, God would teach us pati∣ently to lie down under the power of the cross of Christ, whose saying then we shall acknowledge to be most faithful and true, that if we die with him, we shall also live with him, and if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: our fellowship with him in his death being the only means by him appointed, to translate us out of all death, into life eternal; and to bring us under that Law of the spirit of life, Rom. 8. 2. which hath power absolutely to free us from the law of sin and of death, in all the branches of it.
This is the spirit and conscience, and these the principles of the children of the first covenant, under the Dominion of the law, in which, while they continue using of it lawfully, they are knit unto Christ, by his taking unto him his two staves, BEAUTY and BANDS, Zach. 11. 7. signifying the fruits of his presence, with them and amongst them, as he is their husband by this covenant, until, by slighting his greater glory, and selling him for thirty pieces of silver, they come to disco∣ver themselves to be the flock of slaughter, and such as he at last departs from, and leaves to draw back unto perdition; whilst he carries on the poor of the flock, that bear him company in his sufferings, unto the saving of their souls, keeping them through the power of faith unto his Heavenly Kingdom. This generation of men are witnessed unto by the Scrip∣tures, under a twofold consideration. First, as they were un∣der the Law, as the Law was the figure and shadaw of the good things to come, consisting in meats and drinks and divers washings, and fleshly rites, ceremonies and divine Ordinances under Moses his ministry, imposed until the time of reformation, or to the coming of Christ in the flesh, who in that sense was the end of the Law, and of the observance of it, as considered in that fleshly com∣mandment, and Mosaical administration, that pointed at the very image itself, that was to be manifested in the flesh of Christ, where the same Law was to begin again, and become the holy commandment, spoken and delivered unto men by the son himself, requiring a conformity in and from all men, unto the natural righteousness and perfection of man, shining forth in his flesh, who was made like unto us in all things, sin only ex∣cepted. In this second sense, as the Law is now given by Christ, the true MINISTER OF CIRCUMCISION, Rom. 15. 8. (Issued forth by his first appearance immediately, written in the flesh∣ly tables of the heart by his spirit, whereby the children of it are taken into marriage-union, and made one flesh with him∣self, branches of this vine, Joh. 15) are we to understand the sub∣jects of this kingdom of Christ, that live under this dispen∣sation
in the times of the Gospel, since his coming in the flesh, and putting down the Temple-worship and Service, Acts 7. that was in force before his incarnation, introducing in the room thereof, a spiritual Temple-worship and Service, in the conformity which he takes them into with himself, in his flesh and living body: making them his own Temple, house and habitation, the first Tabernacle or worldly Sanctu∣ary, built up together with him, in his natural righteousness and perfection. Such principles, and such a birth as this of holy and righte∣ous operations and actings, are required in him and of him, that is made by Christ under the law, or a child of the first co∣venant, which, Deut. 32. Jer. 3. 21. compared with Chap. 11. 15. and Isa. 5. and Ezek. 16. do in express terms testifie: shewing how perfect they are (as they come out of his hands) to whom he is a Father and Redeemer in this covenant; planting them wholly a right seed and that, together with the choisest vine, causing them to grow together for a while in himself the true vine, John 15. and thereby renewing in them and upon them a state of holy flesh, natural righteousness and holiness: and as thus qualified, taking them into his own house, as his belo∣ved spouse and married wife: who yet, after all this, do become degenerate plants, that bring forth sowr and wild grapes (whose grape is the grape of Sodom, & their wine the wine of Gomorrah) and so are turned out of the house, & cut off from the vine, as bran∣ches sit for the fire; being trees twice dead, and so plucked up by the roots; once dead in trespasses and sins, as children of wrath in the first Adam, and dead again, after their renewal to natural righteousness and holy flesh in the second Adam, by sinning again after the similitude of the first Adams transgression. Under this general head of Christs subjects, in this second dispensation, we may take notice of two sorts of professors, very numerous and famous in their generations, who (as well teachers as disciples) do content themselves with these prin∣ciples and operations of conscience and spirit, and bless them∣selves in them, saying, we shall have peace here, as not enough
aware of the frailty and slipperiness of this state, or of that root of bitterness, that in and with all these, is or may be spring∣ing up in them, to the defiling of many, and causing them at last to draw back unto perdition, if they be and continue strangers to that saving faith, through the power of which only, men are preserved to eternal life. The first sort are those that hold general Redemption, or, that Christ died for all men: the other are those, that under the name of Orthodox, are their fierce and implacable Antagonists herein: each bearing both a true witness, and a false, one against another: and both of them excluding and opposing, upon divers grounds, the true righteous seed that live by faith: which faith, the Scripture describes to be a hea∣venly power and operation of mind, whereby Christ, as he is the very image itself, and substantial brightness of Gods glory, works himself into the soul, and causeth himself to subsist, dwell, and be evidenced there. He that believeth on the Son of God, hath this witness in himself, and by it, is taught to see, that whoever they be, that live but singly in the natural powers and operations of mind, before described (as perfect, holy and righteous as they are) and there rest, will be in danger of mis∣carrying, before they come to the end of their Race, and so will fall short of the true mark of their high calling. There is not any thing which Christian experience may more convince us of (if we will be ingenuous) then of the fallacy and mistake which most men run into, by laying hold on some shadow and figure, for the good thing it self: which (if they knew their own minds) they themselves would have; and therefore it is so much in their eye and desire in the sha∣dow. But the subtilty of the devil is such, that when he can∣not work the mind to a downright opposition of the truth, he engages the understanding, by the means of a right figure and shadow of TRUTH, to oppose and keep out the very image itself, that is the substance, and the glory that is to follow. In this stratagem, the devil may be traced from the begin∣ning of the Scriptures to the end, imposing upon, and deluding
men, whose short-sightedness at their best, is such, that their thoughts and Gods thoughts differ as far as heaven and earth, which faith reconciles and makes co-workers together, in due subordination and perfect harmony. By reason of this distance between man in his most holy and righteous natural operations, and the heavenly mind of Christ, men, yea good men are with Samuel running to Eli, as thinking he cals them, when they should go to God: and are taking Eliab the first-born, for David the youngest son; Christ in his first appearance, for Christ in his second: and so, with John in the Revelation, are worshipping the Angel and fellow-servant, for Christ the Lord of all: and (to bring this neerer to our purpose now in hand) they take the covenant of na∣ture for the covenant of grace: making those inconsistent, and to fight one against another, that are brethren and dwell to∣gether in unity, if they were rightly explicated and understood. Thus with the letter of truth, men endeavour to bear down the spirit of it. Upon these grounds those that are for the general extent of Christs death, finding the truth of their belief expressed in the letter of the Gospel, (as indeed it is) satisfie them∣selves in that, and rest there, thinking it sufficient to try and judge all men, as they reject or own and fall in with this litte∣ral knowledge of the Gospel, which they profess and give a good and faithful witness in, becoming herein the more established: first, because they see that to be behind them, which they take for the first covenant, from whence they conceive themselves well escaped: & that is, the personal righ∣teous actings and holy operations which the natural consci∣ence exercises itself in, as looked upon to be that wherein our life consists; which they wholly renounce and disclaim, wit∣nessing their life in another, even in the righteous one, through the propitiatory vertue of his blood and sacrifice, which they indeed may, yea ought, as children of the first co∣venant; the Jews being obliged to as much (as we have shewed) by the Law, and as they were inhabitants of the earthly Jerusalem.
But secondly, they are yet the more confirmed in their per∣swasion, because those that pretend to be before them and above them in light, do evidently contradict and deny unto them, most cleer, certain and undeniable truths; undeniable I say, admitting that which ought to be admitted, to wit, that the witness which is given by this sort of professors, amounts no higher in its significancy and right application, then to exhibit to us the state and terms of the covenant of works, as it consists in the knowledge of Christ after the flesh. And so, all that which they say concerning conditional repro∣bation, free-will, falling away, and the like, as relating to the children of the first covenant, will find that from the Scriptures which will justifie it. Their Antagonists therefore would lose no ground, by granting what they say, as thus stated and considered. But that which keeps those that call themselves Orthodox from doing this, is that they judge, it would be a giving up of their cause, when indeed it would but drive them to the surest and most unresistable grounds upon which to maintain it: as is most evident, if you will be at the pains to take a short view of their principles and witness also. For these great and lofty opposers of the general point, do (in like manner as the others did) find that in the letter of Scri∣pture, which renders undoubtedly true, what in their witness they hold forth; asserting a certain number of Elect by name, chosen from all eternity, given unto Christ, of whom he is to lose none. As the fruit of this love, we find also the gift of peculiar grace to some, not to others, which cannot fail nor be fallen from; and commandments given them to do, which the natural will or judgement, in all the power and light there∣of, at best, whilst unregenerate, have no skil in, nor know how to set about; but as fools and little chldren, men must be found at the feet of Christ, that he may give them a new birth, and so teach and enable them thereunto. But now, these that thus have a right litteral knowledge of the Gospel, are necessitated, as to the life and power of their
inward principles, to fall in with, and agree upon the same na∣tural righteousness, holiness and perfection, in kind, with their opposers; and make use of their weapons, to fix the truth of their witness (taken up by them from theletter of the Scrip∣ture, in such expressions, as belong to the new-covenant-life in the second Adam) upon those principles of the first Adams purity and perfection, or the life of the covenant of Works, as restored in and by the blood of Christ; which the Scripture never intends, if rightly understood; but indeed, on this ac∣count, doth undeniably cast the cause upon those that are for the common and general Redemption: who are not to be blamed for what they assert, as to the extent of the benefit of Christs death to all men, but for denying the truth of that witness, held forth by the other, which ought to have its due place, and to be owned by them, as consistent with theirs (if they understood it) yea, as that which alone can give perfe∣ction and stability thereunto; which therefore, if rightly stated and acknowledged by them, would return shame suffi∣cient upon their adversaries, discovering them to be self-con∣demners, as opposing that very thing in the spirit and truth of it, (the grace, faith and principles of the second-covenant-life) which they do so zealously contend for in the Letter (as to the peculiarity and durableness of the benefit which the true Saint receives by the death of Christ) and as agreeing with that in spirit and truth (the single activity and life of first-co∣venant-principles) which they implacably oppose in the letter. These are the contradictions that with great confidence and censoriousness are maintained on both sides, in this our age; whilst truth it self suffers every way, and is unacceptable to either; none being more ready then these, to lay Heresie, Blasphemy, and high Notions at the wrong door of others, in hopes to make themselves appear the sound and good Phy∣sitians. Thus we see, under the shadow and letter of the covenant of Grace, the truth and spirit of it, opposed and kept out; and those that do it, miserably tearing out their own bowels,
and pleasing themselves with names for things. Whence it is, that none are more confident of their being within the cove∣nant of Grace, freed from any danger of the covenant of Works, then this latter sort of men, who do that honour and right to the covenant of Grace, as to be for it in their mouths, but remove their heart far from it, and hug in their bo∣soms the principles and life of the covenant of Works, as that which they will not part with by any means; but in such case, will rather, as with weeping may be said of them, become enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. And herein they are hardned also two waies. First, by considering those that are behind them, who maintain the doctrine of works, against the litteral witness which they give unto the covenant of grace, whence they conclude themselves free from any danger of being compre∣hended under a covenant of works. Secondly, by the consideration of their witness that pre∣tend to be above them, and to hold forth a Kingdom that con∣sists not in word only, but in power; who under pretence of spi∣rit and power, do either with those called Ranters, set up the doctrine and inspiration of devils, in opposition to the truth of their witness, that is but in the letter, introducing again the filthiness of the flesh, whereby to destroy the righteousness and holiness of the natural man (which is not done away, as some falsly and scandalously affirm we say, by conformity with Christ in his death, but is thereby fulfilled; for that garment is made yet more pure and white by the blood of the Lamb, and is kept spotless by this means to the second appearance of Christ) or else they do annihilate the creature-being, and assert perfection to consist in a swallowing up thereof into the pure being of God, (even in that glory, wherein he is in commu∣nicable, and saith, I am, and there is none besides me) as the Fami∣list, and such who gather up all at last into a state of eternal salvation, or rather into no state of creature-being at all, and so, in effect making neither heaven nor hell.
The contrary unto both these opinions, is freely and fully asserted in this treatise, in the believers conformity to Christs death and resurrection: a doctrine which nevertheless in the true and full extent of it, is accounted very offensive and scandalous in these daies of ours, even amongst those that are most zealous for it in the letter: who possibly may oppose it ignorantly for a season: but when it comes to wilful sin∣ning in this case, it carries its own fire about with it, whereby to devour the adversaries. This little excursion I judged not unuseful for the cleerer and fuller asserting of the doctrine of the cross and death of Christ, as it operates upon, and is mis-judged by those that are yet under the first covenant, considered as dispensed by the Son himself in his first appearance, wherein he is a minister of the circumcision in the truth of it; the righteousness and holiness of his flesh or natural man, being the law or covenant of works in its highest and most glorious administration. In this respect, Christ is said himself to be made under the Law: who also doth effectually teach those that follow him in the power of his death and resurrection, how the Law may be used lawfully, and according to the true intent of the giving of it. So that Christ by coming in the flesh, and considered as giving himself singly, in and by the means of his first appearance, doth beget unto himself children of the law or first covenant, whose knowledge of him is only after the flesh, and who, though they be taken by him in to his house, and built up with him in his flesh, as one Tabernacle and habitati∣on unto God, yet attain no higher thereby, then to be in the holy place, and to minister and serve before the Lord there, in a state figured out by the charge of the Levites under the Law, who notwithstanding their officiating and performing service unto God in the Temple, are capable of being for ever excluded from coming into the holiest of all, there to do the office of a Priest, or to come neer to any of those holy things which are within the veil, in the most holy place: and to be made for ever to bear their shame and their abominations, though yet for a season,
made keepers of the charge of the Temple, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein, Ezek. 44. 13, 14. Neverthe∣less, the true Saints, by being built up, one Royal Priesthood with Christ, shall be admitted into the most holy place. This the Apostles well understood, that were the first mi∣nisters under Christ, of this dispensation unto the Gentiles; which considered singly, as the ministry of Christs first ap∣pearance, is acknowledged by them to be but the building up again of the Tabernacle of David, that was fallen and brought down to the grave with Christ in his death, which thus he had power to rear up again amongst the Gentiles, notwith∣standing its fall among the Jews, Acts 15. 14. when he did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a People for his name, that was now ceased or ceasing amongst the Jews. In this sense Paul understands the mercy of God shewed unto the Gentiles, Rom. 11. upon the rejection of the Jews; confessing it to be but such an implantation of the Gentiles into Christ, the good Olive tree, which the Jews had before, and from which state they might again be broken off, as the Jews were already; which can therefore be no other state, but that which Christ doth communicate as he is the minister of cir∣cumcision, or of the covenant of works, by the means of those gifts and distributions of the Holy Ghost, which he gives forth amongst them after his ascention, dividing to every one under this first covenant, severally, and a part, according to his good plea∣sure, till thereby his whole flesh or natural body be built up also among the Gentiles, and compleated. With this agrees fully the exposition which Peter gives, Acts 2. of that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel; It shall come to pass in those daies (saith God) I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesie, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: and it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, ver. 16, 17, 21. From the right consideration hereof, we may discern, that this dispensation was no other, then that of Christs first ap∣pearance,
wherein he was the perfection of the first covenant; the giver forth of common salvation and Redemption, the minister of circumcision, and the setter up of the truth of God in his own flesh; which was promised unto the fathers, and whereof the whole ministry of Moses was but the type and figure, as appears, Acts 7. 37. where Moses is brought in saying, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear. Christ as thus the true Tabernacle and sanctuary in his flesh, which God pitched and not man, was also to suffer, that so he might bring down the first standing thereof into the grave, whereby to make way into the holiest of all, whereinto he en∣tered by his own blood, and did build up the Tabernacle of David thus fallen, in and by his death, into the power of an endless life, wherein he sate down at the right hand of God, exalted far above all heavens, having all principalities and powers made subject to him, who in his fleshly man was made lower then Angels, for the suffe∣ring of death. We are therefore to understand the TABERNA∣CLE OF DAVID (by the means of the eternal words being made flesh) to have had a twofold being and building up, given unto it. First, in the natural and fleshly man of Christ, wherein he was the perfection of the first Adam, bearing that image, and made in all things like unto him, as he was made a living soul, and enjoyed a sinless, spotless nature before the fall. In this natural perfection, singly considered, Christ as meer man, was inferiour to the Angels; as having that life of man in him, which was lower then theirs; which was the heel, which the Serpent had permission to bruise; the Lamb without spot and ble∣mish, the body that was prepared him to offer up in sacrifice to God, as he had received commandment. In this building he became Emanuel, God with us, according to the first covenant; and was a new head unto all the sons of Adam, in the first Adams image, which all that are planted in∣to, are taken out of the wild, and engraffed anew into the good Olive tree, to partake in the fatness and goodnes thereof, as it is the root and spring whence proceeds that restauration and re∣newal
of mans first nature, given to Adam by creation, and corrupted by the fall: which renewal, as it flows from the flesh of Christ, is the fruit and benefit of his death; and where∣ever it is wrought by Christ in any sons or daughters of Adam, it makes them to become members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, baptizing them all, whether Jews or Gentiles, into the same living body with himself, the first San∣ctuary and building, making them all to drink intothe same spirit, and seed upon the same natural perfection and purity which flows forth from his own flesh, or natural man, typed out by the Manna given from heaven, which is said to be Angels food, and is interpreted by Christ himself to signifie his flesh, which he was to give for the life of the world, or for the renewing of life unto the world, from himself, as head of the first A∣dams perfection and purity. This flesh of Christ is spiritual meat, such as the Angels them∣selves feed upon in heaven, as on the incorruptible food, which is prepared for them, by the quickning given unto Christs natural manhood through the resurrection from the dead: which flesh considered as given to men in this world, may be received and eaten of by them, either worthily or unwor∣thily, either in the lawful use thereof, for which it was ordai∣ned and given by God (as the Angels in heaven feed on it, and true believers here in this world) or in the unlawful use of it, as it is fed upon by those that discern not, nor distinguish between Christs living body and his crucified body; between a being made one living soul with him, and a being made one quickning spirit with him, in a life springing up out of the ruines of this first Tabernacle, the fall whereof, in this Lamb slain, and the true followers of this Lamb whither∣soever he goeth, is in order to its being built up anew in him and in them, by the resurrection from the dead. This second sort of building, is that which we mean by that second being which is given to the Tabernacle of David in the person of Christ, in which he is exalted above the Heavens, and is the Temple opened in heaven, Rev. 11. where also is seen
the Ark of the Testament: and so is Emanuel, God with us, in and by the New and everlasting Covenant: having a Name given him above every name, either in this world or in the world to come: according to that description we find of him, Isaiah 4. 2. &c. where Christ, the BRANCH is held forth in both these capacities: called also Zach. 4. the two olive trees, or sons of oyl, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth, by means of the one, emptying out the golden oyl of all natural per∣fection, as he is the Son of man, (singly considered) Christ according to the flesh, Head and Root of the renewal of natural purity and perfection, by vertue of his blood, un∣to Adams fallen posterity: and by means of the other, empty∣ing forth the oyl of Gods new Name, and of all Spiritual per∣fection, as he is the beginning and first born from the dead, made Head to the Heavenly body, the Church, that general Assembly of the first-born, whose names are written in Heaven. In both these respects, this BRANCH of the Lord is to be made beautifull and glorious; so as the very fruit of the earth, or the earthly Adam, shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel, Isa. 4. 2. For in them, the very being of the first Adams perfection, considered as built up again in fel∣lowship and harmony with the second Adams perfection, through the Resurrection of the dead, is as the Ark of the Testament, which is to be seen in this Temple, whereby the Song of Moses shall be sung as perfectly as the Song of the Lamb, as the musick and harmony requisite to be made by the inha∣bitants of the NEW JERUS ALEM, those that are left in Zion, and that remain in Jerusalem, when God shall have cleansed them and purged them, by the spirit of Judgement and burning, by the baptism of the fire of the sacrifice of Christs death, wherby they are written among the living in Jerusa∣lem; that is, do become a Heavenly Tabernacle (as built up into a life from the dead) for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain; in which dwelling places of Mount Zion and upon her Assemblies the Lord will create a cloud and a smoke by day, and
the shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a defence, ver, 3, 4, 5, 6. From this Scripture it appears, that after men have had that work pass upon them, which baptizeth them into one living Body with Christ, making them living Members of his flesh∣ly Manhood, and enabling them to bring forth the excellent, comely fruits of the renewed earthly Adam, ver. 2. unless they yet further abide the trial of fire, which is to pass upon them by the Spirit of Judgement and burning of the day of Christs second appearance, they will not continue long in ZION, nor remain members of this earthly Jerusalem, but will defile and pollute the Temple and Tabernacle of God, set up in them, in conformity to the flesh of Christ; and so make themselves fit subjects for God to destroy, and to swear in his wrath, that even this Generation (thus far advanced out of E∣gypt toward the Land of Promise) shall never enter into his Rest; as those that are but after such a manner Christs house, as is intimated, Heb. 3. 6. whose house are we, if we hold fast the con∣fidence, and the rejoycing of the hope firm unto the end: And as those Paul speaks of amongst the Corinthians, that walked like men, 1 Cor. 3. 3, 17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. Those then are the Children of the first Covenant, who are Christs seed and off-spring, as he is the Head of the first Adams natural perfection, and doth renew the Spirit and power of that perfection in the purity thereof, as a seed in fallen man, that shall grow up and prosper even into a Kingdom in the soul, so as to be the prevailing principle there, and car∣ry the Rule and sway over the corrupt and prophane part, cau∣sing men clean to escape the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of him after the flesh only, and with this flesh, as the true Manna and bread given them from hea∣ven, nourishing them up in the beauty and strength of his natural life. The character of this sort of Christs children by the first
covenant, is lively set down by the Prophet Ezekiel, instancing in the children of Israel, whom God took by the hand and led out of Aegypt under the ministry of the first covenant, wherein he was a husband unto them, as appears Jer. 31, 32. and had made them beautiful and of great renown in the sight of the Heathens round about them, from whom they were separated, as made perfect through his comliness which he had put upon them, Ezek. 16. 13, 14. which sort of Gods children, Paul ranks those Galatians amongst, that still desired to be under the Law in the time of the Gospel, Gal. 4. calling them children of that covenant given from Sinai, gendring to bondage, or of the Ierusalem that now is, to wit, the earthly Jerusalem, in distinction from the chil∣dren of the other covenant, or of the Jerusalem that is above, viz. the heavenly. For we must not think that this generation of men passeth away through the coming in of the Gospel, but is rather much more improved and compleated, forasmuch as by the means of Christ death, the Holy commandment is now spoken by the Son himself, & delivered more immediately, by the dawning of the light of Christs first appearance in the heart, which was (in the time of the ministry of the Law) the word only spoken by Angels, as committed unto them to mannage: through whose ministry or disposition, Acts 7. 53. the circumcised seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, received it, who were as figures of this circumcision to be made immediately by Christ himself among the Gentiles, without hands, by the pouring forth of his spirit upon all flesh, and building them up with him into one living body, as the true Israel of God after the flesh: all which amounts but to the compleating of Christs living bo∣dy, through this first-covenant-work of his, set up in the heart and conscience, called in Scripture the FIRST FAITH, which may be departed from, and prove a faith that fails, as being held upon wavering and uncertain principles, until it be fixed by the baptism of fire, and have that brought forth in fellowship with it, which accompanies salvation; to wit, the incorruptible and immortal seed of the perfection of the second Adam,
causing them to dwell on high, and placing them upon the muni∣tions of Rocks, where bread is given to them, and waters that do not fail. The Rule that is given unto this fleshly seed, or children of the first covenant, is the pattern of Christs natural life and per∣fection, (as he appeareth in the fashion of a man, and form of a servant, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted) which as the Law or holy commandment ministred by him, is given them to keep without spot and unrebukeable, unto his second appearance, 1 Tim 6. 14. and (as was typed out by the Manna) is then no longer to be fed upon as singly ministred, nor is to be ga∣thered, when this true Rest or Sabbath appears, but melts away before the heat of this more glorious Sun, and brighter day of Christs second appearance to them, as having attained its end, calling with the Angel, Gen. 32. 26. to be let go, and ceased from, because of the day-break of Christs second coming, and the sounding forth of the voice of God from that most excellent glory, in which even this first ministry is also compre∣hended and fufilled. This is Israel after the flesh, whether considered as they were shadowed and typed forth by the fleshly seed of the Jews, in general, or as they were in truth the circumcision of Christ, made without hands, in time of the law or of the Gospel, among Jews or Gentiles, who (as such) are called Jer. 2. 21. wholly aright seed, and Isa. 5. a vineyard of Christs, in a very fruitful hill, fenced, cleansed, and planted with the choisest vine, in expectation of their bearing good fruit and bringing forth right grapes; but many of them in the end do bring forth sowr and wild grapes. From these then, thus considered, are distinguished those under the Law, that were only such outwardly, their circumci∣sion being only that which was outward, in the flesh; who having singly the form of knowledge according to the law, contained in ordinances and outward observations, knew not what it was to be a lew in spirit, so much as in a conformity of inward per∣fection and life, to Christ in his headship to the natural man.
These are described, Ier. 32. 23. as those that walked not in Gods Law, nor did any thing of all that God commanded them to do, in the spirit and power of the commandment; parallel unto whom are those in these daies under the Gospel, who seem exceeding zealous of outward Ordinances and observations, consisting in worldly rudiments (as touch not, tast not, handle not, which all are to perish with the using) whilst they remain strangers and enemies in their minds by wicked works, even to that life of natural righteousness, that is required by the Law: not being renewed in and by Christ, as his seed and off-spring, so much as after the flesh; nor made true members of his living body, as planted into a likeness and conformity with him, in his natural perfection of fleshly life. And as the inward fleshly Israelite differs thus from the out∣ward; so is he in eminency far above all that rectified and re∣formed state of nature, effected by the ministry of Angels, in and upon those, who are not yet actually taken out of their first corrupt natural root, the old Adam; but stand yet rela∣ted as members to that head, notwithstanding all the change brought upon them by the first dispensation. For such are not as yet truly feeding with Christ at his fleshly table, nor eat∣ing and drinking in his personal presence, whilst they go forth singly in the acting of what is natural right and just; and have no other foundation for their peace with God, or means of maintaining fellowship and communion with him, but the righteous and good works which they do, according to the light dispensed in that first ministry and government; whereas the Israel that is after the flesh, as renewed in the flesh of Christ, and becoming children of the first covenant, are receivers of Christ himself in his first appearance, for the foundation of their converse with God, and the means of maintaining their fellowship and communion with him. In this respect they are said to have faith accompanied with a good conscience, but such as may be lost and shipwracked, 1 Tim. 1. 19. and 5. 12. such a faith, as in comparison with the faith that works by love, and springs from the root of the
Heavenly Adam, is accounted as no faith at all, Deut. 32. 20. but is rather to be esteemed the knowledge with which men are in danger of being puffed up, 1 Cor. 8. 1. and such a recei∣ving of the truth, which, as it may consist with, so also may be without the love of it, in the spirit and power thereof: in which manner they receive it, who afterward sin wilfully, and so come to be denied any longer continuance of the benefit of Christs sacrifice, for the expiation of their sins, Heb. 10. 26. These with the stony ground receive the word with joy, and are believers: but when their faith comes to its trial, Iam. 1. 2, 3. they prove waverers and unstable, such whose faith fails in the time of need, wanting the incorruptible seed of the heavenly Adam, to bear them up, and make them durable. Through this temporary faith, they are admitted into Christs presence, to eat and drink with him at his table; and are enabled to do many wonderful works in his name, and to make a very fair shew in the flesh, and yet have no abiding city, nor ever enter into the true Rest: but only from the top of this Mount Pisga, they may have a view and prospect into the true Land of promise, the kingdom that cannot be moved, that is in spirit and power, (appearing to them, as a Land of distances, very far off) and may see its Lineaments and proportions, though never be able to enter into the life and power of it: as in like manner, from the top-perfection of the first dispensation, a survey may be taken of the earthly Jerusalem, and of the glory of Christ according to the flesh, without ever being actually translated into it, or knowing of Christ in the life and power of his first appearance, unto which many of those that go under the name of Quakers, do seem to arrive.
CHAP. XVII. Shewing the nature of that kingdom and Rule of Christ in the Saints, which consists not in word and in the form of godliness only, but in power, and in the life of saving faith, the first fruits whereof appear in those hearts that are made conformable to Christ in his death. BY what we have laid down in the two foregoing chapters, it plainly appears, that Christ hath sub∣jects and faithful walkers with him, under both the former dispensations; wherein he suffers the tares and the wheat, the children of this world and the heaven-born sons of Zion, to grow up together for a while, without any discrimination; being not yet come to the harvest, that finishing work of his, wherein he makes up his jewels, Mal. 3. 17. setting apart his choise treasure unto himself, and causing a manifest distinction and difference to shew it-self between the wicked and the righteous, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not, between those that draw back, whose soul God takes no pleasure in, and those that go on to the saving of the soul, Heb. 10. 38, 39. We are therefore not to infer from what hath been said (as some ignorantly or maliciously do) that in asserting those un∣der the two former dispensations to be capable of miscarrying (as not therein arrived at that which is their true safety and
blessedness) we destroy the faith of many dear Saints and pro∣fessors of Christ, who have dyed or yet may die, without ever acknowledging or experiencing a higher, or other state of ac∣ceptation with God. For upon this ground Christ should never have come in the flesh, or have promised to come the second time without sin unto salvation, because many a true Saint may have died and never seen nor acknowledged him in either of these his comings. But indeed, this assertion is so far from straitning, or lesse∣ning the number of those that are the true heirs of salvation, that it rather discovers how they may lie hid, as they did in Elijahs time, out of the observation of visible professors, (a∣mongst those that they exclude as heathens) and may be compre∣hended by Christ their spiritual head, when as yet they may not have their spiritual senses brought forth into exercise, so as to apprehend him: but may be babes in Christ, walking as men, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 3. undistinguished from the rest of the world. And although they may in that respect, seem to be men in the flesh, yet they may live according to God in the spirit, and find accep∣tance in the beloved one: whilst they themselves may either be without law, exercising a chaste natural conscience; or may be under the law, believers, so Zealous of the law, as to flie in the face of Paul himself, for witnessing a higher light then they have yet experience of, or can bear. Which being premised, we shall now proceed to shew what is the third and last sort of Rule and operation of Christ, that is set up in the hearts and consciences of men, by vertue of the new creation and everlasting covenant, described, Ephes. 2. 10. to be that workmanship, whereby we are created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them (distinguished as well from the good works of the law, as the good works of nature, before spoken to) con∣sisting in the operation and exercise of that faith, through which we are preserved from falling away, taken off from those operations wherein self is kept alive and weighs down the ballance, and carried on to the saving of the soul.
For the nature of this faith is, to give subsistence and recepti∣on in the heart, unto Christ in his second appearance, conside∣red as in the seed thereof, springing up more and more unto a perfect day: which (consisting in the very image it self, and substantial brightness of Gods glory, as it subjects and subdues the first, earthly and shadowy image, wherein man was created, unto a perfect subserviency to and harmony with it self) makes of twain, one new man, or Temple of God in heaven, where also is seen the Ark of his Test ament; and forms the heart into a subjection unto Christ, not only as he is the KING OF RIGHTEOUSNES, but as he is KING OF PEACE also; qualifying the soul not only to minister in the charge of the Levits, in the holy place, but to draw neer unto God and enter with the high Priest into the holiest of all, as having the exercise of all the natural powers and faculties of the mind, in their own proper righteousness and holiness, but retained in a broken, bruised, crucified state, perfectly subjected to the spiritual sen∣ces and operations, brought into exercise through faith, to the perfecting and fulfilling of the other, and so making the same Saint capable to sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb too. Thus, by living the life of faith, the true Saint comes to have the evidence of things unseen, and to hope above hope, whilst the first Tabernacle is taking down, to be laid in the grave, and Christ is bringing a perfect weakness and insufficiency upon him, to speak, think, will or do, from any other spring or fountain of action and motion, then from himself, who is risen from the dead, or from his exalted heavenly manhood) who by degrees, as their house from heaven, cloaths them upon, and keeps them from being found naked, though despoyled of their first self-sufficiency & ability, as it stood single & alone. This is the faith whereby power is given to us, to be the sons of God, in a birth and participation of the divine nature, wherein God communicates himself in his first and second appearance, as knit together and made up of twain into one new name in Christ, (which none know, but they that have it) forming up the answer of a good conscience, through the resurrection from the
dead, 1 Pet. 3. 19. to the receiving of whole Christ, as he is the finisher, as well as the beginner of our faith: as he is the High Priest as well as the sacrifice in our nature, or as through the unity of Spirit wherein he lives with his Father, he does offer up and crucify the will of his flesh, bringing it into perfect sub∣jection to his Fathers will. This is the patern of being and obedience, according to which we are formed, when we are made NEW CREA∣TURES, being that image of the Son, unto which all the adopted children of the new Covenant, given by the father to Christ, are predestinated to be conformed, in copartnership with Christ, as he is the first born among many brethren; for which he prayed, as the peculiar mercy reserved for them, in distin∣ction from all the world beside, whom therefore in this sense, he did not pray for, when he desired of his father, that they all might be one, as he and the father are one, Joh. 17. 9, 11. And (says he) the glory which thou gavest me, I have given them: that they may be one, even as we are one. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and be with me where I am: that they may behold the glory that thou hast given me, in the love which thou shewedst me, and wherewith thou lovedst me, before the foundation of the world: that so also, the love where∣with thou hast loved me, may be in them, and I in them, ver. 22. 23, 24, 26. The effect of which prayer, is accomplished in the heart and conscience of every true believer, that is made a NEW CREATURE: and is that, which constitutes and sets up the new man (in his right and perfect distinction from the first Adams highest purity, and utmost perfection) consisting in that building of God, made without hands, mans house from heaven, with which he is gradually clothed upon, as he is gradually un∣clothed of the first building, and so formed up in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto that perfection of manhood, which is attainable; even unto the mea∣sure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: unto which we shall arrive, when we come to be like him throughout, in his glo∣rified
manhood, and shall see him as he is; having that love in us, which he had from his Father, before the foundation of the world. For the opening of this, we are to call to minde that the WORD, when he was made flesh, did set up this building in the seed of it, in the person of JESUS THE SON OF MARY, as well as that of meer man, in which he was made under the Law. In respect of both these birth's of humane perfection in Christ, he was said to grow in grace and in favor with God and man: and so his manhood in the full extent of it, may seem to be described and figured out to us, by the vine in Jothams parable, whose fruit cheereth the heart of God and of man. According to the first of these births, he had the effusion of the Spirit above measure, a perfection given to him from above, making him in this fashion and form of his heavenly manhood, above all; even the Jerusalem above, that is the mother of us all, upon which the new name is written: qualifying him (through this anointing) with a heavenly raisedness of mind, and divine heightning of all his humane powers and faculties, to that fulness and extent, whereby he may be enabled as the true Ark of God, to swim, live, and abide in the waters of the divine glory, where they are risen so high, as to overwhelm and drown all his natural sences or powers of minde, making up a river so deep, as is impassable to them, singly considered, and as alone, Ezek. 47. 5. which highest waters of the utmost discovery and manifestation of God, import and make out that Love of God, and of Christ, which passeth knowledge, and fils the true Saints with all the ful∣ness of God, exceeding abundantly above all they can ask or think, Ephes. 3. 19, 20. This heavenly manhood, anointing, and new name which Christ hath, renders him, as the bush that Moses saw, able to abide in the fiery and most glorious appearance of the very form and similitude of God himself, and not be burned or consumed; yea, is that whereby he is prepared through the
blood of the sacrifice of himself, considered in his other ca∣pacity of manhood, to enter within the vail, and face to face, as friend talks with friend, converse with God in the unveiled brightness of his glory, and express image of his person; feed∣ing upon it as his meat and drink, even the dainties or feast of fat things, provided for him in the kingdom of the Father: The joy whereof set before him, in the days of his flesh, made him endure the cross, despise the shame, and finish the course of his sufferings with cheerfulness, through the sight of him that was in∣visible, to the natural eye. In this sense was Christ made man, when the WORD was made flesh, and was the only begotten son in the bosom of the Fa∣ther, that thus sees God and is able to declare him, whereas no meer man whatsoever, either hath seen God at any time, or can see him. This is he of whom John said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me, for he was before me; upon whom the spirit rests and remains, who therefore hath power to bap∣tize with the holy Ghost, as he did his own natural manhood, when he offered it up. Secondly then, according to the other birth of humane per∣fection in Christ, the spirit was given him by measure (as it was to the first Adam, when he was made a living soul) whereby he was made under the Law, like unto other men, in all things, sin only excepted: that is to say, with equal powers of mind and capacity of will and understanding, as the earthy man, or first Adam, in his purity; capable to think, speak, do, will and desire, in all things, as a man, bearing the same image as the first Adam did before his fall, but with this difference, that joyntly & together with his being made thus a perfect na∣tural man, he had the perfection formerly mentioned, of his heavenly manhood, as that which was the top-stone of the building, the crown of glory and honour wherewith he was crowned and made higher then the heavens, all principalities and powers being made subject unto him. This twofold humane perfection was brought forth in the
holy child Jesus, by the WORDS being made flesh, and through his death and resurrection came to their full maturity and ripe∣ness; wherein Christ was declared the son of God with power, ha∣ving all power in heaven and earth put into his hands by the father, even as he was the Son of man: who in the dignity of this his state and glory, can nevertheless do nothing of himself: but what things soever he sees the Father do, these also doth the Son likewise. For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doth: For as the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickneth whom he will: For the Father judgeth no man; but hath committed all judge∣ment unto the Son; that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute Judgement also, because he is the Son of man: to wit, in the twofold respect before mentioned. But thirdly, over and besides this twofold humane per∣fection, which is in Christ, he is also perfect God, through the unity of Person whereinto he is begotten with the WORD; from the operation whereof, the same Jesus that is the Son of man, is also the living and eternal WORD OF GOD, and is so called, Rev. 19. 13. out of whose. mouth goeth a sharp sword, and wherewith he smites the Nations, and rules them with a rod of Iron, as KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS: which high priviledge is peculiar to him, (it appertaining only to the man Christ Jesus to be God, as he is that one blessed person that is the Mediator between God and Man) and therefore incommunicable to any of the rest of the Seed, or many brethren, whereof he is the first born. But as to what concerns this Jesus, as he is the SON OF MAN, in respect of the twofold humane perfection that is in him, the rest of the seed, even the many children given to him by the Father to bring up to glory, are co-partners with him, at∣taining to the measure of the stature of that his fulness and perfecti∣on, through which they are made by him KINGS and
PRIESTS to God, and are to raign for evermore. Into this perfection they are made to grow up in all things in him that is their head, being by him begotten again unto a lively hope, through the resurrection from the dead: and having the im∣mortal seed of the heavenliness of Christs perfection and life formed and brought forth in them, as the inheritance incorupti∣ble and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them, ready to be revealed in the last time. They that are born of this seed, are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God; and through the power of faith, and the abiding of this seed in them, are kept unto salvation, without any possibility of sinning unto death, or any danger of final falling away; having by vertue of their reception of this seed in the heart, through the gift of God, the nature of true believers communicated unto them, even the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the son of God: which makes them members of the new Jerusalem, children of the promise; who are born after the spirit, and have that anointing whereby they know all things, immediately from the head and fountain itself, and need not that any man should teach them, but as the same anointing teacheth them of all things, 1 Joh. 2. 20, 27. which was given to their head, the true Aaron, without measure, running down upon all those that dwell together with him, in the unity of the faith of the son of God: even to the skirts of his gar∣ments, upon the lowest members of this NEW JERUSA∣LEM, consecrating them a ROYAL PRIESTHOOD with himself, to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto God. This new nature in the seed of it, whilst it is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things unseen, is called faith, even the faith that justifies, spreading over us the propitiatory covering of Christs spiritual headship and EVERLAST∣ING RIGHTEOUSNESS, in which we are made to stand for ever, spotless and without guile before the Throne of God. Those that are of this faith, are blessed with faithful Abra∣ham: and are of that one seed, that are heirs according to the pro∣mise.
The work of this faith and new birth, when once wrought out by Christ in the heart and conscience, is to breed patience; and that patience, experience: and that experience, hope; even that hope which maketh not ashamed. The patience which is wrought out in every regenerate one by this faith, is called the obedience of faith, that when it hath had its perfect work, ma∣keth us perfect, so as to want nothing; arming us with the same mind that was in Christ Jesus, to suffer in the flesh, in order to put an end to sin, and to work off the soul from the will & desire of the flesh, into an absolute subjection and conformity to the hea∣venly will of Christ, wherein he is one with the Father; and so, enabling us to keep the word of Christs patience, which is in∣deed the Law and Rule under which the true believer is sub∣jected, until Christs second coming; being to rest in the grave with Christ (untill the remainder of his sufferings be fulfilled in his whole body the Church) under the certainty and with the comfort of his promise, that those that thus suffer with him, shall also raign with him; and those that thus die with him, shall also live with him. And that all true believers are thus observers of this Rule, according to the patern left by Christ, in his own sufferings, (purifying themselves as he is pure, keeping the word of his patience, and performing the obedience of faith, which is required by the law of the new covenant) we shall endeavour to make known, as in the experience thereof and Testimony from the Scrip∣ture, it is held forth. For through the comprehending power of Christ, as he is the head and root of this spiritual seed, and precious faith, which is obtained by Gods chosen ones, they are separated from the very womb, yea they have grace given unto them in Christ Iesus, before the world began; and are blessed with all spiritual blessings in the heavenly, in him, being accepted in the beloved. In this respect Jacob was loved, and Esau was hated: or the one was accepted, and the other was refused in their mothers wombe, the children being not yet born, neither of them having (as
yet) done good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand: not of works, but of him that calleth. Howbeit, we are not in Scripture sense, nor in truth (as some unwarranta∣bly affirm) actual believers, until by effectual calling we are made receivers of whole Christ in the seed, as before de∣scribed. And therefore the Apostle Paul, who is a remarkable exam∣ple herein, though he had received grace in Christ Iesus, as in his head, before the world began; and as thus comprehended in his head, was separated and distinguished from the womb, in whom the purpose of God according to the election was to stand: yet it pleased not God to call him, and by revealing his son in him, to make him actually a believer and new creature, until he had spent many years, even a great part of his life, in a sowerness and rigidness of spirit, under the dispensation of the Law; flaming out at last into cruel and fierce persecution of the Church of God: though in all, still preserved by his head from wilfull enmity: For, saith he, I did it ignorantly. In like manner, all the children given to Christ by the Fa∣ther, whereof he is to lose none, are thus separated and distin∣guished from the rest of the world (as the beloved seed ac∣cording to Gods purpose) from the womb, and so according to Gods purpose, are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ before the world began: Yet until it pleaseth God by his grace to call them, whether they be in the state of circumcision or uncircumcision, they live and walk according to the principles and Rule of that dispensation they are under. For so we see in the great instance of Abraham, the father of the faithful, as by Stephen he is described to us, Acts 7. in the manner of the calling, with which he was called, and whereby he was made actually a Believer and a new creature; which was, by Gods appearing to him; and by the power of his WORD, working in him, calling and bringing him out of his own Country; the land of his Nativity; and from his natural relations, into the land which he should shew him: causing him
herein to resign up his natural judgement and will entirely to his disposal, and through faith to obey: for he went out, not knowing whither he went: which first remove of his, was out of the state of degenerate nature and his heathenish life, into the earthly land of Canaan, as that was a type and figure of the heavenly: and into circumcision, or experience of that communion with God which is by the first Covenant, where∣by the filth of the flesh in his heathenish state, was cut off and cleansed, and he in minde as well as in body, brought into the figurative land of promise, even to a conformity in mind and spirit to the Law; the perfection of Christs flesh or na∣tural man. In this promised land (perceiving by faith, that it was but the type and shadow of the good things themselves, the heavenly Coun∣try, which was the true object of his Faith) he sojourned as in a strange Country, and was willing and content to have no inhe∣ritance given to him in it: no not so much as to set his foot on: but dwelt in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, Heirs with him of the same promise. For he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. After this manner was Abraham kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation; making use of the very glory of the first Covenant, and excellency of the earthly Canaan, but as an Inn by the way in his passage towards the glory that was to follow, the better and heavenly Country, which his eye was set upon: by vertue whereof, he offered up Isaac when he was tried, and resigned up thereby all interest in him, as he was the fleshly seed or type of Christ according to the flesh, in order to receive him again upon a better account, as the figure of him that was to rise from the dead, and in the glory and power of that life, to make good the Promises to him, which he waited for. Now what saith the Scripture in this case? Hearken unto me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewen, and to the hole of the pit
whence ye are digged; look unto Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you; for I called him alone and blessed him, and multi∣plied him; yea, I have given him as a patern unto the whole Spiritual Seed, so as they that are of the same faith with him, shall be also blessed with him, and share with him in his heavenly inheritance. To be of the same faith with Abraham, is, to be called with the like effectual calling as he was, according to Gods purpose; not of works, but of grace: and thereby to be begotten again unto a lively hope, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto an inheritance incorruptible, that fadeth not away: which inheritance the believer is interessed in, (by being made that one seed with Christ, through the new birth) as the sub∣stance of things hoped for by him, and the evidence of things that are wholly unseen to his natural senses and faculties of mind, in their best improvements, as singly natural. So that through this effectual calling, this precious faith is wrought in the soul, giving Christ an actual inhabitation and abode there, as him that is the true one, or head of the spiritual seed and anoin∣ting, the causer and begetter of the soul into actual member∣ship with himself, in his heavenly and spiritual humane perfe∣ction. Which manner of receiving Christ in the heart, is a parti∣cipation with him in his heavenly nature, whereby his chosen ones receive power to become the sons and adopted children of God, even as many as thus believe on his name. For through this uni∣on with their head, Christ is made unto them wisdom, righteous∣ness, sanctification and redemption: is all in all to them, as to whatsoever they stand in need of for salvation. In this manner wheresoever Christ is and dwels, he distin∣guishes such persons from all others whatsoever, that are not of the same seed, but do shew themselves in the end to be re∣probates, as it is written, 2 Cor. 13. 5. examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith: know ye not your own selves, how that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? Here, this kind of being of Christ in the heart, is called faith; such as distin∣guishes
the persons that have it, from reprobates; being a differing faith in kind from what those have that have the knowledge and enjoyment of Christ only according to the flesh, who upon trial, fall away and sink down into hypocrisie and aposta∣sy. The exercise of which temporary faith, though true be∣lievers may have for a while in common with the children of the first covenant (whilst they walk like men, and are but babes in Christ, in respect of the growth of the spiritual seed in them) yet they stay not here, nor content themselves with the single exercise thereof, but are made in time, to see and experience, that it is by faith of another kind, conveying with it Christs heavenly nature, by which they must be conducted, and enter into the true Rest. Albeit, after effectual calling, that which is the precious saving faith of Gods Elect, may lie undistinguish∣ed in operation from the first faith, which the spiritual seed may continue a long time in the single exercise of, in com∣mon with the fleshly seed or children of the first covenant, as was most evident in Peter, who was effectually called, when the Father revealed Christ to him and in him, as the Son of the li∣ving God, grounding his heart thereby upon that rock, which the gates of hell should never prevail against. Yet how low and weak did the operation and power of faith remain in Peter, to the suffering of him to fall so shamefully as he did, and to the leaving of him several times to the actings of his fleshly will and desire, tending to the sparing of the flesh and kee∣ping back the sufferings of the cross? It is not therefore barely the having of this faith in the right kind, that singly and simply sufficeth to the actual distin∣guishing of the spiritual seed from the carnal (either in inward experience unto themselves, or outward witness and testimo∣ny unto others) But this faith, shewing itself, as saith Iames, ch. 2. by its works, without which, it is as dead in the soul where it is, administring little profit to the sense of the man that hath it and hath not its works with it. For the bare having it, doth not discover his state to be safe; nor doth it justifie itself to
be of the right kind, but as it is operative, and shews itself by its works, to be the faith that doth justifie true believers. Untill which discovery made in the heart and conscience, as the body without the soul is dead, so the comfortable sense of right believing is wanting; which was abundantly shed abroad in the heart and experience of Abraham, when God had tried the powerfull working of his faith, in the offering up of Isaac upon the Altar: wherein he saw a working power of his faith, and how faith wrought with his works, and by works was made perfect, in the experimental sense and discovery thereof, unto himself and others. And that Scripture was fulfilled that saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed un∣to him, for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God. For that faith, wrought out in Christ his Head, whereby he was justified before God, now evidenced it-self to the personal Faith of Abraham in this his trial and proof, to be the faith the Scripture meant when it so spake; and wherein he had stood justified ever since his effectual calling. This place of James, thus understood, is so far from owning a justification by works, for which it is usually alledged, that it doth most abundantly confirm and make good the justification which is not of works, but of grace, according to Gods purpose. The very nature and kinde of this faith may suffice to all unbyassed judgements, to shew that those that are justified by it, are not justified by works: since in its principles and seed, it is quite differ∣ing from that which is by the Law, or born after the flesh, which is of works; so as the one is differenced from the other in the very kind of perfection and life, both as to principles and works, the seed and the fruit of each; yea, and this faith of the right kind, considered as abi∣ding in Christ, not in us, is that that properly justifies the believer. For if it be by grace, it is no more of works: other∣wise
grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more grace: otherwise work is no more work. And besides, the Spiritual Seed are beloved, as they are cho∣sen in Christ, before the world began; and are distinguished, as so accepted in him, from the fleshly seed, before they have done either good or evil. This chusing in Christ is not the justification by faith, inasmuch as that act of God never passes upon us, till we be actually believers. For though we have being in our head, who is blessed and beloved before the world began, Ephes. 1. Yet we are not made to be in our own persons of that Spiritual Seed, untill we have the righteousness of our head actually imputed to us, and so are made to stand without guile or spot before the throne of God, whilst as yet we are ungodly, and bear about with us a body of sin and death, unsubdued, and unabolished, which neverthe∣less in the end, by faith is overcome, and wholly done away. The working power then which is put forth by faith, in the heart and conscience of him that is the true Belie∣ver, is to be distinguished from faith in the first act, singly considered as the new birth and reception of Christ, to inhabite and dwell there, as the root and author of all spiritual life and perfection; which indeed, is rather it∣self the work or workmanship of Christ, as the suitable reception that he makes for his indwelling presence in the heart, then any effect of the power of faith, work∣ing patience and experience there, in pursuance of the end for which it is given; which is, to work the spirit of man, either under the first or second dispensation, to a com∣pleat and full resignation of its understanding, will and desire, unto the teachings, light and life of this faith, evi∣dencing him that is invisible, and giving entrance into the glory that is within the veil; shewing what is the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and what is the ex∣ceeding
greatness of his power to us-ward that believe; Which glory is not seen all that while to the natural senses and discerning; but the life and workings of faith, wherein the spiritual part of the believer does exceedingly rejoyce, the fleshly or natural man in the Saint unsubdued cannot bear, but hath its reluctancy against; lusting to en∣vy, ready to oppose, resist, and contradict the same to the utmost; and is, all the season of the trial of faith, in great heaviness, grief and despondency, through manifold temptations; whilst the believing part is exercising love on him, whom the natural senses cannot reach nor come to the sight of: In whom, though now we see him not, yet believing, we rejoyce with joy unspeakable and glorious; gird∣ing up the loyns of our minds, in sobriety and hope. For the power of faith is such in its operation, that it overcomes the world, and all the powers of flesh and blood in us at the best; which serve but to be made conquest of and triumphed over by faith, in order to be nailed to the cross of Christ, for the slaying of the enmity, which thereby would be springing up, to the choaking of the spirtual seed the crucifying afresh the Son of God, and trampling under foot the blood of the everlasting Covenant, as an unholy thing. This power of flesh and blood that ends and expires at last under the conquering and triumphing power of faith, causes for a long time a sore and fiery trial in the soul, through the sharp contest and dispute that arises between the heavenly powers and spiritual senses on the one hand, and the fleshly and natural powers in the same Saint, on the other; by reason of which, the soul is often incli∣ning and falling back into the life of the flesh, and work∣ings of the natural will, instead of being strengthned in the inward man, and fixed there in love and true Rest, against all contradicting whatsoever, made by flesh and blood; whether pure and holy flesh, or sinful and cor∣rupt: So that oft the party which faith by its power
makes for it self in the heart and conscience of the be∣liever, is deserted and in a manner given off, through the prevalent reasonings and desires of flesh and blood, which make resistance in this warfare to their last breath, or activity that remains in them. And first, when faith cals the heart to leave its natural state, its kindred and relations in the heathenish world, (the morality and civility whereof, seems to have much to say for it self, after the corrupt part in it is cast off) the natu∣ral powers and faculties of the mind in that state, rebel and resist a long season, not knowing how to submit, though upon hopes of a land of promise: specially when they must not know, or cannot be made acquainted whi∣ther the soul is going, and are therefore constantly repre∣senting all discouragements imaginable, to hinder its obedience to this call of faith, till at last they be over-ruled and brought under. But secondly, when through faiths workings by the power of the Law, or Ministry of Christs first appear∣ance, the soul is brought out of the corrupt, degenerate state of nature; hath turned its back upon the land of its nativity, and is come to the earthly Canaan, to the circumcision of the flesh, (not in the letter only, but in the spi∣rit, for the righteousness of works, by the first Covenant:) then hath faith another Call, or second voice to the soul, causing it to sojourn as a stranger, even in the land of pro∣mise: and to look upon this earthly Jerusalem, as no abi∣ding City: but that, out of which it must also pass into a heavenly Country, the Jerusalem that is above; forgetting the things that are behind, or unto which it hath already at∣tained, and pressing forwards to the mark, for the price of its high calling; to be clothed upon, as with its house from hea∣ven. Through the call of this last voice of faith, all flesh and the glory thereof is blown upon, and made as nothing, Isa.
40. 6. the voice said, cry; and he said, what shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field, perishing and fading in a moment; the grass withereth, the flower fadeth away, because the spirit of the Lord blows npon it: surely, the people is grass. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but the WORD of our God shall stand for ever, ver. 7, 8. So then at length, the believing part in the Saint, cometh to see and experiment the emptiness, nothing∣ness, and fading of the best natural perfection, and flesh∣ly purity, not only in legal, worldly rudiments and prin∣ciples, but even in Evangelicals, so far as they consist in the knowledge of Christ himself, but according to the flesh. Whereupon the believer becomes willing to be cruci∣fied to all confidence, esteem, or desire of Rest and abode in them, seeing a patern left by Christ himself herein, when he suffered in the flesh, that we also might be armed with the same mind; and by being crucified in the flesh, may come at last to cease from sin; attaining a perfect free∣dom there-from, by the resurrection from the dead. And now, what high thoughts and proud imagina∣tions do rise up in the heart, fit to be brought down and subdued by the cross of Christ? then which nothing is more grievous to the soul, which loves this Absolon, its own uncrucified fleshly mind and the enlightned reason∣ings thereof, in their very rebellion and endeavours to out it of the everlasting kingdom: yea, it struggles hard, and wrestles vehemently, to keep its Isaac from being offered up in sacrifice. Oh! how with Zipporah, doth the flesh cry out against faith as a bloody husband, thus to require the full resig∣nation of the judgement, will and desire, of the pure, ho∣ly natural man, as well as that of the corrupt? All this it doth require; and no less will serve its turn, then the
bringing of the exercise of these natnral senses, as they are contesting with, and resisting the workings of faith, into perfect captivity to the obedience of faith, and into perfect rest and silence in the grave of Christ; where they are to be bound, as in chains and fetters, utterly dis∣abled for ever acting more, in any resisting or contradict∣ing way, unto the power and life of faith: and so indeed are set free, and have their truest liberty given to them, to act more fully then ever, in harmo∣ny with, and subserviency unto the workings and life of faith. Thus, Rom, 8. it is said, If Christ be in you, the body or flesh is dead, because of sin: but if the spirit of him that rai∣sed up Christ from the dead, dwell in you: he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, or crucified fleshly senses by his spirit that dwelleth in you, to the bringing them forth in a better and more excellent way of operation, then ever they had before. For these fleshly senses, as they are planted into the likeness of the death of Christ, are made one dead body with him: and so are shut up for ever, in an everlasting impossibility to act against the truth, but only for the truth: to act in a way of resisting and contradicting the work∣ings of faith, but in subjection and subordination to em. This is that we mean by the obedience of faith, and keeping of the word of Christs patience, which is required by the law of the new covenant, the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, as it frees us from the law of sin and death; which is so far from destroying the law, that it ful∣fils it: and so far from abolishing the good works requi∣red by the law, that it disannuls only the unlawful use of them, setting them up in their right and lawful exercise, not single and alone, without the faith that is saving; or
in resistance and contradiction to that faith: nor so mix∣ing them with a faith that fails, whereby both faith and a good conscience may come to shipwrack: but making them in such manner the fruit and children of the operation of the faith of Gods elect, as that against such there is no law. This is the gathering together into one dead body with Christ, wherein all his elect must be found, as fashioned in∣to a similitude with him in his death; and that, for the filling up of the measure of his sufferings, in the whole number of his beloved ones: that so at last, they may arise likewise with his dead body, and be gathered together into one glorified body with him, or into a similitude with him, in the glory and power of his resurrection: when they shall be like him, and see him as he is: when at this appearing of Christ who is their life, they also shall appear with him in glory. The hope and expectation hereof, grounded upon the promises, made to this purpose, in Col 3. 4. 1 Joh. 3. 2. Phil. 3. 21. and many other places of Scripture, is that that hath born up the spirits of his people and faith∣ful ones in all ages (that have been made willing to fol∣low this Lamb whithersoever he goeth) from desponding and sinking away, under all those insolent affronts and contradictions they have met with in their several gene∣rations, from their insulting & unreasonable adversaries, the inhabitants of the earth, who flourish & prosper in the world while they are chastened every morning, disciplined under the cross of Christ, miscarrying (as to all that's visible) and overcome in those hot contests, oppositions and assaults, which the seed of the Serpent, lusting to envy, will not fail to exercise them with; who indeed could have no power against them unless it were given them from above: as Christ, the head of this spiritual seed, told Pilate, in his own personal case, Ioh. 19. 11. and as power was given from above, against that great Master & Lord; so is it also given to them, to make
war with the Saints and to overcome them, Rev. 13. 7. but though at present they be so overset by worldly powers, that they cannot work any deliverance in the earth, neither do the inhabitants of the world fall before them, Isa 26. 18. yet at this second coming of Christ, he will call up the dead bodies of these his crucified Saints, and faithful wit∣nesses, not only into a state of security from the destroy∣er, but into a singing and triumphing condition, ver. 19. Thy dead men shall live: together with my dead body shall they arise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust. Both these states of the true Saint, are most lively descri∣bed Isa. 54. which we shall endeavour to give some short tasts of, for our clearer enlightning in the present truth: specially, as to what concerns the former branch; the Saints conformity with Christ, in his death. The other, consisting in a conformity to him in his Resurrection∣state, we shall reserve for the latter end and conclusion of this discourse.
CHAP. XVIII. Concerning the Saints conformity with Christ in his death, particularly opened, and clear∣ed from those mistakes which the enemies to the Crosse of Christ are apt to brand it with. BY conformity with Christ in his death, (which some have been so ignorant of, and such ene∣mies to, as most prophanely to call it a fiction, and make little lesse of it then blasphemy) We say that the flesh or natural man in the Saint, (whether considered in the workings of his mo∣rall nature, or of his renewed enlightned nature under the first Covenant,) is crucified and rendred a copartner with Christ in his dead body, whereby the powers and faculties of the mind in the natural man are neither annihilated nor depri∣ved of their lawful use, as lawful refers to the obedience of faith and the rule of the Gospel; but only have death passe up∣on them, or a disability and privation, as to all unlawful use of them, or possibility of acting in rebellion, resistance or contra∣diction to the Law of the heavenly nature and mind, set up by faith. In this crucified posture of the flesh, and broken-spirited∣nesse into which the powers and faculties of the natural mind are brought by faith, the Prophet Isa. 54. 1. calleth out to the Saint to sing, as intimating, that though the natural man be hereby disenabled to bear or bring forth fruit to its first hus∣band, Christ himself, as made under the Law, and head of na∣tural perfection single, yet it ought neverthelesse to break forth into singing, in regard that by her being become dead
to the Law, she is married to another, even to him that is raised from the dead, to bring forth fruit in newnesse of spirit and life; and that this its barrennesse is no just cause of reproach to it, seeing it came to be lawfully disengaged from all obligati∣on to its first Husband, by the dead body of Christ, through which her first Husband is become dead unto her, so that she is no adulteresse though she be married to another man, Rom. 7. 3, 4. And therefore Cry aloud for joy, saith the Prophet, for more are the children of the desolate, then of the married wife, or she that keeps to her first Husband under the Law; Fear not for thou shalt not be ashamed, neither be thou confound∣ed, for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy Widowheod any more; for thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called. In these two particulars therefore, conformity to the death of Christ is made to consist by the Prophet Isaiah in this Chapter. First, in Christs own refusal to be any longer a Husband unto the natural man in the Saint, through his own voluntary departure and withdrawing of himself out of his own fleshly life, to go to his Father, and be and remaine for ever in the glory of the Father, in order to returne againe to the Saint, as he that is risen from the dead, to marry and espouse the soul that he hath thus grieved by his withdrawing: For saith he, The Lord hath called thee, as a woman forsaken, and grie∣ved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused by thy God; for a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with everlasting mercies will I gather thee. Secondly, the Saints conformity unto the death of Christ consists in the desolate, forsaken, barren state, wherein the flesh and natural man is left by Christ, as in a dry and barren wil∣dernesse exposed to all temptations and trials from God, An∣gels and Men, within and without; ready to sink and faile in spirit every moment; partly, under the appearance of Gods displeasure; whose withdrawing and forsaking, the soul un∣derstands
not any more then Job did, who was privy and consci∣ous to the faithfulnesse and integrity of his heart to his first Husband, whilest he abode with him; and partly, from the cold, dead, disconsolate frame of spirit, wherein it now finds it self, as it measures it self by the life of sense, and not by the life of faith; under both which pressures, the Word of Christs patience is set before the soul, by faith to be kept and observed; Who for the joy that was set before him, en∣dured the Crosse, and despised the shame, patiently suffering the bruising of his heele, according as he had received com∣mandment from the Father. In this posture as a Widow indeed, the poor broken-spi∣rited Saint remains mourning and weeping, left for a season as an Orphan by Christ; brought into that condition which Christ foretold unto his Disciples, whom at the present he acknowledged children of the Bridechamber, whilest they had no higher knowledge of him, then in his fleshly glory and perfection; Of whom therefore he said, As long as the Bridegroome was with them, they could not fast, but the dayes would come, when the bridegroome should be taken away from them, then they should fast; intimating thereby, the dayes of fasting and mourning, and being clad in sackcloth, which the true Saints & witnesses of Christ were to be exercised with, during the time of the trial of their faith, upon the Bride∣groomes being taken from them and changing that living fruitful frame of spirit, which they were fed and nourished up in by him, as they were his married wife under the Law, into a fasting, broken, mournful, desolate state of Widowhood, which they are brought into, as they are made one with Christ in his dead, crucified body, and are planted with him into the similitude of his death. Christ then after he hath become a Bridegroome and mar∣ried Husband unto true beleevers, in and by his first appear∣ance, shining forth upon them in the life and glory of his natural and fleshly perfection, wherein he hath nourished them up, and made them fruitful children of that his Bride∣chamber,
is pleased, and hath power to take himself away from them, and continue no longer with them, as a Bridegroome un∣der the first Covenant, or in the ministery of his first ap∣pearance, but wholly dissolve that marriage-band betweene them, as refusing any longer to come forth in the exercise of life toward them, upon the single root of his natural perfecti∣on, in order (upon the trial of their faith, and their dutiful keeping the word of his patience, during the time of this his separation from them) to return again after a little moment, and with everlasting mercies to embrace them, and be marri∣ed unto them in the light and life of his second appearance; not only supplying to them again that wherein he was with∣drawn from them, but adding over and above, a fuller and more abundant communication of life and glory; which, un∣till this death or withdrawing of his be perfected in them, they are not capable subjects perfectly to receive and inherit; but according to the steps and degrees of this death, doth the approa hand increase of this higher life let it self in upon them, and fill them. This separation and withdrawing of Christ as a Bride∣groome, is the more bitter and grievous, because this his ab∣sence carrieth in it the appearance of his wrath and sore dis∣pleasure, to the eye of flesh and blood, which interprets all this dealing of Christ in the worst sense, as if his mind were wholly turned away, and that he had given over to be gra∣cious any more, to them, that are under this hour and power of darnesse; And so seemes worse then a thousand bodily deaths, to those in whom the spiritual birth is but low, and therefore not unfitly compared to the child in the womb, and at the breast; where it is said Wo unto those that are with child and give suck in those dayes! Yet saith Christ, this is but as the waters of Noah, which is only to be once done to drive the believer into the Arke, even the answer of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection from the dead; and then forever to exempt them from such danger any more, as having provided that for them, which enables them to swim
in those waters which drown the world; in that pure river spoken of Rev. 22. 1. proceeding out of the Throne of God and the Lamb; which compared with Ezek. 47. appears to be a description of the Vision of Holy Waters, where they are risen up as a river to swim in; which those that are without the Ark, attempting to live in, must needs be drowned, it being above all the measures of their attainments and capacities to receive, as members of the first building or worldly Sanctuary. And be∣cause there is not any thing more highly importing the true Saint, then to get well through this wildernesse, and not lose the way, or fall short hereof, under any pretence whatso∣ever; we shall yet endeavour more particularly to handle and declare that which is to be experienced under this dispensation. First, in respect of what Christ doth, and is the worker of, by his withdrawing and refusing to continue any longer a Bride∣groome in his first appearance to the soul. Secondly, in respect of the workings of Satan the Tempter, who is not idle in this hour and power of darknesse, to set on this appearance of wrath from God and Christ. Thirdly, in respect of the workings of flesh and blood, that to the last, are violent op∣posers and resisters. And fourthly, in respect of the work∣ings of Faith or the new creature, disposing the soul to let patience have its perfect work under these manifold tempt ati∣ons, thereby to make it a perfect and compleat sharer with Christ in his sufferings, as the rule and patterne set by him, for the obedience of faith which under all this beholds him that is incisible, and hath an eye to the recompence of reward, in attaining the glory that followes, and arriving unto the state of the resurrection from the dead, never to die more, but for ever to remaine free from the power of sinne and death. As to that which Christ works in the heart of the true be∣liever by his separation and refusal to be any longer a Bride∣groome to the soul in and by his first appearance; It consists chiefly in two particulars. First, in the preparation used by him to fit the soul for this his absence. Secondly, in his actual
withdrawing and for ever hidng his face as to any farther shin∣ing forth upon them singly in and by his first appearance; and in that respect becoming, as perfectly dead and separated from the soul, refusing ever to converse more in the single exer∣cise of that his heshly life, according to which the soul is to know him no more. The preparation herein used by Christ to fit the soul, and support it to bear such an absence of his, is lively presented to our view, by his carriage in this respect towards his Disciples in the dayes of his flesh; when he tells them beforehand, John 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. Chapters, the necessity of his departure from them, that he may go to the Father, and the expediency of it for them in order to his coming againe, and presenting himself to them in a richer & compleater glory, then what they conversed with him in before: Little children, sayes he, yet a little while I am with you, the Bridegroome is with the chil∣dren of the Bridechamber; but this fellowship, as to the joy, fruits and comforts of it, is not lasting, it is but for a little while, here is no abiding City, there is therefore a necessiy of looking out for one to come; And I am going a farre jour∣ney (saith he) to receive a Kingdome and returne, and ye shall seek me when I am withdrawn, and be looking for me to appear again in my fleshly glory; but till a change be brought upon you, to enable you to follow me in my death,; you, (though my Disciples, and the Jewes that are far short of you) [cannot come to me whither I am going. But through believing in me you shall be brought to my Fathers house, into a heavenly City, the Jerusalem that is above, where are many Mansions, if it were not so I would have told you; I go to pre∣pare a place for you, and will come againe and receive you to my selfe, that where I am, there you also may be: And whither I go you know, and the way you know: by the workings and teachings of the new nature that is in you, through believing and your being borne of God. Besides; saith he, I will pray the Fa∣ther, and he shall give you another Comforter, that may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth in the first-fruits
thereof, whereby you shall come to [have an understanding in him that is true, and that you are in him that is true; the Spirit whom the world cannot receive, because it sess him not, nor knows him; being not borne from above, as you are; but you know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you: to bring you out of your forsaken comfortlesse condition, and cause you greatly to rejoyce, though now for this season you be in great hea∣vinesse, through manifold temptations, and to love him whom you have not seene with the eye of sense; and in whom, though you see him not, yet believing, you rejoyce in him with joy unspeakable and full of glory. These things I speak, (saith Christ) whilest yet I am present with you, and before I de∣part from you, by way of preparing you to bear my absence; and My peace I leave with you in this your comfortlesse con∣dition as to sense; which peace of mine I give unto you, not as the world gives it, but in a far more excellent and choice way, in which none shall be able to interrupt you: conveying it to you as a new name in a white stone, which none can read but he that hath it, and as hidden Manna, the sweetnesse and joy whereof no stranger intermeddles with. And therefore let not your hearts be troubled, nor be you afraid; ye have heard how I said unto you. I go away, and come againe unto you: if you loved me, you would rejoyce, because I say I go unto the Father, for my Father is greater then I. And now I have told you be∣fore it come to passe, that when it is come to passe, ye might be∣leeve. And further, I command ye that ye love one another when I am gone; If the world hate you, you know, it hated me first, before it hated you; if ye were of the world, the world would love his owne; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates. you; and if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: for the servant is not greater then his Lord; These things they will do to you, because they have not known the Father nor me: But these things I have told you, that when the time comes you may remember that I told you of them. Which things I have beene telling you from the beginning, ever since
I was with you; but now I must put my sayings in exe∣cution, for I am going my way to him that sent me, and none of you are sensible of it, or so much as enquiring into that state to which now I am going, but because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your hearts; Ne∣verthelesse, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but when I depart I will send him to you: Yet upon my departure, the change will be so great, which you will experience through my withdrawing of my self as a Bride∣groome from you, that you shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoyce; ye shall be sorrowfull, but your mourning shall be turned into joy: As a woman which whilest she is in travel, hath sorrow because her hour is come; so shall you be in the pangs of this new birth, when faith begins to be brought forth into exercise and operation, by way of encountring these sharp trialls: But as soone as the woman is delivered of the child, she remembreth no more the anguish, for joy, that a man-child is borne into the world: Thus also shall it be with you, when the birth of the Soone of God, as the man-child that is to rule the Nations with a rod of iron, shall be brought to light in you, through believing, and the grow∣ing evidence of things unseene: Ye now therefore have sor∣row for a little moment, but I will see you againe, and your hearts shall rejoyce, and your joy no man taketh from you. Such preparative teachings and instructions as these, Christ is continually giving forth, during his tabernacling with be∣lievers in his first appearance, that he may make them as little children weaned from the milk and from the breasts, in order to traine them up to the use of stronger meat prepa∣red for them in his dead body and crucified flesh, which is given to them by him to feed upon, till he come and take them into conformity with him in his glorified body, which he promises them to do through his intercession with his Fa∣ther, for to make them one with him, as he and the Father are one; willing that where he is, they also may be. Through
these glances of spiritual light, whilest the Bridegroome is yet with the soul in his fleshly presence, the Saints do with the Dis∣ciples sometimes think and say, Lord, now speakest thou plain∣ly and not in parables; by this we beleeve that thou camest forth from God, and art againe leaving the world, and going to the Fa∣ther; and yet when the hour of his departure comes indeed, then every one scatters, and leaves him alone, as unwilling to accompany him in his sufferings, but are rather drawing back, and desirous to stay where they are (in the fleshly life and per∣fection which they have experienced, to the making a faire shew of God in the flesh, and gaining the visibility of Saint-ship amongst men) then to suffer with Christ without the gate, leave the Holy City, the earthly Jerusalem, to go along with Christ to Golgotha, the place of skuls, bearing his reproach. Be∣fore the very beleevers themselves will be brought to this, what strugling and wrastling is there within themselves, to detaine the Bridegroome, or first Husband? who, with the Angel that wrestled with Jacob, saith to them, Let me go, for the day breaks, or the day-dawn of my heavenly appearance is over∣taking me, and calling me away to rest in silence and in the grave, as to my appearing to you singly in my fleshly state any more, but as I shall come in company and association with a better consort; and so compleat the marriage betweene us, in the glory wherein I am risen from the dead; that you may bring forth fruit in newnesse of spirit and of life. This is the weaned, unsetled condition of soul, which be∣leevers, whilest under the first Covenant and being in nothing differenced from servants (as to what is yet appearing in them and to them, in the work of the conscience) are led into, by this preparative administration of Christ, who is in them, as in seed, even in their new-creature-being and life; but as a seed under ground, very weakly & undiscernably working as yet, save on∣ly in loosening the soul from resting in its present attainments, and keeping it in expectation of some better thing wherein to be made perfect; In which state, probably most of the dear Saints of God were detained under the Law, before Christs
coming in the flesh; and most of them may still be under the same legal perfection, heightned and improved by Christs coming in the flesh, or by the effusion of his Spirit upon all flesh, in and by the same Ministery of his first appearance; and in this first step and degree of the new birth, are in as safe a state, as to Gods love to them here, and heaven hereafter, as others that have larger, fuller, and greater attainments and ex∣periences. And, as the knowledge of this truth ought not to satisfie any to stay here, but should still put them on, to be pressing forward, whereby to come neerer to the mark of the price of their high calling, as the more comfortable, strong and prosperous state; so also should it satisfie the groundlesse ob∣jection of those, who stick not to brand this witnesse of the be∣leevers conformity to the death of Christ, with the reproach of rendering the faith of all those Saints and precious ones that have died without the experience or acknowledgement there∣of, to be of none effect; as a most pitiful weak affrightment, to deteine some tender-hearted well-meaning persons, from re∣ceiving and owning the excellency of the knowledge of Christs death; which to set evidently before our eyes, that is to say, Christ crucified within us, in making us partakers with himself in his sufferings, brings to the second thing, the consideration of what Christ does, when he actually withdraws and takes himself away from the soul, as the Bridegroom that hath cohabited with it for a season, in the light and glory of his fleshly perfection, or first appearance: when he refuses the wife of his youth, and leaves her comfortlesse, desolate and a widow, for a little moment. This act of his, in a word, is called the hiding of his face from the heart, that he had been espoused and married unto by the first Covenant, and so hiding as never to be seene or known more after the flesh, or in the single light and life of this his first Ministery; which is caused two wayes. First, by the dawning and near approach of the glory of his second appearance; which, by coming in place, turns the Sun and Moon of the first natural glory into darknesse and blood, before this great and notable day of the Lord; which Christ
is willing to suffer, and to own it to the soul, as that which de∣serves not the name of glory, in comparison of that which doth excel, and therefore judges it meet for him, in his first perfecti∣on and light to decrease, as the other increases upon the soul; whereby (doing this by degrees,) the soul is not found naked, but still becomes cloathed upon with a greater, as it is uncloathed of a lesser perfection: and between both, sin and all evil con∣science, consisting in the filthinesse of flesh and spirit, is kept out more firmly then ever; so that, as the Mannah of Christs flesh failes and the nourishment thereby decayes, the hidden Mannah comes in the roome, as bread that is given upon the munition of rocks, and waters that will not faile, but become a Well springing up to eternall life, and a seed of life and light increasing to a perfect day; Thus the Sonne resignes up the Kingdome to the Father in the beleeving heart, giving way to the Fathers ru∣ling over the heart in his roome, that God may be all in all: and that by the Sonnes decreasing, till he voluntarily abase him∣self as low as Gods footstoole in obedience unto the Will of his Father, he may bring down all enemies with him in∣to the same abasement and subjection, whether they will or no, to the putting down all rule, all authority and power, that would, under pretence of friendship to his first appearance, be enthroning themselves there, which thus are triumphed over in this grave, to the leading captivity captive. And therefore Christ, as the Sonne singly considered in his first appearance, doth absolutely refuse any longer to continue a Husband, and to command in that capacity, but gives up his rule into the Fathers hand, and comes again along with him in that new glory, as second in the Throne, and abides ruler over the soul for ever. Thus the Bridegoome takes himself away, and discontinues his rule in the heart, as he is married and enter∣taines converse with the soul in and by the first Covenant, wherein he is known according to the flesh; and by this his se∣paration from the soul, doth bring the natural man of the Saint into a most perfect wildernesse-condition, for barrennesse, dis∣consolatenesse, and untrodden paths to sense and reason, toge∣ther
with exposednesse to all manner of trials and temptati∣ons from within, and from without; and into this forsaken Widowhood doth Christ purposely lead the beleever for the trial of his faith, and to work that work of repentance and change in his mind, which is never to be repeuted of, even to arme him with the same mind that was in Christ Jesus, when he suffered in the flesh to the ceasing, or causing of sinne for ever to cease and be abolished: And therefore makes it his own work, which he fixedly carries on in the soul (against all its re∣luctancies, wrastlings and strivings to the contrary,) as the great discriminating work of his love to his chosen generation, the chastenings wherby he reaches the true sons and heirs of sal∣vation the obedience of faith; and which he prevailes with them patiently to endure, that thereby they may be brought into sub∣jection to the Father of spirits, and live; This is the discipline wher∣with Christ exercises the many sons that he is bringing up unto glo∣ry, being but the same he exercised in and upon himself, Heb. 2. 10. and ch. 12. 6, 7. not thinking fit to deale thus with bastards, v. 8. but leaving them to their liberty, content to be out-wrestled and over-mastered by them, to their crucifying in themselves the Sonne of God afresh, and putting him to open shame, in a counter-endeavour to his voluntary resignation of power, and enmity to his Crosse, setting up the Sonnes King∣dome in their hearts in competition with, and opposition to the Fathers, which the Sonne himself disclaims, hiding his face, as one ashamed thereof. Thus Christ the Bridegroome, takes himself away, and becomes dead to the soul, that was as his married wife, calling to the Saint to follow him into the grave, where he shall find, that out of the devourer comes meat, and out of the strong Lion of the tribe of Judah, slaine and crucified, doth proceed sweet∣nesse. And as Christ in this manner thinks fit to hide his face, and leave the soul in this state of weaknesse and disconsolation, in reference to his first presence and communion with the fruits thereof: so Satan the great Tempter finding it as it were dark
night with the Saint, when no man can work, nor see his way, he then as a wild beast comes out of his den, judging it his time to stir and move all his engines of battery on all hands, to adde affliction to the afflicted, and to bear down to the very pit the broken, sinking-spirited Saint, in this night of his sor∣rowes and sufferings, and is encouraged hereunto from the general rule of permission, given unto him by God as the fruit of that enmity which God said he would put between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent, to the bruising of the Devils head, and the Saints heele; when therefore the De∣vill sees he cannor prevaile by all his temptations and deceits a∣gainst the preparation-work that is used by Christ to fit this Saint for sufferings, (as the oile or ointment poured out upon his head, disposing him to conformity with himself in his death) but is rejected and cast off by the Saint, as he was by Christ the Head, when he was led by the Spirit into the wildernesse to be tempted; and when by Peter he was moved to spare him∣self, in confidence that such things should not befall him; then this great destroyer comes as a down-right enemy, to assault the suffering Saint from all corners, as he did Job in his suffer∣ings, set before us by the Apostle James, as meet for our con∣sideration, and as the forerunning type of the end of the Lord in his death upon the Crosse; In which remarkable exercise of patience, we may behold the enraged malice of this restlesse spi∣rit the Devil at such a time as this; For, First, he endeavours to set God against Job, upon pretence that Jobs godlinesse was all for the gaine he had from it and by it, and not out of any true love to God or godlinesse, for its own sake; and as a means to discover the faithfulnesse, and to trie the integrity of Jobs spirit herein, the Devil hath leave granted from God to bruise Jobs heele, or to be the executioner of Gods wrath upon Job in all manner of appearances and evi∣dences thereof, as could render it real and credible to flesh and blood, (either in Job himself, or in the minds and apprehensi∣ons of his three friends) having for this purpose, a permissive Commssion from God, to spolle and deprive Job of all gain∣full
things to him, as to this world, his life onely ex∣cepted. Secondly, this being obtained, and also put into executi∣on, he doth his utmost to disquiet Jobs spirit outwardly, from the sense of this hard usage and dealing thus received from the Lord, to see if he could move him to an impatient, murmur∣ing, mutining heart against God as a severe Master at best, to a faithful servant: or else as an unjust dealer according to Co∣venant, who promiseth good dayes to them that do eschew evil and do good, which Job having been most diligent and sin∣cere in, is neverthelesse thus rewarded, as to be numbred a∣mongst the vilest transgressors and malefactors in Gods out∣ward dispensation towards him, and yet put upon it to bear it patiently, as becoming a broken contrite spirit before the Lord; who as he gives freely the good things he bestowes, so may also take them away againe, without giving account why. Thirdly, when this takes not, he incenses his nearest rela∣tions against him, imputing the cause of all this wrath to his sincere walking and stedfast cleaving unto God in a singular way from all the rest of the world, representing the sad and suffering state hereby brought upon himself and them, which he might remedy by letting go his integrity, and falling in∣to a fawning compliance with the corrupt interest of the times helived in. Fourthly, as a backing and seconding of this, he moves his three friends against him, that probably were all the com∣fortable society he had in the middest of a heathenish and wic∣ked world round about him; and they being professors of the fear and worship of the true and living God, and exceeding strict and exact in their walkings, as appears by all their argu∣ments and endeavours to perswade Job (against the faithful witnesse of his own conscience within) that all this is befallen him as a just reward from God, of some secret hypocrisie of heart that is in him, and unfaithfulnesse to God in his walk∣ings, which God hath now found out and punished, and which
they urge him to acknowledge and give glory to God by repenting and returning from it, that so the rod may be removed; hereby discovering their great ignorance of Gods designe in this manner of chastening and afflicting his Saints; which is done by God for a farre other and higher end, then they were aware of, that is to say, to traine them up unto the obedience of faith, consisting in that which God ac∣counts thankworthy in servants to their masters; when a man for conscience towards God endures grief, suffering wrongfully, or without giving cause for it; For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is ac∣ceptable with God; for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also thus suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, who did no sinne, neither was guile found in his month; who when he was reviled, reviled not a∣gaine; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed him∣self to him that judgeth righteously. This kind of obedience was God intending to teach Job, who in and with all his former wel-doings is taught by God, not only to want the reward of them for the present, but to have the contrary reward executed upon him, as the bruising of his heele, for the triall of his patience under it, and for the practising another kind of obedience and sort of good works, then any worldly pro∣fessour or bastard that is not the true son would ever bear or endure, Heb. 12. and which all that are sons must be trained up in, as the singular thing which is to be done by them, in obey∣ing Gods will in a way of patience, which shall not be found in any that are enemies to the Crosse of Christ. Fifthly and lastly, Satan improves the result of all these ap∣pearances of wrath from God, perswasions and mistakes of friends and relations, together with the inward sense which by all this is ministred to the workings of unsubdued flesh and blood in him, to make Job faile and despond in his minde to∣wards God, and to conclude himself amongst those that are free amongst the dead, to whom the Lord hath forgotten to be gracious,
ready to cry out, My God, my God, why hast thou for saken me? This is the second maine particular of the fulfilling in us a conformity to Christ in his death, by Satans bruising of the heele in this manner, represented in the example of Job. The third is, in respect of the workings of unsubdued flesh and blood abiding and remaining in a Saint, as the body of sin and death he carries about with him, whether from the cor∣rupt or pure old Adam set up in him; both which are equally to feele the weight of the crosse of Christ, unto which they are to be nailed, to the causing of all enmity and sin to cease out of them, and be for ever abolished and taken away. For which purpose, that is to be taken from them, and offered up in sacri∣fice without spot unto God, which the natural man in whate∣ver capacity he is, whether at his best or at his worst, hath no minde to part with upon any termes; and therefore doth re∣sist and oppose, as long as his ability serves, or until a per∣fect disability and weaknesse be brought upon him, ren∣dering it impossible for him to hold out or keep any longer the selfish power to do his own will, to speak his own words, to think his own thoughts, to finde his own desire, or exercise his own lust, either unto good or evil, as living upon his natural root; which exercise of free will is essential unto mans natural constitution or first make, as hath been shewed, in an arbitrary and independant course of motion and action, conferred upon him by his participation of Gods first image or the Ministery to him of Gods first appearance single; And which (so long as that Ministery lasts, as its husband or object of converse) is kept up in man, as a principle of act∣ing by his own free choice and disposal of himself in the use of fit means allowed him by God, to induce and perswade him to the good God requires of him. This power in the natural man thus to act and live, is his joy and delight, the de∣sire and lust of his soul; and this is revived and strengthened by the Law or the Ministery of Christ in the perfection of the first Covenant, which man makes use of to the embolden∣ing and hardening of himself in a way of natural good works
and well-doing, pretending to keep up his natural lust and desire, in the life, exercise and power thereof (as Saul did the best of the goods of the Amalekites, and their King) for Sacri∣fice to God. And therefore the natural man in the Saint, in all the powers and faculties thereof, stands it out long against the workings of faith in him, and fights hard upon this principle of self-preservation; deriding with the brothers of Joseph, that dreamer which the New-Covenant-Faith in the life, lan∣guage and obedience thereof appears to be to the judgement of flesh and blood, when it perswades us to become weak with Christ, to suffer our selves to be disarmed and despoyl∣ed of this first power and the free exercise thereof upon its single natural root, as keeping up a covetousnesse in us that is Idolatry and the root of all evill; and does assure us that Gods strength shall be made perfect in us through this weaknesse, so as we may rejoyce and glory in such infirmities, through which the strength of Christ shall come to be ever resting on us, whereby at last we shall be made to take plea∣sure in these infirmities, reproaches, necessities, persecutions and distresses for Christs sake, which at first are grievous; but in conclusion we find by experience, that when we in our selves are thus most weak, then are we in the Spirit of Christ made most strong. In this weaknesse then, which is brought upon the natu∣rall man of the Saint, in which he is made to bear about in his body, the marks of the dying of the Lord Jesus, (consisting in infirmities, reproaches, necessities, persecutions and distresses inward and outward) doth the death of Christ work in the flesh of every Saint, untill it be fully crucified, brought downe into the grave, and formed into one dead body with Christs natural man; for ever disenabled and weakened from acting this selfish power, or exercising this natural lust or desire, though in a way of natural or legal good workings singly considered; but to have them brought to their lawful rest in the grave of Christ, as a Sabbath-keeping there, their rea∣sonable service and sacrifice acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ. Whence it comes to passe, that we no longer live, but Christ lives in us, and in and through this weaknesse brought upon us by the Crosse, quickens us to a more ex∣cellent way of working with God and for God, then ever we were acquainted with before, to the fulfilling and establishing the righteousnesse required by the Law, to the highest; so that against these weakened Saints, and poor, broken-spirited children of God there is no Law; but the death of Christ that thus works in them, doth condemne sinne in the flesh, and never leave till it quite abolish it there, and bring in the everlasting righteousnesse of God in the roome of that righteousnesse of man which was but as a morning dew; Thus we come to bear about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life al∣so of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal or crucified flesh; which work of mortification is unto the old Adam most bitter and grievous, it being that which bruises him and puts him to grief, beyond all that can be imagined, and which there∣fore he fights against and resists to the last drop of blood, till he can no longer stand upon his feet, but doth fall down amongst the slaine in the blood of Christ, whose rest is bles∣sed, thus dying with or in the Lord, and his works follow him. This is the third particular wherein our conformity to Christs death doth consist. The fourth and last does respect the workings of faith, as they maintaine the good part of this fight in the Saints, and gaine the victory over the world, and the fleshly seed and principles in them. In the managing of which, faith doth at first (whilest the spiritual senses are not come into use nor strength) undergo many a sore brunt, and is hard put to it by the workings of unsubdued flesh and blood in them, as in the renewed principles thereof they abide in their vigour and flourishing of youth, under the first Cove∣nant, having (through the power of the Law and life of Christs fleshly perfection brought forth in them,) overcome the wic∣ked one, and by the knowledge of Jesus Christ after the flesh, cleane escaped the pollutions of the world respecting the filth of the flesh; in the confidence and strength whereof these
young ones in the experiences of the Gospel, think nothing too hard for them to break through, and get the mastery of; and therefore despise the workings of faith, and seed of the promise, as a barren desolate widowhood, in comparison of their flourishing youth, and would be putting in for the in∣heritance, as obteined by the perfection of the Law and Christs first appearance, esteeming that to be the Kingdome that is to abide and continue, the holy City whose Tabernacle must never be taken down. But against all these fierce encounters from pure flesh and blood in the Saint (armed with conquests over the wicked one, and many fruitful evidences of Christs presence and communion, as a Bridegroome and Husband according to the flesh) faith armes the soul, putting on it the whole armour of light, and evidencing to it things unseene, the hidden Manna, the new name, the Jerusalem that is above, that which neither eye hath seene, nor eare heard, nor hath en∣tred into the natural mans heart and conception; with which it puts forward and advances, bringing in that which is en∣during substance, an inheritance undefiled, and which fades not away, in opposition to a failing, decaying, corruptible Crowne and Rest, which flesh and blood glories in. And in this more excellent way of worshipping and serving God, it comes forth and gains ground in the heart, to the stopping the high careere that flesh and blood was in before, to the utter silencing it at last, and casting down its lofty imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, bring∣ing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Through this powerful operation of faith, the youth of flesh and blood in the Saint is weakened, and grey heirs now begin to appear here and there upon him in this his captivity to the obedience of faith, which state is very honourable, and is the qualification that renders Saints the true Elders in the Church of God, who being old men in Christian experiences, ought to be in great esteeme for the use and advantage they are of, and the great benefit they may bring to true Church∣fellowship and Christian Societie, how despicable soever this
frame of spirit be in the eyes of the worldly Church and of the youthful visible Churches of Saints, flourishing with their fair shewes in the flesh, whereby they are puffed up and have life working in them, whilest death works in Paul the aged and such Elders in spiritual growth, that walk as he walked; yea, these are full and rich, and would be reigning as Kings, in a fleshly visibility and worldly glory without the true cru∣cified Saint, that in the meane time is made a spectacle to men and Angels, and judged as the filth of the world, and as the off-scouring of all things, unto whom neverthelesse Christ speaks after this manner, Esay 26. 19. Thy dead men shall live, with my dead body shall they arise: awake and sing ye that dwell in dust. This is the last particular of our conformity to Christs death. And now by what hath beene said in these four particulars, as the result rising out of them all, our eye may receive enlightning (if God please) in this great and glo∣rious mystery of Christs death, and the effect it hath upon us, when it conformes us unto its own likenesse and similitude. For we see it doth not annihilate the first Adam or natural man in us; but it spoils and disrobes him of the power in ef∣fect, to sin against God; which he upon specious pretences would faine keep for sacrifice in bodily exercise, though of lit∣tle value, a power to do his own will, and to be at his owne disposal, in the strength of grace received; bearing oile in his Lamp, but not in his vessel. In the exercise of which power man is perfectly weakened and disabled by the Crosse: First, through Christs withdrawing the food and nourishment of it in him. Secondly, through Satans bruising and breaking down his stout-heartednesse, as an executioner of Gods wrath upon him, in bereaving him of worldly comforts; which God sanctifies to a laying low of mans spirit under this rod of God, though applied by Satan and his instruments. Thirdly, through the victory and conquest of faith, which never leaves till it captivate all the powers and faculties of the natural man, and bring them into obedience and subjection unto Christ, to live unto him that is risen from the dead, and so to bring forth
fruit unto God in newnesse of spirit and of life, made at last to take faith in the principles and operations of it for its Lord and best friend, and therein to observe the Law of God gi∣ven on that behalf, that the elder should serve the younger; that the first Adam should serve the last Adam; Esau should serve Jacob, or the naturall powers and faculties of the Saints mind should serve the heavenly birth and spiritual senses thereof, (that the righteousnesse of the Law may be performed in the Spirit of faith) by being made one spirit with Christ in the glo∣ry of his resurrection from the dead; the life whereof doth not yet fully appear, but shall do, when he shall be seene in that admirable glory, and bring his Saints with him in the same likenesse, that they may see him as he is, as his associates and coheirs of the same incorruptible inheritance; having hereby the use of heavenly faculties and powers given unto them, where∣by Christ will be admired in all those that do beleeve, and they are admitted to enter within the veile, and are made capable to converse with God in his own similitude, apparently, face to face, as friend converses with friend, (which no man, as a na∣tural man, in his best capacity, did ever see nor can see) and so the true Saints are made such excellent seers and contem∣plators of God, thus influenced, and over-ruled in all the powers and faculties of their subdued natural man, as fashions them to do the will of God in earth, or their earthly natural man thus taught obedience, as they see it done, and as they are the doers of it in heaven, or in their spiritual and heaven∣ly part; and have oile in their vessels as well as in their lamps: In which heavenly frame of spirit they are beheld by the Pro∣phet Isaiah in the 54 chapter before mentioned, when he saith, All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall their peace be; In righteousnesse shalt thou be established, thou shalt be farre from oppression, for thou shalt not fear, and from terrour, it shall not come near thee; when thou art made thus to dwell on high, and art seated upon this munition of rocks; behold, they that shall gather together against thee, shall not do it by me, but whoever shall gather together against thee, shall
fall for thy sake; no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise in judgement against thee, thou shalt condemne; this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousnesse is of me, saith the Lord. And let me say thus much upon this occasion, in one word, to the youthful, visible and flourishing Saints of these our dayes, who with great earnestnesse and zeale are trimming their Lamps with oile to go out to meet the Bridegroome, in expectation of the fleshly glory of Christs Kingdome, to the keeping up of Absalon against the true David in Spirit; of my Lord Esau, against the true Jacob; or of Isaac in the flesh against Isaac crucified and offered up in sacrifice to God, to be received againe in spirit, in the life from the dead. They are not yet under those promises before mentioned, by reason whereof those that gather together against them, may pre∣vaile over them, and the weapons formed against them may prosper, till the power of the holy people be scattered, and none shut up or left. Whereas if the Lord take down and bruise the youthful spirit that is in them, and cause them with Da∣vid, when they have tried the armour of man, to put it off a∣gaine to go forth in this armour of God, which makes the Saint strongest when he is weakest, our Goliah shall be slaine, that defies the Hosts of the living God, and great salvation shall be wrought for Gods people, when they shall be little more then standers by the Lord of the whole earth, and lookers on. By this time we come to see wherein our conformity to Christ in his death consists; the place whereof is found under the third administration of the Kingdome of Christ, which in the three branches thereof, we have endeavoured to de∣scribe in the preceding chapters. The first of which may be compared to the Moone that rules the night, as the weaker and fainter light of Christs first appearance, the representation whereof is given by the single Ministery of Angels, as the supreme Lords and Rulers under Christ, of the natural and first world, by the first Co∣venant,
considered meerly as the Law of nature, recei∣ving its renewal in the blood of Christ. The second is likened by the Scripture unto the Sunne which shadowes forth the vigorous light and glory of Christs first appearance, as it is ministred singly, in and by the first Covenant, considered as the Law and perfection of his flesh, in the principles and life whereof the sonnes and servants are not differenced one from another, but both walk to the house of God as friends, the sonnes of God as well as the sonnes of perdition, those that are borne after the flesh as well as those that are borne after the Spirit, until the manifestation of the sonnes of God be brought forth. The third and last is described, Isaiah 60. 20, &c. by the Sunne that shall no more go downe, and the Moone that shall not withdraw her light, for as much as the Lord him∣selfe shall be their everlasting light, and the dayes of their mourning shall be ended. When the light of the Sunne shall be sevenfold, Isaiah 30. 26. in Christs second appearance, to what it was in the first, under which light the sonnes, that are Lords of all, begin to be distinguished from the state of servants, by the pangs of the new birth, that through the power of faith are wrought, leading them into fellow∣ship with Christ in his death; lively described, Rev. 12. 1, &c. as the great wonder that appeared in heaven, the Church or spiritual seed, under the type of a Woman cloathed with the Sunne, signifying the glory of their fleshly man, in communion with Christ by the first Covenant, having the Moone under her feet, as one that is farre exalted above the morality and civility of the heathenish state, and upon her head a Crowne of twelve Starres, to signifie her conformi∣ty of state with the Disciples, when Christ as their fleshly Bridegroome was about to leave them, John 16. This wo∣man is taken notice of as being with childe, travelling in birth, and pained to be delivered, in opposition to which birth, there appeared the great red Dragon, the Devil and his An∣gels
mustering up all their forces against the powerful workings of faith towards this birth, ready to devoure the childe as soone as it should be borne, ver. 4. but, (as hath beene shewed), This woman does notwithstanding bring forth a man-childe that is to rule the Nations, even the di∣vine birth of faith; which is caught up to God and to his throne, whilest the Woman, or natural man in the Saint, flies in∣to the Wildernesse, and is there fed and nourished, under all the opposition of Satans malice and rage against her, till she obtaine with her seed, a perfect conquest over the old Dragon and all his adherents.
CHAP. XIX. Giving a general view of the Counter-work∣ings of Satan to the government of Christ, in all the forementioned administrations thereof. WE are now come to the next general head pro∣pounded, viz. to lay open the work of the De∣vil, or old Serpent, as he with his Angels fights a∣gainst Michael and his Angels, from the begin∣ning of the world to the ending thereof, to with∣draw and seduce the sonnes and daughters of Adam, from sub∣jecting themselves unto Christ, under any of the administra∣tions of his government in the consciences of men; and to fix them in rebellion and enmity against Christ, by the abuse of all his patience, and what ever means have beene used by him, to the contrary. For the Devil, knowing very well, that whatever kind of union or marriage-band is contracted and renewed betweene Christ and any soul, under the first Covenant, whether dispens∣ed, as the Law of nature or of Circumcision, there is place and roome left for him, by some means or other, to beguile them afresh, and by his subtilty to corrupt their minds, from the simplicity that is in Christ, as he did Eve at the first. He therefore makes it his businesse, to work the subjects of Christ, from under both these dispensations, and to dissolve (as much as in him lies) all obligations and intercourse betweene Christ and them, in order thereby to prepare them to receive his ser∣pentine seed, as he is that strange Spirit or adulterous compe∣titor with Christ in his bed, that sits in the Temple of God, as God, shewing himself to be God, and exalting himself above all
that is called God. This birth of spiritual uncleanesse he there∣fore endeavours by all wayes and means to propagate in oppo∣sition to the birth of Christ, in his heavenly appearance, through which he fixes the soul in an implacable and unchange∣able enmity thereunto, causing a root of gall and bitternesse yea, a spirit of falshood and murder, to spring up against all growing and encreasing light, that witnesses an excellency sur∣passing the purity of nature or glory of flesh; as watching o∣ver the birth of such a man-child to destroy it, so soone as it ap∣pears. In which actings of his, he distinguishes himself into two sorts of Kingdomes and Rules in the consciences of his subjects, represented under the two beasts, Rev. 13. which he maintains and upholds, in opposition to the Rule and King∣dome of Christ, gaining as many as possibly he can from Christ, in order to make his opposition the more universal and formidable, to hinder and keep out the approaching glo∣ry and power of his second coming: which that he may the better accomplish, he puts himself into all formes, from the lowest to the highest, from the most fleshly and outward, to the most Angelical and inward, that the natural man, as such, is capable of, to gaine thereby Proselytes to himself in all ages. And whom he cannot hinder from joyning with Christ at all, he thus labours to procure their defection and apostasie from him, after they have known the way of righte∣ousnesse, tasted the good word of God, and beene so farre en∣lightned, as after which, when they fall away, it is impossible to renew them againe unto repentance. Thus the worldly and natural spirit of man corrupted, and prevailed over by Satan, is brought under his dominion, and becomes his subject in a twofold capacity, in both which men are made the throne and seat of the great Dragon, and are im∣powred by him to carry on in the world, two differing ad∣ministrations of his Rule and Government, both centring in one common interest of self, and making up one worldly Babel or City of confusion; wherein is the strife of tongues; the nature of which we shall first treat of in general, before
we come to the particular unfolding thereof in the follow∣ing chapters. The way used by the Devil, to bring these his designes a∣bout, is, by gratifying the natural desires and lusts of men, with baits suited and calculated by him unto that frame of spirit and dispensation of light, which he findes them under, as they have in lesser or greater measures and degrees beene made partakers by Christ of a renewall and restauration of pure natural life by vertue of his blood; all his aime being to make them sin wilfully against the reconciliation or a∣tonement, freely made for them, offered to them, and re∣ceived by them, as a fruit of Christs sacrifice and death. For the Devill, well knowing, that the proceedings of Christ through the Gospel, in judging and condemning men, will be according to what they have and know, and not according to what they have not and know not; so as, those that are without Law shall perish without Law, and those that are under the Law, shall be judged by the Law, and where there is no law made known, the disobedience to such un∣known Law shall not be imputed; as it is written: Where there is no Law, there is no transgression: hence is it, that in his tem∣ptations and assaults, with which he approaches men that are subjects unto Christ, under his first dispensation or the birth of natural ight by him renewed and wrought out in their consciences, he does endeavour, either to make them reject, scorne, and withstand that work of the Law in their hearts, so as in their operations, to preferre and adhere to the unrighte∣ousnesse and uncleannesse of the flesh, before that righteous∣nesse and holinesse that Christ requires of them; or else so to over-value, trust and rest in their personal fleshly purity and holinesse, (unto which they may and do oft attaine, un∣der that first administration of Christ) as to become fixed op∣posers and resisters of the higher discoveries of Christ, that are yet behind, and were to have beene made knowne unto them, if through this insobriety and impatience of spirit, they had not justly deprived and rendered themselves unwor∣thy thereof.
Now this sort of sinners and corrupted consciences, when thus againe returned into a voluntary subjection unto Satans Kingdome and Rule, (being such who have sinn'd against and denied the Lord that bought them) are treasuring up wrath a∣gainst the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgement of God, who, though they shall not be judged, for what they had not and knew not, as to the righteousnesse which they themselves were to have found in Christs person for their justification in the sight of God, (as shall those that are under the second dispensation, unto whom Christ in this sense is revealed); yet they do justly fall under the sin of unbelief, as well as the other, bringing down the guilt of Christs blood up∣on their souls, through the unlawful use they make of their pre∣sent attainments and personal righteousnesse, in which they harden themselves to the opposing and keeping off the mani∣festation of Christs own righteousnesse unto them, so much as in the knowledge of him according to the flesh. The second sort of Christs subjects, which the Devil applies himself to, and attempts the gaining over unto his use and ser∣vice, for the encrease of his Dominion in opposition to Christs, are those of the Circumcision, children of the first Covenant, who are the subjects wherein Christ sets up and maintaines his Rule and Dominion by the Law, the holy Commandment delivered to them, in the knowledge of him according to the flesh; into whose hearts he comes, as that stronger man, to the dispos∣sessing of Satan, and casting of him out as an uncleane spirit, who till then had beene prevailing over their minds to runne into all excesse of riot in the grosse uncleannesses of the flesh, whom now Christ restrains, by binding him up, and in the roome thereof, bringing forth the fruits of his own indwelling pre∣sence in them, to the cleansing, sweeping and adorning of his house and Temple, wherein he comes to live with them under the first Covenant. Satan perceiving how desperate his game is like to prove by this work of Christ if he should in down-right termes at∣tempt to bring such as these back againe, into the bondage
of corruption, is willing for a while very much to decline that way, chusing rather to endeavour a returne into these cleansed, enlightened hearts, in the forme and appearance of an Angel of light, that he may work death in them, by that which is good, seducing and beguiling them with subtilty, as he did Eve; by making their very conformity to the Law, and the upholding thereof in power and credit in the conscience, to be not only the means of his re-entry with seven spirits worse then before, but, to serve as a strong-hold to resist and beat off Christ, in his approaches unto the soul, in the glory of his se∣cond appearance, by fixing it in a hardnesse and implacable re∣sistance, against the dawnings of that day and brightnesse of his coming. In this posture is the Devil able to seat himself in the ve∣ry Temple of God, as God, shewing himself to be God; whose coming into the heart is with power, with signes, lying wonders, and all deceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse, in all that perish and take pleasure in this kind of unrighteousnesse, and hatred of the truth. By this means, sin comes forth in the mysterious workings thereof, which lies dead amongst those under the first dispen∣sation (as it is written; without the Law sinne is dead) taking its revival, as to this kind of its operation by occasion of the coming of the Commandment, in power and prevalency, in respect whereof, it is said, The strength of sinne is the Law: which strength being wanting in those that are without Law, is the reason, that sinne thus considered, remains in them as dead: without motion or activity. For untill the soul, by the ruling power of the Law, be brought into a kind of security (in its own apprehension) from all prevailing danger of fleshly im∣purity and uncleannesse, this kind of sinning springs not up in its force and vigour, working death by that which is undeni∣ably good, through which it becomes exceeding sinful. In this security the heart of man is the more easily nourished up; from the experience it hath of converse with Christ in his own im∣mediate personal appearance; as those, Luke 13, 25, 26. who
upon this ground maintaine their confidence for acceptance with Christ, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, for we have eate and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets; finding themselves planted into him, as branches in the Vine or good Olive-tree, and so rendered righteous in the righteousnesse of their head and root; which knowledge and experience, those under the first dispensation are strangers unto, being aliens from this Common-wealth of Israel. Of this number are they, who after much enlightning, fall away, and draw back unto per∣dition, Heb. 6. and chap. 10. with Demas, Hymeneus, and Philetus, making shipwrack, both of faith, and a good consci∣ence. In these kind of Seducements, the Devil hath beene long versed, who began this practice upon Adam in his natural righteousnesse and purity, experiencing in his case, all that re∣sistance that man in honour or at his best estate, standing but upon the root of his natural perfection, does signifie or amount unto, for the keeping out of sin, or the hindering it a second time from re-entry and revival, to the making of men sin over the same sin againe, after the similitude of Adams transgression. Thus the old Serpent through this deceit is able to slay man a∣gaine, and work death in him, as fast as natural righteousnesse and holinesse renewed and revived, does give him matter to work upon this way. This mystery of iniquity is undiscernable at first, in the con∣sciences of those, where it works; who judge it to be their duty and obedience to the Law, which they are performing, whilst in their very righteous and holy operation, they are made to serve a contrary interest unto Christs, by going about to establish their own righteousnesse, not submitting to the righ∣teousnesse of God: and so prove deceived and seduced through an unskilfulnesse of discerning in that which is good, to the de∣spising and refusal of that which is a more excellent and en∣during substance, for the fading glory of flesh, and the morning dew of natural righteousnesse; wanting that wisdome which teaches to distinguish betweene the lawful and unlawful use,
that is to be made of the Law, and the eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ, worthily or unworthly. Behold then the evil desire and lust that may and doth spring up in mans pure, holy and righteous nature, as by being under the dominion of the Law, and living in subjection and confor∣mity thereunto, he is striving to separate them whom God has joyned together in Christs second appearance, and to uphold competition and opposition betweene those that should dwell together as brethren in unity, in the communion of the holy Ghost: which counsel of God carries much contrariety in it, to mans natural desire and lust, which would faine get away with Gods first word, the word of the beginning, Heb. 6. 1. wherewith God at first visits man, refusing to stay to the end, and to hear and obey the second word, which God is pleased to have with him (whereby he finishes and compleats his first operations in him; declaring to him, his whole counsel) whereunto the first dispen∣sation is appointed only as a fore-runner, and therefore must needs be short as to that, which is the work of the second, be∣ing no otherwise intended from the beginning, but as a mes∣senger or preparer of the way. Hence we may see what it is Paul means, Rom. 7. and ch. 8. when he acknowledges that the Law through the weaknesse of the flesh, though it have nothing in it which causes or is the author of sin; yet it hath that in it, which sinne takes occasion by, to set up it self anew, and blossome forth againe in mans nature when renewed and restored to a conformity with the Law which is spiritual, holy, righteous and good: for lust is capable to conceive in Adams posterity thus renewed and set up afresh, as well as it did in himself at first: and lust when it hath thus conceived brings forth sinne, or an envying and contesting a∣gainst the glory of Christs second appearance, which sin being perfected, or come to its fixing of the mind in an unchangeable and implacable enmity thereunto, brings forth death, even that death which is spiritual and eternal; so, Rom. 8. such a carnal mind as this, is called death, as it stands in such an enmity to the spiri∣tual mind, that it is neither subject to that Law of God, which is the Law of the Crosse and Spirit of life, nor indeed can be.
Thus (saith the Apostle) by the coming of the Commandment, sin revived, and 1 died, and what was ordeined for life, I found unto me, to be unto death; sin getting into its vigour and strength thereby; assuring the soul, that it is here out of all danger, be∣ing begotten againe into Gods own likenesse, wherein man was at first created, and having the visible characters thereof, shining forth in it; written, not with inke, and on tables of stone, but with the Spirit of the living God, and on the fleshly tables of the heart; shewing it self a right change, and a real heart-work, above and beyond all that is accounted civility and morality, and above all notion and spirituality that is but head-work and fancy. What is now to be done, sayes the Tempter, to this sort of men, but to perswade them torest here and praise and blesse Gods Word, that by this first visit and beginning, hath made so beauti∣ful & glorious a change in their hearts & nature, as this is, wher∣of the experiences are so lively and refreshing? (especially when reflection is made upon what they are changed from, when brought to this, and the way and means of attaining it) which hath also the approbation and praise of visible Churches and Saints, and of the best men so judged by mans day, which makes them say, Let us tabernacle here, with Moses and Elias, especially, if we be upon the Mount, and brought thither by Christ himself, transfiguring himself there before us. In this earthly building of the renewed natural man let us fix, and re∣sist all dawnings and approachings of any higher or better state; Let this our Ishmael live, was once the voice of Abraham him∣self, that afterwards was perswaded to offer up his Isaac, that was but according to the flesh. If we be prevailed with, to fix here, and live after the flesh, we shall die, Rom. 8. 13. or enter and abide in those wayes of death, which make us enemies to the Crosse of Christ, and cause him in the end to swear, we shall never enter into his Rest. As man therefore in the purity and holinesse of his natural will, may be using the Law of God lawfully (as we have shewed) so al∣so he may exercise himself in his own holy and righteous opera∣tions of mind and nature, in such manner, as may be quite
contrary to the mind of God, and the true end of such con∣formity wrought in him unto the Law: experiencing by this means, the evil that is incident unto a pure and uncorrupt state of being; and that lust that is to be known only by the com∣ing of the Law. Which evil desire or lust of man, in this state, is a covetousnesse which sets up idolatry in the highest streine, endeavouring to oppose Christ in the Spirit, by Christ in the flesh; by exalting the glory of his first appearance, above that of the second. Sin in this sense, hath for the Mother and Nurse of it, mans natural righteousnesse, wherein he is apt to glory and be puffed up without cause, contrary to the true meaning of the Law, which requires him indeed, to cherish and maintaine the natural righteousnesse and holinesse, therein and thereby mini∣stred, (whether considered, as it shines forth in the flesh of Christ, or in their own hearts and consciences, in oppositi∣on to that which is the filth of the flesh, or to the resting in our own personal morality and vertue, before the Law came to us:) but authorizes him not or warrants him, to oppose herewith the Crosse of Christ, and the excellency of the know∣ledge of him crucified, or to resist, upon pretence of keep∣ing that up, the coming in of the better and more excellent glory. When once therefore such a frame of spirit, as a root of gall and bitternesse is springing up in men, and that wilfully against manifest conviction and long contestation and pati∣ence on Gods part, to bring them to another mind: at last they are brought by sad experience to find, that in their flesh dwells no good thing, but such as will be leaking out of this fleshly building of the first Adam at its best (if rested in) and subject to corrupt: So that whilst with the mind, they serve the Law of God, with the flesh they serve the Law of sin: finding sin so farre from being perfectly overcome and subdued, (as once they supposed) that by degrees, it returnes upon them with greater force, then ever; making them miserable men, as abandoned and left to its inroad and violence, without any
possibility of being delivered from this death and wrath, that comes upon such wilful sinning: in which case there remains to them no more sacrifice for sinne, but an expectation of fiery wrath. Howbeit, to repair this losse unto them, whilst they have their abode in this world; the Devil lets them have, as their reward, the praise of one another, and enables them to carry the world clear before them, to the oppressing and trampling down the righteous and spiritual seed, wringing out waters of a full cup to them. These are they, who prosper in the world, and encrease in riches, who have no bands in their death, but their strength is firme: who are in no trouble, nor are plagned like other men: but have their eyes standing out with fatnesse, enjoying more then their hearts can wish. They set their mouths against the heavens, and their tongue walks through all the earth, un∣der the universal Dominion and Rule, which Satan (as God of the world) hath, from one end of the earth unto the o∣ther. This great City or universal worldly spirit and rule under Satan, sits as Queene alone, and knows no sorrow, but with her fornications and sorceries bewitches the world and the in∣habitants thereof; exercising her universal Rule and Domi∣nion over them, under various formes and administrations of government, till he come, whose right it is, and cast downe these Thrones before him, receiving to himself Domi∣nion, Glory, and a Kingdome, that all people, Nations, and Languages should serve him, in a Kingdome that is never to be destroyed. The principal means which God uses to bring in his King∣dome, and oppose these Counter-workings of Satan, is, his setting up in the person of Christ, a bruised, broken cru∣cified man (that humbled himself to the death of the Crosse, suffering without the gates of Jerusalem) as the mighty pow∣er of God, by which, to destroy the power of the Devil, and bring to nought the wisdome of the wise, and the understand∣ing
of the prudent: as those foolish and weak things of God, in mans eye, which he hath chosen to confound the great and mighty things of the world: and as those base and despised things, that are not, which he hath chosen to confound the things that are fairest in shew and appearance. Which wea∣pons of Christs warfare though mighty through God, yet be∣ing despicable and weak in the eye of Satan and to the dis∣cerning and judgement of men, they are thereby the more harden'd and encouraged to contest it out with Christ, till at last they come to be trampled under his feet, like mire in the streets.
CHAP. XX. Concerning death to sinne and life to righteous∣nesse, considered as well in the distinct Branches and Parts thereof as in its full ex∣tent and comprehensivenesse; together with the discovery thereby, of that which is coun∣terfeit, hypocritical, or otherwise defe∣ctive. THe summe of what we have beene Treating of, in the preceding Chapters that concerne the Work and Rule of Christ whether in the Natu∣ral, Legal, or savingly beleeving Conscience, as also the Saints conformity with Christ in his death, (the discovery wherof, this chapter had immediately and more orderly succeeded, but that I was unexpectedly prevented in it, by the Presse,) may very well be reduced unto the two ge∣neral termes of Mortification and Vivification, or of our dying unto sin, and living unto righteousnesse, Rom. 6. and this ac∣cording to the kind and measure of Grace received, whether common or special, temporary or everlasting. For in what e∣ver conscience Christ works and gains so farre reception as to be hearkened unto and obeyed, in the Voice or Ministery he holds forth himself by, whether upon the termes of the first or second Covenant, the necessary consequent thereof, is, a de∣parting from sin and an eschewing of evil; as saith the Scripture, Rom. 6. 16. Know ye not that to whom ye yeeld your selves ser∣vants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sinne unto death, or of obedience unto righteousnesse? so as the service
and obedience ye yeeld unto the one, frees and delivers you from the subjection ye were held in, unto the other? For those that are servants of sinne, are free from righteousnesse, or dead to it; as on the contrary, those that are servants unto righteous∣nesse, obeying from the heart the teachings of Christ in any of his Three-fold dispensations before mentioned, are free from sinne, and become dead unto it, according to the Law they are under, or the manner of the working thereof, in several mea∣sures and degrees, experienced in any such conscience. Now that which we are to understand by righteousnesse, (whose servants we ought to be, and whereunto we are to yeeld our subjection) is, the Image of God, formed and set up in the second Adam, or Person of the Mediator, propounding it self to be received and entertained by man since the Fall, upon the foundation of a new entercourse and converse betweene God and Men, which he hath obtained freely through his owne blood, shed as a ransome for all, whereby also the natural conscience is pur∣ged from dead works, and fitted againe for the service of theli∣ving God. This Image of God (consisting in righteousnesse and true holinesse) hath power (as it lives and dwells in Christ) to di∣spence and give the communication of it self in part or in whole, according to the nature of the Ministery and the manner of administration by which it is conveighed into the heart and conscience; So as if this Image of God be but as the Word and Voice of God in the mouth only of servants whether An∣gels or Men, unaccompanied with the personal presence of the Sonne himself, it hath one kind of operation and effect, inti∣mated, Esay 40. 3, 4, 5. by that Voice of the Lord, or Word of God in the mouth of servants only, Crying in the Wildernesse-condition of mans corrupt nature and degenerate state, (as he is dead in trespasses and sinnes) Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make streight in the desert a high way for our God, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together; declaring herein, this preparatory dispensation which tends and leads unto Christ in his first appearance, as he is God manifested
in flesh; in which respect it is, that all flesh can see him together; for as to his second appearance, he dwells in that light and immor∣tality which no flesh can approach unto, which no man hath seen or can see, as he is a meer natural man. This forerunning Ministery unto Christ we may also take notice of, Luke 10. 1. After these things the Lord appointed other seventy, and sent them two by two, before his face into every City and place whither he himself would come; saying unto them, v. 16, 17. He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me, and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me; and the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils or uncleane Spirits are subject un∣to us through thy Name; that is to say, that sort of Devils that dwell and act in hearts unswept and ungarnished, wollowing in the pollutions of the world, the grosse and foul abominations of cor∣rupted Nature. For there is another sort of Devils that delight to rest in swept, cleansed and garnished consciences, and to come in there, whence the other have beene cast out, with whom also the same that dwelt there before as transformed into Angels of light, can find an unsuspected re-admission, in order to more closse and dangerous designes then ever; which the Scrip∣ture takes notice of, Luke 11. 26. The same thing is darkly in∣timated in the case that was brought before the Disciples, Mat. 17. v. 14, &c. to 22. concerning the Devil in the party there mentioned, propounded to them as by vertue of their power to have beene cast out: and the Text sayes, that the Disciples could not cast him out; first, because of their unbelief ver. 20. and secondly, because, saith Christ, this kind of Devils are to be cast out only by Prayer and Fasting; or by the power of the Son himself, as he openly triumphs over all sorts of Devils whatsoe∣ver in the vertue of his grave, signifying hereby to his Disciples the need they stood in, of that Faith which had power over this sort of Devils as well as the other. Thus then by the mouth and hand of servants, whether Angels or Men, (as is plaine in the case of the Centurion, Acts 10.) going forth in the Name of Christ, men may be, and are brought out of their corrupt, degenerate state, Devils in their proper appearance as uncleane
Spirits being cast out of them, their hearts cleansed, their consci∣ences purged and made meet for the service of RIGHTE∣OƲSNESSE, for the worshipping of the True and living God, without ever conversing immediately with the Son him∣self so much as in the knowledge of him after the flesh, as to the life and power given forth in that Ministery; not as yet partaking of those higher and greater Priviledges which all they do in whom and to whom the Sonne is pleased to communi∣cate the Image of God by the Ministery of his own personal presence, though it be but in his first appearance, wherein all flesh may see his glory together. This light either by the inward Ministery of Angels, or by the outward Ministery of the Word, is that which Enlightens every one that comes into the world, John 1. 9. setting up such a work of God in the conscience, Rom. 2. and of the Law writ∣ten in their hearts, as sets them free from the service of sinne and bondage of corruption, and qualifies them for the service of righteousnesse and of the True and living God. All which though it be in it self (simply considered) but the Effect and Operation of common grace, and that which may be fallen from, yet if withal, there be cast into and found in such a heart that seed of heavenly manhood (though yet unawaken∣ed as to the exercise of its spiritual sences, as in Paul when a persecutor:) which brings along with it the things accompany∣ing salvation, this soul is so farre on-ward of its journey towards heaven by this Legal work and first Covenant-state of princi∣ples and life enabling to walk as a man, that it is said to be near to the Kingdome of God (in the young man's case in the Gos∣pel) in a posture, ready to receive the higher discoveries of Christ and communications that are inseparable from his own personal presence, considered either in his first or second ap∣pearance. But however it be as to this, the general benefits of Christs death communicated in his legal dispensation, as he is the Mi∣nister of Circumcision, puts all men again upon their trial, whe∣ther they will chuse to go backward or forward, and takes away
the occasion of using that Proverb in Israel, Ezek. 18. wherein it was objected against God, that the fathers had eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth were set on edge. For by the meanes of this Ministery renewed unto man in the blood of Christ, he laies his claime now to all souls, as his by purchase, saying, All souls are mine; giving them admit∣tance upon this score, into the favour of a new parley and en∣tercourse as to a full and final reconciliation with God; So that now it is he that eates the soure grape, whose teeth only are set on edge, Jer. 31. 29, 30. and unto whom the guilt of the fathers sins are imputed. By this meanes then man is put upon his trial againe, whom he will hearken unto and obey, whether the Law of Righteousnesse, Christ in his first Ministery thus visiting him, and coming freely to his rescue and redemption, setting up the candle of the Lord in his very bowels to search his inward parts; or else yeeld himself up to the motions and perswasions of sin and Satan, to continue and abide under the bondage of his corrupt state, or to be againe entangled with it after a good degree of escape from the pollutions thereof ob∣tained, whereby he is rendered altogether inexcusable; especi∣ally when this good will of God, as to reconciliation and a new treaty, is tendered freely, without any obligation on his part to shew so much grace to fallen man; tendered likewise upon promise of communicating more, and making farther dis∣coveries, where this little is well received, faithfully obeyed and rightly used for the end unto which it was given; as well as ac∣companied with threatenings not only of denying more grace upon the evil reception and ill use of this, but even of taking away againe this which he hath. The benefit then which all under this Ministery have by Christ, is the non-imputation of sinnes past, upon condition of future obedience and faithful walking with God in the light re∣ceived, to the yeelding themselves obedient servants to this RIGHTEOUSNESSE, (made known to them, in order to lead them forward to higher attainments,) without hearkening to the motions of sin on the left hand, for the bringing them
back againe under the bondage of corruption; or being pre∣vailed with by the motions of sin on the right hand, for the taking off their eye from the mark set before them, and cau∣sing them to swerve from the FAITH, by stopping up the passage towards the glory of Christ in his second appearance; the inseparable Benefits and Priviledges whereof, they are ca∣pable to be sharers in. The second Ministery then, in and by which, RIGHTEOUS∣NESSE or the Image of God in the second Adam, is dispensed and given forth unto men, is by the mouth of the Sonne him∣self speaking on earth, in the administration of the first Cove∣nant, as the Image of God shines forth in the face of Christs natural man; or, as he is God manifested in flesh; Where all flesh together may behold his glory and sit downe at Table with him in this his presence, eating the same spiritual meat, and drinking the same spiritual drink; that is to say, feeding mystically upon his flesh, and drinking his blood, so as through the vertue of this living bread and drink, (which is Angels food) they may at∣tain unto, and be nourished up in a life of RIGHTEOUSNES, (like unto that of those young men, 1 John 2. 14. who were strong, through the Word of God thus dwelling and abiding in them, wher∣by they had overcome the wicked One, as to all fleshly impurity and filthinesse) partaking also of other choice Benefits and Priviledges, which those under the first Ministery are meer strangers unto, and have scarcely the shadow or tasts of. For as Christ and they are knit together in this sort of marri∣age-union, they all together make but one flesh, one bread, and one body: he as the Husband, and they as the Spouse, each retaining the properties of those relations, wherin he as the Head, Husband, & good Olive-tree, or true Vine; and they as the Branches, Spouse, or li∣ving Members, in this his Mystical Body, have all things in co-partnership each with other; So as all the glory, beauty, comlines and perfection which is Christs according to the flesh, that is not incommunicable, is theirs. They have the righteousnesse of this his natural perfection, wherein he fulfilled the Law, imputed unto them in his right, and made theirs, for their Justification in the
sight of God, over and besides the indwelling life of it, working in them, as their personal inherent righteousnesse, for their San∣ctification. Both which, those under the first Ministery fall short of, and experience not, until by advancing forward out of that condition, they come to attaine this first marriage with Christ. This union with the beautiful fruits thereof that are brought forth betweene Christ and the children of the first Covenant, is spoken of, Zach. 11. Where also is declared, how it may be broken againe, ver. 10. signified by cutting asunder his first staffe, even BEAUTY, (as that Covenant, wherein he had put his owne beauty, the comlinesse of God upon them) where∣upon the holy flesh passes from them, and then the next newes of them is, they are selling Christ for thirty pieces of silver, (something that gratifies their natural desire) and in their spirit, crucifying the Sonne of God afresh, whereupon he cuts asunder also his other staffe, even BANDS, dissolving that first marriage-union, and so at last, the difference grows up to a perfect loath∣ing of each other, and a final separation, as himself testifies there concerning their very Pastours and Leaders, v. 8. My soul loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me. Yet this sort of men are brought in, as at the last day, confi∣dently claiming admission into his heavenly Kingdome, as their undeniable right; challenging him upon this their intimacy with him, in marriage-union and cohabitation, and so, taking it ex∣ceeding strangly to find him shutting up the door against them, who have so much to plead for their entrance: Lord, Lord, (say they) open unto us, for, have not we eaten and drunk in thy pre∣sence? have not we prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful works? But he will professe unto them, I know you not, depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity: who under all these choice Privi∣ledges and bountiful dealings from me, have made your selves guilty of my body and blood, by eating and drinking unworthily, and not answering the end, for which so great mercy was vouch∣safed unto you.
We say then, that this second way of communication of life and light from Christ, simply and singly considered, as di∣stinctand separate from a higher, more intimate and better uni∣on, imports no more still then that common grace or salvation, flowing from Christ, as he is the Root & Father, to the seed which are by the Law, or children of the first Covenant, in the high∣est partakings and enlightnings thereof, Heb. 6. 4, &c. In which sense Christ sayes, he is the bread that gives life unto the world, John 6. 33. Whereby they are admitted into his conjugal pre∣sence and converse, as he becomes their Bridegroome and Hus∣band, to the keeping up of his Dominion and Rule in their hearts by the Law, and upon the termes of the first Cove∣nant; all which may faile, be broken, and end in the highest loathing of each other, through their committing greater abo∣minations after such enlightenings and conjugal converse, then those of Sodome on the one hand, or those of Samaria on the other; Ezek. 16. 46, 47, &c. and therefore the Au∣thor to the Hebrews, chap. 6. 8, 9. tells this sort of enlightned ones, what a sad and cursed end they may come unto, unlesse there be laid in them the foundation of a better hope, by reason whereof he might see cause to perswade himself better things of them, even things that accompany salvation. The benefits then which thy have by Christ, that are under this second Ministery, do farre exceed any the first Ministery af∣fords; forasmuch as these are knit unto Christ in a Marriage-band, (though capable of Divorce) having thereby given unto them an interest in his person and personal concernments; so that his righteousnesse as answering and fulfilling the Law, is made theirs for their justification in the sight of God, and to the setting of them right againe in the Court of Gods justice, as innocent persons, upon the termes of the first Covenant, the Law being satisfied on their behalf, by another; which bene∣fits and priviledges neverthelesse are not given unto them abso∣lutely and immutably, but conditionally, as is truly asserted by those that plead for this General redemption, without going farther or higher: and for a common salvation (or state of legal
righteousnesse) depending upon the obedience and faithfull walking of the creature, in and under such light received, as to the continuance thereof. This sort of Justification of sinners then, is not absolute; nor is the interest that such have in Christs Sacrifice, for the remis∣sion of sins, so sure and immutable, but that upon their falling away and sinning wilfully, Heb. 10. 26. they may justly be de∣nied, and for ever deprived of the benefit thereof. And this they come to, by hearkening to the motions of sinne on the right hand, to the resisting of the holy Ghost, and rejecting the glory to follow, the life Eternal that is to come, by staying and fixing on this side Jordan, without desire or care to passe over into the true Land of Promise which is their Rest, (upon the same pretence with the two Tribes and half, that liked better to remaine short of Canaan, as being taken with the fruit∣fulnesse and commodiousnesse of that Countrey, for cat∣tel) pleasing themselves in the enjoyment of fleshly excel∣lencies and glory: which they esteeme so high, as to be willing rather to sell and part with Christ, (as he did, that sold him for thirty pieces of silver) stumbling at that stumbling stone, and going about in the meane time to establish and keep up their owne righteousnesse in its credit and authority, not only against the filthinesse of the flesh, (which lawfully they may) but in op∣position also unto the righteousnesse of faith, which is highly dis∣pleasing to the Father, who calls for this Isaac to be offered up, and warns that this earthly Canaan is only to be sojourned in, and that therefore a more heavenly Countrey should be in our eye and desire, even a City that hath foundations and immutability in it, whose builder and maker is God. From this legal or first-Covenant frame of spirit, as exalt∣ing it self in opposition to the life of faith, do arise and spring forth the sinnes of unbelief, to the resisting of the Ministery of Faith or the new Covenant, & endeavouring either to keep out the life and light of the Righteousnesse of Faith, or (if the dawn∣ings thereof break in upon them, whether they will or no) to crucifie and trample it under foot, as an unholy thing, and to op∣pose
to the utmost, the life and power of Christs second com∣ing; though by so much as is witnessed in the first, they may discerne as in a Type and Figure, that glory that excels and is to follow; and that this second dispensation, or first appear∣ance of Christ, in its proper use and tendency, is ordained as a preparatory and forerunning help and furtherance thereunto. This sort of sins, are properly sins of unbelief, or against the life of Faith; called the hidden works of darknesse, 1 Cor. 4. 5. that may lie undiscovered and unsuspected under the purest forms of godlinesse, and a very fair shew in the flesh, of a Practi∣cal blamelesse Righteousnesse according to the Law. By the very good works and consolations, such consciences experience under the Law, sinne works death in them more easily, even a fixed en∣mity against the righteousnesse of Faith, becoming thereby exceed∣ing sinful. Of this sort are the sins that revive and get strength by the coming of the Commandment, (and die not, till we become dead to the Law, by being crucified with Christ) which till the Law come, are unknown as to any experimental discerning of them, by those that remaine under the first Ministery; who in the ut∣most of their transgressings, do sinne only against the Sonne of man, or Christ in his first appearance; but these sinne against the Holy Ghost, or Christ in his second appearance; and by such sinning, forfeit the benefit of all their enjoyments. The third and last Ministery then, in and by which everlast∣ing righteousnesse is conveighed, and the Image of God set up in the heart, in an immutable and incorruptible state, is that, wherein is exhibited to us the glory that follows, that is to be beheld with open face; the seed of Promise, borne of the free-woman; which is the younger, and comes after both the for∣mer dispensations, as the end for which they were given and are kept on foot. This Ministery is exercised by the mouth of the Sonne himself, speaking from heaven, to the shaking and removing of the former heavens and earth, as of things that are made; that this Kingdome that cannot be shaken, may remaine;
into which Christ is ascended, as received up into glory, made higher then the Heavens, and set downe on the right hand of the Majesty on high, in that light and immorta∣lity which no man hath seene or can see, but those only who are admitted to enter within the veile, through their conformity with him in his death. Those that are under this Ministery, do stand possessed of farre higher and richer benefits and priviledges then any do arrive unto under the first Covenant (having also all that they have under that Ministery) being joyned so near unto the Lord that they two are but one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. or hea∣venly manhood: the one in the Relation of the Husband, the other of the Bride, the Lambs wife, who hath made her gar∣ments (the sine linnen which is the righteousnesse of the Saints) white in the blood of the Lamb: which Robes are neither given unto, nor put on by any but the hundred fourty four thousand, Rev. 14. that are the true Virgins and followers of the Lamb whither soever he goes; leading the true, immaculate, unchangeable life of righteousnesse, which is pe∣culiar unto them from all the world besides. The benefit of these Robes, they have in a twofold consi∣deration; first, as they are worne by Christ in his owne person, made white by himself in his owne blood, when he offered up himself without spot unto God, by the eternal Spirit; which is imputed to them for justification, irrevocable, and never to be blotted out; over and besides the benefit of his le∣gal righteousnesse, for their justification upon the tenour of the first Covenant; and secondly, as they are worne by themselves, for their owne personal inherent righteousnesse, and sanctification, as washed againe in the blood of Christ, by a sprinkling thereof upon every one of their hearts, to purge them from all evil conscience, as they become plant∣ed into a likenesse with him in his death, over and beyond the washing of their bodies with pure water from the filthi∣nesse of the flesh, which is the first-Covenant-sanctification,
purging them only from the evil conscience opposite to that Ministery. This then is the Righteousnesse of Faith, or of the se∣cond and New Govenant, consisting (as we have shewed) in that newnesse of life and operation, which never leaves untill it hath brought downe mans first activity, or way of acting by himself alone, into the very grave of Christ. And we are farther to consider, that this Righteousnesse of Faith may have a hidden and relative Being only, in the heart of the Elect, separating them unto God from the womb; and not yet bring them into reall and actu∣all union with Christ in his spiritual headship, nor appear for a long while in its own proper manifestation, or be so much as an operative seed of life, taking the soul in any active way, into co-operation with it self: but at most, is only compre∣hending and preserving it from the evil of falling into the GREAT TRANSGEESSION, or sinning the sin unto death. So then, whilst this holy seed thus lies at the bottome, as it were, the person in whom it is, may be carried forth in the life of other Principles, to the exercise of all good conscience, from first to last, under all the three Ministeries; as it was with Paul, whether considered as in those Principles, wherein he was alive before the Law came; or those wherein he lived under the Law, in a conformity to it; or those wherein he lived by Faith, in newnesse of life and operation, after he became dead to the Law; counting all things lesse and drosse and dung, Phil. 3. which he had till then experienced (how great and glo∣rious soever his receivings and attainments had beene) as fit to be left behind, that he might presse forward, through a conformity with Christ in his death, to the glory of the re∣surrection from the dead, as the mark of the price of his high calling, wherein true perfection and lasting blessednesse consists. Where the Image of God in this third and last
sense, stands but in the least relative kind of union with any heart, there the foundation is laid, which is menti∣oned, 2 Tim. 2. 19. where it is said, The Lord knoweth them that are his, bearing with, and passing by all their evil carriages towards him, in the times of their ignorance and unregenerate state, not suffering the Destroyer to en∣ter and utterly to make an end: but because of this New Wine that is found in the Cluster, God saith, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it. And though this hidden Being which everlasting righ∣teousnesse hath in the soul, to the separating of it unto God from the womb, be not that which does actually invest such persons, so much as with the Priviledges and Blessings of the first Covenant, or give them a personal right to them, (all which depends upon the marriage-union actually to be contracted betweene Christ and them, when they are so joyned as to be made one flesh) yet the sanctification that passes upon the soul, or separation that is made of it hereby from the womb, keeps it from wilful sinning against the grace of the New Covenant, and righ∣teousnesse of Faith; as appears in Solomon, who in the midst of his greatest declinings and falls, had this wisdome ly∣ing at bottome, and keeping him from final Apostasie, as the Book of Ecclesiastes at large declares. So also in Paul, this was evident, who confesses in this respect, that God shewed mercy to him who was the worst and greatest of sinners, because that in all that con∣tradiction and opposition to the light of Faith and of the New Covenant, wherein he became a persecutor and a blasphemer, he was ignorant and unaware. I did it ignorantly, sayes he, 1 Tim. 1. 13. and elsewhere, when called before the Magistrate, Acts 26. 9. I verily thought with my self (sayes he) that I ought to do many things contra∣ry to the Name of Iesus of Nazareth. By this seed then of saving Faith, whereby he was separated from the womb, he
was preserved from the great transgression, or sinne that is unto death. And in this sense we may safely understand that Scripture, Luke 10. 5, 6. Into what house soever ye enter, first say; Peace be to this house: And if the SONNE OF PEACE be there, your Peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you againe. So that no Peace or durable Blessednesse hath commission from God to rest upon any heart, but where this seed is, through which the Saints are separated unto God, from the womb. The Witnesse then which results, and presents it self to our thoughts from this view of things, is this; that dy∣ing to sinne and living to righteousnesse, considered only as the effect and birth of common grace, or life from Christ under the first and second Ministery (singly and apart from the effect and operation of saving Faith, which is proper to the third Ministery alone) does amount to no higher a work in the conscience, then what may and will fail. And yet this Mortification and Vivification thus produced in the heart, is not only real, but all such attainments and recei∣vings as these from Christ, with all the benefits inseperably accompanying his indwelling presence in the soul, by his first appearance, are (as they are called) Ezek. 16. 14, 15. his owne comelinesse, which he thinks fit to put upon these children of the first Covenant; which they notwithstanding, unwarrantably trusting unto, and resting in, do thereby com∣mit iniquity: and that, such iniquity, as that thereupon, all their righteousnesse which they have had and done, shall be no more remembered: but for the iniquity which they thus commit, they must die; Ezek. 33. 13. as found opposers and fighters against the brightnesse of Christs second com∣ing, under pretence of upholding and adhering unto the life and glory of his first. The defect therefore of these mens saintship or sanctifi∣cation, lies not in this, that it is false, counterfeit, hypocriti∣cal,
or head-work only, and unanswerable to the Rule, or holy commandment given unto them. For in all these re∣spects, it may be and is oftentimes free and faultlesse, in the experience of those that have it; who in great since∣rity and zeale, are servants unto righteousnesse and enemies unto sin, in the two first Ministeries, and upon the termes Christ therein exhibits himself unto them: who yet for all this, stumble at the stumbling stone, and fall at last irre∣coverably; by setting up the work of God wrought in their hearts, either under the first or second dispensation (where it only obtaines the place of a Part or Branch, in reference to the whole) in a direct opposition to the coming on of the whole, in the third and last dispensation; as well knowing that when that which is perfect does once come and take place, then that which is but in part (and in that sense, im∣perfect) must be done away: which such minds (so princi∣pled as they are) can by no means bear, being fixedly and ut∣terly unwilling (where saving Faith is not at the bottome) to part with and forgo these small Pearls, whereby to make purchase of the great Pearle, which comprehends all the parts in it self, and that after a more excel∣lent manner, causing them to be enjoyed in a more excel∣lent way they before, and in more abundance. So that the very Holinesse in kind, is not lost, but is perfected and ful∣filled, as we have at large shewed. And therefore the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 12. treating of Grace and the gifts of the Spirit under both these considera∣tions, (first, as the manifestation thereof is given in common to every man, to profit withall, dividing unto every man, severally, as he will; or secondly, as there is a giving forth of this Spirit, in a more excellent way of life and grace, then what the best gifts, given several and apart, do amount unto) exhorts unto the acknowledging and re∣taining of both these, in a consistency and loving harmony together, as making but one body, or compleat fulnesse in
Christ: which he calls Love; Chap. 13. expressely assert∣ing, that all gifts of the Spirit how good and reall soever they be, yet considered, as they are several and in part only, will leave the possessors of them, little better then sounding brasse or tinkling Cymbals; for they will not last or endure to the end. The Apostle hereby intimates unto us, the evil use that may be made of good and spiritual gifts, when either the parts agree not amongst themselves, (but the eye sayes to the hand, I have no need of thee; or the head to the feet, I have no need of you) or when the parts, considered as several, conspire together against the whole; as the Body against the Soul, the Forme against the Power of Godlinesse. When therfore the gifts of the Spirit are given several (as they may) without the seed of saving faith accompanying them, how high and heavenly soever they may seeme to be, they are but common grace, and may be fallen from, and so those may perish that have them. But where such gifts are fol∣lowed with that farther work in the soul, which is the pro∣per fruit and effect of the third Ministery, containing in it things that accompany salvation, then those very gifts (hereby washed in the blood of the Lamb) do change their fading and failing property, and become saving and everlasting. In the righteousnesse then of Faith, both the former righteousnesses are fulfilled, and established upon better prin∣ciples and Promises, then those of the first Covenant; to the making the possessors thereof, heirs of God, co-heirs with Christ, and so, partakers of the Divine nature, entering them into the glory that is within the veile, and setting them downe with Christ on his Throne, as he is set downe with the Father on his Throne, in the fulnesse and per∣fection of both Creations, having all power in Heaven and in Earth, put into his hand. This is the Mortification and Vivification, the dying to
sin and living to righteousness, witnessed unto by the Scrip∣tures, and shining forth in the face of Christ, as the Truth that is in Jesus, (unto which we are made conformable, by being planted together with him, in the likenesse of his death and resurrection) comprehending in it all that righte∣ousnesse and holinesse, which is but in part, and is upon right grounds, pleaded for, either by the Natural or Legal Conscience, and holding forth (over and above) that which is higher, and of a better and more durable kinde, then theirs. But however it be, that the defect and miscarriage we are speaking to, that is incident to Natural or Legal righ∣teousnesse, lie not in this, that it is counterfeit or hypo∣critical, but that it is that which is but in part, and which therefore does unwarrantably exalt it self into a competi∣tion with, or opposition to the whole: (as it comes to passe in those who make such ill use of Christs first appearance, as thereby to resist and keep out his second) yet we are neverthelesse to acknowledge, that there is much counter∣feit work to be found in the world (as daily experience sheweth) both as to light & practice, principles and converse, amongst those that pretend fair to be great proficients in that righteousnesse and holinesse that makes up the answer of the Natural or Legal good conscience, who do not tru∣ly live in the principles of either of these states, but make a flourish with meere notion, head-work, and light without heat, together with some overly performances, as desirous of a share in the praise of men (with those who truly live in such principles) by a meere outward plausiblenesse in converse, whilst their inward part is full of ravening and wickednesse. Others also that are unsincere and faulty in their very principles, we are to discover and lay open, for the pre∣venting of the deceit, with which under these, the Devil lies in wait, to insnare and turne men aside from the
TRVTH. This sort of men, in whom are found these cor∣rupt principles, (whereby they become men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, speaking lies in hypocrisie) the Scripture expressely takes notice, and warnes us of, a∣bove all the rest, as the great engines the Devil makes use of for the instillation of his Doctrine, by faire speeches, to the deceiving of the hearts of the simple. Since therefore there is such deceivable work kept on foot in men, by that grand Impostor Satan, and that un∣der pretence of their dying to sin, and living to righteous∣nesse, in many feigned shews of mortification, forbidding of marriage, and commanding to abstain from meats, (which may be received with thanksgiving, by those who believe and know the truth) which things have indeed a shew of wisdome, in will-worship and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh; all which is so far from being comprehended in the righteousnesse revealed by the Gospel, as any part of it; that under a counterfeit sha∣dow and similitude thereof, it stands in direct opposition thereunto: begetting in the conscience such a dying unto Christ, or the Spirit of TRUTH, as imports, and plain∣ly speaks forth a living unto Antichrist, or the spirit of lies and fashood, prophesied of, as that which with great confidence will be obtruded by the witnesse and practice of divers in the last times, 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3. and elsewhere; since (I say) these things are so, I have held it my duty in very faithfulnesse unto the TRUTH, not to passe by the same in silence, without giving my Testi∣mony against all such deceitful workings in those; who having departed from the faith; give heed unto seducing spirits, speaking lies in hypocrisie, or in feigned resem∣blances unto TRUTH. Of such the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 11. for whose sake he was exceeding jealous, lest the Corinthians, through their influence and subtilty, should be corrupted from the simpli∣city
and chastity of mind, which they ought to bear, as chast Spouses unto Christ, their one Husband, v. 2, 3. Such (saith Paul) are false Apostles, Prophets and professors of Christ, transforming themselves into the appearance of Christs true witnesses and followers: and no marvel; For Satan him∣selfe is transformed into an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers be transformed as the Mini∣sters of righteousnesse, taking upon them to personate true mortification, or dying to sinne, and true vivification or living to righteousnesse, whose end shall be according to their Works, ver. 13, 14, 15. This sort of men, as appeares in the examples of Hymeneus and Alexander, have been once enlight∣ned, and through the receivings of grace and attain∣ments under the first Covenant, have had that which the Scripture calls Faith and a good conscience, 1 Tim. 1. 19, 20. who notwithstanding, do put away their good conscience, and concerning faith, make shipwrack; being the adversaries on the one hand, which Paul exhorts Timothy to maintaine a good warfare against, as well as against the Teachers of the Law on the other hand, who (being ignorant whilest they are under the Law, how to pursue the true end of it) run out into unprofitable, heady disputes, and endlesse questions, (having once turned aside unto vaine jangling) understanding neither what they say, nor wherefore they affirme, v. 4, 5, 6, 7. But stumbling at that stumbling stone in Sion, and rock of offence (to e∣nemies Rom. 9. 33. but of defence and salvation to his chosen & beloved ones, Psal. 95. 1. the same Christ becoming to these, a sanctuary or place of refuge: to them, a stone of stumbling, even to both the houses of Israel: a gin and a snare to the inhabitants of the earthly Jerusalem, Isa. 8. 14 who going a∣bout to establish their own righteousnesse, do not submit unto, and so fall short of the righteousnesse of God, Rom. 10. 3. Both these sorts of men, on the one hand and the other, upon distinct accounts, are to be reputed enemies to the
TRUTH, in the Spirit and Power thereof: as is at large set forth, 1 Tim. 1. the first of which are also meant and described, 1 Tim. 4. 1. where they are said to be those that are departed from the Faith, through giving heed unto sedu∣cing spirits, and to inspirations of devils, in those transfor∣med Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11. 15. who labour to vent the doctrines of devils, (such as devils either are authors or objects of) through whose Ministery they come to have itching ears formed in them 2 Tim. 4. 3. ready to hearken to all that the Serpent, transformed into an Angel of light, presents to them, by way of instruction, and under colour of divine inspiration; as taking upon him the Prophetical office of Christ, and thereby undertaking to carry them forward to what is more spiritual, and to heighten them in their ex∣periences of what SPIRIT and POWER is. In this very way he offered to impose upon, and de∣ceive (if it had been possible) Christ himself, when (percei∣ving that all the literal Religion, and legal worship of the Jewes would not hold him, but lay short of his light) he shewed him all the Kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them, (the utmost creaturely perfection or natural glo∣ry, which he was able to give the prospect and representati∣on of, in his own Angelical nature, being of that highest rank of creatures in the whole first Creation) and that in a mo∣ment or the twinkling of an eye, saying, All these will I give thee, or make thee to live in, if thou wilt fall down and wor∣ship me. This temptation then which Christ resisted, these seduced ones fall under and are snared and taken with, to the making of them love and believe a lie; and to yield up themselves in a fixednesse of service, duty and love unto this false spirit, as unto Christ the true Prophet. And the better to induce them hereunto, and strengthen them in the beliefe of a lie; Satan in this his coming as an Angel of light, is accompanied with power, with signes, and lying wonders, acting the part of a great friend and
favourer of all that is spiritual, heavenly and high; not opposing at all, their having the understanding of all my∣steries, and all knowledge, yea, or their having of all faith, to the working of miracles, or removing of mountaines; their speaking with the tongues of men and Angels, but unto all these attainments he is conducing, as much as in him lies, in all de∣ceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse to serve his designes, by gaining the greater credit and authority hereby in their hearts and affections; and so, the more unperceivably beguiling and winding them over into the belief of a lie, and that in a point of highest concernment unto them; prevailing with them to receive him in their love and affe∣ction, even that adulterous spirit, and deceiver of the Nations, in this his Angelical brightnesse, instead of Christ himselfe THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH and SON OF THE LI∣VING GOD, and that, considered as shining forth in the glory of his SECOND COMING. In consequence hereof, he makes them to resigne up all the powers and operations of their minde absolutely into his hands, in obedience to his dictates and inspirations; upon which they hold themselves obliged to be alwayes waiting, in the posture of passive silence, in a Counterfeit imitation of the true conformity unto Christ, in his death and resur∣rection. So then by this meanes, the Devill is found sitting in the Temple of God, as God (to the apprehension of those who thus possesse him, (or if you will, whom he thus possesses) as also to the imagination of others, their deluded proselytes) where he is opposing and Exalting himselfe above all that is called God. And as in former times, by JANNES and JAMBRES he withstood Moses, through a lively and skilful i∣mitation of his works and miracles, so in the latter dayes by such instruments of his as these, he shall resist the TRUTH, to the causing of many to stumble and be offended there∣at, for the resemblance sake which this false spirit is
able to forme of it. Which false and counterfeit appea∣rance of his, (as we have said) the Scripture sets forth and de∣scribes under these two heads, MORTIFICATION and VIVIFICATION, with a Character of Condemnation upon them, in the very description made of them. Such mortification is spoken of, 2 Tim 2. 17. in the case of HYMENEUS and PHILETUS, whose word is there said to eate like a canker: Intimating, what kinde of mortification, the word by them ministered, did produce; even such a one, as is caused in the body by cancerous hu∣mors, carrying certaine mortality in it, if not timely pre∣vented; not being a mortification in order to health and life, but unto unsoundnesse and death. These teachers with their followers, are men of corrupt and unchast mindes towards the true Lord and husband, under all their abstinence and seeming mortification. Againe, 1 Tim. 4. 2. this mortification is called the searing of the conscience with a hot iron, importing the dead and in∣sensible frame which thereby is brought upon the minde, to any other delight, love or desire, save only towards this false spirit, with whom it is as it were bewitched, to the con∣tracting a spiritual benummednesse and coldnesse to all o∣ther lovers whatsoever: to the world, and all seen things or bodily objects, answering unto the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of sensual life; yea, and also to Christ himself, the true and living God; so as to become past feeling in the case of any checks, accusations, or reproofs from the SPIRIT OF TRUTH; in order to a totall and full resignation of themselves up to the di∣ctates, inspirations and commands of this false and sedu∣cing spirit. In this sense and on this account, we may finde men giving their bodies to be burned, 1 Cor 13. 3. yielding up themselves, to be deprived of all their natural or sensual comforts; yea, many times, the most lawful of them: there∣by
offering themselves up, as in sacrifice, unto these sa∣tanical flames, wherein they are in danger to be everlasting∣ly burning, as in a fire that can never be quenched. For this searing of their conscience as with a hot yron, is but the first fruits in these SONS OF PERDITION, of that re∣surrection into everlasting contempt, designed unto such VES∣SELS OF DISHONOUR: as on the other hand, the true mortification and resigning up of the natural will and desire to Christ, is the first fruits in the true SONS OF GOD, of their resurrection into everlasting life. This sinne of their under the Gospel, as it is more spiri∣tual, seems to be pointed out to us by that sinne under the Law, committed by those that offered up their children to Molech, causing their sons and their daughters to passe through that material fire, and to yield up their very bodies (in the most literal, outward sense and acceptation) to be burned, in that sacrifice, Jer. 32. 35. which was expres∣ly prohibited, Lev. 18. 21. and they threatned with death that should be found practisers hereof, Chap. 20. 2, 3. yea, if men be found conniving in such case, as loth to discover the of∣fender, God farther declares that he himself wil come forth in his wrathful appearance or face, to do execution, as it is written: v. 4, 5. If the people of the Land do any wayes hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and kill him not: (or cause not execution to be done upon him) then will I set my face against that man, and against his family, and I will cut him off, and all those that go thus a whoring after Molech. This just judgement and severity of God, in his proceed∣ing against this sin, as practised in that lowest and most lite∣ral sense under the Law, will be found in the issue, not to be lessened or mitigated, but rather much heightned and raised, to appear in a more flaming execution of vengeance upon all such in whom this sin finally takes place, in a more sublimated and spiritual way, to the offering
up of their own living bodies and the sensual comforts thereof in a strange fire, to the Devil; which they ought by fire from heaven, taken off the true Altar, Christ, to have of∣fered up in sacrifice unto God, Rom. 12. 1. Secondly, the same Scripture 2 Tim. 2. 17, 18. that intimates this way of mortification, does also mention the proportionable vivification accompanying it, called there the resurrection, which such false guides do affirme to be already past in them, (looking for nothing as future or to come, of hell or heaven) to the quickning or raising them up into the utmost perfection of life and glory, as their attain∣ment whilst herein this life, and before that redemption of the body, mentioned Rom. 8. 23. which the Saints, and the creature it self yet groane after, and wait for. This resur∣rection of theirs is called, 2 Col. 18. a worshipping of Angels in a voluntary humility, intruding into those things which they have not seene, as taking it for granted, they are hereby made the true spiritual seed, and that they are enter'd within the veile, as having passed through the STRAIT GATE, and undergone the BAPTISME of the HOLY GHOST AND OF FIRE; and so, that they are also come to be intirely under the teachings of the Father, as actual possessors and inheritors of his everlasting Kingdome and glory. In all this they are seduced, and made through strong delu∣sion to beleeve a lie, being vainly puffed up in their fleshly minde, to the despising and undervaluing of Christ the Mediatour: yea, 2 Pet. 2. 1. to the bringing in of damnable heresies, pri∣vily, by cunning sleights and beguiling insinuations, even to a denying of the Lord that bought them, in the incommunicable properties of his Godhead; by esteeming, and at length in down-right termes asserting themselves to be God; or at least, to be as much the Sonnes of God in all respects, as Christ himself, in his own person, who is God blessed for ever; in consequence whereof, we shall finde them at length owning an everlasting and general salvation of all men and Angels.
This is that posture of spirit into which that old Serpent, called the Devill and Satan, swells up those that are thus deceived by him, in down-right opposition at length to Christ and God, asserting himselfe in them, and so causing them to assert and own themselves (through his inspirations and indwelling presence in them) to be both Christ and God, Father and Sonne, or another while, to affirme that there is no God, no Heaven, no Hell; no Angel or Spirit, as the Sadduces; for if he can perswade them, either that he is God, or else that there is no God at all, he hath enough. And in order to make this witness of theirs to stand and take place against all opposition from the true light; when he has cried down the living WORD OF GOD into a meere equality on all accounts with the creature, or advanced himselfe and his children into the room and place of God himselfe, or partnership at least with the WORD in his incommunicable properties, but then findes that the outward Word of God can very diffi∣cultly be made use of long, to countenance either of these designes; by degrees he labours to draw them into a state of alienation to that also, rendring even the written Word nauseous and despicable to them, and causing them to fall a slighting the Scriptures, this outward Word of God, (which rightly represented, gives forth the discovery, and pleads for the true interest of the inward and living WORD) and so, professedly to disown all bodily or outward worship and service whatsoever, as carnal, and inconsistent with the spiritual service they per∣forme. Hereupon, some of them also forbid marriage, and other lawful creature-comforts, as called to abstinence and a Vir∣gin-life; by which Rule, the spirit they live and walk in, judges marriage unlawful, and commands to abstaine from meats, two
signal characters of this spirit, held forth undeniably to our view, 1 Tim. 4. 3. And in all this they carry a shew of wisdome in wilworship, neglecting of the body, and all things done in honour or satis∣faction thereunto, as hath been said. To these also belong those characters in Jude and Peter, where it is said of such, that they count it pleasure to riot in the day-time; or under pretence of highest light and spiritu∣ality, to turne the grace of God into wantonnesse, and so at last returne with the dog to the vomit, and the washed sow to her wallowing in the mire; yea, and that avowedly, in point of judgement now, as a condition they can satisfie their owne consciences in, and in which they undertake to justifie them∣selves, against all contradiction. These by Peter are called spots and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own self-de∣ceivings, in their feastings with others; having eyes full of a∣dultery, beguiling unstable souls, and alluring through much wantonnesse, them that were cleane escaped from those that live in error. Yet all this while, they will confidently own themselves, as lovers and favorers of the Spirit of TRUTH, notwithstand∣ing that they live unto a spirit of falshood in the sight of God, even in whoredome and defilement with the father of lies. But because many of these may be so meerely deceived, as verily to think themselves with a chaste and Spouse-like affection, to be embracing of Christ, their true Lord and husband: and so, may be doing what they do, ignorantly, and not wilfully; the Scripture sayes in such case, Of some have compassion, making a difference, and others save with fear; pulling them (with a holy severity) out of the fire, lest o∣therwise they finally perish; for this is that kinde of sinning which is unto death, and therefore unpardonable, when it is done knowingly and wilfully. This false seducing spirit is capable of putting forth it self in a greater or lesser degree, in and under all formes, through
counterfeit resemblances unto TRUTH, to beguile and mis∣lead unstable souls; and is daily detected and discovered under all professions or visible formes of Saintship, whether more or lesse refined, whether earthly and sensual, or heavenly and Angelical. Hereof there are in these dayes of ours, but too many living instances, who as Lots wife are turned into Mo∣numents of Gods righteous judgment, declared upon them, for the admonition of others. And that we may not leave this subject, without endea∣vouring to contribute some assistance towards the resolving of that great Question, how the true Spirit may with cer∣tainty and infallibility be known and distinguished from the false? I shall briefly recommend to consideration, as conducible to the discovery hereof, these following particu∣lars. The Spirit of TRUTH is evidently and infallibly distinguished from the spirit of lies and falshood, three se∣veral wayes; by which we may make a trial and judgement of the spirits, whether they be of God or no. First, by the evidence and witnesse which is given of it by the three that bear witnesse in heaven, where the Spirit of TRUTH shines forth in its supreme original light and self-evidence, as we have at large shewed in the first and second Chapters. Secondly, by the Record and witnesse that the Sonne, or Christ the true Spirit, gives of himself, in his flesh or humane nature, causing the truth to shine forth in the face of Jesus; opening what he is, and what he did by coming in the flesh, suffering, and rising againe, according to the Scri∣ptures; which, 1 John 5. 6. is rendred thus, This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood; and it is the Spirit that heareth witnesse, because the Spirit is truth, even the witnesse shining forth in his Spirit and person, who (whether considered as be∣ing and subsisting in the WORD OF LIFE, before his be∣ing made flesh, or considered as after his coming in the flesh,
living, dying, and rising againe) hath a witnesse born of him in heaven, by the FATHER, WORD, and SPIRIT, which Three are one: and also in earth, by the SPIRIT, WATER, & BLOOD, declaring themselves in and upon him, (as he was found in the fashion and habit of a man) which agree in one. Thus in the same person, we have the greater witnesse, which is the witnesse of God; or of Christ, as he is God: and the lesser witnesse, which is the witnesse of man; or of Christ, as he is the Son of man: and in both these, considered also as testified unto by the Scriptures, we have the compleat witnesse, which God hath testified of his Son. By reason hereof, 'tis said, 1 Joh. 2. 12. Who is a liar, but he that denies Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist that denieth the Father and the Son Whosoever denies the Son, the same hath not the Father. Whosoever sees not nor acknowledges the TRUTH, as witnessed and shining forth in the face of Jesus the Son of man, with those that are rightly admitted to serve in the first Sanctuary, among the many that are called; can much lesse behold it, as witnessed and held forth in the brightnesse of Gods face, or of the blessed Trinity, with those who are culled out of the former, and rightly ad∣mitted into the holiest of all, among the few that are chosen. By both these witnesses and records, in harmony with the outward Word, we do come to know him that is true, (as the right and whole object, whereon through faith we are to fix our eye) in the proper forme, character, and distinction which he gives of himself, from all idols or coun∣terfeit appearances of him, whatsoever. The third or last witnesse which is given us of the true Spirit, is that which immediately and necessarily flows from his indwelling presence in our hearts, growing up there more and more unto a perfect day, by working out in the conscience and spirit of the beleever, a confōrmity unto Christ in his death and resurrection; causing a dying to sinne and a living unto righteousnesse, in the full extent of both, as we have opened.
For if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his: and if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sinne; but the Spi∣rit is life, because of righteousnesse. Examine therefore your selves whether ye be in the Faith: know ye not your owne selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobate? And If the Spirit of him that rai∣sed up Jesus from the dead awell in you he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortall bodies, by his Spirit that dwellesh in you; and so the Spirit it-selfe comes evi∣dently and infallibly to witnesse with our spirits, that we are the children of God, as having this Spirit of Adoption poured into our hearts: for if we be adopted children, then we know we are heires, heires of God and joynt heires with Christ, if so be we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. And though we are now Sonnes, so as it doth not yet appeare what we shall be (when we come to the stature of perfect men in Christ Je∣sus, at the full manifestation of the sonnes of God) yet now we know, that we shall then be like him, and that we shall then see him, as he is; yea, by faith we now see him, who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. and by this knowledge we have of him in the mean time, we come to see and experience him, that is true; and that we are in him, that is true; even the true God and eternal life: having the witnesse in our selves, through that holy anoint∣ing which is TRUTH and no lie, teaching us of all things, and a∣biding in us, as a seed to preserve us from the evil and snare of all false and seducing spirits. Abide therefore in him; that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. These things I have written unto you concerning them that seduce you.
CHAP. XXI. Shewing particularly, the evil seed that is sow∣en in the natural conscience by Satan: through which he works men off from their subjecti∣on to Christ, in his first dispensation, and fix∣es them in rebellion against him. HAving already in general laid open the me∣thods of Satan; the weapons of his warfare, together with the diligent and skilful prose∣cution of his designes upon mankind, to se∣duce them, work them off, and forever de∣teine them from their duty and faithfulnesse unto Christ, their true Husband and Lord: we shall come now in a more particular manner, to shew how closse an attendant he is upon the foregoing works of Christ, in the hearts and consciences of men considered under the former dispensations, walking about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devoure: watching what he can find in such hearts, (that in the BEGIN∣NING are Gods and Christs owne workmanship, (as hath beene shewed) and trying whom he may corrupt from their first pu∣rity and simplicity, through the actings and lustings of their owne wills, till he fix them at last, in an unchangeable defecti∣on from, and enmity against God, that created them, and Christ, that bought them. We shall here therefore declare, what effect the power of Satan hath in the renewed natural consciences of men, causing them to deteine the truth (manifested in them) in unrighteous∣nesse, and rendering them unworthy, either of keeping the good they have, or of receiving any further or gre by
the blood of Christ, who hath more grace and mercy in store for those that approve themselves faithful in the lesser measures committed to them. For such is the long-suffering and forbearance which by Christs ransome is procured from God on the behalf of fallen man, that he will have none to perish, for want of meanes to be saved: but does so provide for them, according to the state they are in, that all may, if they will, be led unto repentance, and come to the knowledge of the TRƲTH, which the witnesse of God, set up in them, faithfully hearkened to, will enable them to feele after; but when it so comes to passe, that in stead hereof, they do abuse this good will of God towards them, and through the impenitency and hardnesse of their hearts, go on to despise and neglect the grace tendered to them, then does God think fit to reveale his wrath from heaven against such ungodly, and unrigh∣teous men, that hold the truth of God in unrighteousnesse: account∣ing them unworthy of more favour, who (under all their re∣ceivings of the witnesse of TRUTH, declaring it self in the work of their consciences, and the protection and encou∣ragement, which in the practice of, and conformity unto the same, is afforded to them in this state, from the wholesome and good impressions of the holy Angels, as the benefit of their Ministery and charge) do despise all this already shewed them, being willing to be hardened by Satan, and bid defiance there∣unto, walking on in wayes of unrighteousnesse, highly pro∣voking and displeasing unto God, (notwithstanding all the faithful dictates, inward motions of light, and impressions in their owne minds and consciences, to the contrary) of which number are they of the Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, throughout the whole world, whether acquainted with the ho∣ly Scriptures and things contained in them, or not, being such as live without Law, and perish without Law; who being found∣ed upon the principles of right reason, or the common enlight∣ning work of God in the conscience, according to the measure and degree received, do refuse to reteine the Truth thus mani∣festing it self in them, in a way of righteous and holy operati∣ons
and walkings, according to the rule of that first dispensati∣on; and as taking pleasure in the contrary, and preferring be∣fore it the corrupt conversation of the old Adam, consisting in vanity, foolish uncleannesse and noisome lusts, do prosecute the same with all greedinesse, till they come to be wholly alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them and affected by them, because of the blindness of their hearts, ren∣dering them at last, past all sense and feeling of the evil they commit, being given up by God, to this uncleannesse of spirit, through the lusts of their owne hearts, as the due reward un∣to their wilful disobedience: that as they did not like to retaine God in their knowledge, but rather chose to break with God, so also he held it just, to break with them, and give them over to a reprobate mind, to do things that were not convenient, and to be filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetous∣ness; becoming full of envie, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, haters of God, despightful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to parents, without under∣standing, Covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implaca∣ble, unmerciful, who knowing the judgement of God, by that self-e∣videncing TRUTH with which all are enlightned more or lesse, that come into the world, do most wickedly and profanely im∣prison the workings thereof; suppresse, slight and reject all its motions and counsels declaring to them continually that they that do such things are worthy of death; and going on in op∣position and defiance thereof, not only to do the same things, that bring downe finally the wrath of God, but take pleasure in them that do them. Under this head of openly prophane persons, what multi∣tudes of subjects unto himself, as their Lord and Ruler, does the Prince of the aire gaine? who works in these children of diso∣bedience, carrying them captive unto his owne will to accomplish his designes, and maintaine his quarrel against all shew and ap∣pearance of godlinesse, even in the very forme of it, as well as the power; and to render them in this corrupt interest of theirs the more formidable, he embodies them as it were in
one corrupt love and desire, filling them with one common spirit of uncleannesse, alienation and enmity to the life of God and godlinesse in any kind, which influences them in all their operations, whether considered as private persons, in their act∣ings betweene man and man, or as publick persons in their Mi∣nistery of Rule and Government over one another, accord∣ing to the various formes and administrations thereof, under which (through Gods providence) they are placed, and be∣come related to: all which, conspiring (as it were) together, in one spirit, and combined in one corrupt interest, are as a uni∣versal Dominion and Rule which the god of this world main∣tains, greatens, and manages against Christ and his spiritual seed, (considered either under the first or second Covenant,) as a distinct jurisdiction of his owne, keeping all that are under him in this sense, as much as lies in his power without all ap∣pearance or influence of any other God, but himself. So, as they are properly described in the Scriptures, to be such, as live without hope, and without God in the world. Therefore it is, that this corrupt interest and prophane spirit, considered, as dispersed through the Nations, Kindreds, People and Tongues, in the whole world, is called the beast, Rev. 13. which John saw coming out of the sea foaming out its owne filth, in a way of open profanenesse, having seven heads and ten hornes, and upon his hornes ten crownes, and upon his heads, the name of blaspemy, or evil speaking, against godlinesse in any kind; un∣to whom the Dragon gives his power and seat and great autho∣rity; that is, does so influence and advantage them in all their actings of Magistracy in the capacity of publick Persons and Rulers, in order to render and keep them subservient to this corrupt interest, that he gives them all manner of prospe∣rity and successe, in the exercise of all power and tyranny, to the greatning and advantaging of themselves, in the things of this life, and of their worldly being: who finding and experi∣encing the sweet of this gaine, do shew themselves obedient and faithful in all their actings, to the interest of the god of this world, which they serve, and are most cruel and fierce, like Leo∣pards,
Beares and Lions to flie upon, devour, and tread under foot all opposition whatsoever, that does stand in their way, or would weaken and take away this interest and power of theirs, which as it is put forth in a way of Magistracy, worldly Rule and Dominion, is described by the seven heads and ten hornes, which this beast wears, as the Ensigne of its universal Dominion over the whole world; and that throne which Satan, under all the variety of forms and administrations of Rule and Govern∣ment, hath gained unto his interest, and made instrumental to accomplish his furious designes against the people of God, in all ages of the world. This seven headed and ten horned beast, that is here described in the likenesse of a Leopard, having the feet of a Beare, and the mouth of a Lion, is the same with the four great beasts, that came up from the sea, divers one from the other, Dan. 7. The first like a Lion, the second like a Beare, the third like a Leo∣pard, and the fourth dreadful, strong and exceedingly terrible, having ten horns; and these beasts are said, v. 2. to be brought up∣on the stage, or into their actings, by the striving of the four winds upon the great sea. This great sea signifies the wavering, unstable principles of the first creation, which is here pre∣sented as the matter the Devil works on for the raising up of his throne, intimated by the striving of the four winds thereupon to the bringing up of the four beasts, which this old Dragon or universal evil spirit, that evil one, signified by the four winds, for the comprehensivenesse of evill nature that is in him, by his contestings and strivings in the hearts and consciences of men, does forme to himself and set up as instrumental to his designes in all generations from the be∣ginning of the world to the ending thereof. The greatnesse of the growth and extent of this Domi∣nion, reaching unto heaven and to the ends of the earth, was signified unto Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. under the similitude of a great tree, which grew and was strong whose height reached to the heavens, and the sight thereof to all the earth, whose leaves were faire, and the fruit thereof much, and it
was meat for all, upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation: which was interpreted to signifie this universal Rule and Dominion throughout the whole earth, capable to be corrupted and wrought over (as it were) out of the hands of Christ, through God's permission, as the meanes whereby to bruise the heele of Christ and his mem∣bers, throughout all the ages of the world; and suffered to be actuated by the Devil and his Angels, living in the several branches of it, and keeping it up over the Nations, as that, which is argued to be better then no Rule and Go∣vernment at all, as conteining the meanes for the giving of meat in due season and maintaining orderly life and con∣versation amongst men, upon grounds of common equi∣ty, just and right; The countenancing of all which is no way inconsistent with the Magistrates subserviency to him, in the exercise of that enmity and implacable rage, with which he is prosecuting Christ and his seed, by his Lawes and Decrees for that purpose, whereby the throne of ini∣quity growes, and spreads it selfe, throughout the whole earth. By comparing these Scriptures we shall find it evident, that this universal Monarchy or Dominion, exercised up∣on these principles and interests, and made the throne and seate of the Dragon in all times of the world from begin∣ning to end, is that which we are to understand by the four Monarchies; nor are we to think it strange, that one Monarchy, which as in the four parts of it, it does com∣prehend all worldly Rule and Dominion, should be de∣scribed as by four distinct Monarchies, since the Scripture it self leads us hereunto, when the four beasts mentioned, Dan. 7. are summ'd up into one beast, Rev. 13. 1, &c. signifying but the same Antichristian Rule and Power com∣prehensively in the one, which is to be found distributive∣ly in the other four, in its successions, variety of formes and administrations, wherein it hath had its being in the world, propagating and continuing it selfe in the same spi∣rit,
and interest, (which neverthelesse is still in and under all that variety but one and the same evil spirit and corrupt interest) in and by the meanes of civil Rule and Government, domineering over the Saints in the world, and alwayes making warre with them, as that one beast that hath seven heads and ten hornes; (in which way of interpretation I would not be understood, to exclude the literal or histo∣rical sense, and common acceptation of the four Monarchies, which very well consists with this) in the fall of which uni∣versal Monarchy and Government the four beasts do all of them expire, and the Rule of the fourth Monarchy de∣termines, as the thrones that are to be cast downe, that the Ancient of dayes may sit, and set up an everlasting Domi∣nion, a Kingdome that shall receive no end. And whereas, Dan. 4. 23, 25. by the Decree of the watchers, that strong and beautiful tree (under which also this universal Monar∣chy is represented) was to be hewen downe and destroyed; yet so, as to leave the stumps of the roots thereof in the earth, with a band of Iron and Brasse in the tender grasse of the field, to be wet with the dew of heaven, and have its portion with the beasts of the field, till seven times passe over him; this signifies the depraved, degenerated state of this Govern∣ment, as it is left in the hands of Satan, and managed by him and his instruments, during the time that the Saints heele is to be bruised thereby, which continues so, untill it be renewed and restored in subordination unto Christ and his Kingdome at his second appearance, when seven times will have passed over it, and the seventh Angel will have sounded, to the bringing in of Christs Kingdome, whereby he is to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, reigning with his Saints upon the earth a thousand years, when it shall be knowne that the most High rules in the Kingdomes of men, (and not the Prince of darknesse,) giving them to whomso∣ever he will, in a subserviency unto himselfe, as restored to their Primitive constitution and perfection. Thus we have taken notice of that first beast, coming
up out of the sea (in the constitution, designes and periods thereof, Rev. 13. 1.) comprehending all Nations, kindreds, Tongues and Languages, as they deteine the TRUTH in unrighteousnesse, or in opposition to just and holy opera∣tions, and stand armed with the power of worldly thrones and Civil Judicatures, for their greater instrumentalnesse unto Satan, in rage, fiercenesse and cruelty, fitted for the use he makes of them, in bruising of the holy people and redeemed ones of God.
CHAP. XXII. Shewing in particular, the workings of the my∣stery of iniquity, in the consciences of the chil∣dren of the first Covenant, to the ripening of them unto perdition and final falling a∣way from God. NExt unto those we have described in the Chapter foregoing, the Devil hath another sort of sub∣jects, as we have already shewed, that escape this first snare and danger of being drawne aside and seduced unto prophane and unrighteous lustings and operations: such, who in that re∣spect may have beene found exercisers of good conscience, and to have walked therein with Paul, having proceeded from un∣der the first dispensation, into the Rule and Dominion of the Law, as owning themselves in a professed subjection and con∣formity thereunto; that is, to what is righteous, holy, spiritual and good in its nature and kind, not only as it is within them∣selves but as they are made righteous in another, terminating in the very knowledge of Jesus Christ himself according to the flesh, by meanes whereof they come to escape the pollutions of the world, and to be purged from their old sins; but are still in a wavering, unstable state, so as to be capable of turning aside from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, and to have a latter end worse then their beginning, as by wilfull sinning af∣ter their receiving in this manner, the knowledge of the truth, they come to lose the benefit they once had of the sacrifice and blood of Christ as the atonement and propitiation for their sins, through Gods forbearance towards them.
These do not, as the former, deteine the truth in unrighteous∣nesse, or in opposition to righteous and holy operations, but rather, quite contrary, deteine the spirit of falshood and deceit in and under all their righteous and holy actings, making a faire shew in the flesh a long time, to the deceiving both of themselves and others, whilst as the Temple of God, they suffer a false spirit to inhabit them in the roome of Christ and of God, shewing himself to be God, or personating the likenesse and similitude of God, in and under which he opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God. In these, iniquity works not plainly and down-right as in the others, but mysterously, as lying under all manner of formes of godlinesse whatsoever, from the most sensual and bo∣dily to the most spiritual and Angelical, discovering no opposi∣tion at first nor for a long time against godlinesle, as it shines forth in the dresse of formes, worldly rites and institutions that are legal or evangelical as to the letter of them; and as it appears in the lowest or highest figures and similitudes of God that can be given by the tongue of men or Angels. But they have a root of gall and bitternesse in and under all this, spring∣ing up against godlinesse in the power of it, and as in its per∣fection of beauty it begins to dawne and approach in the first fruits that the Saints enjoy by the Spirit of adoption, which is to shine forth more brightly and fully at Christs second coming. The coming of Satan into these, is after he hath beene once cast out of them, as a spirit of grosse and open uncleannesse, Mat. 12. 43, &c. by the power of Christs first appearance, as the stronger then he; who when he is thus cast out, walks about in dry places, seeking rest and finding none, seeking a place where he may be fixed and sure to abide, which he findes none so pre∣pared to be, as those who have beene once in a large and high manner enlightned and cleansed, after all which they may so fall away, that it may become impossible to renew them againe to repentance, being such to whom there remaines no more sa∣crifice for sinne, but a certaine fearful looking for of judgement and fiery indignation, to devoure them; into this house there∣fore
whence he was cast out, he thinks it his best way to return, and when he is returned into this his house againe, he finds it to be for his purpose, as that wherein he may rest undiscerned and unsuspected, being empty, swept and garnished, and then he goeth and taketh seven other spirits more wicked then him∣selfe, more fierce, cruel, and full of rage against the power of godlinesse, and they enter in and dwell there as in their rest∣ing place, out of which they shall never be driven or ejected more. Of this number are all Hypocrites and Apostates, all that receive the grace of God in vaine, who though they have both faith and a good conscience, yet not such as will abide triall, or can be held by them without wavering, and therefore such as at last will faile and come to shipwrack in a storme, being but as the house built on the sand. These are they that begin well; Start at entrance into the race set before them, with the true Saint; running well a good while in the same; going to∣gether to the fleshly Tabernacle of Christ or house of God as friends, as appears by that last plea of theirs, where they say, Lord, Lord, have not we eaten and drunk in thy presence, pro∣presied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, and done many wonderful works? yet at last, they go forth from the true Saints, because they were never of them, as to the divine birth and spiritual seed, having never beene made partakers of the divine nature, as the true heirs of God according to the pro∣mise are, in pursuance of the great and precious promises, de∣clared in the New and everlasting Covenant, to the cleansing them from all filthinesse of spirit as well as of the flesh; which the other came short of, having had only a cleansing or washing away of the filth of the flesh. Neverthelesse through such cleansing only, and washing away of the filthinesse of the flesh, they gaine the appearance, visibility and reputation of the right Saints, in the judgement of mans day, or of such professors, 2 Cor. 10 12. who mea∣suring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are not wise, but though Virgins, as cleansed from
the filth of the flesh, yet prove at last but foolish Virgins, ha∣ving oile in their lamps, but none in their vessels; holding all the grace and receivings of light from Christ upon a fading tenure which will not endure nor hold out to the end, in time of greatest need, even at the bridegroomes second appearance; who are therefore distinguished, in the seven Churches menti∣oned in the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, from those that overcome, as the true heirs do; who are therefore made pillars in the house of God, never to go forth more; whereas these that made up a considerable party in every one of those seven Churches, were such from whom the Candlestick might be removed, and whose names might be blotted out of that life they in the BEGINNING received. These therefore are Christs excommunicated ones, the branches that have beene once in the Vine, and have partaken with the good Olive-tree in its fatnesse, but afterwards have proved to be such branches as were fit to be cut off, prepared by their great and high illumination for the fire of more dreadful vengeance and wrath; in whom the Devil trans∣formes himself into an Angel of light, by meanes whereof, these his Ministers do become false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ and Mini∣sters of righteousnesse, whose end is according to their works; an end that deceives them, as well as they by their works de∣ceive the world. All these, under the various formes and visibilities of Saint-ship wherein they are found throughout the whole world un∣der the name of worshippers and servants of God (whether more or lesse refined, whether Seraphicks in Angelical bright∣nesse; or Sensualists, in meere bodily exercise, which profits lit∣tle) are embodied and incorporated together as into one Temple or house of rest unto the false spirit or great decei∣ver, through whose subtilty and dexterity they are beguiled, to sinne againe after the similiude of Adams transgression; that as the Serpent beguiled Eve, so are these also corrupted in their minds from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 11. 3.
drawne by the taile of the great Dragon, out of their heavenly habitations, unto a revolt and backsliding with him into a fixed enmity against Christ their true Husband, to the committing of whoredome and lewdnesse with a false spirit, as adulterers and adulteresses: which adulterous brood of hypocrites and back-sliders that the Devil hath in all ages propagated and multi∣plied by occasion of the same meanes that Christ ordeined to bring to life and lead unto salvation, are compared in Scripture to the holy City where our Lord was crucified, spiritually called Sodome and Egypt, the Israel after the flesh, which Esay com∣plaines of, saying, Had not the Lord left us a seed, we had all beene like Sodome and Gomorrah; referring to Deut. 29. where Israel Gods covenanted people, v. 3. that had seene with their eyes, the great temptations, signes and miracles which he did, were not yet so secured thereby, v. 18, 19, &c. but that a∣mongst them, (even that enlightned people) might spring up a root that bears gall and wormwood, that though they hear the words of the curse, declaring the wrath of God against the falshood, uncleannesse and deceitfulnesse of spirit which they live in towards God under all their righteous and holy opera∣tions, makes them neverthelesse blesse themselves, saying, We shall have peace, though we walke in the imaginations of our owne hearts, adding drunkenness to thirst. In which case the Lord declares that he would pour out his fury upon them, to make them as Sodome and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger and in his wrath. And, Deut. 32. 32, 33. this generation of men, in their good beginning as well as in their backsliding accursed end, are at large described; where their Vine is said to be as the Vine of Sedome, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes, grapes of gall; their clusters, bitter; their wine, the poyson of Dragons and the cruel venome of Aspes; their choisest food and ministrations leading to the chambers of death, and tending to the bowing downe of the back alway. Is not this (sayes God) sealed up among my treasures, and laid up in store with me, in the proper time, to be revealed, when they shall be consumed by the breath of Christs mouth and brightnesse of his second coming?
This is the great City, BABYLON the great, who is fal∣len, is fallen, from the glory of her first state in communion with Christ himself in his first appearance, and by the first Covenant, and through Satans seducements and beguilings is become the habitation of Devils the hold of every foul spirit, and cage of every uncleane and hateful bird. For all Nations, or all sorts of men in all Nations have drunk more or lesse of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, or have made themselves drunk with the wine of this false spirit; and the Kings or eminent ones of the earth, men of renowne for godlinesse and vertue have committed fornication with her, and the Merchants of the earth are waxen rich through the abundance of her delicacies, e∣ven all that are for gaine from their quarters; that count gaine godlinesse, or are followers of godlinesse for earthly rewards, and as they gaine by it some way or other in this world. The Devil muster's strong of the inhabitants of this City, from the lowest and sourest spirited legalist, to the largest, loose, spiritual Apostate and wanderer from the truth, (who center in one common interest of enmity to the Crosse of Christ and the glory that followes in the power of an endlesse life, by attaining the resurrection from the dead) taking in all hearts and consciences upon what pretence and cause soever, that do faile of the grace of God, and instead thereof, have some root of bitternesse springing up, to their spiritual defilement and corrupting of their way towards him that is risen from the dead, and offers to marry them unto himself by an everlasting Cove∣nant. In this I shall not need to enumerate, in regard the univer∣sal Apostasie of the latter times will be the best interpreter hereof, and will signifie, as it were, by name, the several di∣stinct professions that will be herein concerned, whether of such as are zealous of Ordinances, shut-up under them, or of such as are loosen'd from them, living above them in a false, deceitful spirit. This sort of Satans instruments and subjects are described, Rev. 13. 11. and represented by the other beast which John
saw coming out of the earth, who had two hornes like a Lamb, to signifie the likenesse he bears, in all his actings, unto Christ according to the flesh, or in his first appearance; but however, keeping the fiercenesse and cruelty of nature, that was in the first beast, by speaking as a Dragon. For indeed, this is still the first Adam or natural man, new washed in the blood of Christ, and healed of the deadly wound at first given to him, and all his posterity by the fall: through which heal∣ing he comes to be wondered at, or admired by the rest of the world that are made partakers of this change (as if these men were so the mighty power of God, that nothing could withstaud or make warre against them) to the puffing of them up, in this their cleansed, healed state of nature, and emboldening them to open their mouth in blasphemies against God, to blas∣pheme his Name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven, and to prosecute these their words with execution, to the ma∣king warre with the Saints and overcoming them. So as what with the power of the first beast and the power of this second, the Devil rules and hath his dominion over all kindreds, tongues and Nations, and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slaine from the foundation of the world. This second beast, which is the first, considered, as having the deadly wound thus healed, as wash'd from the filth of the flesh, is therefore armed with the same power which the first had, for publick acting in and by the use of civil Rule and Go∣vernment; exercising all the power of the first beast before him, or in superiority to him and by way of greater eminency, cau∣sing the earth and them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast, or the old Adams image and perfection, as having the deadly wound thus healed. In which administration great wonders are wrought, so that he maketh fire to come downe from heaven upon the earth in the sight of men; presenting to the judgement of man, the fire and zeale of holy actings and righteous o∣perations of the right impression, exactly answering unto Rule, whereby they that dwell on the earth are deceived, taking this
image of God, in which they appeare and shine forth, for the highest and best discovery of God they are to arrive at; which thus mistaken and abused, is compared, Rev. 13. to the making of an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword and did live; having power to give life to that image in righteous and holy actings, in which, to cause the old Adam or first beast, to speak and go forth in such vigour and perfection, as not to beare with any that will not receive the image of the beast, and take his mark in their right hand or in their fore-head, in their actings or professions; denying liberty to any to buy or sell, to have any worldly commerce, that have not the mark or name of the beast, or the number of his name. All this he does from the great credit he hath gained in the sight of men, by giving plaine evidence and visible testimony of the life that is brought into this image and of the spiritual gifts and enlightnings from heaven that accompany it, as a fruit and effect of Christs owne workmanship, which therefore he would exalt above all that is called God, causing all to fall downe to it and worship it, as the highest and fullest discovery of God, beyond which he will allow nothing to be owned or received; though this image be but the number of a man, of the first man, made of the earth earthly; as the summe of his natural perfection, which all the children of wisdome know how to count, finde out and un∣riddle. This second beast is the same with the little horne, Dan 78. before which there were three of the first hornes plucked up by the roots and behold, in this horne were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking proud things: and, v 11. I beheld, sayes Daniel, because of the voice of the great words which the horne spake, (even words against the most high) v. 25. who shall weare out the Saints of the most high and think to change times and lawes; I beheld (sayes he) untill the beast was slaine and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame, v. 11. All which does lively describe the usefulnesse of this second heast, as he is diverse from the first, being set out and adorned with the purity and perfection of the first Adam (renewed up∣upon
him by the blood of Christ,) to make warre with the true Saints of the most high, and to weare them out with his cruelty and rage, pretending to visible Saintship himself, and by the pow∣er of his Rule and Government in the Magistracy, (that is sub∣servient to him) to give Lawes and Rules in Gods worship un∣der colour of warrant from the Scriptures, making himself Umpire of all controversies in matters of Religion, and decla∣rer of Heresies, Blasphemies, and the like; in the exercise of which power he speaks great words against the most high and tramples as dust under his feet the spiritual seed or inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem, thinking upon this faire pretext to change times and Lawes, and over-turne all that stand before him, in the managing of so glorious a designe as to bring in upon the prophane wicked world the Kingdome of Christ; and at the same time, to slay the right heirs that the inheritance may be his, and that he may reigne, as sitting upon Christs throne, when he cannot any longer carry it, as detected and laid open in the falsenesse of his owne spirit and principles. This second state of Antichrist and his Kingdome, is that which John, Rev. 17. beheld, with a holy kind of wonder and great astonishment, as little suspecting so foul and unchast a spi∣rit unto Christ, should come forth in so fair and neere a likenesse and similitude to him in life and operations, and therefore de∣scribes it under the name of the great Whore whom God was about to judge, that is, to lay open and to destroy. She is found sitting upon many waters, to wit, people and mul∣titudes, Nations and tongues, inhabitants (as we have said) of the holy City, spiritually called Sodome and Egypt, with whom the Kings of the earth or Princes of the world, (men in the honour and dig∣nity of the first Adams purity and principles,) have committed fornication, trusting to this beauty, and reteining it in opposition to Christs heavenly appearance (as unwilling to veil it, and let it fall into the grave with Christ, that the way thereby into the most holy might be set open) making all the inhabitants of the earth drunk with this wine of her fornication. This is the Character of that unchast spirit that acts and in∣fluences
the subjects of this branch of Antichrists Kingdome, under a fair shew in the flesh, a likenesse and conformity in life and actings, unto Christ himself. But the beast that carries this Whore, is the spirit of man, made drunk with the wine of her fornication; who in his actings of understanding and will, whether in his private or publike capacity of a Magistrate and Ruler, gives up himself to the service, interest and love of this Whore, or Antichristian spirit; which beast (compared with the other) is set out in an adorning of scarlet colour, yet full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten hornes, the like power of man by counsel and force to carry on the designs of the old Dragon, as the first beast hath. The woman that rides this beast, or this false spirit that in∣fluences this sort of enlightned men, makes a very faire shew, and is exceeding beautiful and alluring to the eye and judge∣ment of man, being arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, deck∣ed with gold and precious stones and pearls, many admirable and excellent spiritual gifts received from Christ, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthinesse of her fornication, and upon her forehead, written: Mystery, Iniquity, or Babylon in mystery or its hidden deceit; Baby∣lon the great, the mother of harlots, and of the abominations of the earth. But under all this tempting, ensnaring glory, she is fa∣mous and eminent for two things, whereby Antichrists work is exceedingly advanced and carried on by her, after such a dexterous manner as could not possibly be contri∣ved by the first beast. with all his power. For this woman perfumed and decked with excellent ornaments and gifts; as she is described to the full, Prov. 7. 10, to the 24. and Eccles. 7. 26. is exceeding skilful at inveigling and draw∣ing in numbers and multitudes into her nets and fnares; and when they are once caught; she leads them as the Oxe to the slaughter, fatting them to destruction; and Secondly, this falsenesse of spirit with which she en∣tices and ensnares men, is alwayes accompanied with a fix∣ed
implacable rage and enmity against the chaft Spouse of Christ, so as she is found drunk with the blood of Saints, which is so sweet to none as to this sort of men, under and by whom the Lord was crucified at Jerusalem, and concern∣ing whom he speaks when he sayes, Behold, I send unto you Prophets and wise men and Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucifie, and some of them shall ye scourge and per∣secute from City to City, that upon you may come all the righ∣teous blood, shed upon the earth from Abel to Zacharias; and againe, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou that killest the Pro∣phets and stonest them that are sent unto thee: how oft, &c. Luke 13. 34. Matth. 23. v 34, to 38.
CHAP. XXIII. Concerning the common interest wherein the Devils subjects meet and correspond, under both the dispensations before mentioned, which yet by the wisdome and power of Christ, comes at last to be dissolved in the use which he makes of the one to destroy the o∣ther. THE two sorts of subjects before spoken of, are the two maine pillars and supports of Anti-christs Kingdome, who are figured out in those two beasts, which as two fit engines of warre the Devil makes use of in carrying on his en∣mity against the Saints of the Most High, in the contendings of him and his Angels with Michael and his An∣gels from the beginning of the world, to the ending thereof. These two beasts in the eleventh of Daniel, under the fi∣gure of the Kings of Persia and Greece, have their ruling pow∣er described, the one as King of the North, the other as King of the South, which Ezekiel, chap. 20. v. 46. & ch. 21. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 12. interprets to our hands; where by the South he shews is intended the earthly Jerusalem, as in her declining apostati∣zing state, she is ripening her self for judgement by the hand of those that are not a people, even the Heathenish Nations. And by the North He shewes is to be understood the King of Babylon as Head of those Heathenish Nations, who areall re∣mote and aliens from the beauty of holinesse, that like the Sun in his strength, shines forth in Zion.
These also in the 8. of Daniel are signified by the RAM and the HE-GOAT; all which places compared together, do make known to us the consistencie and correspondencie wherein the Devil does at his pleasure, through Gods permission, retaine these two branches of his Dominion, when it is for the further∣ance and advancement of his work, making leagues between them and strengthening them by marriage; for in the end of years they shall joyne themselves together, saith Daniel. The Kings daughter of the South, shall come to the King of the North to make an agreement or association in prejudice to the Saints of the Most High, and both these Kings hearts shall be to do mis∣chief; and they shall speak lies at one table in joynt consulta∣tions against the true witnesses of Jesus, those that would serve to the introducing of his everlasting Kingdome. But in this combination of theirs they shall not prosper to the end: though they mingle themselves thus with the seed of men, and as the iron and the clay, Dan. 2. 43. would faine be embo∣dying themselves together, all such attempts shall be frivolous and disappointed by God, made an occasion of hastening the ruine and downfal of Antichrists Kingdome that would thus be peecing up it self in both its branches against the Kingdome of Christ. For when the hypocritical Apostate-generation of Profes∣sors (signified by the daugher of the KING OF THE SOƲTH, as having lived in the warmth and zeal of a legal spirit under the Sun shine or day of Christs first appearance) shall be so put to it, as to have no other relief left them but to associate themselves in combination with the prophane Hea∣then against the spirit of Christ in his faithful Witnesses, and to espouse the interest and principles of the corrupt dege∣rated world, figured out by the first beast and by the KING OF THE NORTH, (as living remote from the Sun-shine of Christs first appearance, under the single Ministery of An∣gels,) and by the Iron, Dan. 2. as a stony-hearted generation that cannot mix with the Clay, (Israel with their hearts of flesh, or knowledge of Christ after the flesh) then is the time of the
downfal of both these Kingdomes neere; as is intimated by that Dreame of Nebuchadnezzar with the interpretation there∣of, Dan. 2. signifying to us the whole Kingdome of Anti-christ, under the great Image, whose brightnesse was excellent, and whose forme was terrible, the head whereof was of gold, and his armes of silver, his belly and his thighs of brasse, his legges of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay, to sig∣nifie his two supporters before described, and as both of them consist together in one body or Universal Kingdome of Anti-christ, having the adornments of spiritual gifts, and all sort of natural perfections, to set it self out by; though ever decli∣ning, decaying and growing worse and worse in its apostatizing frame of spirit from Christ; who towards the end will smite both these Rules and Kingdomes of Satan, as well the Iron as the Clay, and by dividing them will break them and shatter them to peeces, making one of them the ruine of the other; So that the great Whore shall be burnt with fire by those very hands that were on her side for a season, and so both of them in a manner shall fall together, to make way for the stone cut out without hands, which as a great mountaine is to fill the whole earth. As therefore we have thus seene these two branches of An∣tichrists Kingdome described in their consistencie and associ∣ation together; so it will be requisite to consider them, as in those Chapters in Daniel before mentioned, they are repre∣sented also in their divided interests, and fierce irreconcileable oppositions one against the other. Thus we see them signified to us under the RAM and the HE-GOAT, the RAM being the same with the King of the North, and the HE-GOAT with the King of the South: the first ha∣ving a Kingdome and interest within himself, which the open∣ly prophane will and judgement of man espouses and em∣braces in opposition to and dislike of the rule and interest of the renewed natural man, and the reformations and purity of his actions; in the exercise of which power, the RAM pushes Westward and Northward and Southward, laying about on all
hands, to subdue all unto his degenerated interest and way, so that no beast might stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; So he did according to his will and became great. But to encounter him, Behold, a HE-GOAT that came from the West on the face of the whole earth, none touched him in the earth, and he had a notable horne betweene his eyes, and he came to the RAM, and ran unto him in the fury of his power, and he came close to him, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the RAM, and there was no power in the RAM to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground, and stampt upon him, and none could deliver the RAM out of his hand. Therefore the HE-GOAT became very great, and when he was strong the great horne was broken; and for it, came up four notable ones towards the four winds of heaven, and out of them came forth one little horne which waxed exceeding great towards the South, and toward the East, and toward the pleasant Land, Dan 8. In which description, under the type of this HE-GOAT and this RAM, we are given to understand the root and cause of this opposition and division betweene these two branches of Antichrists Kingdome, which is occasioned and maintained by Christ in the Ministery of his first appear∣ance, in and by which for a season he associates in principles, Councels, actions and interest, his owne Saints in their fleshly state and as children of the first Covenant, with those that in the conclusion prove Hypocrites and Apostates, binding them up together in one Covenant, as with a staffe of beauty and of bands Zach. 11. and making as yet, no discrimination or difference betweene the servants and the true heirs that are Lords of all, but embarquing them together in one common interest and ex∣ercise of power, owned and supported by himself in opposition to the Rule and Kingdome of Satan under the first beast; and signified by the One horne, which was betweene the two eyes of the HE-GOAT, which came not to be broken untill he had mastered and quite subdued the RAM, and then it fell back by way of degeneration, into the interest and power of the
first beast, making head and opposition thereby against the HOST OF HEAVEN, from whom till then he had beene assisted; and in the confidence of this united strength being waxed great, he sets himself against this Host of Heaven (the true and right Heires, differenced from the state of servants by the spirit of true sonship or adoption) and in his violence and rage he casts some of them down upon the earth, and stamps upon them as the off-scouring of the world; yea, he magnifies himself against the PRINCE OF THE HOST Christ him∣self, and bruises his heele upon the Crosse, the consequents whereof are the taking away of the daily sacrifice, or whole visible worship of the Jews, the casting down of the place of Gods Sanctu∣ary which God delivered up into the hand of the beast by reason of transgression, whereby the truth was cast downe to the ground; and the Rule of Antichrist prospered and practised against the HEAVENLY HOST to give both the Sanctuary and the Host to be trodden under foot, in respect of the transgression or abo∣mination THAT MAKES DESOLATE. For no sooner does the King of the South, or earthly Jerusalem oppresse the spiritual seed and prevaile against the true Sanctuary and Heavenly Host, to tread them under foot, but the King of the North comes up against him like a whirlwind, Dan. 11. 40, 41. with Chariots and horsemen and many ships, and he shall en∣ter into the Countreys and passe over; yea, he shall enter into the glorious Land and many shall be owerthrowne; so as the first beast exercising the power of the prophane and unrenew∣ed judgement and will of man, armed with seven heads and ten hornes, hath a mind put into him towards the Whore, to make her desolate and naked, and eate her flesh, and burne her with fire; to the consuming and destroying of one branch of Anti-christs Kingdome by the other. Thus the King of Babylon did to Jerusalem in the time of Jeremiah; and the Romanes to the Jewes inhabiting Jeru∣salem after their crucifying of Christ; The like is foretold concerning the earthly Jerusalem that now is in the dayes of the Gospel, or Holy City, Rev. 11. which is given to the
Gentiles to tread under foot fourty and two moneths, and in the streets whereof the dead bodies of the Witnesses are to lie unburi∣ed three dayes and an halfe; for saith God, Zach. 14. 2, 3. I will gather all Nations against Jerusalem to battel, and the Ci∣ty shall be taken; then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those Nations, as when he fought in the day of battel. The Nations and the earthly Jerusalem contend it long together, the conquest falling sometimes to the one and sometimes to the other, accordingly as Jeru∣salem is faithful with her God, and keeps her self as a virgin daughter of Zion, chast to her own husband; for then she shakes her head and bids defiance unto the King of Syria and all the Na∣tions round about her; but when she revolts and back-slides from God, and moves him to jealousie by that which is not God, then he moves them to jealousie by them which are not a people, and pro∣vokes them to anger with a foolish Nation; their Rock that bought them is pleased to sell them and deliver them up into the power of the Heathen and openly prophane people. Thus Antichrist wages warre with Christ, serving himself of the power and interests of both his Kingdomes, to advance his designes, and withstand the coming in of Christs everlasting Kingdome; both which are made up but of the principles of worldly wisdome and power, managed upon a different account. The first consisting of the Dominion and Rule which Satan ex∣ercises over the Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues that he works off from Christ, in and under the first dispensation; causing them to hold the truth in unrighteousnesse, or to imprison the witnesse thereof in unholy and unrighteous walkings; where∣in being become subject and slaves to Satan, and preferring that state before the benefit of restauration by the blood of Christ to their first purity and perfection, tendered to them; they envie, hate and oppose all those men that are better then they, and who by their holy professions and righteous walk∣ings, condemne them; thinking it strange to find any that run not with them into the same excesse of riot, speaking evil of them by reason thereof.
But now secondly, because the Devil lies too much exposed to common view in the exercise of this his first Rule and Do∣minion, and is not able to carry through his work, against the righteous and holy seed of Christ, under so foul a face as open prophanenesse, or at best, only a state of Heathenisme moralized by civil government; but finds by experience that the Saints of God are able to raise up too strong a power and party a∣gainst these meere heathenish subjects, even out of the world it self, (as restored in several measures and degrees, to some purity and rectitude of natural principles, by the coming of Christ in the flesh, and by the preaching of the Gospel to every creature under heaven) he therefore winds about, and changes his course by transforming himself into an Angel of light and de∣claring himself a friend unto Christ, considered in his first ap∣pearance, and as he is the restorer and renewer unto man of his first purity & natural perfection; knowing that by this his dissi∣mulation and feigned complyance with Christ, as vile and false a spirit as he is, he can come in by flatteries into those souls and consciences whence he hath beene cast out and kept out by force; and can returne as unsuspected, and take up his place and state in the very Temple of God, shewing himself that he is God, by all the signes, wonders and evidences that flesh and blood can expect from him to approve himself by, to the deceiving of the very elect themselves, if it were possible, and using all de∣ceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse, he knowes how to greaten and enlarge his Dominion and Rule, by this second branch of it: in the use he makes of enlightned, restored men, the children of the first Covenant, that are under the Dominion of the Law, married to Christ by that Covenant, and who will admit no Rule nor Government over them, but such as is consistent with the righteous and holy operations and actings that are re∣quired by the Law in those that work as debtors unto it; where∣of we have, at large spoken, in opening the mysterious work∣ings of sinne and Satan, that are taken by the occasion of the Commandment, working death by that which is good: so that the De∣vil makes a surer game for himself this way then the other; for
out of this grave there is no redemption, but it must be let alone for ever; There remaines no more sacrifice for sin, nor place for repentance, when after such enlightnings there is a drawing back, and falling away, through a root of bitternesse springing up a∣gainst the dawning and approaching glory of Christ in his se∣cond and heavenly appearance. Such backslidings and declinings of heart are fatal, as having mingled in them that seed and nature of sinning, for which God swears in his wrath, whoever becomes wilfully guilty, shall ne∣ver enter into his rest; but be delivered up to beleeve a lie, that they all that are such, might be damned and perish everlastingly, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved: but after they had received the knowledge of it, became bitter haters and opposers thereof. When once this Decree of Gods wrath comes in its execu∣tion upon any soul, denying unto it the benefit of the sacrifice of Christs death, let men have beene never so farre enlightned, to the escaping of the pollutions of the world, through the know∣ledge of Iesus Christ: to the attaining of excellent spiritual gifts, having all knowledge, all faith, that can be had without the love of the truth shining forth in the Crosse and Resurre∣ction of Christ; all this and all the righteousnesse they have done shall be no more remembred, but in the iniquity they herein com∣mit, they shall surely die, and their old sins from which they had beene washed and purged, returne with vigor and power againe upon them, making their latter end worse then their begin∣ning. So then the Devil is no loser at last, by temporizing for a while, and giving, as it were, leave unto his subjects, these sonnes of perdition, to conforme to the Lawes of his enemy, and walk with, the Saints as friends, and fellow subjects in Christs King∣dome; for when they break and part, (these drawing back to perdition, whilst the true heirs go on to the saving of the soul) the Devil finds his reckoning in the winding up, and serves himself of this his deceitful compliance by himself and his in∣struments with Christ and the true spiritual seed, to paythem
home at last with inveterate rage and malice, signified, Rev. 12. by that flood of water which he poures out after them, if it were possible, to drowne and destroy them utterly; as is most apparent also in the action and carriage of the He-goat in Daniel, that pretended a long while to be for Christ the Prince of the heavenly Host, and to engage on his and their behalf against the RAM, till hereby he had strengthened the Kingdome to him∣self, and then Christ and the true Saints have the slip given them, and none more enraged against them at last then the HE-GOAT, none that speaks greater words against them, or more rea∣dy to piece up in association with the RAM which he before had beaten downe, and got the perfect mastery over. This will be found by experience a most certaine truth; that Hypocrites and Apostates when once they come to wil∣full sinning, and with Saul to discerne that God hath left them and is departed from them (as to what divine presence and fruits of it, they had before beene made sensible of) none will be more ready to joyne avowedly with the Devil and the worst of his instruments, to accomplish their rage against the suffering Saints of Christ; who by this meanes, have all the power of the world not only withdrawn from being their protection, but declaring it self in visible opposition to them, and have little other defence left them then in faith and patience to possesse their souls, as the poore, destitute and needy ones of the flock of Christ. Which dark dispensation and season is hastening apace, being, as it were, the midnight-state wherein the Bridegroome shall come the se∣cond time without sinne unto salvation; and unto which all things must work, as the last times draw to their end, when the falling away will be greater then ever, and the rage of all the Churches enemies most enflamed and implacable, and when all visible protection and defence shall be as good as ta∣ken away from the true spiritual seed and suffering Saints, to the making of such a time of trouble, as never was since there was a Nation. Yet the Scriptures do declare, that although the ordina∣ry
visible protection shall be taken away and withdrawn from the holy people, and their power of the arme of flesh broken, God will however be a little Sanctuary unto that residue and remnant which he shall preserve faithful unto himself under all the trials and shakings that shall be brought upon the world. For, Zach. 14. 3. It is said, Then shall the Lord go forth against those Nations as when he fought in the day of battell, which ver. 13. interprets to be in the case of Gideon, when a great tumult from the Lord was sent amongst his peo∣ples enemies, so as they did lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and rose up one against another, until they all fell together (like Abners and Ioabs men at the poole of Gibeon) and became a prey to Gideon with his company, who stood (as it were) still, with their lamps burning, and hearts praying unto the Lord, until this salvation was wrought for them. And this which was wrought by the Lord only, is yet said to be done by the sword of the Lord and of Gi∣deon; to shew that there was a sword still in the hands of Gods people, though retained in such a posture of crea∣ture-weaknesse, that it was more in shew then any thing else. Unto this day of battel, fought and won by Gideon, doth the Holy Ghost by the Prophet Zachary referre, thereby foreshewing, how that the like dispensation of Gods power and protection, is reserved to be put forth by him on the behalf of that remnant that shall be reduced to such a smalnesse in number and destitutenesse of all visible power, that nothing but such a day of battel (to be acted over againe for them) as this, is judged meet by God to be the meanes for their deliverance. And because in this battel, as we have said, there was not only the sword of the Lord, but the sword of Gideon; it doth seeme to intimate, that the sword and power of Magistracie, as well Civil as Military, shall not be so quite taken out of the hands of Gods people in the last and worst of dayes (even whilst the Witnesses are prophesying in sackcloth, and finishing their testi∣mony,) but that in the midst of the little remnant of Gods faith∣ful
ones, there shall be found such a holding of that sword in their hands, as was with Cideon and his three hundred, having been taught the practice and use of it in the greatest purity and most exact subserviencie unto Christ it is capable of, till the restitution be made of that and all other things, in their full redemption from the bondage of corruption, by Christs second coming.
CHAP. XXIV. Concerning Magistracy, as in its primitive constitution and right exercise, it hath its place and beares its part in the Reigne and govern∣ment of Christ over men, in this world. WE have already considered Magistracy as in its corrupted, degenerated use, it is in a manner the Throne and seat of the beast, serving to promote and advance the great designe and interest of the Devill in the world; whereby it doth become part of his Kingdome and hath its place and use in the Govern∣ment that Antichrist keepes up, to the oppressing and keeping under the deare Saints and Holy ones of the true and living God. And therefore it doth not onely follow in course, but there is a kind of necessity enforcing to treat of it also, as in its primi∣tive constitution and right exercise, wherein it is not only capa∣ble of serving to a higher end, but must through the restitution that all things are to be brought forth in at last, be made actual∣ly instrumental unto the Holy designes and glorious interest of Christ and his people, as his earthly Throne, wherein he will sit and rule the Nations as with a rod of iron, and part of that domi∣nion which the Father will give unto him in the end of dayes, as that Glory and Kingdome wherein all people, Nations and Lan∣guages shall serve him, whose dominion is an Everlasting domi∣nion that shall not passe away, and a Kingdome which shall not be destroyed; But as a judgement, shall sit, and take away all other or Contrary Dominion hereunto, to consume and to destroy it unto the end; whereby the Kingdome and Dominion and the greatnesse
of the Kingdome under the whole Heaven shall be given to the peo∣ple of the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdome is an ever∣lasting Kingdome, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7. 14, 26, 27. And whereas it is said in this place, all Rulers must be brought at last to serve Christ and his people; yea, to serve Christ in his people, it doth not only meane earthly Thrones amongst men, but the very heavenly Thrones of Angels them∣selves, who are made subject unto Christ and the true spiritual seed that are the right heirs of salvation, unto whom even the An∣gels are appointed Ministring spirits; who yet as we have shew∣ed, are the highest Lords and Rulers of this world under Christ, those that execute his command in all parts and places of his Do∣minion, throughout the whole world; being those that are higher then the highest Rulers amongst men, and that know how to bring redresse of grievances and restauration of judgement in a Province, when it is violently perverted by the uncontrol∣able force and power of man, then in Authority and Rule there, Eccles. 5. 8. The Angels then under Christ are the highest powers in this world, whose Thrones and Dominions and Principalities are in∣visible, yet are influencing to all visible powers whatsoever; steering them to the end Christ hath appointed, whatever the intentions, designes and interests of the instruments are; And all visible powers are the next subordinate Thrones and Do∣minions unto them, which amongst men (who are ruled by and under a visible administration of government,) are accounted supreame, and those we call the Higher or highest powers. These powers, Rom. 13. 1. are said to be ordained of God, and 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. are likewise called the ordinance of man; both which ingredients are therefore requisite to the setting up of Magistracy amongst men in its right constitution and exercise. For men in their Creation and births are made of one blood, all the nations of them, Acts 17. 26. and so are equal, and cannot therefore be distinguished and fixed in such different conditi∣ons and capacities of Rulers and subjects, but by Gods ordinance
and to serve some holy and glorious end of his; nor is the sub∣jection which God requires, irrational and meerely implicit, but rational and voluntary, unto which men are to be led not only by the awe and feare of God, unto whom it is they pay a duty; but are also to be won and perswaded by the sense of their common good and benefit thereby; which, in what ever formes the government be administred (that in themselves, simply considered, are all lawful and innocent) doth difference just and righteous Rule and Government over men, from a Tyranny and subjection unto private will and lust, which is none of Gods Ordinance, but the abuse of it. When lust thus creeps into Magistracie, which in it self, is the good Creature and Ordinance of God, it knows how to engender to bondage and tyranny, which God for a punishment brings upon the Na∣tions of the world, and suffers, but it is no part of the Primitive institution of a right Magistracie, a description whereof we find, Isa. 1. 26. where it is prophesied of and promised to be set up as part of Christs Kingdome, as reduced to its original patterne: for so saith that Scripture, I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counsellors as at the beginning, afterwards thou shalt be called the CITY OF RIGHTEOUSNESSE. This is yet farther explained, Isa. 60. 17, 18. Where we find that the same heightning and purity, which other parts of the Creation shall arrive unto (through the general restitution of all things,) Magistracie it self (as ranked among the rest,) is proportionably to receive; For brasse (sayes he) I will bring gold, and for yron I will bring silver, and for wood brasse, and for stones yron; I will also make thy officers peace, and thine ex∣actors righteousnesse. Violence shall be heard no more in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shalt call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise This restauration seemes to hold proportion with the dege∣nerating of Magistracie, figured out in Nebuchadnezzars Image. Dan. 2. 32, 33. Whose head was of fine gold, his armes and breast of silver, his belly and thighs of brasse, his legges of yron, his feet part of yron and part of clay; which, when it shall be sunk downe in∣to
this its lowest and most corrupted state, is to receive a change, wherein it shall be raised up to its primitive height and glory. We are then from hence to be assured, that Magistracie had a primitive patterne and Rule unto which Isa. 1. 26. referres; which though as to the practice of it, it will hardly be found, yet hereof the judicials of Moses were a shadow and type, as through which did shine forth a Magistracie yet in promise, in the man Christ Jesus: which Moses beheld as the true Original in the Mount, when he received the command to see that he made all things according to the patterne shewed him in the Mount: and who saith of Christ, Deut. 18. 15, 18. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall you hear: which compared with Isa. 32. 12. shewes that this Prophet is also a King, in the sense now spoken of; where 'tis said, Behold, a King shall reigne in righteousness, and Princes shall Rule in judgement, and a man shall be as an hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, and the shadow of a rock in a wea∣ry land. So then faith sees or may see an image and Rule in Christ, by whom Kings Rule and Princes decree justice, unto which Ma∣gistracie it-self, in its Primitive institution and right exercise, is or ought to be conformed: the knowledge of which truth was powerfully set upon Davids spirit, enabling him Prophetically to describe it, 2 Sam. 23. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. saying, He that rules e∣ver men must be just, ruling in the feare of God, and he shall be as the light of the morning when the Sunne riseth, even a morn∣ing without clouds, as the tender grasse springing out of theearth, by cleare shining after raine: Which though David did not ful∣ly experience in his personal administration of this rule (which was in him as in the type,) nor yet could find it like to be in his house, as to the fleshly seed, yet he foresaw it and accordingly prophesied of it as a thing to come, by the exercise and admi∣nistration thereof in the hand of Christ and his people in the latter dayes: and so first describes, wherein Magistracie consists,
as considered in the purity of its institution and the right ex∣ercise thereof, when he saith He that rules over men must be JƲST, ruling in the fear of God: and secondly, when he shewes also the use which Christ will make of it, when it shall by him be brought into practice, according to its first patterne; even for the thrusting away of all the sonnes of Belial, as so many thornes that have laine goading in the sides of Gods suffering Saints, for a long time, which cannot be taken with hands; but the man invested with this Magistracie and power shall be able to touch and subdue them, as fenced with this rod of iron, and staffe of a speare, and they shall be burnt also with fire in the same place. The fire that comes forth out of the mouth of Gods witnes∣ses shall also slay them, as concurring with this sword to the ut∣ter destruction of all Gods enemies. As a true result then a∣rising out of this Scripture, it doth appear, First, that there is a rule over men which is Gods Ordi∣nance, capable to be brought into its exercise and practice a∣mongst them, according to the purity of its institution: which being called a Rule over men, and not in them, signifies, that the exercise thereof refers to the outward man, or outward con∣cernes of men, in their bodily converse in this world. Secondly, that he that is to be in this power, as qualified to exercise this Rule, is man; first, Christ himself as he is the Son of man, and then the Saints, as gathered into one glorified body with him. But this will be only at the time of Christs second coming: Neverthelesse, man in his earthly state (as the figure and type of this) is and hath beene qualified for the exercise of Magistracy from the beginning to the end of the world; which seemes to be as one of the pillars whereby Christ bears up the World through the vertue of his blood, when otherwise by the fall, the earth and all the inhabitants thereof had beene dissolved, and run into confusion, Psal. 75. 3. keeping this promotion at his owne disposal, so as, ver. 6, 7. It cometh neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he putteth downe one, and setteth up another, in the variety of formes and administrations wherein it is and hath beene exercised in
all ages throughout the whole world. And as the meanes of qualifying men hereunto, Christ hath beene keeping up his witnesse, even the fear of the Lord in the consciences of men, under the threefold Government and Rule which he sets up in them, which he preserves as a di∣stinct jurisdiction from the outward exercise of Rule by man, but as conducing to the better managing and carrying on of that outward Government in the hands of men. For when the Scripture saith that the Rule of Magistracy is over men, we are to understand by this terme, the proper sphere, bounds, and limits of that office; which is not to intrude it self into the office and proper concernes of Christs inward Government and rule in the conscience (at large before di∣scoursed by us) but is to content it self with the outward man, and to intermeddle with the concernes thereof in reference to the converse which man ought to have with man, upon the grounds of natural just and right, in things appertaining to this life; wherein the Magistrate or higher power is not only the proper Judge, but hath the right of coercion thereunto, if not obeyed. And the more illuminated the Magistrates conscience and judgement is, as to natural justice and right, by the knowledge of God and communications of light from Christ, under any of the three dispensations before mentioned; the better quali∣fied is he to execute his office, and the more accountable he is to God and man, in default thereof. So in a threefold respect Magistracy may be brought into its lawfull exercise over men; and where it is not so, it is the sinne and abuse of those that ex∣ercise it and deteine it in unrighteousnesse, contrary to the light within them, which they live under and ought to be faithful unto. Before we go farther then, we are to acknowledge, that Ma∣gistracy or Rule over men may be exercised amongst all Na∣tions in general, in a lawful and right manner, suitable to their dispensation and light received; and as such, is as a weaker or stronger sort of Rule of and from Christ set up amongst them,
and ought not therefore so much as in its lowest dispensation, in the righteous exercise thereof, to be judged, condemned or disobeyed byany, as accounting it a part of the fourth Monarchy, or seat of the beast; since it is so only, as considered and found in its corrupt use, and fixed enmity against Christ and his Saints. Againe, by this also we may take notice that we are not to be in bondage to the Judicials of Moses, as in the letter of them they conveyed the Lawes of Civil Government to the people of the Jewes; since the spirit and original patterne of those very Judicials is set up by Christ in men, through his resurrecti∣on from the dead; to enable them unto a righteous ruling over men, in the fear of the Lord, by the pouring out of his Spirit up∣on all flesh; and thereby qualifying them unto that office, as wel as to all other Christian duties, performable by the renewed natural man. So as it would be a returning back againe unto Moses, contrary to his owne charge, Acts 7. if we should bind up our selves to his Judicials: For Moses himself saith, A Pro∣phet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all that he shall say unto you; as well for the enabling of you to the right discharge of Magistratical du∣ties, as the rest of that work which the Christian is to be conver∣sant in, according to his command. So that instead of going thus backward, we are to go forward and to be still enquiring and learning out more of Christs mind in this great work, as by steps and degrees he leads us thereunto through the influ∣encings of his Spirit in a way of righteousnesse, and by the daily renewed outgoings of his providence. And doubtlesse if Moses Judicials are thus to be left behind, as they that have lost their force and obligation; no humane ordinances or positive Lawes must expect to be perpetual and exempt from change and removal, if the Lord please by a vi∣sible hand of his owne, in judgement and righteousnesse to fold them up as old garments, and change them as vestures of the worlds old fashion, to make way for the new heaven and new earth that Christ is bringing into their roome: whose abolish∣ing
and taking away in such a case, is their improvement, per∣fection and establishment, according to the Primitive and best Constitution of Government. This being by way of preparation and introduction laid down, we shall now proceed to shew more particularly, where∣in Magistracy, as to the purity of its constitution and righte∣ousnesse of its exercise, doth consist. Magistracy then is the Rule which God hath ordained to be exercised over the outward man, by man himself qualified thereunto, to act in righteousnesse and in the fear of the Lord, in discharge of this his high and great trust; and so is an office meerly respecting Rule and Government over men, in their outward concernes, which is capable to be rightly used or not, according as the persons entrusted therewith, are qualified and do exercise the same, the office of it self being good, and the end for which it is set up being according to Gods Ordinance and institution, for the ministring of punishment to them that do ill, and encouragement and protection to them that do well. And men may lawfully arrive and attaine unto this office and dignity, either in an ordinary way, through the endeavours and free choice of men; or extraordinarily, by the immediate call of God himself to the exercise thereof, making those that are to obey, willingly subject in that day of his power. For the office it self, it is (as we have shewed) in Gods insti∣tution, a Rule that is set up over the outward man, in righte∣ousnesse and in the fear of the Lord, obliging the persons in∣trusted with this power, to put forth righteousnesse in all their actings that appertaine to their publick charge, in the judge∣ments and statutes given for the right ordering and regulating of humane societies, in the outward converse of men one to∣wards another, and in the common protection, safety and de∣fence which by them is to be provided, with reference to those that are under their charge. And as in this, the principles of natural justice and right, in their highest improvement, are to be their Rule; so the fear of
the Lord should oblige them in an humble dependency upon him, and trembling posture of mind before him, to be watch∣ful, in not suffering any thing to be done by them, that may carry in it, hinderance or opposition to the breaking in of high∣er discoveries upon them, as to the very exercise of the Magi∣stratical office, in the purity and perfection, wherein it is pro∣mised to be brought forth in the last dayes by Christ himselfe; unto which they should alwayes have willing and ready minds, to make way and to submit. Upon such grounds, Magistracy may be preserved in its lawful use and exercise, as a faithful servant waiting for the coming of his Lord; and the persons exercising that authority, are to be accounted as the Ministers of God to us for our good; of whom we are to be afraid, if we do evil; and whom we are not to fear, if we do well; because they are to be a terrour only to evil works, and a praise to the good: In which respect, the Apostle sayes, true Christians must needs be subject, as having an obli∣gation leadin them thereunto, not only for wrath, but for con∣science sake, Rom 13. 5. The power that appertains to this office, is all the strength that man is capable of being formed into, either in a way of counsel or force to prevent and resist all assaults that may en∣counter the same, in way of disturbance or opposition; to the end that righteousnesse in the outward converse of men, may run and be in Authority and Rule against all contradiction thereunto, from the malice of Devils or men. And therefore we are not to conceive, as most are apt to do, that man in his innocent state and sinlesse nature, stood in no need of this office of Magistracy; for it is not only useful to restraine from unrighteousnesse and disorder occasioned by sin and the fall; but also to conserve and maintaine men in the good order and right disposition of things, wherein by their creation they were placed, in a preventing way unto the dis∣order and danger that lust threatens, and is ready to introduce upon man in his mutable righteous and holy state. And in this way of exercise it will be upheld by Christ,
during his Reigne on earth the thousand years, when with the whole creature it shall be restored from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, and be made subservi∣ent to the interest of the right heirs of salvation, whereby Kings shall become nursing Fathers, and Rulers Nursing Mothers unto the Church; bringing the glory and power of all Nations unto it; so as all Nations shall walk in the light of the new Je∣rusalem, before which all the Kings of the earth shall stoop and be made to yeeld homage and subjection, as not able to re∣sist the wisdome and power of God there shining forth; but from the conviction and demonstration flowing thence, shall conforme, whether they will or no, to the righteous Rule of this Government of Christ, who thereby binds their Kings in chaines, and their Nobles in fetters of yron, causing them to fall downe and yeeld themselves up in submission thereunto; or else to be burnt up like thornes in the fire, as they shew them∣selves resisters thereof: this being the honour which all the Saints shall have, in this manner to prevaile over, and subdue all their enemies and opposers, Psal. 149. From what hath beene said, we have had some general in∣sight into the true nature of Magistracy or Rule over men, and how righteous an administration it is, respecting the outward man, as well in the Principles as the Rules of righteousnesse, that are enabling thereunto on Gods part, whose ordinance and institution it is: so that considered, such as God requires it to be, it is mans Ruling over men in righteousnesse, and in the true feare of the Lord. And this Christ, in his own person as the Sonne of man, is perfectly qualified to do, whose right also it is, having all power in heaven and in earth put into his hands. And his Saints when fitted by him, to sit upon the Throne of the same glory with him, shall likewise be found prepared to bring forth even Magistracy it self in its right exercise, exactly answering the end for which it was set up by God; and so shall be acknow∣ledged by all the Nations of the world, during the thousand years Reigne of Christ on earth.
Which pure state of Magistracy, in the practice of it, an∣swerable to the righteousnesse of its Primitive institution, is part of Christs Kingdome which he exerciseth in the world. Which therefore we are to eye, and be farre from discounte∣nancing or grieving the witnesses thereof, who through humane frailty may be at first very raw in the particulars unto which they give witnesse herein, when their hearts may be sincere to Christ, in longing after his coming, to set up even Magistracy it self in the purity of its use and exercise. And if it be here demanded, whether the Saints of God are to content themselves with having this in their eye only, and with the contemplation of it by faith, as the thing which Christ will bring about in his due time, in despight of all opposition, who as the stone cut out of the mountaine without hands, Dan. 245. shall become a great mountaine that shall fill the whole earth; It is answered, Though the Saints should sit down in faith and patience, waiting to see this promise accomplished by the immediate power and hand of Christ, without entertaining any solicitude in reference to other meanes, they should not be disappointed nor fall short of their expectations at the last. But secondly, there is a duty of the day, a generation-work, respecting the time and circumstances of action, in which the lot of our life is cast, which calls upon us to use all lawful and righteous meanes that are afforded by the good hand of God, through the inward light and knowledge he vouchsafes, and outward providences and helps which he casts in, whereby to make way for, and to be hasting unto the coming of that day of God, wherein the old heavens and earth shall be rolled away as garments, yea, with the works that are therein, be burnt up, and the new heavens and the new earth wherein dwelleth righ∣teousnesse shall be brought forth in their roome. Our part is the same therefore in this, as in the practice of other righteous duties appertaining to us, the perfection where∣of we cannot expect untill the redemption of the body; and yet we are to be using all lawful meanes and endeavours, to come
as near the Primitive patterne and Rule as we can, in our whole practice throughout. So that when once we have well considered what Rule Christ himself if he were on earth, would exercise over men, in protecting those that do well, and being a terrour to evil works, as also in distributing righteousnesse equally and impar∣tially unto all, upon the grounds of right and just (which eve∣ryone, in the measure of light they have attained, are acquaint∣ed with, and do acknowledge for the Rule which they are willing to be concluded under, as to all their outward con∣cernes) we ought in the way of Christ, and in the use of all lawful meanes, to be as near this in our practice as possibly we may, in the Rule over men, which we shall be either as prin∣cipals or accessories in setting up, holding our selves obliged in heartinesse and freedome of mind, to maintaine. In this lesson, the Lord Jesus hath given cause to many of these Nations in these late years, to be great proficients, by the experiences which he hath afforded them step by step, for the learning of his will and mind therein: who hath not emptied us from vessel to vessel without some teachings thereby, what was bad and fit to be left behind; nor without some dawnings and intimations of what is good, and is yet before us, to be pro∣secuted and followed after. Which, whoever shall impartially and sincerely weight the cause and interest which the good people of this Nation have all along engaged in (as well in reference to their Civil liberties or interests of men as men, as to their Christian liber∣ties, as Saints) cannot but acknowledge: nor therefore can yet remove the perswasion throughly out of their minds, that God, who hath brought on the work thus farre, should leave it here when it is come (as it were) unto the birth, and is upon the very anvil to be formed into what may answer the true ends of Magistracy and common good of men: unto which if there were yet applications made in a way of righte∣ousnesse, and in the fear of the Lord, good men and Gods own people might not despaire of being taught by God, and
enabled through his power to grow up to that, wherein like faithful servants unto Christ they might receive encouragement from their Lord at his coming; and finding of them so doing, with their loynes girt, and lamps burning, ready to receive him at his second appearance. For if once the Lord be pleased so farre to enlighten the minds of men in these Nations, Governours and people as to shew them the good of Magistracy as it is in its Primitive institution, and is held forth in promise, for to be restored in the last dayes; It will then be their desire and delight to en∣quire and consider in a way of free debate and common con∣sent, on behalfe of the good people of these Nations (who in all these great trials have stood faithful, and unshaken, as to the knowne cause they have beene engaged in) how the Rule o∣ver them may be brought nearest to its first institution and original patterne, in the exercise and practice thereof amongst them (founded, as we have seene, upon the principles of na∣tural right and just, and so exclusive to all private interest and personal concerne of any singulars that shall be found to stand in competition with, or preference to the good of the whole) and how that which is the Ordinance and Institution of God, may become also the ordinance and statute of man, established in a free and natural way of common consent to the reuniting of all good men as one man, in a happy union of their spi∣rits, prayers and counsels, to resist all common danger and opposition, which by Devils or Men may be raised against them. And in this posture, being taught how to escape the defile∣ments and corruptions of the world, together with the wrath and vengeance attending the same, they may be accounted worthy to stand before the Sonne of man at his appearance, and be acknowledged by him as those faithful servants of his, Luke 12. 42, &c. whom the Lord having made Rulers of all his houshold, to give them their portion of meat in due season, shall find at his coming, to be so doing; in distinction from those wicked servants, who say in their hearts, and by their actions
(whatever contrary profession may be in their mouths) that their Lord delayeth his coming, and thereupon apply themselves to beat their fellow-servants, and to eate and drink, and be drunken; upon whom the Lord will come in a day when they look not for him, and at an hour when they are not aware, and will cut them in sunder, and appoint them their portion with hypocrites and unbeleevers, where will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
CHAP. XXV. Treating of the power which shall be given unto the two Witnesses, to Prophecie and fi∣nish their testimony, when the suffering Saints of Christ must expect the visible protection of Magistracy to faile them, as exercised in a worldly way. WHat these two Witnesses are (considered as well in a general acceptation as in the more restrained sense, relating to Revel. 11. where the power of prophesying, to be given to them, is mentioned) we have already spo∣ken in the thirteenth Chapter; unto whom the Scripture sayes; power shall be given to prophesie a thousand two hundred and threescore dayes, in sack∣cloth, being the two Olive-trees and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth; whom, if any man will hurt, fire proceedeth out of their mouths and devoureth their enemies; and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it raine not in the dayes of their prophecie: and have power over waters to turne them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues; as often as they will, Rev. 11. 3, 4, 5, 6. comprehending in this power of theirs, all that was incident unto Moses and Elias in the dayes of their Ministery, to fit them to the work that was by God al∣lotted unto them. In the exercise of this power, the Saints of God shall be enabled to go forth, before the great and notable day of the
Lord come; even then, when to the eye of flesh and blood, their state and condition shall be at the lowest, and they shall seeme to be surrounded with the power of the world, in the fiercest opposition and enmity against them. At which time, it is said, Dan. 12. 1. that MICHAEL shall stand up, the GREAT PRINCE, which standeth for the children, that are the true Israel of God, in a troublesome season, such as never was, since there was a Nation to that time; and the Saints shall be delivered, even every one that shall be found written in the Book. This standing up of Christ, seemes to be by the power which he gives to his TWO WITNESSES that in this troublesome season are to prophesie in sackcloth: shewing plain∣ly thereby, that they are but fore-runners to the coming of Christ himself; before the brightnesse of whose appearance, all opposition shall be consumed and vanish away. Whence it is, that during these two Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, their enemies bear up in as much confidence as ever, consisting not only of the generation of Hypocrites and Apo∣states, embodying themselves as a holy City and earthly Je∣rusalem, but of all the rest of the Gentiles, who notwith∣standing the differences betweene themselves, do make a shift to peece up together, that they may both attaine their ends upon the true spiritual seed and right heirs of salvation; essaying to mingle themselves, and joyne counsels and forces in a combination against the approaching glory of Christs Kingdome, as he shall come to be admired in all those that do beleeve. When it shall thus come to passe, that this yron and clay shall mixe together, it shall be but for a season: for at length the cor∣rupt world finding its owne strength, will besiege this Jerusa∣lem, spiritually called Sodome, and burne this whore in the fire of their rage and hatred against her. Then shall the visible wor∣ship and formes of Christian Religion (that are in being and practice amongst any people, in their fleshly reformation) come to be destroyed, taken away, & swallowed up into impurity and
corruption, and mens hearts will be greatly failing them for feare, by reason of what God is bringing upon the earth. And at this very season, when all outward protection, visible defence and power, through the treachery of Hypo∣crites and Apostates shall be withdrawne from the suffering Saints of God; and in a just recompence of Divine ven∣geance, the siege of the earthly Jerusalem shall draw nigh upon those that have made themselves accessory to the be∣traying of the spiritual seed, (as it did on the literal Je∣rusalem upon the betraying and crucifying of Christ) then shall the TWO WITNESSES receive their Commission, and stand up in a destitute, naked and poor condition as to worldly assistance, but armed with the mighty power of God, and the fiery indignation that shall accompany their witnesse, against their adversaries, whereof Elias in his dayes was the figure, who for the same number of dayes prophe∣sied and said there should be no raine, and afterwards brought raine againe by his prayer, and fire also from heaven, yet a man of like passions and affections with us, which also these two Witnesses shall be found to be, in the dayes of their prophecie, as a proof whereof, their dead bodies shall be found in the streets of the holy City, spiritually called Sodome and E∣gypt, kept for three dayes and an half, unburied; signifying, that they must in all things submit to the bruising of their outward man, in conformity unto Christ, and be slaine as their brethren have beene, from the beginning of the world; which is to be their lot, in the latter end. This prophetical and powerful spirit of Eliah shall be poured forth in those dayes upon the witnesses of Christ, that keep the WORD OF HIS PATIENCE, (and endure the fiery triall of those times, not thinking it a strange thing that thereby hap∣pens unto them) and shall fill them with exceeding joy under all the reproaches which they beare for the Name of Christ, as the Spirit of glory and of God that is resting upon them, and fitting them for such a season: that as John Baptist by his
Ministery, ushered in Christs coming in the flesh, or in his first appearance; so this same prophetical spirit of Eliah, shall be the fore-running dispensation, given forth by the witnesses of Christ in those dayes, unto Christs second ap∣pearance or coming from heaven, as hath beene foretold by all the Prophets since the world began, for the restitution of all things, as the fruit of his personal presence in the world, exercising Rule and Dominion there for a thousand years with his Saints, and then carrying them up with him to his Father and their Father, into the same Kingdome as continued in glory, in heaven for evermore. What this prophetical spirit of Eliah is, that shall be thus poured out upon the Witnesses of Christ in those dayes, is to be understood by what it was in Eliah's person, who was but the type, and therefore certainly had this spi∣rit in a much inferiour degree to what it shall be in them. The spirit of glory and power therefore which he had, they shall have, and much more, as indeed is expressed when it is said, if any man will hurt them, he must in this man∣ner be killed: fire proceedeth out of their mouth and devours their enemies. These have power by the same way Eliah had, which was by the prayer of faith, to shut heaven, that it raine not in the dayes of their prophecie, yea, they have power also o∣ver waters to turne them into blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. Yet under all this power and glory they shall remaine exposed in their per∣sons (upon the finishing of their TESTIMONY) to the rage and power of their enemies, who shall then make warre a∣gainst them, overcome them and kill them. But notwithstand∣ing, on the third day, they have power given them to rise from the dead, and to ascend up into heaven, Rev. 11. 11, 12. after a more glorious manner then Eliah did; and this, in the sight of their very enemies, to their terrifying and a∣mazement. Thus we see the spirit and power of Eliah, what it is,
that then shall be poured forth, and that in a more mystical and spiritual consideration. Something we shall also speak to the opening of the state and qualification of the persons that are called the TWO WITNESSES, and why they are so called. For their state and qualification, this is to be known by their names and their apparel. They are called the two Olive-trees, and the two Candle∣sticks, standing before the God of the whole earth. By what hath beene already opened on this subject, we are not far to seek what these signifie. For the two Olive-trees and two Candlesticks that stand by the Lord of the whole earth, must either be Christ in his owne person, as he is head to his bo∣dy, the Church, and Mediatour betweene God and man, shining forth in his first and second appearance, as both these perfections of the natural and spiritual man are built up and wrought into a perfect consistency and harmony in him: or else these two Olive-trees do signifie the confor∣mity, which from him as the head, is wrought out in, and derived upon his spiritual and heavenly members (by his first and second appearance) in both those perfections of the first and second Adam, as the elder is made to serve the younger, and the first is built up into a consistency and har∣mony with the second, by the power of the Crosse, ma∣king them conformable to him in his death. Which conformity is signified by their prophesying in sackcloth, te∣stifying the marks which they bear about with them in their mortal bodies, of the dying of the Lord Jesus. And in this crucified, mortal flesh of theirs, they are owned by Christ, as having the Spirit of God and of glory thus made to rest up∣on them; in a like dispensation unto that of Eliah's pro∣phecy. So that when once it shall please God to raise up a seed and generation of Saints, in whom these marks of the dying of the Lord Jesus shall be eminent, to the slaying and bring∣ing to rest, all operating powers and faculties of their na∣tural
man, as standing in opposition to the Lord of life and glory, and subjecting every high imagination in them by the Crosse, to the laying of it and all the glory of flesh, in a very great measure under the feet of Christ, whereby that which lets his glory from appearing unveiled, and hath all this time let, is taken away; then will it be knowne what the TWO WITNESSES are, and that they have not hitherto so much as begun their prophecy, in the pow∣er of Eliah before mentioned; so farre are they from being slaine.
CHAP. XXVI. Treating of the time of the manifestation of the sonnes of God, their sitting with Christ on his Throne, ruling and influencing all things on earth, during the space of a thou∣sand years. HAving finished what relates to the Saints being made one dead or crucified body with Christ, and shewed the opposition which is exercised by the Devil thereun∣to: that which remains to be considered, is the gathering also of the Saints toge∣ther into one glorified body with Christ, at his second coming; when it shall appear what those shall be, that now, though they are sons, are undistinguish∣ed from those that are not: who have beene planted into a conformity with Christ in his death, and who, considered as his dead body, having beene exposed to the bruising of their heele by Satan before his being bound up, shall be declared the proper subjects and inheritours of this first resurrection, in the exercise of the power and glory thereof, as KINGS and PRIESTS reigning with Christ a thousand years. This time of the manifestation of the sonnes of God is said to be that, which is the earnest expectation of the very creature it self, Rom. 8. 19. as the season also wherein the whole creati∣on is to be restored to its Primitive purity, and to be deliver∣ed out of the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sonnes of God, as the benefit which it shall then receive,
by vertue of the price of Christs blood, paid for all: for the want of which, it now groaneth and travelleth as in paine, as deteined under the bondage it is fallen into by sin, and is stretch∣ing out its neck (as it were) with a holy impatiency after these times of refreshing, that are to come from the presence of the Lord, by the sending of Jesus a second time, and revealing him with power from heaven, to restore all things, and accomplish the full redemption of the body: which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began, Acts 3. 19, 20, 21. But considering the distinct and large handling of this weighty subject, from testimony of Scriptures and other∣wise, in Volumes lately made extant; together with the re∣serve, which Christ thinks fit to keep in his owne hands, as well of the time as the exact patterne and material circum∣stances of this his Reign; it shall suffice me to be joyning in te∣stimony unto this great truth, according to the general prospect thereof, which hath beene given in to my faith, in some small glimpses, as well from the inward as outward Word of God; in a patient and humble expectation of the clearer and more certaine description thereof, as the things themselves are draw∣ing on, which Christ in his times will fully shew, by the bright∣nesse of his owne coming, unto which the children of light and of this day are exhorted to be hastning, as that which is hastning upon them, that so it may not overtake them as a thief in the night, at unawares; but the mindfulnesse thereof may keep them in a meet posture, with their loines girt, and lamps burning, as men waiting for the coming of their Lord. Paul in 1 Tim. 6. 15, 16. does call these dayes, the times of Christ, in which he will shew, that his judgment and power shall bear sway in distinction from and opposition to the power and judgement of mans day, (now in exercise and credit through∣out the world) himself being the blessed and only POTEN∣TATE, the KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS, that must take place with his everlasting Dominion. This Scripture compared with Rom. 8. v. 19, to v. 24. Acts 3. 19, 20, 21.
1 John 3. 2. Hab. 2. 3, 14, 20. 2 Thes. 2. 8. Phil. 3. 20, 21. Dan. 2. 44, 45. and Dan. 4. 3. and Chap. 7. 26, 27. does evi∣dently declare thus much; that the hidden life and immorta∣lity, wherein the man Christ Jesus does remaine with God (as him that is invisible, seene only to the eye of faith, by the true sons and heirs of salvation) shall have a season and time to be manifested and brought to light openly, before the eyes of all: and this two manner of wayes. First, in a way, which shall be peculiar to the spiritual seed, and extend only to them; who having died with Christ shall now live with him, and having suffered with him, shall now reigne with hiw, as gathered into one spiritual and heavenly body with himself, through his changing their vile body into the likenesse of his most glorious body, according to the work∣ing of his mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Secondly, in a way, which shall be common to all natural men, yea, to the whole creation of God, so as every eye shall see him, and every tongue shall confesse him, and every knee shall how to him; either voluntarily or by compulsion, as unto the on∣ly POTENTATE unto whom they owe their subjection, and that in the right of the redemption by him procured for them, who became a ransome for all, to be testified in due time, through which they shall be actually and entirely delivered from the bondage of corruption, and restored into their Primi∣tive purity, natural life and glory, upon the same tearmes of mutability, as wherein Adam was at first created; yea, with this advantage over and above what he had, not only a being taught by his experience, but assisted with those means which he experienced not in the manner they shall do, together with a freedome from any exercise of that old Serpents power or sub∣tilty upon them, who during the time of the whole thousand years; shall be bound and sealed up in the bottomlesse pit, by the power of Christ, Rev. 20. 2, 3. and so, totally disabled to deceive or beguile the Nations any more, all that while, as he beguiled Eve, that Christ may rule in righteousnesse amongst
them without disturbance, nothing being left to hurt or de∣stroy them, in all his holy mountaine or Dominion, if they destroy not themselves, for they shall be left unto the full and entire scope of their own free will, self-managing and disposal, that they may be as good as they themselves shall desire to be, and have the means at hand to keep them so, if themselves be not in the fault. That which Christ will do at his second coming, is intima∣ted by those greater works he speaks of, John 5. v. 20, to v. 30. at the sight whereof every one should marvel. In which Scri∣pture we find a twofold power, that shall then be exercised by Christ. First, a quickning power, for Christ shall then quicken whom he will, calling whom he pleases out of their very graves, whe∣ther spiritual or literal, and they shall hear his voice and come forth: the grave, at his call, shall yeeld up her dead, not be∣ing able to resist the power of this quickning spirit of his, who then, as by the voice of the Arch-Angel, the trump of God, 1 Thes. 4. 16 shall visibly declare the exceeding greatnesse of his pow∣er over death and the grave it self, in the sight of the whole world, to the admiration of all, and to the stopping the mouths of the greatest enemies and gain-sayers, that would be apt to contradict and oppose the glory of his Kingdome. Secondly, a Judicial power; For Christ shall then receive authority from the Father, to execute judgement also, and that, as the Sonne of man; according as it is also expressed, Acts 17. 31. He hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousnesse, by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. Thus then, as the Father hath life in himself, that is to say, the proper life of God, absolute, su∣preme, irresistible and Almighty; the SONNE OF MAN shall then also come forth in the exercise of the same life, in uni∣ty with the Father; it being given to him, in like manner, to have life in himself, and to effect and execute all that which he desires and thinks fit in both these respects, in the exercise
of the same absolute and Almighty power of God himself: By reason whereof it shall come to passe, that all men shall honour the Sonne, even as they honour the Father, and whosoever ho∣noureth not the Son, shall be proceeded against, in judgement and in the execution of Gods wrath, as if he had not honoured the Father. For, unto the Sonne of man, in this day of his power and glory, shining forth in the beauty of his new name that is a∣bove every name, either in this world, or in that which is to come, every knee is appointed to bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and the duty of every tongue shall be to confesse that Iesus is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Hence then it is evident, that as God or the WORD in Christs first appearance, was pleased to be manifested in flesh, wherein to condescend and make himself of no reputation, by taking upon him the forme of a servant, and being made in the likenesse or habit of a man, and in this fashion, as a man, sub∣jecting himself to the doing and suffering all that, which was required to be done and suffered, on the behalf of sinful man∣kind, and for the bringing many sonnes unto glory; so also is he (that thus did and suffered all things as a man, in the dayes of his flesh, for our redemption) at this time to see his seed, and reap the fruit of the travel of his soul, which then he made a sa∣crifice for sin, being now a second time to appeare, without a∣ny reference to sinne, as then he did; but instead thereof, to declare himself the Sonne of God with power by the resurrection from the dead. So as in and by this second appearance, the man Christ Iesus, in the fashion and forme of his exalted and glori∣fied manhood, consisting of spirit, soul and body, in substantial or personal union with the WORD, is to shew and manifest him∣self in the glory of the Father, in the joynt and united exer∣cise of the same divine life and power with him, and there∣in to give a plaine demonstration, that he is the Sonne of God, as by his being made flesh, and becoming obe∣dient to the death of the Crosse, he did undeniably demonstrate that he was really and properly the Sonne of Man, made of
the seed of David, according to the flesh; living the life, and dying the death, of a perfect natural man. Thus the Sonne of man shall come with power and great glo∣ry, sitting with the Father upon the same Throne, therein shew∣ing himself the only POTENTATE, the KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS, dwelling in immortality, and that light, which no man can approach, hath seene or can see. Christ then (considered as thus dwelling in immortality and that light which is invisible and inaccessible, in reference to all those that are meer natural men) shall at this time declare himself to be the life and quickning of his own dead body, and the object of their converse, who having been made one dead body with him, as planted in the similitude of his death, shall now be called and gathered together unto him, in one in∣corruptible, immortal, glorified state of spirit, soul and body, & be planted into the likenesse of his Resurrection, to the attaining of their compleat adoption, and the redemption of the body, at this manifestation of the sonnes of God, and heirs of salvation, which is spoken of, Colos. 3. 4. where 'tis said, that when Christ who is our life shall appear, we shall also appear with him in glory; and 1 Iohn 3. 2. we are now sonnes, but it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is; or as he dwells in immortality, and in that light, from whence he excludes every natural eye, reserving it as the peculiar enjoyment and inheri∣tance of his friends, whom he loves, that are Heirs of God, and Co-heirs with Christ, in the things prepared only for them, which neither eye hath seene, nor eare heard, nor have entred into the heart of the natural man to consider. This likenesse which the true Saints shall be brought forth into with Christ, the beginning and first-begotten from the dead, is described in general, by the promise Christ makes to them on that behalf, And Iesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in regeneration, when the Sonne of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Matth. 19. 28. So, Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcometh (sayes he) I will grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father on his throne; which imports, First, that as by the Fathers quickning of Christ, raising him up, and fitting him in spiririt, soul, and body, to exercise in unity with him, the same divine life and power, to the making his manhood Second with him on the Throne: so Christ, in like manner, will quicken and raise up all the members of his dead body, or slaine faithful Witnesses, that have beene made con∣formable unto him in his death, and fit them in their spirit, soul, and body, to exercise in unity and association with his heavenly manhood, the life and power which he is enabled to exercise, as he is the exalted Sonne of man, to the rendring them a fit Bride, Queene, and Second with him, in his Throne, where they shall neverthelesse sit as upon Thrones of their owne, as his Equals and co-heirs, yet in subordination unto him, judg∣ing the twelve Tribes of Israel, in a light and glory, superiour to the earthly Jerusalem or worldly Church; yea, to the good Angels themselves, who shall be found but standing about the Throne, whilst the Saints shall be sitting downe with Christ, upon it. Secondly, as the Father gives authority to Christ in the capa∣city of the Sonne of man, to execute judgement as the only l'O∣TENTATE, KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS, under him, so Christ also shall give and derive to his body (the general assembly of the first-borne, whose names are written in heaven) authority to be the only Potentates, Lords of Lords, and Kings of Kings under him, whose Decrees and Ordinances, shall be binding unto all in heaven, or in earth, or under the earth, next and immediately under Christ their head; and this, as well in reference to the regulating and well-ordering the ser∣vice and worship of God in the societies of Saints and all his true worshippers; as in reference to the governing and well-ordering the natural and outward converse of men in their hu∣mane societies, during the reigne of Christ upon earth, the thou∣sand years.
Both these powers and jurisdictions shall be residing in the general assembly of the first-borne, whose names are written in hea∣ven, who shall then be declared the Bride, the Lambs wife, the New Ierusalem, coming downe from God out of heaven, described, Rev. 21. 2. as she that is prepared as a Bride adorned for her hus∣band, being that Tabernacle of God with men, wherein he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he himself will be with them, and be their God, wiping away all teares from their eyes, so as there shall be amongst them no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more paine: for the form∣er things are passed away, and by the power of him that sits up∣on the Throne, all things are made new. This GENERAL ASSEMBLY, in the exercise of their Judicial power, are to be considered in a twofold capa∣city. First, that wherein they are properly spiritual or heavenly men, qualified with a discerning peculiar to the spiritual seed, through the anointing which is truth and no lie, whereby they en∣ter within the veile, and are admitted into that light and im∣mortality, which their owne natural man sees not, nor can see, but by the help and teachings of this anointing; and that, at se∣cond hand. As thus considered, they have committed unto them, the power of the KEYS, in the full extent and exercise thereof, whereby, all that they binde in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and all that they loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: so as all the declarative power of what infallibly is truth, and the mind and will of God, to be observed in heaven or in earth, by all the inhabitants of both, shall be in them: and all disobedi∣ence and opposition thereunto, shall be punished by their Church-Censures, in a way of Excommunication, considered in the Scriptures, either as conditional, and referring to sianes against the Son of man, as in his first appearance; or the disobedi∣ence against the first Covenant, capable of release in this world: or, Secondly, as the final, irrevocable sentence, called the ANA∣THEMA MARANATHA, respecting the sinne against the
holy Ghost, Christ in his second appearance; or the wilful dis∣obedience against the second Covenant: from which censure, none shall be able to escape or appeale; this JUDGEMENT∣SEAT of Christ, having for its attendants and Ministers of justice, the holy and mighty Angels, ready with flames of fire to take vengeance on all that shall not obey the Gospel, and to punish them with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Secondly, the same GENERAL ASSEMBLY do also in another capacity, exercise their Judicial power: to wit, as they are properly natural men, qualified with a pure natural discerning, wherein they are found acting the powers and fa∣culties of the natural mind, in all the righteous and holy opera∣tions, required by the first Covenant, in a newnesse of life re∣ceived by the resurrection from the dead, and as they are made one glorified incorruptible body, with Christs natural man. In this sense, they have the power of the sword committed to them, as supreme Ministers of natural right and justice, un∣der Christ, the KING OF RIGHTEOUSNESSE, and in association with the innumerable company of holy Angels, Heb. 12. 22. who, in the exercise of this part of Judicial power, are joynt-Rulers with the Saints, that in the first, were but servants and attendants, as those PRINCIPALITIES AND POW∣ERS in heavenly places, unto whom the manifold wisdome of God is made knowne by the Church, Ephes. 3. 10. By Saints, in this capacity, Christ will judge the world, and rule the Nations as with a rod of yron, breaking those in pieces, as a potters vessel, that are stubborne and rebellious; binding their Kings in chaines, and their Nobles in fetters of yron: as it is written, Psal. 149. Such honour have all his Saints; to wit, as met together in this GENERAL ASSEMBLY, authorized and enabled to administer as well the distributive as the reven∣ging justice of God, so as to be a terrour unto all that presume to offend against the principles of natural good and right, held forth in and by the righteousnesse of the first Covenant: and a
protection and encouragement unto all that do well, and shall be found approving themselves in the practice of those pure natural and holy principles. Unto this, that in 1 Cor. 6. 2. must necessarily referre, where Paul saies, Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the world, taking cognizance of things pertaining to this life? and to shew the superiour jurisdiction, which the Saints as the Church, or in their spiritual capacity have over Angels themselves, he saith also, v. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? how much? more things that appertaining to this life? It is in this sense likewise, we are to understand what is mentioned, Rev. 21. 24. where the Nations that are said to be saved (that is to say, with the common salvation, which by vertue of Christs ransome, shall then be effectually applied to all men in general, to the freeing the natural man from the bondage of corruption, at the restitution of all things, then to be made) during this THOUSAND YEARS REIGNE, shall walk in the light, or live under the Protection of this Government, which shall flov forth from the new JERUSALEM and true MOUNT SI∣ON, there described; so as not only the Kings of the earth in their owne persons shall bring their glory and honour into it, as contented to do homage, and to be under the blessings of it, but they shall also be willing to be the means of bringing the glory and honour of the very Nations themselves thereinto, by their patterne and example, v. 26. Thus there is a quicknin and judicial power, as we have shewed, which the Saints shall put forth, through their confor∣mity with Christ in his resurrection; by means whereof, they shall stand possessed of the power and perfection, as well of the true Church and Ministery, as of the right Magistracy, or worldly Rule and Dominion: both which shall then be found in their purity, as well of their practice as institution, in this tri∣umphing Church of the NEW JERUSALEM, and universal worldly Government or Magistratical Dominion, in this true COMMON-WEALTH OF ISRAEL, for whose sakes, all thinigs shall be made new, all being theirs, as they are Christs, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
Nor have the Scriptures left us without witnesse herein but in sundry particulars do lay open and declare the manner how, and steps whereby Christ proceeds, as well to the bring∣ing in, as to the actual setting up of this Kingdome of his, du∣ring a THOUSAND YEARS, to be managed by himself, and the quicken'd, glorified body or society of his Saints, as the Church or general Assembly of the first-borne, fitted and a∣dorned by himself, to share with him in this his Rule and Go∣vernment. The preparatory dispensation unto this, is a dark MID∣NIGHT, Matth. 25 6. such a time of trouble, as never was, since there was a Nation; in which the powers of the holy people shall be scattered and utterly broken, Dar. 12. 1, 7. the earth∣ly Jerusalem or worldly Christian Church shall be besieged and taken, Zech. 14. 1, 2. that great and holy City, Rev. 11. 2, 8. which for her hypocrisie and spiritual whoredomes, apo∣stasie, and enmity against the faithful WITNESSES of Christ is compared, Rev. 11. to SODOME and EGYPT, answer∣ing to the state of the same Jerusalem in the letter, where our Lord was crucified. And therefore in Matth. 24. and other Scriptures where the literal Jerusalem is threatned with destruction, the Mystical earthly Jerusalem, or worldly Church under the Gentiles is therein comprehended and also meant, as that which shall at the end of the world, and in the last times, be found in a most cor∣rupted, declined estate of Apostasie, 2 Thes. 2. 3. 1 Tim. 4. 12. 2 Tim. 3. 1, &c. unto which therefore several characters and signes are appropriated, that cannot be understood to be accom∣plished at the destroying of the material Temple and outward Jerusalem, but are necessarily to be meant of this Mystical one, as the Heavens that are remaining to be shaken yet once more, Heb. 12. signifying the removing of those things that may be shaken, as of things that are made; that those things that can∣not be shaken, may remaine. This Mystical earthly Ierusalem is that which shall not have one stone left upon another, as well as the other Typical Ierusalem:
not so much as any visibility or forme of worship shall be left to her, but she shall be given to the Gentiles or prophane world, who shall tread this holy City under foot, fourty and two moneths. And to make this hour and power of darknesse the more terrible, there shall be warres and rumours of warres; Nation shall rise up against Nation, and Kingdome against Kingdome, and there shall be Famines and Pestilences and Earthquakes in divers pla∣ces; yea, all these things shall be but the beginning of sorrows; For as thus, warres and troubles and sorrowes shall be in refe∣rence to the outward man; so also deceit and errour by false Prophets, and false Christs, shall arise, causing much defilement, in reference to the inner man; whence will flow great decli∣nings and apostasies from holy and righteous principles; for sa∣king of the truth, or a waxing cold in the love of it, amongst the in∣habitants of this Mystical earthly Ierusalem; and not only so, but there will spring up a root of bitternesse, and an implacable persecuting spirit against the faithful WITNESSES of Christ, that shall in those dayes be found in her, to the afflicting, killing, or flaying of them, and letting their dead bodies lie unburied in the street of this great City, which the Nations shall come and de∣stroy for all her whoredomes and apostasies (as they did the li∣teral Ierusalem) God putting it into their hearts, to agree together, and burne this Whore with fire. And then they themselves that are thus made the rod of Gods anger, and executioners of his vengeance on this great City, shall not escape, but, Zach. 14. 3. The Lord shall go forth and fight against those Nations, as when he fought in the day of battel, For a great tumult from the Lord shall be among them, and they shall lay hold, every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour, ver. 13. So, Mat. 24. 29, 30. Immediately after the tribulation of those dayes, shall the Sunne be darkned, and the Moone shall not give her light, and the Starres shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of the Heavens shall be shaken. And then shall appeare the signe of the Sonne of Man in Heaven: and then shall all the Tribes of the earth mourne, and they shall see the Sonne of man coming in the clouds of Heaven,
with power and great glory; actually entering upon the exercise of his Kingdome: and this, First, by sending forth his Angels, and gathering together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other, as into one glorified body with himself, to the constituting of this GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the FIRST-BORNE, which shall be made up, partly of those the Lord brings with him; and partly of those which shall be found alive and remaing unto the coming of the Lord; or shall be in the natural body, during the thousand years; all which shal be changed in a moment, in the twink∣ling of an eye, by way of translation, as it was with Enoch, and not see death: Whereby their mortal shall put on immortality, and their corruptible shall put on incorruption; and death and the grave shall be swallowed up in victory. The first in order then, which Christ quickens at his coming, shall be his own Mystical dead body, for the dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Thes. 4. 16. that is, those that have beene slaine, and have born the marks of the dyings of Jesus upon them, who are cal∣led, Rev. 20. the souls of them that were beheaded for the wit∣nesse of Jesus, and for the WORD of God, who all of them at this time, through the quickning power of their Head, shall live and reigne with him, the first-fruits, who hath already for a long time beene living and reigning at Gods right hand; as it is written; 1 Cor. 15. Every man in his owne order: Christ, the first-fruits, af∣terwards they that are Christs at his coming, whom he builds or raises up with himself into one spiritual and glorified body, v. 44. causing them thereby to bear the image of the heavenly and last Adam, as they have borne the image of the earthy or first Adam, and this in the utmost perfection thereof (as arrived to the mea∣sure of the stature of that fulnesse and perfection, which declares and manifests it self in Christs heavenly manhood) enabled to exercise in copartnership with him, the power and glory of a threefold humane life and perfection, in which he went before them. First, when upon the laying down of his natural body, he came into the exercise of a life proper to the spirit of a just
man made perfect, in likenesse and equality with that of the holy Angels, who stand in a superiority of life unto the earthly man, even of Christ himself, Heb. 2. 9. Secondly, when he also came forth in the exercise of a hu∣mane bodily life, raised up in a glorified and incorruptible forme, never to die more, Rev. 1. 18. in which he conversed with men, the fourty dayes betweene his resurrection and ascen∣sion. Thirdly, when yet farther he came forth in the exercise of a divine humane life, in which, ascending to his God and their God, to his Father and their Father, he was exalted into a unity and copartnership in life and operation, with the ROOT OF DA∣VID, the WORD OF LIFE, the first-born of every creature, and first-begotten from the dead. This is spoken of, as the fruit also of his resurrection from the dead, Ephes. 1. ver. 20, 21. When through the mightinesse of Gods power that wrought in him, he was raised from the dead, and set at Gods owne right hand in the Heavenly (or in the first and Heavenly Tabernacle that is set up in the WORD, treated on by us in the first Chap∣ter) farre above all prin ipality and power, and might, and Domi∣nion, and every name, or particular nature and being, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. In which life, ver. 22. 'tis said, that to the humane nature of Christ, it is given to be the Head over all things, or in a superiori∣ty in all things, unto the Church, or true spiritual seed, which is his body, the fulnesse of him that filleth all in all, built up into a Heavenly conformity in all things, as a Wife and Spouse unto this her Head and Husband. This excellency of Christs exalted manhood, was (surely) inti∣mated unto Iaceb, by that ladder, Gen. 28. 12 which in his dream he beheld, set upon the earth, the top whereof reached to Heaven, as also, the Angels of God ascending and descending upon it. For thus we find it interpreted by himself, Iohn 1. 50, 51. as that greater sight of his humane perfection, then what could be seene in the dayes of his flesh: Verily, verily (sayes he) I say unto you, hereafter you shall see Heaven open, and the Angels of God ascend∣ing
and descending upon the Sonne of man: as if he should have said, You shall see the Heavenly Temple of God opened, Rev. 11. 19. that is to be found in the WORD OF LIFE; and the heavenly discoveries flowing thence, or sent forth from the same, in their ascents and descents in and upon the manhood of Christ, as the means chosen for the making manifest the riches of his glory to men and Angels, in their particular beings and per∣sons. In these three respects shall the true SONNES AND HEIRS OF SALVATION, fitted and adorned as a Bride and Heavenly body to this Husband and Head, appeare bear∣ing on them the image of the last Adam, made like unto him, to the seeing of him as he is; and shining forth in this likenesse, they will have accomplished upon them, that manifestation of the sonnes of God, which shall vastly difference them from the natu∣rall or fleshly seed, considered in their highest mutable perfecti∣on, or in the incorruptible forme wherein they shall be raised up to everlasting contempt. By vertue then of this conformity in image, which the Saints shall be brought into, with Christs heavenly manhood, they shall come forth in the exercise of this threefold life, in kind, wherein the manhood of Christ hath beene conver∣sant, ever since the laying down of his earthly and natural body. First, of that life, which all the true sonnes and heirs of sal∣vation, that have died in the faith, have beene exercising, ever since their change or falling asleep in the Lord; that is to say, the life of the spirits of just men made perfect, a life like that of the Angels or perfect spirits, that can live and act without dependance upon bodily life and motion; described by Christ himself, where he sayes, that they, who shall be accounted wor∣thy to obteine that world, and the resurrection from the dead (as were Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who then were, and yet are in the possession of it) neither marry nor are given in marriage, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are children of God, and of the resurrection, Luke 20. 35, 36, that is to say, are the children
of God in their spirits made perfect, and thereby are become equals and fit associates for the holy Angels themselves, as the souls of wicked men, departed this life, become equals and fit associates for the evil Angels, concerning which state also, in the best sense, Christ spake unto the thief upon the Crosse, when he said, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. The second exercise of life which the Saints, as gathered unto Christ their Head, at his second coming, shall be brought forth in, is that of a glorified, incorruptible body, in fashion made like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3. Into the exercise of which life, they are not yet entered, but reserved for it, by the MAN CHRIST IESUS, the FIRST-FRUITS, who will have the souls of those, slaine under the Altar, to rest yet for a little season, in the single exercise of their Angelical life, as spirits of just men made perfect, untill the gathering of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the first-borne together, and setting them (who have beene the slaine Witnesses of Christ) upon their feet, in the exercise of this immortal, incorruptible bodily life, here in this world, wherein they are to continue and abide for a THOUSAND YEARS, keeping the true Sabbath of Rest unto the Lord, in that seventh part of the time of the worlds duration. All worldly strength, wisdome and power, shall then, as the walls of Iericho, fall flat before Iesus, the true Ioshua, and these true Israelites (as having beene by them compassed about six dayes, and now on the seventh, a thousand years being with the Lord, as one day, 2 Pet. 3. 8.) making way for the end, men∣tioned, 1 Cor. 15. 24. to come and shew it self: at which time the fleshly Rule and Kingdome of Christ in his first appearance (till then kept up in the world as the first general Dominion) is delivered up unto the Father (the Sonnewillingly becoming subject herein, with reference to the bringing himself forth in his second appearance, to rule and reign in the place of the first) that God may be all in all, and that all other rule, authority and power may hereby be put downe; yea, death it self, as the last enemy, may be destroyed, and made unable to deteine any under its
power, that the quickning vertue shining forth in this presence and appearance of Christ, shall call forth, and give freedome unto. The Saints in the exercise of this life with Christ upon earth, during this THOUSAND YEARS, shall be those, in whom Christ will be admired, and the Father glorified. This state of theirs, is the reward spoken of in Scripture, where it is said, The meek shall inherit the earth; and, Godlinesse hath not only the promise of the life to come, but of this also, 1 Tim. 4. 8. So, Rom. 4. 13. The Promise to Abraham that he should be heir of the world, is declared, not to be by the Law, or to have its accomplishment under the first Covenant-dispensation; but through the righteousnesse of faith; that it might be by grace; to the end the Promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only, which is of the Law; but to that also, which is of the faith of A∣braham, who with other beleevers, died, and received not the ma∣king good thereof. It therefore remains to be performed in its due time, at this manifestation of the Sonnes of God, which faith sees and acknowledges, Heb. 11. 39. These all having ob∣tained a good report through faith, received not the promise, (to wit, this promise, of being heirs of the world, and of all Nations being blessed in and by the meanes of the spiritual seed) which will certainly be fulfilled to them, in the times of the NEW HEAVENS AND NEW EARTH, Isa. 65. 17. &c. God having foreseene and reserved some better thing for us, (saith the Author to the Hebrews) that they without us should not be made perfect; but that all of us may enjoy that better thing together at once, in the keeping of a holy Sabbath unto the Lord, at the coming of this day of God, in which the Hea∣vens that now are, shall passe away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up, to make way for, and give place unto the NEW HEAVENS and NEW EARTH wherein dwelleth righteousnesse, which we look for according to his promise, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 13. Nor are we to think that the Saints departed, who are now
exercising the life that is equal to Angels, are at all debased or lessened in their heavenly or Angelical enjoyment, as brought forth & gathered together into one spiritual and glorified body with Christ, at his coming. For hereby, they are enabled to exercise (over and besides the first) that life which Christ led here upon earth after his resurrection; which excludes them not from being with the Lord in the aire, 1 Thes. 4. 17. or in the exercise of their Angelical life, in which they are for ever with him, for as much as they do assume the exercise of this bodily life againe, in its incorruptible forme, upon such termes, that it is no hinderance to, or in the least, inconsistent with the free and absolute exercise of the former Angelical life, but serves rather as the meanes for them to be in the body as well as out of the body, at their owne pleasure, and as they shall find it most suitable to Gods designes, for the maintaining and keep∣ing up the Rule and Dominion of Christ in the world, during the thousand years, in the hands of this GENERAL ASSEM∣BLY of the first-borne, who, as the Jerusalem coming downe from God out of Heaven, are to be the Tabernacle of God with men, to administer the accomplishment of Gods promise, as to the making good the reward which godlinesse is to receive, even in this life, and the promise unto Abraham and his seed, of ma∣king them heir, of the world through faith, Rom. 4. 13. by ver∣tue of the quickning power of Christ, which he shall put forth at this time of the Restitution of all things. The forementioned exercise of this bodily life, to be as∣sumed by Saints departed, at the Resurrection, is intimated to us, by what is recorded, Matth. 27. 52, 53. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of the Saints that slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many; Signifying by way of figure and prediction, the common practice hereof at Christs com∣ing to quicken his Mystical dead body, and bring them out of their graves; as it is written, Esay 26. 19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out the dead. The third and last sort of humane life, which the body or Church of Christ shall by their Head be brought into the ex∣ercise of, is that of his exalted state, as He ascended to his God and their God, to his Father and their Father, going before to pre∣pare a place for them; as being unwilling that his Saints should rest, so much as in the second degree of life, shining forth in his person, by the Resurrection, without expecting a higher; which he gave notice of to Mary, when he said. Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, John 20. 17. in whose house there are many Mansions, John 14. 2. which at the end of the thousand years he hath in store, to lead them into, as their final and utmost degree of glory and perfection in heaven, in the immediate and beatifical vision of God (when the world shall be no more mentioned, Rev. 20. 11) and as the last re∣treat to the full Rest, God hath prepared for his Saints, when upon the expiration of the thousand years; Satan being let loose out of his prison, shall have mustered up his last reserve of force against them from all the four quarters of the earth, even Gog and Magog, who for number are as the sand of the Sea, who come up, on the breadth of the earth, and compasse the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City, the NEW IERUSALEM, which thereupon ascends up into heaven (their enemies beholding them) into this utmost degree of the Resurrection and their exaltation; as made with Christs manhood, to ascend to their God and his God, to their Father and his Father, in the exercise of the life of the first-borne of eve∣ry creature and first-begotten from the dead, to the obteining a name above every name, which sets them with Christ, far above all principality and power, might and dominion: the name or nature of any other particular being whatsoever. And all this they attaine unto, by their being made one with Christ, Davids OFF-SPRING, as this OFF-SPRING or BRANCH is made one with his owne ROOT, who is the beginning and first-begotten from the dead, having in all things the preheminence, as being from above, and over all; made
higher then the Heavens, better then the Angels, (as having by in∣heritance obtained a more excellent name then they, so that An∣gels and authorities are made subject to him) and therefore in a state, exalted above all natural men, for they are lower then the Angels. In this capacity, Christ in his own person, received the pour∣ing out of the Spirit without measure; and in this capacity, his body the Church shall, as at the second hand, in this day of their ascension and final exaltation, receive the effusion of this same Spirit without measure upon them, unto which they have spi∣ritual sences in some degree fitted and suited, whilst they are here in the body, (through the newnesse of life and motion set up in them by faith, or the new Creation) which are yet farther heightned and enlarged after the laying down of the body, by the two first degrees of glory and power, into which they are brought by the resurrection from the dead, but shall then be ripened to their most absolute capacity, compleat exercise, and perfect use, upon this their ascension and highest advance, at the expiration of the THOUSAND YEARS. Into this state of glory, Christ (as we have said) did arrive in his own person, upon his ascension, having received of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost, or the actual possession of this inheritance of God, at Gods right hand, where his man-hood doth so become the INGRAFFED WORD of God, that as man, he is taken into the enjoyment of Gods naked glory, and very similitude and forme, beholding him face to face, and conversing with him, as friend speaks with friend, mouth to mouth, sharing and partaking throughout with the WORD of life, the ROOT of David, in all those first crea∣ture-operations that are set up by the immediate Workman-ship of the Trinity, when they personally appeare in the WORD: in respect whereof, this creature-state in Christ, is said to be without Father, without Mother, without descent, Heb. 7. having neither beginning of dayes, nor end of life: but made like unto the Sonne of God, abides a Priest for ever, at Gods right hand. By which description it may appear, that the
manhood of Christ, considered as the OFF-SPRING and BRANCH, is brought forth into such likenesse and equa∣lity with the ROOT, as to be made a fit associate to the Son of God, considered as the ROOT. And thus it is (by way of figure and resemblance with the nature of man, in the first degree of life, attained by the resur∣rection from the dead, as he is brought forth into the exercise of life, like unto Angels, and so becomes their equal, yet is not an Angel, nor loses the subordination and inferiority of his na∣tural being, unto the Angels: So also, Christ is still perfect man, notwithstanding this his exaltation; yet so, as that he is also in the same person, God, as we have shewed; and the Saints, that come thus to be branches of the same perfect heavenly manhood with him, are so neverthelesse, in a distinguished state of subordination and inferiority to him; in the capacity of the Bride, the Lambs wife, who by all this their exal∣tation are neither Godded with God, nor Christed with Christ, but are still in the proper capacity of creatures, but of the highest and best creatures under Christ their Head, ex∣alted above all Angels or any particular nature whatsoever; and brought thus at last into the enjoyment of the beatifical vision of God, in the face of the blessed Trinity. Thus we have endeavoured to describe the glory where∣in Christ is given to be the Head and Husband to the whole spiritual seed, as actually espousing and taking to wife, the whole general assembly of the first-borne, bringing them into the same glory with himself, as he hath received power from the Father, and expressing it to be his will and desire, that they should participate of the same glory, and be one with him, as he is one with his Father. Neverthelesse, by this dignity given unto them, they do not attaine unto the priviledge and preheminence that is due only unto their Head, in that Hypostatical union, into which he is taken; but have that which belongs to them, as the BRIDE the LAMBS WIFE, in a secondary and subordinate way, by marriage-union with Christ; wherein they are one with
Christ, as he is one with the Father, Heirs of God, and co-heirs with Christ, but a in weaker, inferiour state of glory. This is figured out by the woman, who partakes of the same life and glory in kind with the man, as she is his image or glory; and so is as his equal, yea, one with him by marriage-union, yet sing∣ly considered, is in a state of subordination and inferiority to him. And as thus we see what is the attainment, unto which the right heirs of salvation do come, by the resurrection from the dead, when they shall be made like unto Christ, and see him as he is; so we also have hereby signified unto us, what the wick∣ed do arrive unto, (who must also partake of the resurrection from the dead, and be raised up in dishonour, to everlasting contempt) and that consists, first, in their being made equal in the first degree of the resurrection with wicked Angels, and fit associates for them, as spirits perfected, to be kept up as ves∣sels of dishonour in a way of contempt. Secondly, in that state of dishonour, into which their body returnes at the re∣surrection thereof, wherein it becomes incorruptible, never to be changed more. And now, for as much as in this manifestation of the sons of God, there shall be found the perfect use of the natural sences of their minde and body, wholly subjected by the Crosse of Christ to their spiritual and heavenly; in this perfect and compleat exercise of their natural sences, they shall hold forth that Law of righteousnesse, and the obedience thereof, unto which natural men in those dayes shall be required to conform, who shall for that end, not only be set at liberty, from the bon∣dage of corruption, but stand free from the assaults and wiles of Satan, (who shall be bound up from molesting them) and be moreover advantaged with all needful and requisite helps and meanes to further them therein, under the influence of a Ministery and Magistracy, brought forth in the highest and ut∣most perfection and purity that can be enjoyed on earth, mana∣ged by the person of Christ himself, and the whole GENE∣RAL ASSEMBLY of the first-borne. The book of the
creatures shall also be made legible in the fairest characters wherein they can be written out, and the Scriptures open∣ed in the highest degree of clearnesse and full comprehensive∣nesse thereof; an instance of which Christ gave, after his resurrection, Luke 24. 27. who beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself: which will be the general practice of the Saints after their resurrection, all along the thousand yeares Reigne. Hence it is, that besides the change that we have already spoken of, which is peculiar to the Saints, there shall be brought forth by the Saints, as the secondary meanes in Christs hand, a most glorious change, next in order unto theirs upon the whole creation, (as we have already laid o∣pen in general) which, in reference to men, the principal part of it, shall be as a state of common salvation, mutable and temporary, to the affording of the highest example and proof that possibly can be given, of this common state of purity and excellency, appertaining to the natural man; which men have so generally admired, and been so fond of, from the beginning of the world to this time. Then it will shew it self in its kind, and plainly discover what it will sig∣nifie and amount unto at its best, where it shall be only re∣teined single, and want the benefit of association and consort∣ship with the spiritual sences, which are found in the minde of true Saints, to the making Christ admired in all them that do beleeve, and to the abasing and entirely bringing down the pride and glory of all flesh. Thus Christ, as sitting upon this Throne of his glory, and his Saints with him, shall make all things new, by bring∣ing forth the second change before mentioned, which shall come upon the world, the former things as old, being made to passe away, and to receive a consuming by fire, that all things may be renewed and restored into their first puri∣ty and natural perfection, throughout the whole first creation, in all the parts and members of it, by vertue of the power∣ful
influence, that shall come from this healing & refreshing pre∣sence of the Lord, in & with his Saints, for that purpose; at which time he shall make good that saying of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. All things are yours, and you are Christs, and Christ is Gods, by granting a general day of JUBILE and release unto all natural beings then in the world, from under the power of sin and Satan, and setting up means for the keeping and preser∣ving of them, during the thousand years, in this their spotlesse sinlesse nature, (not suffering the Devil to annoy them, or deceive the Nations, till the thousand years be fulfilled) executing up∣on the rebellious and disobedient, his fiery vengeance and in∣dignation to the cutting them off from the Land of the living, as Ananias and Sapphira were dealt with, making good that Word of the Lord, Act 3. 23. And it shall come to passe, that e∣very soul which will not hear that Prophet, in these his dayes, he shall be destroyed from among the people. For all those that shall then discover that they love not the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, shall be Anathema Maranatha, or accursed, by this coming, and from this presence of the Lord. And therefore we are to know, that the natural generation of men which shall be in those dayes (how pure and spotlesse so∣ever their fleshly nature be, yet being but mutable) will have either a good or an evil change passe upon them. The good we have already spoken to; and of the evil, we shall say but little here, since we have so at large treated of it also, as it is the ser∣pentine seed, growing up in and under that which is good, to the fixing and hardning of men at last, in an implacable rage and enmity against Christ in his heavenly and second appear∣ance. For this hardning, when it is perfected, proves an unchang∣able enmity, and brings on the spiritual or SECOND DEATH, wrought out in the natural mind, which is not subject to the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, nor ever can be, no place being now left for repentance. These vessels of wrath will then be raised to everlasting contempt, and will have the perfect exercise of their natural sences, in spirit, soul and body, fitted and pre∣pared
for the taking in of the full vials thereof, that shall be poured out upon them for ever, from the presence of the Lord; Yea, for this purpose they are also heightned to a partaking with the wicked Angels, in the raisednesse of their Angelical beings; so as to become of equal capacity with the evil Angels, through the power of the resurrection from the dead, that raises them up into everlasting contempt, and gives them their portion with the Devil and his Angels; unto whom they serve as a Temple and habitation, in like manner, as the Saints in their glorified body, are the Tabernacle of God. And in this Idols Temple, the Devil shall be so able to transforme himself into an Angel of light, by the experience he will have gained during the thousand years, and so to transform his Ministers also as the Ministers of righteousnesse, and Apostles of Christ, that he shall have the confidence (at the end of the thou∣sand years, when he shall again be let loose) to embody his par∣ty of wicked Angels and men, from all quarters, and come up in this seeming glorious posture, to vie it out at last with the New Jerusalem, the City of the living God, in this its earthly state, gathering Gog and Magog to battel, the number of whom is as the sand of the Sea, who (hoping to carry all before them) shall come up on the breadth of the earth, and compasse the camp of the Saints about, the Beloved City, desiring and endeavouring to swallow up that Assembly of true Saints on earth, who have not had as yet their finall change brought upon them, but are waiting for it, universally to be accomplished, at the end of the thousand years. At which period of time the Devil being let loose, and putting forth his last and utmost power doth play his game by transforming his party into the likenesse of the glorified body of Christ and his Saints, gathering into one counterfeit spiritual body, all his children and servants, whose coming then shall be with such power and signes and lying wonders, as were never put forth by him before. Then Christ, in a moment, shall finally perfect his glorious change upon all the Elect, and carry them all up with him to the mansions provided for them in his Fathers house; from whence he
sends down fire to devour all their adversaries, and the whole vi∣sible frame of the creation, casting the Devil into the Lake of fire where the BEAST and FALSE PROPHET are, and shall be tor∣mented for ever, day and night, by vertue of the just judgement of God, which then shall be revealed against the wicked, when the last JUDGEMENT shall be set, and there shall appeare a great white Throne, and one sitting upon it, from whose face the heaven and the earth shall flee away, so that there shall be no more place found for them, even, for that heaven and earth, wherein there had beene made a full restitution of all things, in those times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, during the reigne of the thousand years. Then the great and last universal day of judgement shall be brought forth, when the dead, small and great shall be made to stand up before God, and then the books will be opened, and another book will be opened, which is the book of life, and the dead shall be judged out of those things that are written in the books. And the sea shall give up the dead that are in it, and death and hell shall deli∣ver up the dead that are in them: and they shall be judged every man according to their works. To be more particular in describing the state of things, as to the change which does respect the whole creature, during this thousand years, will be needlesse; considering that the general expressions are so clear and full, that it shall be a glorious, pure, incorrupt state unto the whole creation, which shall then keep a holy Sabbath and Rest unto the Lord, a seventh part of the time of the worlds continuance, in which there shall be no sowing of the field nor pruning of the vineyard, nor exacting any labour from the creature, but what in voluntary service it shall per∣forme by way of homage and worship unto Christ, for the use of his Saints, during the thousand years, who are yet in their cor∣ruptible natural body, expecting their great change. Even so, come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. FINIS.
