W1029 R10904 12150264 55049
SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction OF THE KINGS of ENGLAND. WITH AN APPENDIX In Answer to part of a Late Book Inti∣tled, The KING'S Visitatorial Power Asserted. LONDON, Printed for William Battersby, at Thavies-Inn Gate in Holborn, and Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet-street. 1689.
To the Reader. A Late Declaration for Liberty of Con∣science, whereby the King Assum'd a Power of Suspending All Penal Laws in matters of Religion, The Ecclesiasti∣cal Commission, and suspending by vertue of it the Bishop of London, and depriving the Fellows of Magdalen-Colledge, occasioned a general dissatis∣faction in the Nation, and produc't some Pamphlets to justifie all those Proceedings, viz. One Entituled The King's Right of Indulgence in Spiritual Matters, with the Equity thereof Asserted; Another, A Vindication of the Proceedings of his Majestie's Ecclesiastical Commissioners against the Bishop of London and the Fellows of Magdalen-Colledge; A Third, The Lega∣lity of the Court held by his Majestie's Ec∣clesiastical Commissioners Defended; And last of all, The King's Visitatorial power assert∣ed. Perusing these Pamphlets, I could not but ob∣serve that one and the same inveterate error ran through them All, viz. Their ascribing to the King all such power, Jurisdiction and Authority, as by the Law of England and the very Original Consti∣tution of our Government, is lodged in the Legisla∣tive body of the Kingdom; and which the King is intrusted onely with the Administration of, and that in his Courts of Justice. I had attempted the an∣swering more than one of those Pamphlets, but I found that at every turn I met with that mistake in the Authors: who either through Ignorance or
Design or both, argue for the King's Prerogative from whatever they find to have been done in Great Councils of the Realm, or in Ordinary Courts of Ju∣stice: this one mistake, together with some rash and unwarranted expressions glean'd out of a few, late Writers, will be found to be the main strength of their Cause. I thought therefore that it might be a work of some use, especially at this time, to en∣deavour the removal of this rubbish, and the laying open in some measure the nature of the Ecclesiasti∣cal Jurisdiction of the Crown of England: both because we have lately seen how dangerous and fatal these mistakes are, and because although much has been written since the Reformation by Mr. Prynn, Sir Roger Twisden and others, to vin∣dicate the Ecclesiastical Supremacy from Forein Pretensions and Ʋsurpations, yet I know not whe∣ther any has yet taken in hand to give an Account of it, as stands by Law here at home. I do therefore offer these few Observations upon it to the publick, desiring the Judicious Reader's pardon for what slips and imperfections he may find herein; and have added in an Appendix an Answer to a Section in the Book concerning Visitatorial Power; wherein I hope the Reader will be satisfied how groundless and weak most of the arguments are, which our Prerogative-mongers pretend to draw from Antiquity. These following Observations are brought down no lower then to the latter end of King Henry the eighth's Reign. I design a Continua∣tion, with Remarks upon some Judicial Presidents, that have pass't since the Reformation, if these Papers are well received; if not, I shall save time and be eas'd of trouble.
SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Of the King's of ENGLAND. IT is obvious enough to judicious and intelligent Persons, by what unhappy Circumstances it comes to pass, that one great Mean of our Pre∣servation seems at present in a manner hid from our Eyes. But since Experi∣ence is said to be the Mistress of Fools, it is hoped that at least in this our Day we may see the things that belong to our Peace; Luke 19.42. and remember that the reason why the Ostrich leaveth her Eggs in the Dust, Job 39.13, 14, 15, 17. forgetting that the Foot may crush them, is, because God hath deprived her of Wisdom, neither hath he imparted to her Ʋnderstanding.
If Interest or Ambition have swayed with some of us, Prov. 22.28. as far as in them lay, to remove the antient Land-Marks which our Fore-Fathers have set; Josh. 7.19. let such give Glory to God, and take Shame to them∣selves. In the mean time, what effect soever these ensuing Papers may have upon our Friends, at least let our Adver∣saries see that there is a Remnant left in Israel, 1 Kings 19.18. that have not bowed their Knees to Baal. An Arch-Bishop may tell us, The Legali∣ty of the Eccle∣siastical Com∣mission defend∣ed. pag. 6, 7. that the King may take what Causes he pleases to determin, from the Determination of the Judges, and determin them himself; and that it is clear in Divinity, that such Au∣thority belongs to the King by the Word of God. But as we are not to receive even the Word of God it self, under the Sanction of a Human Law, from the Mouth of an Arch-Bishop, or from the whole Body of the Clergy; much less are we bound to submit to any Courtly Glosses upon that Sacred Text, concern∣ing the Power of Kings; whose Autho∣rity, as we suppose it to be grounded wholly upon Municipal Laws, so we know the Law to be a better Foundati∣on, and a better Security, than any ima∣ginary Authority pretended from Scrip∣ture.
And if the Defender would have observed what the Lord Coke in the Pre∣sence, and with the clear consent of all the Judges and Barons of the Exchequer, Coke 12. Rep. pag. 63, 64, 65. answered upon that occasion before the King himself, both from Reason and Au∣thority, he would have silenced the Arch-Bishops Divinity, and saved me the trouble of taking notice of that part of his Discourse. It was their Opinion, that the King could not in Person adjudge any Case: Which they confirm with such Reasons and Authorities from judi∣cial Records and Acts of Parliament, that it seems very imprudent in the Defender, to urge that as an Authority, which received so solid, so learned, and so honest an Answer. Judges and Serjeants may entertain themselves with what Discourse they please post prandium, Legality of, &c. defend∣ed. pag. 10, 11. Coke 12. Rep. pag. 19, &c. and in their moot∣ing upon one extrajudicial Point may talk of another by the by; and if one of the Company put this transient Dis∣course into Paper, so that afterwards it gets into the Press, Good God! what condition are we come into, when Table∣chat must be obtruded upon us for Law! To go a little further; Judges in
Courts of Justice may pretend to re∣solve what Points of Law they please; but if their Resolutions are not pertinent to the Matter depending before them in Judgment, and necessary for the decid∣ing it, such Resolutions go for nothing, because the Judges had no Authority so to resolve: And I am fully assured, that this Point, Legality of, &c. defend∣ed. Pag. 8.9. Coke 5. Rep. Cawdry's Case. viz. Whether any King or Queen of England for the time being might issue an Ecclesiastical Commission, such as, &c. by the Antient Perogative and Law of England, never yet came in que∣stion judicially before any Court what∣soever. The Case betwixt Cawdry and Atton turned upon this Point, viz. Whether the High Commissioners might deprive for the first Offence, whereas the Act of 1mo. Eliz. cap. 2. inflicts it only for the second? Pop. Rep. pag. 59, 60. And resolved that the Statute is to be understood, when they prosecute upon the Statute by way of Indictment, and not to restrain the Ecclesiastical Ju∣risdiction. What's this to the Question, Whether such a Commission might have been issued without an Act of Parliament impowering the Queen to issue it? Nor do the Judges in that Case, nor the Lord Coke in his double-tongued Re∣port
of it, nor the post prandium Judges and Serjeants so much as pretend to a∣ny manner of Authority for their Opi∣nion there delivered, that the King might grant such a Commission by his Peroga∣tive at Common Law: Nor do's the late Defender quote any antient Record, History, Maxim of Law, or any other Legal Authority, or Historical Proof whatsoever, to clear the Point: Nor will I reflect upon some Resolutions of Judges that have been in former times, or in this Age of ours; Ship-Money. which gained so little Credit upon their Authorities, that exemplary Punishments have and may be inflicted upon some of the Resolvers. But tho this Point be left so forlorn by the Defender, as having nothing to support it on his side, but an ipse dixit; and tho we live in an Age, in which (blessed be God) most Men have a bet∣ter Opinion of their own Understand∣ings, than to take things upon trust; yet, because this Question concerning the Legality of an Ecclesiastical Commissi∣on resolves it self into the mistaken no∣tion of a Personal unbounded Supremacy; and because some of our Clergy give us Schemes of Government, according to which this Commission is the most justifi∣able
thing in the World; I am desirous to offer a few Observations concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Kings of England; in doing of which, the only thing I aim at, is the putting others who are better qualified, and perhaps misinformed upon farther In∣quiries, if haply I may compass that. We are told that our Common Lawyers have often affirmed, Legality of, &c. defend∣ed. pag. 38.39. That whatever the Pope de facto formerly did within this Realm by the Canon Law, that of right belongs to our Kings: That on this ground it has been adjudged, That the Legislative Power in Matters Ecclesiasti∣cal is lodged in the King. The Pope made Laws for the Government of the Clergy, and so may the King; and so much Queen Elizabeth, as supreme Head of the Church of England, exercised, &c. And that the Power in the King in Matters Ecclesiastical, is too ample to be bounded by an Act of Parliament. But notwithstanding these and other Bravado's, we are told also, that the Acts of Parliament which restore the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown, are but Declarative, Vindication. pag. 6. Legality of, &c. defend∣ed. pag. 8. that they give no new Power, but recognize what always was de Jure the King's Right: Which
naturally sends us back to Antiquity, to enquire how the Supremacy was then managed and exerted, before a Forreign Power had made inroads upon it. They that affirm this or the other Act to be but Declarative, and that this or that may be done by the Common Law, always al∣ledge (if they intend to perswade) some Judicial or other President, some Re∣cord or other, some anciently received Maxime or Rule of Law: They that resolve without such grounds for their Resolution, set up for Law-makers and not Interpreters. Now it was to difficult matter to resolve that the Supreme Jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal, did originally belong to the Crown of Eng∣land. Every Chronicle Writer can tell us when the power of the Court of Rome prevailed, to lop off some of its Branches: And the Crown must needs have it before it could lose it. But whether our modern conceptions of the Supremacy are adequate to that Ancient Legal Supremacy at the Common Law, of which we agree the restoring of Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction by Act of Parlia∣ment to be but Declarative, is certainly worth their Enquiry, who pretending
that All Laws concerning it are but declarative, must either justifie that Position and other modern Ascriptions from Antiquity, or confess the vanity of them. The Ancient Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Kings of this Realm, was no personal Prerogative: But our Kings were Head of the Church as they were Head of the State, governing both by Laws made by the same Authority (if designed to be binding to all) and ad∣ministred in the same Courts, till King William the Conqueror's Reign, and from that time downwards, in the Spi∣ritual and Temporal Courts apart. All Matters whatsoever concerning Religion, Discipline, Ceremonies, with all Laws, Canons, and Articles what∣soever relating thereunto, by which the Laity were to be bound, were anciently Enacted by the same Authority that made our Temporal Laws: and with∣out such Authority are not binding to the Laity to this day, nor ever were. Nor has the King any power by the Law to impose any New Article, Cere∣mony, Practice, Rule, or Order what∣soever, upon the Clergy or any of them under any sort of Penalty, without an Act of Convocation at least.
In the first place I will give a few Instances before the entry of the Sax∣ons, by which it will appear in some measure how the Law stood in those days with respect to the Supremacy. In the Year 448, Germanus and Lu∣pus, two Learned Bishops, were sent hither out of France to suppress the Pelagian Heresie: Upon which occasi∣on a Synod was assembled at Verolam. Aderat Populus, expectabatur futurus Judex. Adstabant partes, &c. After a long debate Populus arbiter vix ma∣nus continet, Judicium clamore conte∣stando, &c. In this first Synod that we read of in England, the People were present, and were Judges; and by their determination a great Controversie of Religion was settled Vide Spelm. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 47, 48. An Account of this Council, and of the time when it was held. Bed. Eccl. Histor. Gent. Anglor. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. Thus it was in the first Christian Council that ever sate, viz. the 15th Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. After the matter had been debated, whether the be∣lieving Gentiles ought to be Circumcised, and to keep Moses his Law? verse 22d. It pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church to send, &c. And they wrote Letters after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren
send Greeting unto, &c. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, &c. So that the Laity as well as the Clergy had in this Council decisive Votes. And if it shall appear by what follows, that the People of this Nation never were, nor can to this day be bound by the settling or determining any point of Religion any where else than by themselves in Parliament; then at least the power of settling and determining Points of Do∣ctrine and Practice, either is no part of the King's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, or is not personal; But must be exert∣ed in Parliament. In the British times Bishopricks were conferred in Parliament. Petivit Rex [Arthurus] Eboracum, instantis Natalis Domini Festum celebraturus. Cum{que} urbem intrasset, visa Sacrarum Ecclesia∣rum desolatione, condoluit. Expulso namque beato Samsone Archiepiscopo, cun∣ctisque sanctae Religionis viris, Templa semi-usta ab officio Dei cessabant. Tan∣ta etenim Paganorum insania praeva∣luerat. Exin convocato Clero & Popu∣lo Capellanum suum Metropolitanae sedi Destinat. Ecclesias usque ad solum diru∣tas renovat: Atque Religiosis caetibus Virorum & Mulierum exornat. Galfrid
Monumeth. lib. 9. cap. 8. Here King Arthur in an Assembly of his Clergy and People makes an Arch-Bishop, restores ruinous Churches, and replenishes Mo∣nasteries with Monks and Nuns. If a Judge or a Lawyer should say, tho' he took along with him the concurrence and assistance of his Parliament, yet he might have done all this by his Prero∣gative without them; I must insist up∣on proof of such Prerogative. If a Di∣vine tells me, that by the Law of God such Prerogatives belong to Princes, for that the Power of the Prince is Superior to that of the Law, not given by Law, but from God; then cannot I compre∣hend how our Churchmen can value themselves upon their being Established by Law, if they acknowledge a Power upon Earth above the Law. But if it shall appear by what follows, that till the Reign of King John, Arch-Bishopricks, Bishopricks, and other Ec∣clesiastical Dignities were conferred in and by the Parliament; then will a common mistake appear to run through many of the Books of Law; wherein we frequently read, Cr. Jac. 553, 554. Ro. rep 2d. part. 130. Sir John Dav. rep. that before his time they were donative, and conferred by the King Per Traditionem annuli baculi:
Confounding the Election with the In∣vestiture, and ascribing that to the King solely, which was the Act of the King and Parliament. Bishop Ʋsher in his Antiqu. p. 63. Britan. Eccles. Gives us other Instances of Bishops Elected in Parliaments or Great Councils. Postquam praedicti senioris (Germanus & Lupus) Pelagianam Hae∣resin extirpaverant, Episcopos pluribus in locis Britanniae consecraverunt. Super omnes autem Britannos dextralis partis Britanni beatum Dubricium summum Doctorem à Rege & ab omni Parochia Electum Archiepiscopum consecraverunt. Hac dignitate ei à Germano & Lupo da∣ta, constituerunt ei Episcopalem sedem, concessu Regis Maurici, Principum, Cleri & Populi apud Podium Lantavi. Addit Galfridus ab eodem Dubricio Ʋr∣bis Legionum tunc Archiepiscopo Arthu∣rum Regni Britannici diademate insigni∣tum; eundem{que} (Dubricium) in Curia illa magna, quam apud urbem legionum Arthurus tenuisse dicitur, in eremiticam vitam anhelantem, sese ab Archiepisco∣pali sede deposuisse. Eodem tempore, Davide procurante, Me∣neviam Metropolitanae sedis factam esse translationem, refert Giraldus Cambrensis:
& postea in Breviensi Synodo confirma∣tam. In illâ scil. Synodo magnâ omnium E∣piscoporum & Abbatum totius Cambriae, nec non & Cleri Universi, una cum Po∣pulo Collecta propter Pelagianiam Haere∣sin, (that Doctrin it seems revived, tho it had been publickly over-ruled,) ubi & unanimi totius Conventus tam Electione quam Acclamatione, quanquam invitus & renitens David in Archiepiscopum est sub∣limatus. Usher Britan. Antiqu. pag. 64. Now if in the times of the Britains the People assembled in the Common Councils of the Nation, had decisive Votes in Controversies of Religion, in the E∣lection of Arch-Bishops and Bishops, if by their Authority ruinous Churches and Houses of Religion were repaired and furnished with Monks and Nuns, Bishops Sees founded and translated; if in those Assemblies Resignations of Bi∣shopricks were made, &c. Then we may reasonably conclude, that the Supremacy, commonly so called, was lodged and vested just where the Legislative Power in Temporal Matters resided; to wit, in the King's, together with their Com∣mune concilium Regni. But the first is true, as appears by the foregoing Autho∣rities. Ergo, &c.
Nor was it peculiar to this Nation, V. Dr. Burnet's History of the Rights of Prin∣ces in the dis∣posing of Ec∣clesiastical Be∣nefices, &c. to have the People chuse Bishops. It was the Universal Practice of all Christen∣dom for many hundred years, as is noto∣riously known to all that read any Hi∣story. In the second place I will exhibit a very few Instances of the Saxon Times, during the Heptarchy. The Reader may consult many more at his leisure. No marvel if we find this People sub∣mitting to nothing in Religion, but what was ordain'd by themselves. Tacitus de mo∣ribus Germa∣norum. cap. 11. De majo∣ribus omnes was one of their Fundamen∣tal Constitutions before they came hi∣ther; and it is continued here to this day. And Matters of Religion were a∣mongst their Majora, even before they received Christianity. Accordingly Edwin King of Northum∣berland, Vid. Bed. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 2. Cap. 13. Hun∣tington. Lib. 3. Pag. 188. habito cum sapientibus concilio, renounced his Paganism, and he and they embraced the Christian Faith. This is de∣scribed in Bede and Huntington, to have been done in such an Assembly of Men, as the Parliaments of those days are ge∣nerally mentioned to consist of. After the Christian Religion had spread amongst the Saxons, the Bishops and Clergy frequently held Synods without
the Laity for Church-Visitation, Vid. Spelm. Conc. ubique. and made constitutions for the Regula∣tion of the Clergy, which they obeyed and submitted to by reason of their Oath of Canonical Obedience: But, as nothing transacted in those Assemblies of the the Clergy bound the People, so can no instance be produced of the Clergy's being bound by any Act of the King, not assented to in the Provincial Sy∣nods of those Times. But the Clergy themselves, both as to Doctrin, Disci∣pline and Ceremonies, were bound by the publick Laws of the Kingdom, en∣acted in the Great Councils of the Na∣tion. In the year 673, Matt. West. pag. 122, 123. Concilium Herudfor∣diae celebratum est sub initio primi anni Lotharii Regis Cantiae, Praesidente Theo∣doro Cantuariae Archiepiscopo. At this Council says Matthew of Westm.) were present Episcopi Angliae, & Reges, & Mag∣nates Ʋniversi: Where Theodore propo∣sed decem capitula out of a Book of Ca∣nons before them All; which were there Assented to, and Subscribed. The first was concerning the observation of Ea∣ster; the ninth, that the number of Bi∣shops should be encreased crescente fide∣lium numero. The rest were concerning
Bishops Bishopricks, Monks, Marriage, Fornication, &c. Spelm. Council. Vol. 1. pag. 152, 153. The Presence of the Bishops and all the Magnates, makes this Assembly ap∣pear to have been a Parliament of those Times. What Orders of Men were comprehended under the word Magna∣tes, is not material to our present pur∣pose. The Great Councils that made the Laws, and without whom no Laws were made, are frequently so described by our antient Historians. In the year 692, Ina King of the West Saxons, enacted many Constitutions for the Government of the Church, as, De formula vivendi Ministrorum Dei. De baptizandis Infantibus. De opere in die Dominico. De immunitate fani, &c. The Preface to which Laws runs thus; Ego Inas Dei beneficio Occiduorum Saxonum Rex, suasu & instituto Cenredi Patris mei & Heddae & Erkenwaldi Episcopo∣rum meorum, Omnium Senatorum meo∣rum, & natu Majorum sapientum Populi mei, in magnâ servorum Dei frequentiâ, religiose studebam tum animorum nostro∣rum saluti, tum communi Regni Nostri conservationi, ut legitima nuptiarum fae∣dera, &c. Here the King, his Bishops,
all his Senators, the Natu Majores & Sapientes of his People (which are De∣scriptions of the Laity in Parliaments of those Times,) and a great number of Gods Servants (by which the Clergy are meant) make Ecclesiastical Laws. This was a Parliament, as appears, not only by the presence of the Laity, but by ma∣ny Temporal Laws enacted at the same time. Spelm. Conc. Tom. 1. Fol. 182, 183, &c. In the year 694. Concilium Magnum Becanceldae celebratum est, Presidente Wi∣thredo Rege Cantiae, necnon Bertualdo Archiepiscopo Britanniae, cum Tobiâ Epis∣copo Roffensi, Abbatibus, Abbatissis, Praes∣byteris, Diaconibus, Ducibus, Satra∣pis, &c. All these pariter tractabant, anxie examinabant de Statu Ecclesiarum Dei, &c. Here the King's Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Matters exerted it self, not Personally, but in this Great Council. They do all enact, Statuimus, decernimus, praecipimus. For when the King himself is spoken of, the Singular Number is used, Nullus unquam habeat licentiam accipere alicujus Ecclesiae vel Familiae Monasterii Dominium, quae à me∣ipso vel antecessoribus meis, &c. Spelm. Conc. Pag. 189, 190. A Council was held at Berghamjtede,
Anno 5to. Withredi Regis Cantiae, i. e. Anno Christi 697. Sub Bertualdo Archi∣episcopo Cantuariensi, praesentibus Gyb∣mundo Episcopo Roffensi & omnibus Ordi∣nibus Gentis illius, cum Viris quibusdam militaribus. In quo de moribus cavetur ad Ecclesiae cognitionem plerumque perti∣nentibus. These Ordines Gentis illius seem by the Preface to these Laws, to be meant of the Ordines Ecclesiastici Gen∣tis illius; but withal, that they cum vi∣ris utique militaribus humanissimè & communi Omnium Assensu has Leges decrevêre. Spelm. Conc. 194. So that these Ecclesiastical Laws were enacted by the assent of the viri Militares, as well as of the King and the Clergy. A Council was held at Cloveshoe sub Cuthberto Doroberniae Archiepiscope, prae∣sentibus (praeter Episcopes, Sacerdotes & Ecclesiasticos quamplurimos) Aedilbal∣do Merciorum Rege cum suis Principibus & Ducibus, Anno Dom. 747. In quo de∣cernebatur de unitate Ecclesiae, de Statu Christianae Religionis, & de Concordiâ & pace, &c. Spelm. Conc. 242, &c. In the Year 787, Concilium Legati∣num & Pananglicum was held at Cal∣chyth, in which many Canons were made de fide primitùs susceptâ retinendâ, aliis∣que
ad Ecclesiae regimen pertinentibus. This Council was held Coram Rege Aelf∣waldo & Archiepiscopo Eanbaldo & om∣nibus Episcopis & Abbatibus Regionis, seu Senatoribus & Ducibus & Populo terrae; who All confirmed them. After these Ecclesiastical Laws had been thus enact∣ed by Aelfwald King of Northumberland, the Legates carried them into the Coun∣cil or Parliament of the Mercians, where the glorious King Offa, cum Senatori∣bus Terrae, una cum, &c. convenerat. There they were read in Latin and Teutonick, that All might understand, and All pro∣mised to observe them; and the King and his Princes, the Archbishop and his Companions, signed them with the Sign of the Cross, Spelm. Conc. Vol. 1. Fol. 291, 292, &c. Many Instances of this kind might have been added, as particularly that of the Council at Hatfield, An. 680. wherein the Canons of five General Councils were received; which was a Witena Gemote, a Conventus Sapientum: But I spare time, & am endeavouring only to open a Door. By these Instances it is apparent, that the same Body of Men that enact∣ed the Temporal Laws of the Kingdom, did in the very same Councils make Laws
for the Government of the Church. In∣deed, the whole Fabrick of the English Saxon Church was built upon Acts of Parliament; nothing, in which the whole Community was concerned, was enacted, decreed or established, but by that Authority. For whose reads impar∣tially the Histories of those times, and compares them with one another, will find, that as most of those Antient Coun∣cils, commonly so called, were no other than (to speak in our Modern Language) Parliaments; so not any thing whatso∣ever in Religion, obligatory to the Peo∣ple, whether in matters of Faith, Disci∣pline, Ceremonies, or any Religious Ob∣servances, was imposed, but in such As∣semblies as no Man can deny to have been Parliaments of those Times, that has not a Fore-head of Brass. For the Presence not of the King's only, but of the Duces, Principes, Satrapae, Populus terrae, &c. shews sufficiently, that neither the Kings, nor the Kings and the Clergy, without the concurrent Authority of the same Persons, that enacted Temporal Laws, could prescribe General Laws in matters of Religion. I do not dispute what Orders of Men among the Saxons were described by Duces, Principes, &c.
but sure I am, that they were Lay-men; and as sure, that they assented to and confirmed those Laws, without whose as∣sent they had been no Laws: So that the Kings of those Times had no greater Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Mat∣ters than in Temporal. The tearing the Ecclesiastical Power from the Temporal, was the cursed Root of the Kingdom of Antichrist: It was that that mounted the Papacy. Those Powers never were distinct in England, nor most other Nations, till that See got the ascendant. And it is a strange incon∣sistency to argue one while, that what∣ever the Pope de facto, formerly did by the Canon Law, that of right belongs to our Kings; and another while, that the several Acts that restore the Ecclesiasti∣cal Jurisdiction to the Crown, are but De∣clarative. It shews how little the Su∣premacy is understood by Modern As∣serters of it, and how little they are acquainted with the antient Govern∣ment of England. The Third Period of Time to be con∣sidered, shall be from the uniting of the several Kingdoms of the Saxons under one Monarchy, to the Norman Con∣quest.
In this Division we find a Letter from Pope Formosus to King Edward the El∣der, wherein the Pope complains, that the Country of the West-Saxons had wanted Bishops for seven whole Years: Upon the receipt of this Letter, the King calls Synodum Senatorum Gentis Anglo∣rum, who being assembled, Singulis tri∣bubus Gervisiorum (West-Saxonum) Sin∣gulos constituerunt Episcopos, & quod olim duo habuerunt in quinque diviserunt. Spelm. Conc. 387, 388. The Ecclesiastical Laws of King Ed∣ward the Elder and Guthrune the Dane, begin with this Proaemium: Haec sunt Senatus consulta ac instituta, quae primò Aluredus & Guthrunus Reges, deindè Edwardus & Guthrunus Reges, illis ipsis temporibus tulêre, cum pacis faedus Daci & Angli ferierunt. Quaeque postea à sapi∣entibus (Tha Witan) saepiùs recitata at∣que ad Communem Regni utilitatem aucta atque amplificata sunt. The Titles of some of these Laws are, De Apostatis, De Correctione Ordinatorum, (i.e.) Sacris initiatorum, De incestu, De jejuniis, &c. All of Ecclesiastical Cognisance, or at least of After-times so reputed. These are called Senatûs Consulta, than which a more apposite Word could scarce have
been used for Acts of Parliament, and were assented to by the Wyten; from which Word the Saxon term for Parlia∣ments, Wytena Gemot, is derived. Spelm. Conc. 390, &c. A Concilium Celebre was held under King Athelstane, in quo Leges plurimae, tum Civiles, tum Ecclesiasticae, statueban∣tur. It's true, the Civil Laws are o∣mitted; and Sir Henry Spelman gives us an account only of the Ecclesiastical Laws made at this Assembly, which conclude Decreta actaque haec sunt in cele∣bri Gratanleano Concilio, cui Wulfelmus interfuit Archiepiscopus, & cum eo Op∣timates & Sapientes ab Athelstano evo∣frequentissimi. Spel. Conc. p. 396, &c. King Edmund held a Council An∣no 944, where many Ecclesiastical as well as Secular Laws were made, as, De vitae castitate eorum, qui Sacris ini∣tiantur, De fani instauratione, De peje∣rantibus, De iis qui barbara factitârunt Sacrificia, &c. And this Council is ex∣pressed to have been Conventus tam Ec∣clesiasticorum, quam Laicorum; celebris tam Ecclesiasticorum quam Laicorum frequentia. Spelm. Conc. p. 419, &c. I will give no more instances before the Conquest, tho numbers are to be
had which lye scattered up and down in the Monkish Histories; and being compared with one another, will suffi∣ciently disclose what I assert. For some∣times Laws that concern Temporal Af∣fairs, as well as Ecclesiastical, are said to have been made by such or such a King in one Author; which very Laws another Historian tells us, were made in the Great Council; which yet they have no Uniform, appropriated Expres∣sion, Term or Denomination for: Just as we in common Parlance say, King Edward the Third, or King Henry the Seventh, made such or such a Law; which yet every Man understands to have been made in Parliament, because else it were not a Law. That Bishopricks and other Ecclesia∣stical Dignities, For the Electi∣on of Wulstan Bishop of Worc. Temp. Edw. Confess. v. Matt. Paris. p. 20. That in his E∣lection there concurr'd Ple∣bis Petitio, Vo∣luntas Episco∣porum, Gratia Procerum, Regis Authoritas. were in the Saxon times conferred in Parliament; we have the further Testimony of Ingulphus, who was Abbot of Crowland in King William the Conquerors Reign. A multis annis retroactis nulla erat electio Praelatorum merè Libera & Canonica: Sed omnes Dignitates tam Episcoporum quam Abba∣tum Regis Curia pro sua complacentia conferebat. Ingulph. Hist. Fol. 509. b.
Concerning Appeals in Ecclesiastical Causes, I shall say more in the next Di∣vision: Only here it will be proper to insert, that the Constitutions of Cla∣rendon, one of which is expresly con∣cerning Appeals, are said to contain the Avitae Consuetudines Regni. Malmesbur. de gestis Ponti∣ficum Anglor. Lib. 3. And William of Malmesbury relates a remarkable Sto∣ry of Wilfrid Archbishop of York, whose Archbishoprick being divided by the Common Council of the Northumbrian Kingdom, into four Bishopricks; he appealed to the Pope, who wrote Letters to the King in his behalf; upon the re∣ceipt of which, the King told the Le∣gates, Se quidem Legatorum Personis ho∣norem ut parentibus deferre; caeterùm assensum legationi omninò abnuere, quod esset contra rationem homini jam bis à toto Anglorum Concilio damnato, propter quaelibet Apostolica Scripta, communicare. This shews, that tho a Prelate thought the Pope's Authority might stand him in stead, yet the Nation acknowledg∣ed no Foreign Jurisdiction, and that the Supreme Judicature here from which the Archbishop appealed, was that of the Parliament and not of the King.
The Power of dispensing with Laws concerning Church Matters, could not be a Personal Perogative in the King in these days; for Dispensations were not born till Two hundred years after the Conquest; as will appear hereafter. The fourth Period of Time shall be from the Norman Entrance, down to the Reign of King John: In this time it was, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Crown suffered a Rape, and that four very considerable Branches were cut off. By this time the Pope had shaken off his Dependance upon the Empe∣ror; the Laity were excluded from vo∣ting in his Election: And the Game plaid at Rome, was, by setting the Clergy in a state of Exemption from Temporal Laws, as to their Persons and Possessions; and excluding the Laity, King's them∣selves as well as Parliaments, from Ec∣clesiastical Power, to govern Mens Con∣sciences first, and then all they had, di∣rectly or indirectly. But this was a work of Time, and could not be effected but by degrees. King William the First, made one step this way, by dividing the Spiritual and Temporal Courts; without which per∣haps it had been impossible for the
Canon Law to have broken in upon us. But yet in his time, tho he was cer∣tainly in the sense of his Great Council, Lambard de priscis Anglo∣rum Regibus. p. 138, 142. & Hoved. p. 345. as much Head of the English Church as a∣ny of his Predecessors were, or his Suc∣cessors are by Law; for he was decla∣red to be Vicarius summi Regis, ad hoc constitutus ut Regnum terrenum & Popu∣lum, Domini & super omnia, Sanctam ve∣neretur Ecclesiam ejus, & regat, & ab in∣juriosis defendat, & maleficos ab eâ evellat, & destruat, & penitus disperdat: Quod nisi fecerit, nec Regis nomen in eo consta∣bit. Yet in his time (I say) a Personal Supremacy, independant of the Great Council of the Nation, was never pre∣tended to: For he reformed the Eccle∣siastical Laws and Canons of the Church, no otherwise than de Communi Consilio Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Seld. Not. & Specileg. ad Eadmer. p. 167 Lamb. de pris∣cis Anglor. Le∣gib. p. 158. Abba∣tum & omnium Procerum Regni sui, &c. Nor was this the Constitution of the English Church only: Ordericus Vita∣lis, Folio 552. gives us a remarkable In∣stance out of Normandy of the same plat∣form there. Rex Guillielmus in Festo Pentecostes Anno ab Incarnatione Domini 1080. apud Illebonam resedit, ibi{que} Gulielmum Archi∣episcopum
& omnes Episcopos & Abbates Comites{que} cum aliis Proceribus Norman∣niae simul adesse praecepit: ut Rex jussit factum est. Igitur 8. Anno Papatus Do∣mini Gregorii Papae 7. Celebre Concili∣um apud Jullam bonam Celebratum est. Et de Statu Ecclesiae Dei totius{que} Regni Providente Rege cum Baronum suo∣rum consilio utiliter tractatum est. Then he inserts the Laws made there, all concerning Ecclesiastical Matters. In the next Reign, that of King William Rufus, there was a Schism in the Popedom between Clement and Ʋr∣ban: Anselme whilst he was Abbot of Bec in Normandy, had Sworn Obedi∣ence to Ʋrban: and being Elected Archbishop of Canterbury, desired leave to go out of the Realm to fetch his Pall from him. This the King opposed (for that Ʋrban had not been received for Pope in England) and told the Arch∣bishop, he could not keep his Fealty to him (his Prince) saving the Obedience, which he owed to Ʋrban. Anselme up∣on this referred himself to the Judg∣ment of the Archbishops, Bishops, Pro∣ceres, &c. in Parliament, who accord∣ingly were Convened at Rochingham, Ex Regia Sanctione; and the matter
discussed before them. If the Arch∣bishop had had any Notion of a Personal Supremacy in the King, separate from, and independant of the Great Council of the Realm, it had been absurd in him not to acquiesce in the King's Judgment, but Appeal to a Parliament. If the King himself had been possessed with an opinion of any Legislative or Supreme Judicial Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, lodged in his Person, he would never have consented to call a Parliament to determine a cause which himself, as far as in him lay, had determined already. The History may be read at large in Eadmer. Hist. Nov. Lib. 2 page 24, 25, 26, &c. In King Henry the First's time, Anno Dom. 1102. A Council was held at London, in which at Anselm's request to the King, the Laity were present, Quatenus quicquid ejusdem Concilii au∣thoritate decerneretur utrius{que} Ordinis curâ & sollicitudine, ratum servaretur. Sic enim necesse erat. Quum multis re∣tro annis Synodali culturâ cessante, viti∣orum vepribus succrescentibus, Christia∣nae Religionis fervor in Angliâ nimis te∣puerat. This is a clear Testimony that the Assent of the Laity was necessary to
the Enacting such Ecclesiastical Laws, as they were to be bound by: And that neither the King by his Prerogative, nor the King and the Clergy could impose a∣ny Constitutions upon them without their Assent, Eadmer. Histor. Nov. Lib. 3. Will. Malmesb. De Gest. Pontif. An∣glor. Lib. 1. p. 129. But tho' the King could not make Laws Himself, could he not permit a Legate to exercise his Legatine Power here? King Henry the Eight indeed per∣mitted Wolsey to exercise his Office here, and afterward brought the whole Clergy under a Premunire for submitting to him, and owning his Authority. But the Statutes of Praemunire were then in being. Could not our ancient Kings, that Reigned before any Act of Parliament now upon Record was ex∣tant, they that must needs have had all the inherent Prerogatives that are invol∣ved in the Notion of Imperial Soveraign∣ty, Doctor Hicks. they that understood their power somewhat better perhaps than it is now understood, because they lived nearer to the creation of it, and exer∣cised it before it was sophisticated; could not they (I say) by vertue of their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, permit the
Popes Legate to domineer a while with∣in the Realm? Why, King Henry the First was very well satisfied that himself had no such power: For when Petrus Monachus Cluniacensis was sent hither by Calixtus the Pope, to exercise his Office of Legate within this Realm, the King would not suffer him so much as to Lodg upon the Road in any Religious House: And when he came into his presence, and had told him his Errand, Rex obtensâ expeditione, So Anno Dom. 1225. Magister Otto, Domini Papae nuncius, in Angliam ve∣niens, promag∣nis Ecclesiae Rom. negotiis, Regi literas praesentavit, sed Rex cognito li∣terarum teno∣re, Respondit, quod solus non potuit definire, nec debuit, ne∣gotium quod omnes Clericos & laicos totius Regni tange∣bat. Matth. Pa∣ris. p. 325. in quâ tunc erat (nam super Walenses eâ tempestate exer∣citum duxerat) dixit se tanto negotio o∣peram tunc quidem dare non posse, cum Legationis illius stabilem authoritatem non nisi per conniventiam Episcoporum, Abbatum & Procerum ac totius Regni Conventum roborari posse constaret. E∣admer Hist. Nov. p. 138. And so the Legate went back as he came. He tells it him as a known, truth (Constaret) that the giving him leave to exercise his Office here, was too great a work for him to go about (as his affairs then stood) for that it could not be done, but in and by the Parliament. If the Par∣liament had not a share in the Ecclesia∣stical Jurisdiction, how came their As∣sent to be necessary? If they had, when
did they lose it? If the King's Suprema∣cy was personal, why might not he (if he would) have licensed him himself? If it was not personal then, but is so now; then do not assert over and over that the late Acts of Restitution are all declarative, and give no new power. If the Pope's power de facto exercised, be translated to the King, shew the con∣veyance. This same King in a Letter to Pope Paschall about Investitures, tells him that if himself should be so mean (in tantâ me dejectione ponerem) as to part with them, yet Optimates mei, imò to∣tius Angliae Populus id nullo modo pate∣retur. Decem Scriptores 999. The Investitures were performed by the King in person, but subsequent to an E∣lection by the Parliament; and yet the Parliament were so concerned in them, that they were not, nor could be part∣ed with, but by an Act of Parliament: Which accordingly ensued, notwith∣standing the King's resoluteness at first; for when Anselme came from Rome, the King was perswaded to with-draw his claim, and it was granted in a Parlia∣ment held at London; Astantibus Archi∣episcopis, caetera{que} multitudine maxima
Procerum & Magnatum, ut ab eo tempo∣re in anteâ nullus electus per dationem Ba∣culi pastoralis vel Annuli de Episoopatu vel. Abbathia investiretur per Regem vel aliam quamcun{que} personam secularem. Ibid. Et Sim. Mon. Dun. 228, 229, 230. But tho' Investitures were lost, Ele∣ctions remained as they were (at least of right) till King John's time. Concessit Rex Johannes libe∣ras in omnibus Ecclesiae Angli∣canae electiones, Matth. Par. p. 262, 263. The Charter it self, which was cer∣tainly an Act of Parliament. See Presidents of many Bishops and Abbots Elected in Parliament in the Reigns of King Stephen and King Henry the Se∣cond. In Spelm. Conc. Second. Part. p. 42 & 119. Innumerable are the instances of Ca∣nons and Constitutions made in the Reigns of the first Norman Kings in their Great and General Councils, concerning Churchmen and Church Matters: Which any one may have recourse to in Spelm. Concil. Eadmer. Hist. Mat. Paris. and o∣thers. In the beginning of King Henry the Second's Reign, there was another Schism in the Popedom between Ale∣xander and Victor, upon which a great Council of Clergy and Laity out of the Kingdoms of England and France met to determine, whether of the two should
be acknowledged Pope within those Realms. The matter was debated in Conspectu Regum & Praesulum, coram u∣niversâ, quae convenerat, multitudine Cleri & Populi. And Alexander was received for Pope, and the Schismaticks Excommunicated. The History is in Nubrig. Lib. 2. c. 9. Pursuant to which President, when there hapned in King Richard the Se∣cond's time to be another Schism in the Papacy, and Act. of Parliament was made, to declare who should be received Pope in England; and a Law made for punish∣ing any of the Clergy that should ac∣knowledge the other Pope. Vide Catt. Records, Ann. 2. Rich. 2. p. 180. What thing can be more purely Ec∣clesiastical, than the determining who it lawfully chosen to be the Ʋniversal Bishop? And yet neither the King, nor the King and the Clergy would settle the point without the Laity. By what has been said it appears, That the Ancient Supremacy, of the Kings of England in Ecclesiastical Matters, was a very different thing, not so much from what it is now by Law, as from what it is apprehended to be by many amongst us. The Error is fundamental, and
consists in ascribing Things, Acts, Powers, &c. to the King in person, which belonged to, were done and ex∣ercised by him no otherwise, than in his Courts. Appeals are said to have been to the King at Common Law: And so an Abridgment of Law has it; so Fox, Rolls, cap. 8. vid. Chron. Gerv. p. 1387. Speed, and others. And the Authority quoted is the Assize of Clarendon, which in one Chapter directs that Appeals shall be from the Bishop to the Arch∣bishop; from the Archbishop to the King. But another Act of Parliament made about 12 years after clears the matter. Sir Roger Twisden. For in the mean time Becket was Mur∣dered, and King Henry the Second be∣ing put to hard Pennance for it, part of his satisfaction was, that he should a∣gree not to hinder Appeals to Rome in Causes Ecclesiastical, Mat. Paris p. 126. yet so as the party going was to give Security that he would not endeavour Malum Regis nec. Regni. But within Four Years af∣ter, the Nation Assembled in Parlia∣ment would not quit their interest: But the Assize of Clarendon was again renewed, and a more close expression used concerning Appeals, and such per∣sons as had prosecuted any; Justitiae
faciant quaerere per consuetudinem terrae, illos qui à Regno recesserunt, & nisi redire voluerint infra terminum nominatum, & stare Juri in Curiâ Domini Regis, utla∣gentur, &c. This Gervas. Dorobern. (who well understood it) tells us, was but renewing the Assize of Clarendon: Rex Angliae Henricus, convocatis Regni Pri∣moribus apud Northamptoniam, reno∣vavit Assizam de Clarendon. Here we see, that such as were aggrieved by a Sentence given by the Archbishop, were, pursuant to the Statutes of Clarendon, not to appeal to Rome, but to the King: Which the Statute of Northampton, made but twelve years after, explains to be to the Curia Regis. By this, and by what has been said before upon this Subject, it appears, that the ultimate Appeal in Causes Ecclesia∣stical as well as Temporal, was to the Curia Regis or Parliament; and that, as the same Assemblies made Laws both for the Government of Church and State, so the Supreme Judicature Ecclesiastical and Temporal, was one and the same. After that time Appeals were some∣times prosecuted in the Court of Rome, that Statute and the Assize of Clarendon notwithstanding; but this was only by
connivance. At last, when the Pope got the better of King John, who lay under great Disadvantages, as all our Historians tell us; and that in his Mag∣na Charta these words were inserted: V. Matth. Pa∣ris. Pag. 258. Liceat unicuique de caetero exire de Reg∣no nostro, & redire salvò & securè per terram & aquam, salvâ fide nostra, &c. Then Appeals to Rome multiplyed for e∣very little Cause, and the Master-piece of Papal Encroachments was wrought effectually. But it cannot be too often incul∣cated, that the Laws of Clarendon which gave the ultimate Appeal to the Curia Regis, as aforesaid, are so often stiled the Avitae Consuetudines Regni: Which shews sufficiently where the Supreme Judicature resided, according to our old Constitution. It appears by what has been said, that King William the Conqueror was acknowledged to be God's Vicar, ap∣pointed to govern his Church; and yet, that neither He nor his Successors pre∣tended to make any Ecclesiastical Laws to bind the whole Kingdom, but in a General Council of the Kingdom: That the King's Supremacy was so far from be∣ing Personal, that an Archbishop did as
it were, appeal from himself in Person to himself in Parliament, and that the King submitted and owned the Jurisdicti∣on: That the same Archbishop under∣stood the Law to be, that the Assent of the Laity was necessary to the making of Ecclesiastical Laws, by which they were to be bound: That the King could not of his own Authority, permit a Legate to exercise his Office within the Realm: That leave to exercise his Of∣fice could not be given him but in Par∣liament: That the King could not part with Investitures if he would, without the Assent of the People: That Parlia∣ments determined, who ought to be received as Pope within the Realm: That Appeals were to the Curia Regis, by the Avitae Consuetudines Regni: And that Bishops were elected in Parliament. Whence I conclude, that a Personal Supremacy has no warrant from An∣tiquity. The clearing the Antient Supremacy and stating the Matter aright, is of great use in this present Age; in which, as one sort of Men over-stock us with Jure Divino's, so the Lawyers accost us often with the Common Law, and the King's Perogative at Common Law; and
that this and the other Act is but de∣clarative of the Common Law, and gives the King no new Power. And yet, as the Divines have little or no ground for their Jure Divine's; no more have the Lawyers in these Matters of the Supremacy, any thing to warrant their late Hyperbole's, but Shadows and Imaginations: They found a Power exercised by the Pope, which they had good reason to think injurious to the Crown; they had heard, that from the beginning it was not so: And thus far they were right. But how it was ex∣ercised before the Court of Rome and the Clergy invaded it, they had forgot; it having been usurpt upon Four hundred years before they were born. For it is in vain to look for a true Scheme of the Antient Legal Supremacy at a nearer distance than from the Reigns of King John, King Richard the First, King Henry the Second King Stephen, and so backwards. And yet we find no Resolutions concer∣ning what the Supremacy at Common Law was, and wherein it consisted, grounded upon Authorities of those Times, which only can afford a right Idea of it: Nor indeed can any thing
be found in our Old Books of Law, as Bracton, Glanvil, Britton, Fleta, the Mirrour, nor in the Antient Histories of those Times, that warrants such an Ecclesiastical Supremacy in the Crown as we now a-days dream of; no Supre∣macy in Ecclesiastical Matters, other than in Temporal (which in a Nation of Saxon descent, could never exclude the Ordines Regni) having ever entred in∣to the thoughts of Man, as lodged in the King's Person, or any Temporal Prince. The Pope pretended to it, (but our Kings never did:) Only where the Constitutions of Clarendon mention Appeals from the Archbishop to the King, they take up with the Letter, and examine no farther: As some Philoso∣phers have ascribed Phaenomena in Na∣ture, which they could give no rational Account of, to occult Qualities; so the Lawyers resolve puzling Questions, by telling us Magisterially, that so and so it was at the Common Law, as occult in these Matters to many of them, as any Secret of Nature to the Philo∣sophers. That Branch of 1o. Eliz. which unites Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown, appears by the Journal of the
House of Lords to be in the sense of the Parliament, V. Sir Simon Dewes. that past it but Declara∣tive: But that all other Acts and Clau∣ses of Acts which were pass'd at the time of the Reformation, with respect to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction are so too, I can't believe, till I see Autho∣rities of Antiquity proving it. Those particular Branches of the Su∣premacy, concerning the making of Bi∣shops, Appeals, &c. with some Temporary Laws, now expired, as they were guided and limited by positive Laws made in King Henry the Eighths time, and King Edward's, and revived in Queen Eliza∣beth's; so they are grounded upon those Laws only, and have no other Founda∣tion, so far forth as they are Personal. For the Antient and Legal Supremacy having been so long overshadowed, as to be almost forgot, they did not upon the Restitution of it, return all things to their former estate. They prescribed another course for Appeals, than had ever been known in our Law before: They did not resume the Elections of Bishops to the Parliament, who had had them formerly, but leaving a shew of an Election in the Consistory, they au∣thorize the King to name the Man. The
power of making Laws and Constituti∣ons Ecclesiastical for the Government of the whole Kingdom, we find no Re∣sumption of, no declarative Act con∣cerning it, other than in the Recital of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. For that Point had never been gained from them. From the Reign of King Henry the Second downward, to King Henry the Eighth, we find little or nothing of any Canons and Constitutions for the Govern∣ment of the Church, made with assent of the Laity: For the Clergy had now established their Exemption, and had set up Imperium in Imperio: But ma∣ny Acts we meet with, setting Bounds to their Encroachments, and limiting their Jurisdiction, and all made by the same Authority that enacted the Temporal Laws of the Kingdom: And therefore the Supremacy, so far forth as it remained in the Crown, was not Personal, but exerted it self in the Legislative Body of the Kingdom. For the Parliaments, tho in a great measure Anti-Christ-ridden, did not even in these Times, so far forget the old Constitution, as to let the Church and Religion run adrist for all them, and be wholly managed either by
the King or their Ghostly Fathers. The Writs of Summons to Parlia∣ments both antient and modern, have this special Clause in them: Pro quibusdam arduis & urgentibus nego∣tiis, nos, Statum & defensionem Regni Angliae & Ecclesiae Anglicanae concer∣nentibus, quoddam Parliamentum, &c. So that the State of the Church is as properly within the care of a Par∣liament, as the State of the Realm. And in the Prologues to most Acts of Parliaments, the Honour, the Pro∣fit, the Reverence, the Benefit, the Advancement of Holy Church, is men∣tioned, as the End of their Meeting, no less than the Safety and Defence of the Realm. Accordingly innumerable Acts of Parliament were made, and are now in print, concerning Church-men, the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Matters of Religion, &c. As the Statutes of Mort∣main, Circumspecte agatis, the Statute upon the Writ of Consultation, Arti∣culi Cleri, several Statutes entituled Pro Clero, the Statutes of Premunire and Provisors, concerning Priests and Salaries, against Appeals to Rome, prohibiting Bishops to meddle in Mat∣ters
of the Peace, removing Bishops from Temporal Offices, restraining the Popes Exactions and Usurpations, and Encroachments of the Canons upon the Civil Jurisdiction, freeing Clergy Men from Arrests during the time of Di∣vine Service, for the Instruction of the People by Preaching, concerning Pri∣ors dative and removable, &c. Exemp∣ting of Pilgrims from the Punishment of Vagrants, Hunting on Holy-days, Con∣secrations of Church-yards, and Appro∣priations of Churches and Alms, con∣cerning Provisions of Exemptions from regular or ordinary Obedience granted to Religious Persons from Rome, the Sup∣pression of Sectaries, Heretical Books, Schools, Working on Holy-days, Entring into Religion without Consent of Pa∣rents, Tythes, Chalices, Ornaments of the Church, &c. So that whatever remain∣ed of the Supremacy, remained in the Legislative Body of the Kingdom, and was there exerted. During this time the question was not, Whether the King could by his Prerogative impose Laws upon the Clergy, or in concurrence with the Clergy conclude the Laity (these are Notions started up since the Reformati∣on,
which has brought to light in Poli∣ticks, as well as Religion, Mysteries that had been hid from Ages) but whe∣ther the Spirituality or State Ecclesiasti∣cal, of whom the Pope was now de fa∣cto the Head, could bind the Laity, without their Assent in Parliament. This was a fifth Encroachment, which was attempted by introducing the Canon Law, and drawing to them∣selves by a side wind all Temporal Ju∣risdiction in ordine ad Spiritualia. But the design was never brought to per∣fection; such was the Genius of a Go∣vernment built upon this noble Foun∣dation, that no man ought to be bound by a Law that he does not consent to, that muffled up in Darkness and Super∣stition, as our Ancestors were, yet that Notion seemed to be engraven in their Nature, born with them, sucked in with their Mothers Milk; the impressi∣on was so strong, that nothing could deface it: Accordingly we often find them protesting that this and the o∣ther thing did not bind them, because it was done without their Assent; Rott. Par. 40. Edw. 3. nu. 7, 8. Rott. Parl. 5 Ed. 3. art. 46. Rott. Parl. 6 Rich. 2. nu. 62. that they would not be bound by any Or∣dinances of the Clergy, without their Assent: That they would not subject
themselves to the Prelates, no more than their Ancestors had done. And in the 25. H. 8. cap. 21. They tell the King, That this his Grace's Realm, re∣cognising no Superiour under God but on∣ly his Grace, hath been and is free from subjection to any Man's Laws, but only to such as have been devised, made and ordained within this Realm, for the wealth of the same, or to such other, as by sufferance of your Grace and your Progenitors, the People of this your Realm have taken at their free Liberty, by their own consent, to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long use and custom to the observance of the some, not as to the Laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to the accustomed and anoient Laws of this Realm, originally establisht as Laws of the same, by the said sufferance, consent, and custom, and none otherwise. By those other Laws, not ordained within the Realm, they mean the Canon Law. For the Clergy extended the bounds of it daily, and always got ground. But the Sufferance and Cousent here spoken of, was not a bare tacit Submission to it by the People, but a Consent in Par∣liament: Where they not only received
foreign Canons into the body of our Municipal Laws, but also from time to time came to a Compremise with the Clergy, with respect to several Mat∣ters, of which the Clergy claimed Cog∣nisance, as appertaining to what they called. Spiritual Jurisdiction, First (For our Records of Parliament, yet extant, go no higher) by the Statute De Cir∣cumspecte agati, but that would not sa∣tisfie them. In King Edward the Se∣cond's time they got Jurisdiction in ma∣ny other Causes, as you may see in the Statute of Articuli Cleri. And in King Edward the Third's time they went yet farther; Nine new Points were gained, 25 Edw. 3. by the Statutum pro Clero. The Conusance of these Matters, which by these Statutes were left to the Clergy, belonged before to the King's Courts, as part of the Common Laws of the Realm, by which the King govern∣ed his People, and which he admini∣stred in his ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary proceedings of Law. And therefore before they were allowed to the Cognisance of the Ecclesiastical Courts by Act of Parliament, Prohibi∣tions were granted.
The King's Right of Indul∣gence, page 28. The granting of Prohibitions in these Cases, is urged by a late Author, as an instance of the King's Ancient Supremacy, and urged amongst other things, to prove a right in the King's Person to dispense with Civil Laws a∣bout Ecclesiastical Matters. Whereas Prohibitions were granted then, no o∣therwise than as they are now, to Spi∣ritual and other Courts, when they ex∣ceed the bounds of their Jurisdiction. When the Spiritual Jurisdiction broke in upon the Temporal, and the Ecclesi∣astical Courts assum'd an Authority in Cases not allowed by the Laws of the Realm, to be within their Cognisance, this was an Offence against the King's Crown and Regality (as the Statutes of Premunire run) and Contra Coronam & Dignitatem Regis, as the forms of some Prohibitions in the Register run, and yet the Kings Temporal Jurisdiction was not personal. In this period of time it was that Dispensations brake forth. They began in King Henry the Third's time, which is not old enough to give the Crown a title to them by Prescription; for it is within the time of Memory. The Hi∣story of their Nativity may be read in
Matth. Paris. The Pope led up the Dance, taking upon him by Non Obstan∣te's to revoke his own Grants, and to dispense with the Canons upon a pre∣tence of some plenitudo potestatis or other, derived to him, as Pastor of the Ʋniversal Church by Succession from St. Peter. And Secular Princes Writ after his Copy in taking upon them to dis∣pence with their own Penal Laws. Which before were religiously observed as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, Sir John Da∣ries Case, De Commenda. which could not be dispensed with. And therefore a Canonist says that Dis∣pensatio vulnerat jus commune. And a∣nother says that all Abuses would be re∣formed, Si duo tantum verba, viz. Non Obstante, non impedirent. And Mat∣thew Paris, Anno Dom. 1246. having re∣cited certain Decrees made in the Coun∣cil of Lyons, which were beneficial to the Church of England, Sed omnia haec & alia (says he) per hoc repagulum, Non Obstante, infirmantur, Dav. Rep. 69, 70. &c. Secular Princes, it seems, had not learnt that part of their Prerogative, till they were taught it by their Ghostly Father. Nor could they well have any notion of it, since as Sir Henry Spelman tells us in his Glossary, tit. Assisa, Reges &
Proceres in condendis Legibus earum o∣lim jurabant observantiam. Hence Bra∣cton calls the Laws of England Leges Juratas. Now the taking of an Oath to observe them, and the being allowed a power by Law to break them, seem to me very inconsistent things. It's ob∣servable to this purpose what Bracton tells us concerning the Laws of Eng∣land, Legis vigorem habet quicquid de Consilio & Consensu Magnatum & Reipub∣licae Communi sponsione, authoritate Re∣gis sive Principis praecedente, justè fuerit definitum & approbatum. So that a Sta∣tute of the Kingdom of England is an Agreement betwixt all parties concern∣ed: Which for any one of them to set aside, is against Natural Reason. And Fortescue who was Lord High Chancellor of England in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, cannot be sup∣posed to have known of any such Prero∣gative in the King, by the account that he gives us of the Solemnity of Enacting Laws here in England, and of the course that was to be taken when any of them were found by Experience to be inconvenient. Pag. 39, 40. Statuta tunc Angliae bona sunt necne, solum restat exploran∣dum. Non enim emanant illa Principis solùm voluntate, ut Leges in Regnis, quae
Regaliter tantum gubernantur, ubi quan∣do{que} Statuta ità constituentis procurant commodum singulare, quod in ejus subdito∣rum ipsa redundant dispendium, & ja∣cturam. Quando{que} enim inadvertentiâ Principum hujusmodi, & sibi consulenti∣um inertiâ, ipsa tam inconsultè eduntur, quòd corruptelarum potiùs quàm Legum nomina mereantur. Sed non sic Angliae Statuta oriri possunt, dum nedum Prin∣cipis voluntate, sed & totius Regni assensu ipsa conduntur, quo Populi laesuram illa essicere nequeunt, vel non eorum commo∣dum procurare. Prudentiâ enim & Sa∣pientiâ necessariò ipsa esse referta putan∣dum est, dum non unius, aut centum solùm consultorum virorum prudentiâ, sed plus∣quam trecentorum electorum hominum, quali numero olim Senatus Romanorum re∣gebatur, ipsa edita sunt. Et si Statuta haec tanta solemnitate & prudentia edita, efficaciae tantae, quantae conditorum cupi∣ebat intentio, non esse contingant; con∣cito reformari ipsa possunt, & non sine Communitatis & Procerum Regni illi∣us assensu, quali ipsa primitùs emanarunt. A Power in the Prince to suspend Laws by whole-sale, is altogether needless in a Constitution wherein Concitò reforma∣ri possunt, by the same Authority that
made them. In Forty days time a Par∣liament may be summoned to consent to what alteration they shall think fit to be made. And it is the constant pra∣ctice observed to this day, that at the beginning of every Parliament a Com∣mittee is appointed, to consider what Laws are inconvenient, and have need to be altered, continued or repealed. If the Parliament shall not think fit to make any alteration, the Laws must re∣main in force, and ought to be put in execution, for there can be no Reforma∣tion of them made Sine Communitatis & Procerum assensu. And the reason is, because by such assent Primitus emanâ∣rant. The Repealing of a Law, or, which is all one, a total Suspension of a Law, is making a new Law, whatever quibbles and foolish distinctions may be pretend∣ed to be made in the Case. Now the Laws of England do not oriri Principis voluntate, and rherefore a Repeal or to∣tal Suspension of a Law grounded upon the voluntas Principis only, is not war∣ranted by that model of the English Go∣vernment, that Fortescue presents us with. He that asserts such a Power in the King to Suspend Laws Enacted by the Consent of the whole Kingdom, turns
the Government of this Nation topsie turvie: Lord Chief Justice Herbert in Sir Edward Hales his Case. And makes the Laws of Eng∣land indeed the King's Laws; contrary to the style of all Antiquity, of all Histo∣ry, and contrary to the forms of Legal Proceedings even to this day; Lex terrae, and Leges terrae, Leges & Consuetudines Angliae, Leges Angliae, Statuta Angliae, & Assiza Regni, are known and com∣mon Expressions: Leges Regis sounds harsh: the phrase is uncouth, because the Notion included in it, is false; nor was ever thought of by our Fore∣fathers. The Statutes of Praemunire and Pro∣visors, and the method of dispensing with them before the Reformation, will abundantly disclose to us where the power of dispensing with Acts of Par∣liament, even in Ecclesiastical Matters, was vested. In the 16th Year of King Richard the Second, the Archbishop of Canterbury declared the Causes of the Parliament: The second of which was, to provide some remedy touching the Sta∣tute of Provisors, for eschewing debate betwixt the Pope and the King, and his Parliament, Cot. Records, p. 346.
King Richard needed not have put himself to the trouble of convening his Parliament, in order to provide a Re∣medy in such case, if by the Law, as it was then understood, he might by his Perogative have dispensed with the Sta∣tutes of Provisors, and all other Laws concerning Ecclesiastical Matters. In the 17th. R. 2. It was enacted in Par∣liament, that Tydeman, late Abbot of Beawliew and Elect of Landaffe, by the Popes Provision, should enjoy the same Bishoprick, notwithstanding any Act, so always as this be taken for no Example. Ibid. p. 354. So that tho Tydeman had a Dispensation from the King, he durst not trust to it, without getting his Ti∣tle to his Abby confirmed in Parliament. The like President occurs in 18 H. 6. The Archbishop of Roan had the Profits of the Bishoprick of Ely granted to him by the Pope, and confirmed in Parlia∣ment. Ibid. p. 623. But in the Fif∣teenth year of King Richard the Second, the Commons for the great Affiance which they reposed in the King, grant∣ed, that the King by the Advice of his Lords, might make such Toleration touching the Statute of Provision, as to him should seem good until the next
Parliament, so as the Statute be repealed in no Article thereof, nor none disturb∣ed of his lawful Possession: So also, as they may disagree thereto at the next Parliament, with this Protestation, That this their Assent being in truth a Novel∣ty, be had or taken for no Example. Ibid. p. 342. And in the Sixteenth year of the same King, the Commons grant to the King, that he, by the Ad∣vice of his Lords, should have power to moderate the Statute of Provisions, to the Honour of God, and saving the Rights of the Crown, and to put the same in execution, so as the same be declared in the next Parliament, to the end the Commons may then agree to the same or no. Ibid. pag. 347. The occasions of these Concessions were the then circum∣stances of the Kings Affairs, who was often at enmity with France, and made advantage of the Pope's Friendship, which he obtained by this, and other Methods of the like kind. The like In∣stances occur in the same Collection, p. 362, In the Twentieth year of the same King. p. 393, In the First year of King Henry the Fourth. p. 406, In the Second year of King Henry the Fourth.
From hence it appears, that those Times had no notion of any absolute Power, any inseparable Perogative in the King himself of dispensing with those Laws without his Parliaments consent: For they grant the King such Power, and that but for a time, and so as they may disagree to it at their next Meeting, and with a protestation that this their Assent be not drawn into Example, and declare their giving the King such Power to be a Novelty: And all this they do with a saving to the Rights of the Crown; which let them (if they can) explain the meaning of, who imagine that the unit∣ing of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown of England, by the Statute of 1 Eliz. is a vesting of it in the King's Person. In this same interval of Time, the Statutes of Praemunire were enacted, viz. 27 Edw. 3. cap. 1. and 38 Edw. 3. cap. 1. 16 R. 2. and some others, with which how far it was lawful for the King to dispense, take an account from what hapned to Cardinal Wolsey in King Hen∣ry the Eighths time. He had a Com∣mission from the Pope to exercise his Office of Legate here in England; he had the King's leave so to do; he exer∣cised
that Office many years without controul, and was submitted to almost universally. I remember but one Ob∣struction offered to have been made to him, and that was by Hunne a Merchant-Taylor in London. The History of which may be read at large in Fox, and Dr. Bur∣net's History of the Reformation: And yet the whole Clergy were afterwards attainted of a Praemunire, for submitting to such Foreign Authority, as the same Authors, the Lord Herbert, and others abundantly testifie. But Stephen Gar∣diner's Letter to the Duke of Somerset concerning that Matter, as it is very remarkable for many other Passages, so this ensuing part I think proper to be here inserted, because it will save me the trouble of relating the History, and of endeavouring to open the Reasons of that Proceeding. Now whether the King may command against an Act of Par∣liament, and what Danger they may fall in that break a Law with the King's consent? I dare say, no Man alive at this day, hath had more Experience with the Judges and Lawyers than I: First I had experience in my old Master the Cardinal, who obtained his Legacy by our late Sovereign Lord's request at
Rome, and in his sight and knowledge, occupied the same with his two Crosses and Masses born before him many years; yet, because it was against the Laws of the Realm, the Judges conclud∣ed it the Offence of the Praemunire, which conclusion I bare away, and take it for the Law of the Realm, because the Lawyers so said, but my Reason digested it not. The Lawyers for con∣firmation of their Doings, brought in a Case of the Lord Tiptoft, as I re∣member, a jolly Civilian; he was Chancellor to the King, who (because in the Execution of the King's Commis∣sion he had offended the Laws of the Realm, he suffered on Tower-Hill,) they brought in many Examples of ma∣ny Judges that had Fines set on their Heads in like Cases, for doing against the Laws of the Realm by the King's Commandment, and then was brought in the Judge's Oath, not to stay any Pro∣ces or Judgment for any Commandment from the King's Majesty: And one Ar∣ticle against my Lord Cardinal was, that he had granted Injunctions to stay the Common Law, and upon that occa∣sion Magna Charta was spoken of, and it was made a great matter the stay of
the Common Law; and this I learned in that Case, sithence that time being of the Council, when many Proclamati∣ons were devised against the Carriers out of Corn; at such time as the Trans∣gressors should be punished, the Judges would answer, It might not be by the Laws, whereupon ensued the Act of Proclamations, in the passing of which Act many liberal Words were spoken, and a plain Proviso, that by Authority of the Act for Proclamations, nothing should be made contrary to an Act of Parliament or Common Law. A known and notorious Judgment has been lately given in favour of a Dis∣pensation, with an Act of Parliament, Sir Edward Hales's Case. in a cause of extraordinary great conse∣quence; and the Court grounded them∣selves upon a Case pretended to have been adjudged in the Second year of King Henry the Seventh, concerning Sheriffs. It had been enacted by several Statutes, That no Sheriff, Ʋnder-Sheriff, &c. should abide in his Office above one whole year, as by the 14 Edw. 3. cap. 7. and the 42 Edw. 3. cap. 9. And in King Richard the Second's time, it was en∣acted, That no Man who had been Sheriff of any County by one whole
year, should be another time chosen into the said Office within three years ensuing, &c. Notwithstanding which Statutes, the contrary was often practi∣sed by colour of Dispensations with those Laws: Which Dispensations of what validity they were in Law in the Judg∣ment of Parliaments, may be seen by divers Instances in Cotton's Abridgment of the Records of the Tower; V. Cott. Abr. p. 387. Anno 1. H. 4 One Artic. of Im∣peachment a∣gainst King Rich. 2. some of which are very untoward. To obviate the mischief of these Non Obstante's, the Parliament in the Twenty Third year of King Henry the Sixth, enacts, That the said Statutes above recited, shall be duly observed, and inflicts the Penalty of 200 l. upon any Sheriff, Under-Sheriff, &c. that shall hold the said Office longer than a year: And farther enacts, That e∣very Pardon thereafter to be made for such Offence, or Occupation, or for∣seiture of Sums before recited, shall be void, and not available; and that all Patents made, or to be made of any of the said Offices, for term of Years, for term of Life, or in Fee Simple, or in Fee Tail, shall be void, and of no va∣lue by the same Authority; any Clause or Word of Non Obstante, in any wise
put, or to be put in any such Patents notwithstanding. And moreover, that whosoever shall take upon him to have or occupy the said Office of Sheriff by vertue of such Grants or Patents, now to be made for term of Years, for term of Life, Fee Simple, or Fee Tail, shall stand for ever, and at all times disabled to bear the Office of Sheriff within any County of England. That that Statute was ever after look∣ed on as a Law binding to the King, and restraining any Non Obstante's in such case for the future, will appear by considering some Statutes subsequent to the Law it self, both before and af∣ter the pretended Judgment in 2 H. 7. The first is that of 28 Hen. 6. cap. 3. Whereby it is ordained and granted that the Sheriffs, &c. which were for the year last passed, shall be quit and discharged against our Soveraign Lord the King and all his Liege People, of the Penalties and Forfeitures of 200 l. which they or any of them might fall in, or incur by force of the said Statute made in the 23d. Year of the said King, as for the occupation or exercise of the Office of Sheriff longer than by a Year, &c. So that such Sheriffs
as had exercised their Office longer than a Year, contrary to the said Statute of 23 Hen. 6. could not be safe by any Dispensation granted by the King, with∣out an Act of Parliament to indemnifie them against him and his People. In the Eighth Year of King Edw. 4. cap. 4. the Parliament reciting the Sta∣tute of the 14th of King Edward 3. and of the 42 of the said King (above-menti∣oned) and that of the 23th of King Hen. 6. concerning Sheriffs, and that contra∣ry to the said Ordinances divers Sheriffs, &c. in the First, Second, and Third Years of the said King Edward the 4th. that then was, the Realm then being in great trouble, and the Peace not fully e∣stablished, did occupy over a Year, the said King by Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the Request of the Commons ordained and established, That no manner of persons be∣ing Sheriffs, Ʋnder-Sheriffs, &c. in the said Three first Years of his Reign or a∣ny space within the same for the occupati∣on of the Office of Sheriff, &c. in the said Three Years, or any part or space within the same, or of the same, or any of the same above a Year, altho their Occupati∣on were against the Ordinances above re∣cited,
be damnified nor in any wise hurt by any Action, Pain, or Forfeiture in the same Ordinances or any of them com∣prised, &c. Yet nevertheless the said Or∣dinances, and every of them to remain in their strength and force against all She∣riffs, Ʋnder-Sheriffs, &c. for their oc∣cupation all other Years than the said Three Years as aforesaid. If the King's Pardon could have saved them harm∣less, the Act of 26 H. 6. notwith∣standing, which provided that all such Pardons should be void, then these Of∣fenders had not need to have recourse to an Act of Parliament for their Secu∣rity. These two Laws subsequent to the said Act of 23 H. 6. cap. 8. and prior to the said pretenced Judgment of 2 H. 7. shew it to have been the Sense of the Parliaments and People of those times, that all Pardons and Dispensati∣ons with the said Statute were nullities in Law. Whether they received any fur∣ther light as to the King's Prerogative in Dispensing with it, notwithstanding all the caution that the Wisdom of a Nation could use in such a case, from the pretended Opinion of the Judges in that Case we may guess at, by obser∣ving
the Act of 6 H. 8. cap. 18. Which Act, reciting the Act of 13 Ed. 3. and of the 23 of King H. 6. and the Forfei∣tures and Penalties thereby imposed, and that every Pardon for such Offence should be void, and all Patents with Non Ob∣stante's of the said Statute void in like manner, does yet Enact, Establish and Ordain, that the Ʋnder-Sheriffs, and other Officers of Sheriffs in the Shire of the Town of Bristol, may continue to oc∣cupy their Offices in like manner as the Ʋnder-Sheriffs, and other Sheriffs Of∣ficers in London do, without any Penal∣ty or Forfeiture for the same, the said Acts or any other Act to the contrary not∣withstanding. By this Act it appears that in the Judgment of that Parliament a Patent to exercise the Office of Sheriff longer than a Year with a Non Obstante of the Sta∣tute of 23 Hen. 6. cap. 8. was a Patent void in Law: For they recite the Act, not only as an Act in force, but that par∣ticular clause in it, whereby Non Ob∣stante's to it are declared to be void, as a reason why the Under-Sheriffs of Bri∣stol could not be safe in acting contrary thereunto; without Assent of Parlia∣ment, which was therefore had for their
Security, and would have been need∣less, if a Patent with a Dispensation had then been accounted legal. These Acts of Parliament might be thought sufficient to invalidate the Au∣thority of that Judgment, if any such had been given; but the truth of it is, there never was any such Judgment given, as that the King might by his Perogative dispense with the said Sta∣tute of 23 Hen. 6. by which it is ex∣presly enacted, That no Non Obstantes in such case shall be available. The Question indeed was upon the validity of a Grant made by King Edward the Fourth, of the Shrivalty of Nor∣thumberland to the Earl of that Coun∣ty, for his Life: And the Judges held the Patent to be good. But they did not ground their Judgment upon the Non-Obstante therein; for there is not a word spoken of the Non-Obstante, but by Rocliffe (who was then second Baron of the Exchequer,) after the Court had agreed the Patent to be good, By reason of a Proviso in an Act of Resumption. But I shall forbear meddling any more with that Case, for that a very good Account of it will be shortly given by another Hand; as
also of the five Points pretended to have been agreed by the Judges in Sir Ed∣ward Hales's Case, and a sufficient An∣swer to that slight Pamphlet, entitu∣led, A short Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hales's Case: Written by Sir Edward Herbert in Vindication of himself. Indeed Non Obstante's, as they were first invented and introduced by Popes between the years of our Lord 1200 and 1250, V. Matth. Paris. p. 810, 811. Ibid. p. 817, 818. p. 854. p. 875. and afterwards inserted into the King's Patents and Protections in imitation of them by King Henry the Third; so they were never made use of by any of our Kings to elude Acts of Parliament, till after the Statute of Mortmain, which was made in the 7th. of Edw. 1. Which first attempt, as it must needs be illegal, First, because contrary to Magna Charta, cap. 36. (which is the first Law that prohibits Alienations in Mortmain, and was not only sworn to, when enacted and con∣firmed, but is also by many after Acts of Parliament, ordered to be observed in all Points, as by 2 Edw. 3. cap. 1. 4 Edw. 3. cap 1.14 Edw. 3. cap. 1. and innumerable others.) Secondly, Because
when the Clergy petitioned King Ed∣ward the First, for a relaxation of it: His Answer was, Hen. Knighton, p. 2502. in Dec. Script. that he could not do it, because it was enacted de Consilio Magnatum suorum, & sine eorum Consilio non erat revocandum. And Thirdly, Because the sole Act of the King could not with any colour of Reason prejudice the Rights and Interest of the Mesne Lords; yet such was the misguided Piety and Devotion of those Times, that such Non Obstante's were obtained, as appears by the Patent and Charter Rolls in the Tower, from 8 Edw. 1. downwards, abounding with special Licences to pur∣chase and hold Lands, &c. Statuto de terris & tenementis in manum mortuam non ponendis non Obstante. And yet were not these Licences accounted legal, or the Clergy safe in purchasing Lands, Rents, Advowsons, &c. by virtue of them, till it was enacted in Parliament, Anno 18 Edw. 3. cap. 3. That if Prelates, Clerks beneficed, or Religious People, which have purchased Lands, and the same have put to Mortmain, be impeach∣ed upon the same before our Justices, and they shew our Charter of Licence and Process thereupon, by an Inquest of Ad quod damnum, or of our Grace, or by
Fine, they shall be freely let in Peace, without being further impeached for the same purchase: And in case they cannot sufficiently shew, that they have entred by due Process, after Licence to them grant∣ed in general or in special, that they shall well be received to make a convenient Fine for the same, and that the Enquiry of this Article shall wholly cease, accord∣ing to the accord comprized in this Par∣liament. But Non Obstante's with the Statute of Mortmain, having been introduced, as aforesaid, tho undeniably illegal at first, and gaining afterwards a counte∣nance from this Act of Parliament, have given occasion to the dispensing with o∣ther Acts of Parliament. Tho at first they were very rare, and seldom occur in the Old Books; and tho they are more frequent in the New, and that Judges and Courts of Justice have in∣vented little Distinctions betwixt malum in se and malum prohibitum; betwixt Laws made pro bono publico, and Laws of a more private regard; betwixt Laws in which the King's Profit and Interest is concerned only, and Laws in which the Subject has an interest, and is intituled to an Action, as pars grava∣ta;
yet the Cases that have hitherto come before them judicially, have been Questions upon Dispensations granted to particular Persons, to exempt them prohîc & nunc, from incurring the Pe∣nalty of such or such a Law. A Dis∣pensation suspending the Effect of a Law at once, has been so far from receiving any countenance from Courts of Justice hitherto, Thomas and Sorell's es. of Wine-Liceneer. that it has always been a fa∣tal Objection against any particular Dis∣pensation, if it was such as consequen∣tially quite eluded and frustrated the whole Law: For that such a Dispen∣sation is in effect a Repeal of the Law. It would be endless to launch out in∣to a Discourse upon such particular Dis∣pensations as have been granted, and ei∣ther allowed or condemned: The prin∣cipal Cases in our Modern Books, in which the conceits of latter times are display'd, are these following: Coke's 8th. Report, the Princes Case. The Case of the City of London. 11th. Re∣port, the Case of the Taylors of Ipswich, and the Case of Monopolies. Dyer, 52. a. 54. a. 224. b. 270. a. 303. a, b. Plo. Com. Grendon against the Bishop of Lincoln. Vaughan's Reports; Thomas and
Sorell's Case. V. Roll's Abridgment: Second Part, p. 179, 180. Lett. Y. Co. 12th. Report. p. 18, 19. Sir John Da∣vie's Reports. Le Case de Commenda. p. 68, &c. Moor's Reports, p. 244, 245, &c. cs. 384. But how correspondent the reason of some of these Judgments is to the sense of former Parliaments, and consequen∣tially to the Judgment of the whole Na∣tion, and the very Constitution of this Government, take a hint from a notable Record in the Fiftieth Year of King Ed∣ward the Third, whereby it appears, That Richard Lyons Merchant of Lon∣don, was impeached and accused by the Commons, of many Deceits, Extor∣tions, and other evil Deeds, commit∣ted by him, against our Lord the King and his People, as well in the time that he had been belonging to the House and Council of the King as otherwise, during the time that he was Farmer of the Subsidies and Customs of the King; and more especially, for that the said Richard, by Covin had between him and some of the Privy Council of our Lord the King, for their singular Profit and Advantage, had procured and gotten many Patents and Writs
of Licence to be made, to carry great Faith and Credit, whereby Skins, Wool and other Merchandizes, were trans∣ported otherwise than to the Staple of Calice, against the Ordinances and Defences made in that behalf concerning the same before time in Parliament. He was charged with other particular Crimes; to some of which he offered to make a Defence, but to others, and this amongst the rest he made no answer: Wherefore the said Richard was a ward∣ed to Prison during the King's plea∣sure, and distrained to Fine and Ran∣som according to the quantity of his Trespass, and that he should lose his Freedom of the City of London, and be no more in Office under the King, and to incur other Penalties and Forfei∣tures; as may be seen at large in the Record printed by Mr. Selden, in a Book entituled. The Priviledges of the Baro∣nage of England. pag. 34, 35, 36, &c. So that Licences for the shipping of Wool, contrary to an Act of Parliament, tho mentioned by Rocliffe in the Book of King Henry the Seventh, as legal, and grantable by the King with a Non Obstante, and countenanced sufficiently by latter Judicial Authorities. Vide
Dyer, 52. a, 54. a, &c. Yet appeared otherwise to antient Parliaments; and if the Judgment of a Parliament be of greater Authority than that of a Court in Westminster-Hall, or indeed than that of all the Judges put together, and if Judicial Presidents do not make the Law, but ought to declare it only; then is the Legal Perogative in dispensing with Acts of Parliament much straiter, if any at all, than modern Opinions would repre∣sent it to us. And that Parliamentary Presidents are of the highest Authority in this Nati∣on, will appear by considering, that in former Times it was very frequent with the Judges in Westminster-Hall, if any Case of Difficulty came before them, e∣specially if it depended upon the Con∣struction of an Act of Parliament, to be so cautious of making any new, un∣warranted Presidents, that they frequent∣ly adjourned the Matter, ad proximum Parliamentum. By the Statute of Westminster the Se∣cond, made Anno 13. Edwardi primi; cap. 23. It's enacted, That Quotiescun∣que de caetero evenerit in Cancellaria, quod in uno Casu reperitur breve, & in consimili casu, cadente sub eodem Jure,
& simili indigente Remedio, non reperi∣tur, concordent Clerici de Cancellariâ in brevi faciendo, vel atterminent queren∣tes in proximum Parliamentum & escri∣bantur Casus, i quibus concordare non possunt, & referant eos ad proximum Parliamentum. My Lord Coke in his Second Institutes, pag. 407. tells us, That before this Act the Justices did punctual∣ly hold themselves to the Writs in the Register, because they could not change them without an Act of Parliament: And pag. 408. That Matters of great Diffi∣culty were in antient Times usually ad∣journed into Parliament, to be resolved and decided there. And that this was the antient Custom and Law of the Kingdom, Bracton bears witness; Si a∣liqua nova & inconsueta emerserint, quae nunquam priùs evenerunt, & obscurum & difficile sit eorum judicium, tunc ponan∣tur judicia in respectu usque ad Mag∣nam Curiam, ut ibi per Concilium Curiae terminentur: And hereof the Lord Coke says, There are infinite Presidents in the Rolls of Parliament, and quotes in his Margent many Presslents out of the Year Books. Observable to this purpose is the Statute of 14 Edw. 3. cap. 6. which reciting that divers Mis∣chiefs
have hapned for that in the Chan∣cery, King's Bench, Common Bench and Exchequer, Judgments have been de∣layed, sometimes by Difficulty, and some∣times by divers Opinions of the Judges, and sometimes for some other Cause: It is assented, established and accorded, That from henceforth at every Parlia∣ment shall be chosen a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons, which shall have Commission and Power of the King, to hear, by Petition delivered to them, the Complaints of all those that will com∣plain them of such Delays, and they shall have power to cause to come before them at Westminster, or elsewhere, the Tenor of Records and Processes of such Judgments so delayed, and cause the same Justices to come before them, which shall be then present, to hear the cause of such Delays: Which Cause and Reason so heard; by good Advice of themselves, the Chancellor, Treasurer, the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, and other of the King's Council, as many, and such as they shall think conveni∣ent, shall proceed to take a good Ac∣cord and make a good Judgment. So that our Parliaments of antient Time looked upon the Judges, not as abso∣lute
Oracles of the Law, but as Men that were both liable to Mistakes, and under the Regulation and Direction of Parliaments, even in their Ordinary Proceedings. The Nation did not so far intrust them, as they themselves would persuade us of late. In the Three and thirtieth of H. 6. a Question arose in the Exchequer Cham∣ber, Whether a Record then and there certified as an Act of Parliament, were really an Act of Parliament or no? Fortescue who gave the Rule, says, They would be well advised before they annulled an Act of Parliament; and the Matter was adjourned to the next Parliament, that they might be certi∣fied by them of the certainty of the Matter. 33 Hen. 6. Fol. 18. Indeed the Question, Whether such or such a Record certified, were an Act of Parliament or no, may seem too high for modest Judges to take upon themselves the Resolution of? (Tho no∣thing can be too high nor too difficult for such Judges to determin, who are wise enough to declare Acts of Par∣liament void.) Co. 8. Rep. Fol. 118. a. Moor's Reports, pag. 828. But what shall we say of them in 40 Edward 3. who because the Statute of 14 Edw. 3. cap. 6. had
impowered them to amend the mispri∣sion of a Clerk, in writing a Letter or a Syllable too much or too little, not only made a Question, Whether they might amend where there was a Word wanting, but went to the Parliament to know the Opinion of them that made the Law? See the Story in Coke's 8 Report, 158. a. So sacred were Acts of Parliament accounted in those days, and so little was the Au∣thority of the Judges in Westminster-Hall; or rather of so great Credit and Authority were the Resolutions of Judges in those days, when they were wary and cautious of making Alterations, and in difficult Matters consulted their Superiors. Other Ex∣amples of Adjournments ad proximum Parliamentum, may be seen in Cotton's Abridgment of the Records in the Tower. But that which surprizeth us is, That all our Judges since the Re∣formation, should have attained to such an omniscience in the Law, that I think I may confidently affirm, there has not been an Adjournment, ad proxi∣mum Parliamentum propter difficultatem, these Hundred and fifty Years last past. Sure I am, that no President
of any such thing appears in our mo∣dern Books of Law. And yet Cases of as great moment, concern and conse∣quence to the Government and the whole Nation, have come in question within that space of time, as ever did or could in former Ages. But there is a Notion broached a∣mongst us, that the Kings of England have greater Power and larger Preroga∣tives in Ecclesiastical Matters, than in Temporal, and that by vertue of their Ecclesiastical Supremacy they may dis∣pense with such Acts of Parliament, as concern Religion. But they that say so, do not consider, that before the Reformation, the Kings of England had much less power in Ecclesiastical Mat∣ters than in Temporal, and therefore they cannot have greater now, unless some Act of Parliament give it them. And therefore this power of dispensing with Acts of Parliament in Matters of Religion, must be given by some Acts of Parliament since the Reformation; or else the King has it not. And admit for the present their Hy∣pothesis, who would invest the King with whatever power the Pope de facto exercised here: Yet that will not serve
the turn, for as much as the Pope him∣self, whatever power he might claim, and attempt to exercise, yet was never allowed a power to dispense with Acts of Parliament concerning Ecclesiastical Matters, even when it was full Sea with him here in England. Take one remarkable President out of Matt. Paris, p. 699. that in the Year of our Lord 1245. The King, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Great Men of the Realm (then Assembled in a most general Par∣liament at Westminster) drew up seve∣ral Articles of Grievances against the Popes Exorbitances and Illegal Oppressi∣ons, one of which was conceived in these words; viz. Item, Gravatur Reg∣num Angliae ex adjectione multiplici, il∣lius infamis nuncii, Non Obstante, per quem juramenti Religio, consuetudines antiquae, Scripturarum vigor, concessio∣num authoritas, Statuta Jura & Privi∣legia debilitantur & evanescunt. And it cannot but seem strange, that after such publick Complaints (for many others of the like nature might be cited) of the whole Kingdom against Non Obstante's, as intolerable Grievances they should be afterwards countenanced, and screw∣ed up to such a transcendent Soveraign∣ty,
as to frustrate Laws, Statutes, and Acts of Parliament; and that by vertue of an Ecclesiastical Supremacy by which the King is pretended to have whatever power the Pope had, when the Pope himself was never allowed this. To these Presidents and Authorities of former times, it may not be impro∣per to add what happened in the latter end of the Reign of King James the First, and the beginning of King Charles the First, upon occasion of the Spanish Match, with relation to the Penal Laws against Roman Catholicks: The whole Negotiation of that Affair may be read at large in Rushworth's first Volume of Historical Collections, and in Prynne's Introduction to the Archbishop of Can∣terbury's Tryal. I will only point at two or three passages that are most ma∣terial to the present purpose. 1. King James in a Letter written with his own hand to the King of Spain, has these words; viz. Leges nostrates, quae mul∣ctam Catholicis, non mortem irrogant, a∣boleri aut rescindi à nobis Seorsim non posse, leniri it a posse, cùm erit usus, ex∣ploratum habeat Serenitas vestra, omni∣bus ut dictorum Catholicorum Romano∣rum animis mansuetudine ac lenitate no∣strâ
conciliatis, &c. he had promised that no Romish Priest, or Catholick should be proceeded against for any Ca∣pital Crime; but for the other Laws, ut supra. Yet afterwards, when King James was made to believe that the Match was just upon the point of being con∣cluded, a Proclamation was prepared for granting a toleration to Papists, tho' it never came out. But Archbishop Abbot wrote a Letter in the nature of a Remonstrance to King James, in which besides other Considerations of Religion and Policy, these words follow, Prynne's Introduct. p. 40. Besides, this To∣leration which you endeavour to set by your Proclamation, cannot be done with∣out a Parliament, unless your Majesty will let your Subjects see, that you will take unto your self a Liberty to throw down the Laws of the Land at your plea∣sure. And in the Second Year of King Charles the First, the King commanded his Attorney General to charge the Earl of Bristol at the Bar of the House of Lords with High Treason and other Of∣fences and Misdemeanours, that they might proceed in a legal Course against
him, according to the Justice and usual Proceedings of Parliaments; the fifth of which Articles is in these words, That from the beginning of his Nego∣tiation, and throughout the whole ma∣naging thereof by the said Earl of Bri∣stol, and during his said Ambassage, he the said Earl, contrary to his Faith and Duty to God, the true Religion professed by the Church of England, and the Peace of the Church and State, did intend and resolve, that if the said Marriage so treated of as aforesaid, should by his Ministry be effected, that thereby the Romish Religion, and the Professors thereof, should be ad∣vanced within this Realm, and other his Majesties Realms and Dominions, and the true Religion and the Profes∣sors thereof discouraged and discounte∣nanced. And to that end and purpose the said Earl, during the time afore∣said, by Letters unto his late Majesty, and otherwise often counselled and persuaded his said late Majesty to set at Liberty the Jesuits and Priests of the Romish Religion, which according to the good, Religious and Publick Laws of this Kingdom, were imprison∣ed or restrained; and to grant and to
allow unto the Papists and Professors of the Romish Religion, free Tolerati∣on, and silencing of all Laws made and standing in force against them. Vide Rushworth, Vol. 1. p. 251. and Prinne's Introduct. p. 32. So that King James thought himself had no power to rescind or repeal the Laws Seorsim, tho' he could so mode∣rate the execution of them, as to make his Roman-Catholick Subjects be ob∣liged to him. Yet when afterwards, in hopes of obtaining the Infanta for his Son, he had agreed to issue a Proclama∣tion for Indulgence to Roman Catholicks, and a Proclamation was drawn accord∣ingly, but never published; we may read the Sense of the Church of England upon it in Archbishop Abbot's Remon∣strance. The Reason why the Procla∣mation was not published, was because the putting of it in practice or not, was to depend upon the success of the Match, which miscarrying, the Proclamation was stifled. And that may be the rea∣son why the Parliament in 21 Jacobi take no notice of it. But in the Parlia∣ment of 2 Car. 1. The Earl of Bristol was charged by the King's own Dire∣ction, for having persuaded the King
to it, as having committed a very high Crime in so doing. Whereas if the King had a power by Law to do it, it could not well be a Crime in him, to persuade him to make use of his Power, when the Circumstances of his Af∣fairs required it. And as it was then conceived a Mis∣demeanour to Advise the King to it, so who knows how far future Parliaments may account it a Misdemeanour to have been in any wise instrumental towards the carrying on of a design, which some will not stick to say now, as the Archbishop did then, is to give the King a Power of throwing down all the Laws of the Land at his plea∣sure? Thus I have endeavoured to give some small account of the rise and pro∣gress of Dispensations with Acts of Par∣liament; by which it does appear, that as the clause of Non Obstante was first in∣troduced by Popes, and first applied by the instigation of the Popish Clergy, to break through Acts of Parliaments, (tho' our Parliaments never Counte∣nanced them, and our Courts of Justice never extended the dispensing power far∣ther than to particular persons, or at
most to Corporations) so Dispensations suspending at one blow the whole effect of Laws, were invented at Rome too, in favour of English Papists, upon the Treaty of the Spanish Match in King James's time: But they never appeared bare-faced in view till King Charles the Second's time; in whose Reign they were twice damned in Parliament. The third effort has been made of late, since which no Parliament has yet sat down. It may seem strange, considering the great Solemnity and Caution that is used in passing Acts of Parliament, that so impudent a conceit, as that of the Legality of a dispensing Power, should ever enter into the thoughts of Men. For if a Bill be first brought into the House of Lords, after it is read, it is committed to a Committee of Lords, and certain Judges are appointed to attend them, that nothing may be put into the Act, which may be mis∣chievous to the King or Kingdom. Af∣ter which, when it comes to be read in the House again, the Judges sit as At∣tendants upon the House, and hear all the Debates of the Lords upon it. In∣deed they have no Voice in the House
of Lords, but if any Bill that is passing should in their Judgments have any ill Consequences to the King or Kingdom, they might either have offered their Reasons at the Committee, or suggested what their thoughts were to some of the Lords in the House, who would have acquainted the House with it. A Bill having passed the House of Lords with all this Caution, is afterwards sent down to the Commons by some of the Judges themselves, and sometimes by the Chief Justices and Chief Baron, who coming into the House of Com∣mons with Reverence, and the respect of three Bows, deliver the Bill to the Speaker. And the method is the same in case of a Bill coming from the House of Commons, and committed by the Lords, some of the Judges are al∣ways appointed to attend and wait upon the Committee of the Lords. After all this Solemnity, the Bill yet signifies nothing, without the Royal As∣sent. In order to which, before the King is to give it, the Clerks of the House of Lords are to bring the Bills before the King and the Privy Council, before whom they are read, and not only the
King's Council are ordered to attend, and be present, but likewise all the Judges in Westminster Hall: And if any Bills should be thought of mischievous Con∣sequence, they, as being the King's Council in Matters of Law, are bound by the express tenour of their Oath, to shew and disclose it to the King. But if no such thing be done, then the King in full Parliament gives his Le Roy le Voet, and so it becomes a general Law, to bind the whole King∣dom. Now after a Law made with such caution and solemnity is entred upon Record, as a Statute binding to the whole Kingdom; it must needs seem strange, that the Judges in Westminster Hall should dare to allow of Dispensa∣tions with such a Law, grounded upon the sole Act of the Prince: and much more, that they should, as a late Ho∣nourable Author tells us they have done, declare Acts of Parliament to be void, Coke 8 Rep. Fol. 118. Heb. 87. and contrary to the Law of God or Na∣tural Equity, or that they should sup∣pose any Law thus made to be so, with∣out assuming a power to themselves of Impeaching both Houses of Parliament, the King himself, all the Privy Council∣lors,
nay and themselves too, or at least their Predecessors, for want of Knowledge, Prudence or Foresight, as not being capable to judge of common Sense, or not fore-seeing Inconvenien∣ces, which either themselves now per∣ceive, or would persuade us the King by some new illumination has disco∣vered: especially when these inconveni∣ences, if real, may easily be redressed In Parliament, without having recourse to a Westminster Hall Prerogative, or Dreams of Imperial Power vampt up with Ignorance, a good Fancy, and a tollerable Pen, by some scurrilous Authors, whose names I cannot prevail upon my self to defile paper with. I cannot leave this period of time be∣twixt King John and King Henry the Eighth, without a remark upon an Act of Parliament made in the Second Year of King Henry the Fifth, cap. 1. That Act recites that many Hospitals have been founded by the Kings of this Realm and divers other Estates of Men and Wo∣men, to which Hospitals the Founders have given part of their moveable Goods and of their Lands, therewith to sustain impotent Men and Women, &c. And that the same Hospitals be now for the
most part decayed, and the Goods and Profits of the same withdrawn and spent in other uses: And therefore Enacts, That as to the Hospitals which be of the Pa∣tronage and Foundation of the King, the Ordinaries by vertue of the King's Commissions to them directed, shall enquire of the manner and foundation of the said Hospitals, and of the Govern∣ance and Estate of the same, and of all o∣ther matters requisite and necessary in that behalf, and the Inquisitions thereof shall certifie into the King's Chancery; And as to other Hospitals, which be of another Foundation and Patronage than of the King, the Ordinaries shall enquire of the manner of the Foundation, Estate and Governance of the same, and of all other Matters and Things necessary in this behalf, and upon that make due cor∣rection and reformation, according to the Laws of Holy Church, as to them be∣longeth. This Act apparently makes a distin∣ction betwixt Hospitals that are, and that are not of the King's Foundation and Patronage, with respect to the Right of Visitation. Those of the King's Foundation the Ordinaries were to visit by the King's Commission. But
those that were not of the King's Foun∣dation the Ordinaries were to visit too, but how? Not by any Commission from the King, but as special Commissioners, special Visitors, appointed by that Act. The King did not pretend to issue a Commission to Visit an Hospital of a Sub∣ject's Foundation. The Parliament were strangers to such a conceit. The right of Visiting, de communi Jure be∣longs to the Founder; he that gave the Laws, ought to see them executed. If the Parliament had appointed that Hos∣pitals of the Foundation of Subjects, should be Visited by the Ordinaries by Commission from the King; they had in effect translated the Rights of all Foun∣ders that were Subjects to the King, which they never intended. For the Legal Notion of Visitation in such Cases, is no more than this, viz. A Man Founds and Endows a College. The Rule of Law and of Natural Rea∣son teaches, cujus est dare, ejus est dis∣ponere. As a Man may give Lands to a private person upon what condition the Donor pleases, provided it be not against Law: so a Man may give Lands to a Society of Men upon what terms he pleases. The terms exprest in the Foun∣dation,
are called the private Laws, by which the Society is to be ordered and governed. And just as when a Man makes a Lease for Life or Years, the Lessor may enter of right to see whe∣ther waste be done or no, so a Founder may come and enquire whether those of his Foundation observe the Rules and Orders prescribed by him or his Ance∣stors; and proceed according to the Statutes and the Powers thereby re∣served, in case he find any neglect or misdemeanour. What right the King has to interpose his Authority in such case, any more than in the Government of a private Family, I cannot dis∣cern. But Colleges in Ʋniversities are pre∣tended to be visitable by the King's Commission, by vertue of his Ecclesiasti∣cal Authority: Here we must distin∣guish. A College of Divines, for Ex∣ample, founded by a Subject and En∣dowed, and receiving Laws for their Governance from their Founder, are visitable by their Founder and his Heirs or Successors. They may be also (for any thing here alledged to the contrary) visitable by the Bishop of the Diocess, or (if exempt from E∣piscopal
Jurisdiction) by the King's Com∣mission. But what Power have these Visitors? The Founder enquires, whe∣ther the Statutes of the Foundation are observed, and punishes according to the Statutes, but goes no farther. The Ordinary, or Archbishop, or (if the place be exempt) the King's Visitors enquire, Whether they profess the Doctrin, and observe the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Eng∣land. If the King had any thing to do to intermeddle with the Statutes and Go∣vernment of such a College in the first Instance, by virtue of his Ecclesia∣stical Supremacy, it seems very strange that in the third and fourth Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when the Bishop of Winchester, Founder of Maud∣lyn College in Oxford, had at a Visi∣tation deprived the President, and he appealed to the Queen in Chancery; the Judges and Civilians having had a Conference upon the Business, agreed, that the Appeal lay not as the Law then stood; for that this Case was out of the Statutes of 24 and 25 Hen. 8. (which direct Appeals to the King in Chancery) and this Depriva∣tion
was a meer Temporal Thing, and inflicted as by a Lay Patron: And that, if he were wrongfully expelled, he might have an Assize, or other Suit at Common Law. Concerning the King's Power with respect to the private Statutes of a College of a Subjects Foundation, I will acquaint the Reader with one Act of Parliament made 1 Mariae, which will yield some very useful Inferences. The Act recites, Whereas the late Noble Prince of Famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth, Father un∣to our most Gracious Sovereign La∣dy the Queen, amongst other his godly Acts and Doings, did erect, make and establish divers and sun∣dry Churches, as well Cathedral as Collegiat, and endowed every of the same with divers Mannors, Lands, Tenements and Possessions, for the maintenance of the Deans, Preben∣daries and Ministers within the same, and for other charitable Acts to be done and executed by the same Deans, Prebendaries and Ministers, and also did incorporate the same Deans, Pre∣bendaries and Ministers, and made them Bodies politick in perpetual Succes∣sion,
according to the Laws of this Realm of England: And where al∣so, as the said late King, for the bet∣ter maintenance and preservation of the said Churches, in a godly Unity, and good Order and Gover∣nance, granted unto the several Cor∣porations and Bodies Corporate of every of the said Churches, that they should be ruled and governed for ever, according unto certain Ordinances, Rules and Statutes, to be specified in certain Indentures, then after to be made by his Highness, and to be deliver∣ed and declared to every of the Bo∣dies Corporate of the said several Churches, as by the said several E∣rections and Foundations of the said Churches, more plainly it doth and may appear: Since which said Erecti∣ons and Foundations, the said late King did cause to be delivered to every of the said Churches, so as is aforesaid erected and incorporated, by certain Commissioners by his Highness ap∣pointed, divers and sundry Statutes and Ordinances, made and decreed by the same Commissioners, for the Or∣der, Rule and Governances of the said several Churches, and of the
Deans, Prebendaries, and Ministers of the same; which said Statutes and Ordinances were made by the said Commissioners, and delivered unto every of the Corporations of the said several Churches in writing, but not indented, according to the Form of the said Foundations and Erections; by reason whereof the said Churches, and the several Deans, Prebendaries, and Ministers of the same, have no Statutes or Ordinances of any Force or Authority, whereby they should be ruled and governed, and there∣fore remain as yet not fully esta∣blished in such sort, as the godly intent of the said late King Henry the Eighth was, to the great imper∣fection of the Churches, and the hin∣drance of God's Service, and good Order and Regiment to be had and continued amongst the Ministers of the same. And forasmuch as the Authority of the making of the said Statutes, Ordi∣nances, and Orders, was reserved only unto the said King, and no mention made of any like Authority to be reser∣ved unto his Heirs and Successors, the same Orders, and Statutes, cannot now
be made and provided without Autho∣rity of Parliament. And then the Act proceeds to empower that Queen during her Life, to prescribe such Or∣ders and Statutes; and to alter, trans∣pose, change, augment or diminish the said Orders, Statutes, &c. And gives her likewise Authority to make, ordain, and establish Statutes, Ordinances and Foundations for the good Order and Go∣vernment of Grammar Schools erected by King Hen. 8. or King Edw. 6. and to alter Statutes already made. V. Ra∣stall's Statutes, 1 Mar. Par. 2. Act 9. And she dying before the work was finished, there was another Act in Queen Elizabeth's time impowering her to do the like, and to alter the Statutes in being. Hence I infer, first, if King Henry the Eighth having reserved a Power to himself of appointing private Laws, &c. as aforesaid, and coming to die without executing that Power, his Suc∣cessor could not make such Laws, though for the Government of Colleges, &c. of which the King himself was Founder (as most evidently, according to the Opinion of those two Queens
and their Parliaments, she could not) and for the Government of Colleges, &c. that had no private Laws at all for their good Order and Government, then a power given by Commission to Survey, Alter, Reform, Amend, &c. the Statutes of the Foundation of Col∣leges, Halls, &c. was not in those days look'd upon as Law. Secondly, If the King could not ap∣point New Laws for the Government of Colleges, &c. of his own Foundation, then he could not alter the Statutes of Colleges founded by Subjects. I infer from hence in the third place, that some Commission grounded upon these Statutes of Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, which were Tempo∣rary, and gave those Queens Power but for Life; has been the pattern for that Clause in a late Commission, which relates to the Colleges in Ʋniversi∣ties, &c. And that the Gentleman who drew the late Commission, had forgot those two Acts of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, because the latter ne∣ver was printed, and the former, being expired long before his Statute-Book was printed, is left out of it (but it is to be seen in Rastall.)
And finding such a Commission upon the Roll, he concluded the King had a Power by the Common Law to grant it. Archbishop Laud pretended to visit both Ʋniversities, Jure Metropolitico, and it was decreed at the Council Ta∣ble, that he had right to visit; but he claimed only a Right to visit them, as to their Doctrin, and Church Discipline, and Ceremonies, not to meddle with the private Statutes of their Founda∣tion: Which he disclaimed any Right to enquire into. V. Rushworth's Col∣lections. I mention this only to shew how a College may be subject to a double Vi∣sitation diverso respectu. The Question is not here concern∣ing the King's Authority to visit the Ʋniversity, but what Authority he has to visit a private College for their good Government, and to meddle with their Statues, himself not being the Founder, I cannot see as yet. HAVING given some Account of the Nature of the Antient Legal Jurisdicti∣on, which in former Ages the Crown claim'd and exercis'd in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Matters; come we now to King Henry the Eighth's Reign, in
whose time all Foreign Power was ex∣cluded, the Antient Supremacy restor'd, and New Powers given, some to that King personally, some to Him, his Heirs and Successors. I shall run through the Acts, as they lye in order of Time. The first Act that made an open Breach with Rome, was that of 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. That no Appeals should be used, but within the Realm: The Preamble to that Act will afford us considerable Observations, and very pertinent to the chief Subject and Oc∣casion of this present Discourse. It runs thus: Where by divers, sundry, old, authentick Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed, That this Realm of England is an Empire, and so hath been accepted in the World, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same: Ʋnto whom a Body Politick, compact of all sorts and degrees of People, divided in Terms, and by Names of Spiri∣tualty and Temporalty, been bounden and own to bear, next to God, a natural and humble Obedience: He being also institute and furnished, by the Goodness and Suf∣ferance of Almighty God, with plenary,
whole and entire Power, Pre-eminence and Authority, Prerogative and Juris∣diction, to render and yield Justice, and final determination to all manner of folk Resiants, or Subjects within this his Realm, in all Causes, Matters, Debates and Contentions, happening to occur, in∣surge and begin within the Limits there∣of, without restraint or provocation to any Foreign Princes and Potentates of the World; The Body Spiritual where∣of having Power, when any cause of the Law divine cometh in question, or of Spiritual Learning, that it was declared and shewed, by that part of the said Bo∣dy Politick, called the Spiritualty, now being usually called the English Church; which always hath been reputed, and al∣so found of that sort, that both for Know∣ledge, &c. it hath been thought, and is sufficient and meet of it self, without the intermedling of any exterior Person or Persons, to declare and determine all such Doubts, and to administer all such Offices and Duties, as to their Rooms Spiritual doth appertain: And the Law Temporal, for tryal of Property of Lands and Goods, and for the conservation of the People of this Realm in Ʋnity and Peace, without Rapine or Spoil, was and
yet is administred, adjudged and executed by sundry Judges and Ministers of the other part of the said Body Politick, cal∣led the Temporalty; and both their Ju∣risdictions and Authorities, do conjoin together in the due Administration of Justice, the one to help the other. From this part of the Preamble we may observe, First, That for the King∣dom of England's being an Empire, consisting of two Estates of Men, and governed by One Supreme Head, the King and Parliament appeal to old, au∣thentick Histories and Chronicles; and consequently, wherein the power of this One Supreme Head doth consist, must be learnt from Antiquity. Se∣condly. That the Exclusion of Foreign Jurisdiction was the main thing in their Eye; without restraint or provocation to any Foreign Princes or Potentates of the World. Thirdly, That as this Supreme Head administred ordinary Justice to his Subjects in Matters Temporal, by proper Officers, sundry Judges and Mi∣nisters; so in Causes of the Law Divine, or of Spiritual Learning, the same was to be declared, interpreted and shewn by the Spiritualty, (which is to be under∣stood of ordinary Proceedings.) And
consequently, not by Commissioners ap∣pointed by the Supreme Head: For he can appoint no Commissioners to deter∣mine Matters of civil Right, but where special Acts empower him, and no Act had yet impowered him to do so in Ecclesiastical Matters; nor did his Predecessors or himself, practise it till af∣terwards: For his divers, sundry, old Hi∣stories and Chronicles, afforded him no president of any such thing; and there∣fore it could not be either in the nature of the thing, or in the sense and mean∣ing of the King and his Parliament, any essential part of his Legal Supreme Headship, to have a Personal Supre∣macy, either independant of the Estates of the Realm, or which might be ad∣ministred otherwise than in the Course setled by Law, i. e. by proper Officers, appointed thereunto either by express Act of Parliament, or the Original Con∣stitution of the Government, or both. The Body of the Act prohibits Ap∣peals to the See of Rome, and enacts, That in such Cases, where heretofore any of the King's Subjects and Resiants have used to pursue, &c. any Appeal to the See of Rome, and in all other cases of Appeals, in and for the Causes aforesaid,
they may and shall from henceforth take, have and use their Appeals within this Realm, and not elsewhere, in manner and form as hereafter ensueth, and not otherwise; that is to say, First, From the Arch-deacon or his Official, if the Matter or Cause be there begun, to the Bishop Diocesan of the said See, if in any case the Parties be aggrieved. And in like wise, if it be commenced be∣fore the Bishop Diocesan, or his Commis∣sary, from the Bishop Diocesan or his Com∣missary, within fifteen days next ensuing the Judgment, or Sentence thereof there given, to the Archbishop of the Province of Canterbury, if it be within his Pro∣vince; and if it be within the Province of York, then to the Archbishop of York, and so likewise to all other Archbishops within the King's Domini∣ons, &c. there to be Definitively and Finally ordered, decreed and adjudged, according to Justice, without any other appellation or provocation to any Person or Persons, Court or Courts. By the next Clause, Matters or Con∣tentions to be commenced before the Arch∣deacon of any Bishop or his Commissary are appointed, in case either Party be ag∣grieved, to be brought by Appeal to the
Court of Arches or Audience of the same Archbishop of the Province, there to be Definitively and Finally deter∣mined. The next Clause appoints that Causes to be commenced before any of the Arch∣bishops, shall before the same Arch∣bishop be definitively determined; sa∣ving always the Prerogative of the Arch∣bishop and Church of Canterbury, in all the aforesaid Causes of Appeals, in such and like wise as they have been accustomed and used heretofore. Then it is Enacted that Causes touch∣ing the King, his Heirs and Successors, shall be finally decreed by the Prelates, Abbots, and Priors of the Ʋpper House of Convocation. Hitherto no Appeal lay to the King in Person, or in Chancery: You have heard already, that originally the ultimate Appeal in Ecclesiastical and Temporal Matters, was to one and the same Tribunal. Afterwards the See of Rome gained Appeals by Usurpation and Con∣nivance. Now they are lodged in the Diocesan, the Archbishop, and Ʋpper House of Convocation, and their Sen∣tences respectively are appointed to be final and definitive. And therefore,
neither the Clergy in their Submission, wherein they Recogniz'd the King to be the Supreme Head of the English Church, V. Burnet's Collect. ad. Vol. 1. p. 128, 129. nor this Parliament, who had been inform'd by Old Authentick Hi∣stories and Chronicles, that the Spiritu∣alty and Laity of this Realm are go∣verned by One Supreme Head and King, did so much as imagine, that by ver∣tue of that Office or Title the Supreme Cognisance of Appeals, belonged to him personally. If Appeals to the King in Person or in Chancery, or Commissions of Review had then been dreamt of, there needed not another Act in the Year ensuing, to take off the odium of these definitive Sentences from the Archbishops. It is the Stat. of 25. H. 8. cap. 19. Wherein it is Enacted, That for lack of Justice at or in any of the Courts of the Archbishops of this Realm, or in any of the King's Do∣minions, it shall be lawful to the par∣ties grieved, to Appeal to the King's Ma∣jesty in the King's Court of Chancery. And that upon every such Appeal a Com∣mission shall be directed under the Great Seal, to such persons as shall be named by the King's Highness, his Heirs or Successors, like as in case of Appeals
from the Admiral's Court, to hear and Definitively to determine such Ap∣peals. By a subsequent Clause Appeals from the Jurisdiction of any Abbots, Priors, or other Heads and Governours of Mo∣nasteries, &c. and places exempt, &c. shall be made immediately to his Majesty into the Court of Chancery; which Ap∣peals so made, shall be Definitively de∣termined by Authority of the King's Com∣mission. It looks like a blemish to the Notion of Supreme Head, in the modern ac∣ceptation of the Word, to have the fi∣nal Judgment in Causes Ecclesiastical referr'd by the Parliament to the Bi∣shops, Archbishops, or to Commissioners appointed by vertue of an Act of Par∣liament, &c. and yet the Parliament in 25 Hen. 5. cap. 21. takes Notice of, and allows the Clergy's Recognition, nor was it till many Years after, to wit, the 39 of Eliz. that the Lawyers found out a way to make these Acts consistent with their imaginary personal Supreme Headship; and that was by introducing Commissions of Review. Which they tell us the King, after such a definitive sentence may grant, as Supreme Head,
Ad revidendum, 4 Instit. p. 341. Where two reasons are given for it, First, For that it is not restrained by the Act, which seems to be a mistake: For it is restrain'd by the Act, as much as it was capable of being restrain'd; and that by these words, viz. that such Judgment and Sentence as the said Com∣missioners shall make and decree, in and upon such Appeals, shall be good and effectual, and also definitive. How could Commissions of Review be restrain'd more expresly, than by these words? They are not nam'd indeed, and good reason why, viz. because there never had been any such things in our Law before. For he, that will apply to this Case that common Rule of Law, viz. that where the King is not named in a Statute, he is not intended to be bound by it; must prove that Appeals lay to the King in Person or in Chancery, before these Acts were made. And then perhaps I may yield, that such Commissions of Review are not hereby restrained. How comes it to pass, V. Cr. Car. 40 Jones Rep. p. 147. Duke's Law of Char. Uses; p. 62. Windsor and Hilton's Case. that the Chan∣cellor's Decree upon Complaint of a person aggrieved by a Decree of the Commissioners of Charitable Ʋses, is fi∣nal; upon which no Bill of Review is
to be allow'd? Why, because the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 4. gives an Appeal to him, and goes no higher. And since there were no such Commissions of Charitable Ʋses before that Statute, therefore the Statute, being introdu∣ctive of a new Law, must be pursued, and where the Statute does not pro∣vide a Remedy there is none. Now the Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 12. and 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. So far forth as they concern Appeals, are for the most part introductive of New Laws too. And the latter of them gives Appeals to the King in Chancery, which never lay before. And therefore, as. the Act gives them, he ought to take them, and no otherwise; for the Act is his title, and it has negative words. But the Lord Coke's Error in ascribing that Power, Jurisdiction, and Autho∣rity to the King in person, which was ab origine in King, Lords, and Com∣mons, runs through almost all that he has written upon that Subject. And our Lawyers (who look upon him as an Oracle, for his Learning and Judg∣ment in the Controversial, profitable part of the Law, in which he was unquestionably a very great Man) fol∣low
him blind-fold in some mistakes They study Resolutions of Judges in cases of Property, and till of late have gone by that lazy rule, that the latest authorities are the best. So they forget Antiquity, and hardly cast their thoughts further backward than Dyer and Plow∣den. Those of them, that are more in∣quisitive, go as high, as to the Quadra∣gesms and Book of Assizes. But the Government is not so much beholden to them as were to be wisht. They deserve worse of it than other Men, for it being the only honour of their Profession, to support it by understand∣ing and asserting it, and the natural bent of their Studies carrying them in∣to it, their narrow Spirits, private In∣terests, Et illud quod dicere nolo, pre∣vail with too many of them to betray it by neglecting it. The Lord Coke's second Reason for a Commission of Review, to examine a de∣finitive Sentence given by the Delegates, is, because the Pope as Supreme Head by the Canon Law us'd to grant a Com∣mission ad revidendum, and such Au∣thority as the Pope had, claiming as Supreme Head, doth of right belong to the Crown, and is annexed thereunto
by the Statutes of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. and 1 Eliz. cap. 1. And so it was re∣solved, says he, in the King's Bench, Trin. 39 Eliz. You see the English on't is; the King may do so, because the Pope did so; for the Pope was Supreme Head then, or claimed to be so, and the King is ac∣knowledged to be so now. This pretended Translation of the Pope's Power to the King, is another fiction, that has contributed exceeding∣ly to raise the Supremacy in some Mens Imaginations. But it will appear by running through the several Acts made in King Henry the Eighth's, King Edward the Sixth's, and Queen Elizabeth's Reigns, concerning Religion and Church Government, that no Power given to the King, or ac∣knowledged to be in him, has any re∣spect or relation whatsoever to the Pope's pretended Power, heretofore ex∣ercised. The Pope's Power was abo∣lish'd and abrogated. Stat. 28. Hen. 8. cap. 10. The Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown, which by the Common Law and Fundamental Con∣stitution of our Government, was in∣herent in it, was restored; only some branches of it put into another method
of Administration: And that by the Supreme Power of the Nation, from whose Authority and Jurisdiction no∣thing within this Kingdom is ex∣empted. That such Authority as the Pope had, does of right belong to the King, he would prove by the Statutes of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. & 1 Elizabeth, cap. 1. The first of which, to wit, that of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. was repealed long before the Case in 39 Eliz. came in question, and consequently is there alledged to no purpose. As for the Second, that of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. how far that goes, we shall have occasion to enquire hereaf∣ter, when we come to it in order of time. He gives us a Corollary, viz. that upon a Sentence given by the High Commissioners, a Commission of Review may be granted, by vertue of an express Clause in the Commission; and if no such Clause had been, says he, yet a Com∣mission of Review might have been grant∣ed, Quia sicut fontes Communicant a∣quas fluminibus cumulativè, non priva∣tive, sic Rex subditis suis Jurisdictio∣nem communicat in causis Ecclesiasticis, vigore Statuti in ejusmodi casibus editi,
& provisi cumulativè, & non privativè, by construction upon that Act. But a Commission of Review upon a Sentence given by the High Commissio∣ners, is not now disputed. The High Commission was erected long after the 25 Hen. 8. And consequently a Review of their Sentences (which it seems some construction upon that Act gave colour for,) was not provided against by that Statute. But by what Law a Review should be granted of a Sentence given by the Delegates, which by the Act is to be Definitive, I am yet to seek. I would fain know, whether a Cause determined by Virtue of this Act in the Ʋpper House of Convocation (for there Ecclesiastical Causes in which the King himself is concerned, are to be defini∣tively determined,) may be drawn in question ever after, before Commissi∣oners, ad revidendum, or not? And if not, why is a Sentence of the Delegates liable to be examined any more than that? Do these Men really believe that the Judicial Authority of the Nation, is by the Law lodg'd in the King's Person? What means then the Act of 16 Car. 1. cap. 10. That neither his Majesty nor his
Privy Council, have or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority, by English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libel, or any other Arbitrary Way whatsoever, to examine or draw in question, determine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, He∣reditaments, Goods or Chattels of any the Subjects of this Realm; but that the same ought to be tryed and determined in the Ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the Ordinary Course of Law. If it be said, the King appoints the Judges, and hath formerly sate in the King's Bench in Person: For his appoint∣ing the Judges; since the time is known when it was otherwise, that cannot be urged as a Perogative originally inhe∣rent in the King: That our Kings have sometimes sate in the King's Bench in Person, I yield, and will agree to all the Inferences that can be drawn from it; do but allow me, which cannot be deny'd, that Writs of Error lye from the Court of King's Bench, and Appeals out of Chancery (whoever sits there) before the Lords in Parliament; who, whether the King be present or absent, agreeing with, or disagreeing from the Sense of the House, affirm or reverse the Judgments and Decrees, as they see
Cause: And were it not more honoura∣ble to ascribe no Judicial Power at all to the King in Person, than to make him Judge of an Inferior Court. But you'l find that our Kings never sate in the King's Bench or the Starr Chamber Ju∣ridically: The Courts gave the Judg∣ments, Co. 12. Rep. p. 64. and they were entred per Cu∣riam. Nay, take in their Hypothesis, Brady, John∣son, Filmer. who would persuade us, that Parliaments of old time before they were christen'd by that Name, were but Assemblies of the King's Tenants, in the nature of a Court-Baron. Why, even in a Court-Baron the Suitors are Judges. And all the Judges of England told King James the First, Co. 12. Rep. 64. That the King could not in Person adjudge any Case. If therefore our King's have no Judi∣cial Power personally in them, how can they derive to others what themselves have not? How comes it to pass that the King can grant a Commission to re∣view a Decree, when himself cannot re∣view it, nor is impowered by Act of Parliament to grant any such Commis∣sion?
I will dwell no longer upon these Acts concerning Appeals. It appears (I hope) already, that Appeals, which by the Antient Law of the Realm, were to the Curia Regis, had been gain'd from it to the Court of Rome. That King Henry the Eighth caused such Foreign Appeals to be restrain'd, and directed how they should be pro∣secuted within the Realm for the fu∣ture. Which Direction ought to be pursued; for so far forth as it gives Ap∣peals to the King in Chancery, it is in∣troductive of a New Law: Which I must believe, till I can be inform'd that our Kings in former times ever received Appeals out of Parliament, or their Magna Curia, what ever that was. The next thing in our way, is a∣nother part of the fore-mentioned Sta∣tute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19, viz. That the Clergy in their Convocations shall en∣act no Constitutions without the King's Assent. The words of the enacting Clause are, That they (the Clergy) nor any of them from henceforth, shall pre∣sume to attempt, alledge, claim, or put in ure any Constitutions or Ordinances, Provincial or Synodals, or any other Canons; nor shall enact, promulge, or exe∣cute
any such Canons, Constitutions or Or∣dinances Provincial, by whatsoever Name or Names they may be call'd, in their Convocations in time coming (which al∣way shall be assembled by Authority of the King's Writ) unless the same Clergy∣men have the King's most Royal Assent and Licence, to make, promulge and exe∣cute, such Canons, Constitutions and Or∣dinances, Provincial or Synodal, upon pain of every one of the Clergy doing con∣trary to this Act, and being thereof con∣vict to suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine at the King's Will. This Act cannot be pretended to give the King and the Clergy any new power: For it is penn'd in Negative Words. It is but declarative of what the Anti∣ent Law of the Kingdom was. The Clergy had frequent Provincial Synods ever since the Christian Faith was in∣troduc'd amongst us; but till the Pope had set his Foot here, our Kings some∣time presided, were frequently present in them: Their Assent was had to all Constitutions made for the Government of the Church. And Canons intended to bind the Laity, never obtain'd as Ec∣clesiastical Laws here, without the Assent of the Temporalty. But when the Clergy
had got an Exemption from the Tempo∣ral Laws, and lookt upon themselves as a distinct, separate Body of Men from the rest of the King's Subjects, as having a dependance upon, and owing Cano∣nical Obedience to a Foreign Head; then they proceeded to make Canons without consent of the King or the Tem∣poralty. But even in those days when ever they entrench't upon the Common Law of the Realm, which was the Sub∣jects Fence and Protection, the Tempo∣ral Courts gall'd them with Prohibiti∣ons: They had not in the times of Po∣pery a Power of binding the Laity, even in Matters of Religion, without their Assent. But themselves they bound, and the inferior Clergy were all subjected to the Power of Provincial Synods, because of their Oath of Ca∣nonical Obedience: And these Canons by which they bound the whole Body of the Clergy, never had any Royal As∣sent to them since King Stephen's days. No Ecclesiastical Laws, other than what were enacted in Parliament, having since that King's Reign derived their Authority from the King. This Act there∣fore ties up the Clergy from any power of making Canons and Constitutions with∣out
the King. But since it gives them no manner of Power or Authority whatsoever, their Power (even the Royal Assent taken in) is no other since this Act, than it was before they had withdrawn themselves from the King and the Laity: Which how far it extended has been sufficiently ex∣plain'd already. I will not go so far as some have done, to affirm, Sir Edward Bagshaw's Ar∣gument con∣cerning the Canons. that the King's Assent here spoken of, must be understood of his Assent in Parliament. But I think it is very observable, that the Parlia∣ment did by this Act appoint Sixteen of the Two and thirty Commissioners, (who were to view, search and exa∣mine the Canons, Constitutions and Or∣dinances Provincial and Synodal hereto∣fore made, in order to the keeping of some and rejecting others) to be of the Ʋpper and Nether House of Parliament. They would have Committees of their own Houses inspect all Canons former∣ly made, and judge which were fit to be retain'd. How can we then ima∣gine, that they had any thoughts of subjecting themselves and their Poste∣rities, to the King and the Convoca∣tion of the Clergy in Matters of Religion for the future?
Nay, they seem, as it were, jealous lest this Act, tho as cautiously penn'd as the Wit of Man could contrive it, should be made use of to colour some unwarrantable Power of the Clergy in Convocation, having the Royal Assent to their Constitutions: And therefore they add a special Proviso, that no Ca∣nons, Constitutions or Ordinances, shall be made or put in execution within this Realm, by the Authority of the Convo∣cation of the Clergy, which shall be con∣trariant or repugnant to the King's Pe∣rogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws or Statutes of the Realm. Now whe∣ther it was against the Laws of the Realm or not, in the Opinion of this Parliament, for the King and the Clergy to top any Laws upon them without their consent, will appear by the Pre∣amble of another Act of this very Session of Parliament, and therefore I will pass it by now. Nor was there any thing in the fu∣ture practice of this King's Reign, which gave or asserted any Power to the King and Convocation, to bind or conclude the People without an Act of Parlia∣ment concurring and enforcing the same.
The next Act is the Twentieth Chap. of this same Session of Parliament, concerning the Election and Consecrati∣on of Bishops. This Act does not re∣sume the Election to the Parliament, from whom it had been gain'd, but leaving a shadow of Election in the Consistory, impowers the King to name the Person, commands the Dean and Chapter, under the Penalty of a Praemunire, to choose the Person no∣minated to them in the Writ of Conge d'eslire, and appoints how he shall be Consecrated without Pall, Bulls, or o∣ther things formerly requisite to be ob∣tained at the See of Rome. This Prerogative that our Kings now have in the Election of Bishops, stands upon the foundation of this Act of Par∣liament, and other it has none. The Supreme Headship, it seems, did not in∣clude the power of appointing Bi∣shops, for that had been allow'd two Years ago, and is acknowledged by way of recital in this Session, cap. 21. and yet the Election and Consecration of Bishops is appointed by Act of Parli∣ament; so that the title of Supreme Head did not then imply any such exor∣bitant
Power, as some have imagin'd. Next comes the Act entituled, No Imposition shall be paid to the Bishop of Rome, &c. It recites, That where this your Grace's Realm, recognising no Supe∣rior under God, but only your Grace, hath been and is free from subjection to any Man's Law, but only to such as have been devised, made and ordained within the same, for the Wealth of the said Realm, or to such other, as by sufferance of your Grace and your Progenitors the People of this Realm have taken at their free Will and Liberty by their own Consent to be used among them, and have bound themselves by long use and custom to the observance of the same, not as to the observance of the Laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to the accustomed and ancient Laws of this Realm originally e∣stablish'd as Laws of the same, by the said sufferance, consent, and custom, and none otherwise. These other Laws, which the People of this Realm are said to have taken at their free Will and Liberty, by their own Consent, and are said to have bound themselves to, as to the Established Laws of the Realm, by the said sufferance, consent,
and custom, and none otherwise, are the Canon Laws. Which here the Parli∣ament disclaim any Obligation to the observance of, otherwise than as they had bound themselves by their own suf∣ferance and consent. And consequently they did not look upon any Ecclesiasti∣cal Laws, as obligatory to themselves and their Posterity, but what them∣selves had, or for the time to come should Consent to. This would never have proceeded from them, if they had imagin'd, that the Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, was or ever had been vested in the King's Person, as some amongst us have not stuck to assert of late. But the Act goes on; It standeth therefore with natural equity and good Reason, that in all and every such Laws humane, made within this Realm, or in∣duced into this Realm, by the said suf∣ferance, consent, and custom, your Roy∣al Majesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, repre∣senting the whole state of your Realm in this your most high Court of Parlia∣ment, have full Power and Authority, not only to dispense, but also to au∣thorize some Elect Person or Persons, to dispense with those and all other
humane Laws of this your Realm, &c. and also the same to abrogate, am∣plifie or diminish, as it shall seem to your Majesty, and the Nobles and Commons of your Realm, present in your Par∣liament, meet and convenient, &c. Here is no dispensing Power acknowledged to be personal in the King. Nor is the Parliament so much a stranger to Mat∣ters of Religion, as not to have a share even in the dispensing, as well as the ab∣rogating Power, with respect to Ec∣clesiastical Laws. You see, as soon as ever the foreign Yoke was cast off, they put in for their share of the Supremacy, nor did the King look upon it as any di∣minution to his own legal right, to ad∣mit their claim. It was in concurrence with them, and with their assent that the method of prosecuting Appeals had been settled; they joyn'd with him in tying up the hands of the Clergy from promulging any Constitutions, without the Royal Assent; their Authority con∣curr'd in appointing how Bishops should be Elected, Invested, and Consecrated; and here they impower the Archbishop and the King to grant Dispensati∣ons.
Then they proceed to Enact how, and by whom, and in what cases Dis∣pensations shall be granted for the future. And first they impower the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, and his Successors to grant Dispensations to the King, his Heirs and Successors, for causes not contrary to the Scriptures and the Laws of God. How? Could not the King by vertue of his inherent Preroga∣tive dispense with himself? Dr. Hicks. Was not this involv'd in the formal conception of Im∣perial Soveraignty? No. If he will act contrary to Law, he must have a Dispensation, and that Dispensation granted by a Subject, impowered by Act of Parliament so to do. This is the first and only Act that gives the King a power of dispensing in Ecclesiastical Matters, and the Archbishop of Can∣terbury may dispense in all cases, which the King by vertue of this Act may dis∣pense in; only in cases unwont to be dis∣pensed in at Rome, he must advertise the King or his Councel; who if they de∣termine that such Dispensation shall pass, then the Archbishop, having the King's Licence, shall dispense accordingly: But who ever heard of the King's Li∣censing an Archbishop to dispence with
an Act of Parliament? How would it found in our Ears, if Divinâ Providen∣tiâ Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus should issue a Non Obstante to an Act of the King, Lords, and Commons in Parlia∣ment? And yet the Archbishop may grant Dispensations with the King's al∣lowance in all Cases whatsoever, that that Act extends to. Therefore, I say, the King's Power of dispensing by vertue of that Act, is with the Canon Law only, which in effect was no Law at all. To say that the King is not restrain'd by this Act, Hob. p 146. in Colt and Glovers Case. but his power remains full and perfect as before, and he may grant them still, as King, for all Acts of Ju∣stice and Mercy flow from him, is a sound of words only, vox & praetereà nihil. And yet we find by Experience, that hae nugae seria ducunt in mala; there is likewise a strange Expression in Moor's Reports, 542. cs. 719. Al tierce point ils semblont que la Royne poit granter dispensations come le Pape puissoit en ca∣ses lou l'Archevesque n'ad authority per le Stat. de 25 H. 8. de granter dispen∣sations: quia tout l'authority, que le Pape usoit, est done al Corone. But these and many other scattered Cases
and extravagant Expressions of Repor∣ters (which have been made use of as Judgments in after times) there may possibly be some account given hereaf∣ter in a Discourse by it self. The latter part of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. concerns the visiting of Colleges, Hospitals, and places ex∣empt. It is enacted that the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury or any other person or persons, shall have no Power and Au∣thority, by reason of this Act, to visit or vex any Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Colleges, Hospitals, Houses, or other places Religious, which be or were ex∣empt before the making of this Act, but that Redress, Visitation, and Confirma∣tion shall be had by the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors by Commission under the Great Seal, to be directed to such persons as shall be appointed re∣quisite for the same, &c. This Act of Parliament, having ab∣rogated the Pope's Power here in England, those places that had been exempt from ordinary Jurisdiction, would naturally have fallen back with∣in the Visitation of the Diocesan (I mean, such places, as had been ex∣empt by vertue of any Bulls, Licences,
or Dispensations from Rome only) if it had not been especially and expresly provided that nothing in the said Act should be taken nor expounded to the de∣rogation or taking away of any grants or confirmations of any Liberties, Privi∣ledges, or Jurisdiction of any Monaste∣ries, Abbies, Priories, or other Houses or places exempt, which before the ma∣king of this Act have been obtained at the See of Rome: and if the Visitation of them by Commission under the Great Seal, had not been provided for. In the next Year, Ann. 26 H. 8. The Statute was made, which enacts that the King our Soveraign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall be taken, accepted and reputed the On∣ly Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England, called Anglicana Ecclesia, and shall have and enjoy, united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well the title and stile thereof, as all Honours, Dignities, Pre∣heminences, Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Authorities, Immunities, Profits, and Commodities to the said Dignity of Su∣pream Head of the same Church belong∣ing and appertaining.
What was then meant, understood, recognis'd &c. by the word Supreme Head, will appear by these following Considerations; First, that the reci∣tal of the Act shews they intended not by that recognition to invest him with any new Power: For they recite that the King's Majesty justly and rightfully, is, and ought to be the Supreme head of the Church of England; and so is recog∣nised by the Clergy of the Realm in their Convocations, yet nevertheless for cor∣roboration and confirmation thereof, &c. So that this Act so far forth, as it gives or acknowledges the Title of SUPREME HEAD, is but Declarative. And consequently they, that upon this Act ground a Translation of the Pope's Power by the Canon-law, to the King, utterly mistake the matter: For our King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not grounded upon the Canon Law, but the Common Law of the Realm; it was a Native of our own, and not of any foreign extraction: Secondly, That this Supreme Head-ship of the Church, con∣sists only in his being Supreme head of that Church of England, which then was called Anglicana Ecclesia; and who they were, appears First, by the Sta∣tute
of 24. Henr. 8. cap. 12. aforemen∣tioned: The body Spiritual whereof (of the Realm of England) having Power, when any Cause of the Law Divine, hap∣pened to come in question, or of Spiritual Learning, that it was declared, interpre∣ted, and shew'd by that part of the said body Politick, called the Spiritualty; now being usually called the English Church. So that the Spiritualty are the Ecclesia Anglicana, of whom the King is here declar'd the supreme head. Secondly, It appears by the Recogni∣tion of the Clergy, who having no Au∣thority to declare a Supreme Head in Ecclesiastical matters for the Laity, did but by that Submission acknowledge themselves to be to all intents and pur∣poses, the King's Subjects and not the Pope's. But Thirdly, This same Par∣liament in this very Session tells us, that the King had of right always been so: It is in the third Chapt. for the payment of first-fruits to the King. The words are, Wherefore his said humble and obedient Subjects, as well the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, &c. do pray that for the more surety, continuance, and augmentation of his Highness Royal
estate, being not only now recognis'd (as he always indeed hath heretofore been) the only Supreme Head in Earth, next and immediately under God, of the Church of England, but also their most assured and undoubted, natural Lord and King, having the whole Governance of this his Realm, &c. They tell him, That he was not only the Supreme Head of the Church of England, but their (viz. the Temporalties) Lord and King; so that he had the Governance of the whole Realm and Subjects of the same. What can be more plain, than first, That by Supreme Head of the Church of Eng∣land, was meant the Supreme Head of the Spiritualty? which was necessary to be recogniz'd, because they had ac∣knowledged formerly another Supreme Head. Secondly, That they gave no new Power by that word, since they tell us, that indeed he had always been so. And Thirdly, That his Supremacy consists only in a power of Governance. Fourthly, This title of Supreme Head does not give the King any power of dispensing with Acts of Parliament in Matters of Religion or Ecclesiastical Af∣fairs whatsoever. That power was ne∣ver
yielded to the Pope himself, during that whole time that he was uncon∣troulably submitted to, as Head of the Church. That power they complain of in the Act of 25 H. 8. cap. 21. as an Ʋsurpation, an Abuse, a Cheat. They declare it to be in the King and them∣selves. Fifthly, Dr. Burnet in his Hi∣story of the Reformation, p. 142, 143. First Part, has these words; But at the same time that they pleaded so much for the King's Supremacy, and power of making Laws for restraining and coercing his Subjects, it appears that they were far from vesting him with such an absolute Power, as the Popes had pretended to; for they thus defined the extent of the King's Power. Institution of a Christian Man. To them (speaking of Princes and Magistrates specially and principally it appertaineth to defend the Faith of Christ and his Religion, to conserve and maintain the True Doctrine of Christ, and all such as be true Preachers and setters forth there∣of, and to abolish Heresies, Abuses, and Idolatries, and to punish with cor∣poral pains, such as of Malice be the occasion of the same. And finally to oversee and cause that the said Bishops
and Priests do execute their Pastoral Office truly and faithfully, and spe∣ally in these Points which by Christ and his Apostles were given and com∣mitted to them; and in case they shall be negligent in any part thereof, or would not diligently execute the same, to cause them to double and sup∣ply their lack; and if they obstinately withstand their Prince's kind moni∣tion, and will not amend their faults, then and in such case, to put others in their rooms and places: And God hath also commanded the said Bishops and Priests to obey with all humbleness and reverence, both Kings and Princes and Governors, and all their Laws not being contrary to the Laws of God) whatsoever they be, and that not only propter iram, but also prop∣ter conscientiam. Thus it appears, that they both limited obedience to the King's Laws, with the due caution of not being contrary to the Law of God; and acknow∣ledged the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in discharge of the Pastoral Office, commit∣ted to the Pastors of the Church by Christ and his Apostles; and that the Supremacy then pretended to, was no
such extravagant Power as some ima∣gine. Sixthly, That the Supremacy ascribed to the King by this Act, had no reference to any such absolute Power as the Pope pretended to, ap∣pears by the whole course of the King's Reign; forasmuch as the Exercise of this Supremacy in every Branch of it, was directed by particular and positive Laws made much about the same time; nor perhaps were any Acts of Su∣premacy exerted during this King's Reign, that some Act of Parliament or other did not warrant, as will appear in our Progress. The truth of it is, that no more can be made of it, than an utter Exclusi∣on of the Pope's pretended Authority, and an acknowledgment that the King is (not an absolute Dominus fac-totum in Spiritualibus, but) the Fountain of Justice to be administred according to Law in Cases commonly called Ecclesiastical, as well as Temporal, without any dependance upon a Foreign Potentate. Hence it is, that in these Acts of King Henry the Eighth concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, the Crown of
England is so often mentioned to be an Imperial Crown and the Realm of Eng∣land, an Empire. Sir Edward Hale's Case. Tho that Word has been made use of of late to countenance a very strange and unheard of Judg∣ment: But the Gentleman that made use of the Word, either understood it not, or wilfully misapplyed it. The Crown of England is said to be an Imperial Crown, because it is subject to no Foreign Jurisdiction. The Kings of England are not Homagers nor e∣ver were, for their Kingdom to any other, as many Kings have been. A Regal Crown does not ex vi termini, exclude a Subordination; an Imperial Crown does. The Emperor of Germa∣ny (whose Crown must needs be Impe∣rial) has less Power in the Empire than most Princes in their own Do∣minions. But it must be confess'd, that the Word Supreme Head, tho legally un∣derstood, it be no such Bug-bear, yet was a Term borrowed from Antichrist; a Word that gave offence, especially to those that knew little of its Sig∣nification, but what they had learnt from a Jurisdiction pretended to be ex∣ercis'd
by the Pope as such; and claim∣ing to be so, as Vicar General to Christ. Papists thought the Right of St. Peters Successor injuriously invaded; and Protestants, though universally sub∣mitting to the Legal Power of the Crown, yet many of them boggl'd at the Title, as making too bold with our Saviours Prerogative of be∣ing the only HEAD of the Church. And so great Powers were given to King Henry the Eighth by Acts of Parliament, (of which by and by) in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Matters; which, though given by particular Laws, and those Laws occasion'd by the then Circumstances of Affairs; yet by some unadvised Persons are confounded with his Legal and Original Supremacy at the Common Law, or at least are lookt upon as incident to the Title, Style, and Dignity of Supreme Head; that no wonder the Title has found little countenance from Protestant Writers. The other part of this short Act of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. is very observa∣ble, and discovers a Secret that few observe; but rightly considered, lays
open a very fine Scene, and gives an undeniable Answer to the only ma∣terial Argument that can be produced in favor of the late Ecclesiastical Com∣mission. The Argument lies thus: King Henry the Eighth issued a Commissi∣on to Cromwell, whereby he constitu∣ted him his Vicegerent in Ecclesiasti∣cal Matters, and delegated to him the Exercise of all his Ecclesiastical Juris∣diction, long before the 1 Eliz. which impowered Queen Elizabeth and her Successors from time to time, to issue such Commissions: And this Commis∣sion to Cromwell cannot be deny'd to have been a Legal Commission, be∣cause it is recited in an Act of Par∣liament, 31 Hen. 8. cap. 10. admitted to be according to Law, and a place appointed him in respect of that Office, above the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury in the House of Lords. And there having been no Act of Parliament in King Henry the Eighths time, whereby he was ex∣presly impowered to issue such a Commission; the Commission was war∣ranted by the Common Law. This being the Argumentum palmarium, tho foolishly omitted by those that have
undertaken to write in Vindication of the Proceedings of the late Com∣missioners, receives a full and satisfa∣ctory Answer from this very Act of Parliament, this being the Act which was the Ground and Foundation of that Commission, and, as far as I know of the Commission, did really warrant it. The Words are these, viz. And that our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall have full Power and Authority from time to time, to visit, repress, re∣dress, reform, order, correct, restrain, and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Offences, Contempts and Enor∣mities, whatsoever they be, which by any manner Spiritual Authority or Juris∣diction ought or may be lawfully reform∣ed, repressed, ordered, redressed, cor∣rected, restrained or amended, most to the Pleasure of Almighty God, the in∣crease of Vertue in Christs Religion, and for the conservation of the Peace, Ʋnity, and Tranquillity of this Realm, any Ʋsage, Custom, foreign Laws, foreign Authority, Prescription, or any thing or things to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. By these Words a Personal Authority
(not of Legislation) but of visiting, re∣dressing, correcting, &c. is given; to whom? To the King, his Heirs and Successors. This Power was given by the Parliament, nor was enjoyed or exercised by the King or any of his Predecessors before; and being vested in the King, his Heirs and Succes∣sors, may consequentially be delega∣ted to Commissioners. After this Act was pass'd, out comes Cromwell's Com∣mission of Vicegerency, and not till then, tho the Clergy had recogniz'd the Supremacy two years ago; and the Parliament in the 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. and the 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. had in effect done so too: Yet was not the recognis'd, restor'd and de∣clar'd Supremacy lookt upon as any Warrant for an Ecclesiastical Commis∣sion, till a new Power was given to the King by this Act: And this Act of Parliament having been Repealed by the First and Second of Phil. and Mar. and never since reviv'd; there is now no ground from this Act, or from that President of Cromwell's Com∣mission, for a like Commission in our Days. How far the Statute of 1 Eliz.
gives countenance thereunto, shall be enquired into when we come to it. The next Act that I shall take no∣tice of, is the Thirteenth Chapter of this same Session, entituled, By whom Suffragans shall be nominated and elect∣ed: The Act recites, that sithen the beginning of this present Parliament, good and honourable Laws and Statutes have been made and established for E∣lections, Presentations, Consecrations, and investing of Archbishops and Bi∣shops of this Realm, with all Ceremo∣nies appertaining to the same; yet ne∣vertheless, no Provision hath been made for Suffragan Bishops; and therefore enacts, what Towns shall be taken and accepted for Sees of Bishops Suffragans: And gives the King Power and Authority to give to one of two Per∣sons to be presented to him by any Arch∣bishop or Bishop, the Stile, Title and Name of a Bishop of such a See, &c. provides for the Consecration of such Bishops; limits what Authority they shall have in the Diocess, &c.
Hence I infer, that the Parliament had its share in the Government of the Church, The Letters Patents made pursuant to this Act, con∣clude, Vigore Statuti in ejus∣modi casu editi & provisi. Dr. Burnet. Coll. of Rec. ad Vol. 1. p. 130. notwithstanding the Re∣stitution of the Supremacy; and the King could not as SUPREME HEAD, without this Act of Parliament ap∣point the number of Suffragan Bi∣shops, or give, limit or bound their Power and Authority. In the Twenty eighth Year of this King, it was enacted, That all Arch∣bishops and Bishops of this Realm, or of any the Kings Dominions consecra∣ted, and at this present Parliament taken and reputed for Archbishops and Bishops, may by the Authority of this present Parliament, and not by Vertue of any Provision or other Foreign Au∣thority, Licence, Faculty or Dispensa∣tion, keep, enjoy, and retain their Arch∣bishopricks and Bishopricks, in as large and ample manner as if they had been promoted, elected, confirmed and conse∣crated according to the due Course of the Laws of this Realm: And that every Archbishop and Bishop of this Realm, and of other the King's Domini∣ons, may minister, use and exercise all and every thing and things pertaining
to the Office or Order of an Archbishop or Bishop, with all Tokens, Insigns and Cere∣monies thereunto lawfully belonging. Here the Parliament impowers the Archbishops and Bishops that then were, to use and exercise their Offices and Orders, not by Virtue of any Foreign Authority, but by Authority of this present Parliament. This the King could not have done without consent of Parliament, because he could not dispense with the Statutes of Praemu∣nire and Provisors, as has been said already, and as appears by a nota∣ble Act in the Twenty fifth Year of this King's Reign, Burnett's Collect. of Re∣cords. ad Vol. 1. pag. 121, 122, 123. concerning the De∣privation of the Bishops of Salisbury and Worcester: The Act recites, That where by the laudable Laws and Pro∣visions of this Realm, it had been esta∣blished that no Person or Persons of of what Degree, Estate or Quality, should take or receive within this Realm of England, to Farm by any Procura∣cy, Writ, Letter of Attorney, Admi∣nistration, by Indenture, or by any other Mean, any Benefice or other Pro∣motion within this Realm, of any Per∣son or Persons, but only of the King's
true and lawful Subjects, being born under the King's Dominions: And al∣so, that no Person or Persons of what Estate and Degree soever, by reason of any such Farm, Procuracy, Letter of Attorney, Administration, Inden∣ture, or by any other Mean, should, &c. Notwithstanding which said wholsom Laws, Statutes and Provisions, the King's Highness being a Prince of great Benignity and Liberality, having no Knowledge, or due Information or Instruction of the same Laws, Sta∣tutes and Provisions, hath heretofore nominated and preferred, and promoted Laurence Compegius Bishop of Sa∣rum, with all the Spiritual and Tem∣poral Possessions, &c. belonging to the same; And hath also nominated, pre∣ferred and promoted Hierome, being another Stranger, to the See of Wor∣cester, &c. Be it enacted by Autho∣rity of this present Parliament, That the said two several Sees of Salisbu∣ry and Worcester shall be taken, re∣puted and accounted in Law void, &c. Here we see the King was not allow∣ed to act contrary to Acts of Par∣liament concerning Ecclesiastical Mat∣ters:
We see Bishops depriv'd by Act of Parliament, and by the Act of 28 H. 8. cap. 16. other Bishops and Arch∣bishops, who in strictness of Law were no Bishops of those Sees, by reason of their foreign Provisions, quieted in the injoy∣ment of their Bishopricks and authoriz'd to exercise their Episcopal Function, there by Act of Parliament; though it is not to be doubted, but if the Rolls of those times were searcht, Dispensa∣tions formerly granted to those Bishops would be found amongst them. But they stood them in no stead, because contrary to the Laws, Statutes, and Provisions aforesaid. So that here the King and Parliament acknowledging that the King had no knowledge or due Information or Instruction of the said Statutes (which is a modest and respectful way of expressing the King's doing an illegal thing) what else can we infer than that they disown, and he disclaims any personal Preroga∣tive inherent in himself, to violate those (and, consequently other) Laws con∣cerning Ecclesiastical Affairs? Which shews both that the King's Supremacy was not accounted any such unbound∣ed
Power, as some fancy, and that the Parliament retain'd its share in the Ju∣risdiction over Ecclesiastical Persons and Things, notwithstanding the restituti∣on, recognition (or call it what you will) of the Supremacy. I pass by the Act of 31 H. 8. c. 14. whereby certain Opinions then ac∣counted Heresie, and Marriage of Priests, are brought within the compass of Treason and Felony (for that the in∣flicting of such Punishments, for what Crimes or pretended Crimes soever, is an Act of Civil, not of Spiritual or Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction) and come to the Act of 32 H. 8. cap. 26. which laid the top stone of King Henry the Eighths Supremacy, and mounted it one story higher than ever it was carried before or since. It was thereby enacted, that All Decrees and Ordinances, which ac∣cording to God's Word and Christ's Gos∣pel by the Kings Advice and Confirmation by his Letters Patents, shall be made and ordained by the Archhishops, Bishops, and Doctors, appointed or to be appointed by his Royal Majesty, or else by the whole Clergy of England, (nota benè) in and upon the matter of Christian Religion,
and Christian Faith, and the lawful Rites, Ceremonies, and Observations of the same, shall be in every point thereof be∣lieved, obeyed, and performed to all in∣tents and purposes, upon the pains there∣in comprised. Here Matters of Do∣ctrin and Worship are given up to the King's determination and appointment. But he was to determine by such Ad∣vice, as was appointed by the Act. And this Power was personal, died with him, and was never pretended to by any of his Successors. It was given him by Parliament, who could not have given it him, if they had not had it themselves: for there was no Act of Convocation in the case. He had it not before, for then there would have been no need of the Act. It is greater to give than to receive. They give it him with a restriction, that affords a good Argument against a pretended power in the King, of dispensing with all Acts of Parliament concerning matters of Reli∣gion, viz. Provided that nothing shall be ordained or defined which shall be re∣pugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. It seems the Parliament at that time was so far from apprehending any
power lodged in the King, either by vertue of any inherent Prerogative, or by vertue of his Imperial Soveraignty, or as incident to his lately recognis'd title of Supreme Head, of breaking through all Acts of Parliaments relating to Religion and Ecclesiastical Affairs, that now in the 32 Year of his Reign, when he had been declared the Su∣preme Head by Act of Parliament Six Years ago, when every Act of Parlia∣ment about Church Matters carried an acknowledgment of that Declaration in the front of it, when a Legislative Pow∣er as to Doctrine and Ceremonies was given him by Act of Parliament, yet even then when the Supremacy blaz'd like a Meteor, and had so malignant an influence, as to strike opposers dead, when it was armed with such a Power as never any King of England enjoyed before or since, yet then were Acts of Parliaments accounted so Sacred that nothing was to be ordained or de∣fined by this new Legislative Authority contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.
And this very Legislative Power, owing its birth to a Parliamentary Concession, which qualified it with a Restriction, which perhaps was not acceptable, is sufficient to inform us that a Parliament can give more power and larger Prerogatives to the King, even in Ecclesiastical Matters, than he has by common right; and that's all the use that can be made of this Act now in our days. The next Act is that of Marriages; cap. 38. of this Session, the Conusance of Marriage had time out of mind be∣longed to the Spiritual Jurisdiction; which was now vested in a great mea∣sure in the King's Person; the executive part he might administer by Commissi∣oners delegated, by vertue of the Stat. of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. (as hath been said) a Legislative Power was given him by 32 Hen. 8. cap. 26. But that Act did not enable him to make any binding Laws about Marriage, for the Declarations, Decrees, Definitions, Re∣solutions and Ordinances which he was impowered to make according to God's Word and Christ's Gospel, with his Bi∣shops
and Doctors to be appointed, were only in Matters of Christian Faith and the lawful Rites and Ceremonies of the same. And the setling of the Degrees of Marriage not falling un∣der either of those two Heads, viz. Matters of Faith, or Ceremonies; it was necessary there should be an Act of Parliament to make a Regulation therein. The next Act is the 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 1. which prohibits the setling or using of any Books of the Old or New Testament of Tindal's Translation, or comprizing any Mat∣ter of Christian Religion, Articles of Faith or Holy Scripture, contrary to the Doctrin set forth since Anno Dom. 1540. or to be set forth by the King; prohibits the retaining a∣ny English. Books or Writings con∣cerning Matters against the Holy and Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, or for Maintenance of the Anabap∣tists, or other Books abolished by the King's Proclamation; forbids any thing to be taught contrary to the King's Instructions, &c. under
severe Penalties. In which there is this farther Clause: And be it far∣ther enacted, That the King's Ma∣jesty, our said Soveraign. Lord that now is, King Henry the Eighth, may at any time hereafter at his Highness liberty and pleasure, change and alter this present Act and Pro∣visions of the same, or any Clause or Article therein contained, as to his Highness most excellent Wisdom shall seem convenient, any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. So that a Power in the King of Changing and Altering (and consequently of Sus∣pending, which in effect is Repeal∣ing,) Acts of Parliament concerning Matters of Religion, unless given by a Parliament, is not according to the Constitution of our Government, nor is it a Perogative inherent in the King of common Right: For if he had had such a Power in himself, this Clause (which no doubt, was put in by the King's Order) would have been vain and nugatory.
The Act of 35 Hen. 8. cap. 16. gives the King Authority during his Life, to name Thirty two Persons, viz. sixteen Spiritual and sixteen Tempo∣ral, to examine all Canons, Con∣stitutions and Ordinances Provinci∣al and Synodal, and to establish all such Laws Ecclesiastical as shall be thought by the King and them con∣venient to be used in all Spiritual Courts. This the King could not do by Vertue of the Act of 32 Hen. 8. cap. 26. For that Act gave him a Power concerning Matters of Christian Faith and Ceremonies only: Nor could the King and the Clergy settle these Ca∣nons and Constitutions, without an Act of Parliament; for the Laity in all Matters Ecclesiastical, in all things of Spiritual Conusance, were to be bound by them: Nor would the Par∣liament trust the King and the Spi∣ritualty to settle the Canon Law, with∣out an equal number of the Temporalty added to them. The next and last Act that I shall observe in this King's Reign, is the 37 Hen. 8. cap. 17. 'which Act re∣citing,
That the Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Archdeacons and other Eccle∣siastical Persons, have no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by, un∣der and from the King, Enacts, That all Persons, as well Lay as Marryed Men, being Doctors of the Civil Law, may lawfully execute and exercise all manner of Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Coercions appertaining to, or in any wise concerning the same, &c. any Law, Constitution or Ordinance to the contrary notwith∣standing. What can be more pure∣ly Spiritual than exercising. Ecclesi∣astical Censures, and yet this King, though he had a Personal executive Power given him in all Matters Ec∣clesiastical by the 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. a Legislative Power in part, by the Statutes of 31 Hen. 8. cap. 8. and 32 Hen. 8. cap. 25. and a Power of Dispensing with the Canon Law, by the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. yet thought it convenient at least, to have the concurrence of his Parlia∣ment, in breaking through those Or∣dinances and Constitutions, where∣by Lay-men and Marryed-men were
disabled to exercise any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, or be Judge or Regi∣ster in any Court commonly called Ecclesiastical Court. I cannot well deny but that the King might have dispens'd with those Canons and Constitutions by Vertue of the Statute of the 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. which impowered him to allow the Archbishop of Canterbury to grant Licences and Dispensations even in Cases not wont to be dispensed in at Rome: Nay, and these Constitutions whereby Lay and Married Men were disabled, as aforesaid, are in the Preamble of this Statute, said to be utterly abo∣lish'd, frustrated and of none effect, by a Statute made in the Twenty fifth Year of the Kings most Noble Reign: By which seems to be meant the Nineteenth Chapter of the then Ses∣sion of Parliament: And yet because the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdea∣cons, and other Ecclesiastical Persons practised the contrary; which might give occasion to some evil disposed Persons to think, and little to regard the Proceedings and Censures Eccle∣siastical, made by your. Highness
and your Vicegerent, Officials and Commissaries, Judges and Visitors, being also Lay and Married Men, to be of little or none Effect or Force; Therefore it is ordained and enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, That all and singular Persons, as well Lay as those that be Married, being Doctors of the Ci∣vil Law, &c. The enacting of a thing by Parliament to silence all Doubts, to give credit to the Pro∣ceedings of such Lay-men as then did actually exercise Ecclesiastical Ju∣risdiction by Commission, or otherwise, shews sufficiently, that even in Mat∣ters never so Spiritual, the Act of King, Lords and Commons, carryed a greater Authority than any Commis∣sion, Dispensation, or other Act what∣soever proceeding from the King solely, and that at a time when the Supremacy was at the height. There were many other Acts pas∣sed in this Kings Reign, concerning Church men and Matters confessedly of Ecclesiastical Conusance, as 21 Hen. 8. cap. 5. concerning Probates
of Wills. Cap. 6. Concerning Mor∣tuaries taken by Priests and others. Cap. 13. Against Pluralities of Be∣nefices and taking of Farms by Spi∣ritual Men. 23 Hen. 8. Cap. 1. A∣bridging the Power of Ordinaries, and taking away the Benefit of Clergy in some Cases. Cap. 9. That no Man be cited into any Eccle∣siastical Court out of the Diocess wherein he dwells, unless in cer∣tain Cases. Cap. 10. Concerning Feoffments and Assurances to the use of any Church or Chappel. 25 Hen. 8. Cap. 14. For the punish∣ment of Heresie and Hereticks, li∣miting the manner of proceeding a∣gainst them, defining what shall be Heresie, how it shall be punisht, and abridging the Authority of the Bishops and the Canon Law. Cap. 16. Concerning Pluralities. 26 Hen. 8. Cap. 3. For the payment of the First Fruits of all Dignities, Bene∣fices, Promotions Spiritual and Tenths, to the King and his Heirs, abolish∣ing the Pope's Usurpation and Au∣thority herein. Cap. 13. For abo∣lishing the Priviledge of Sanctuary
in Cases of High Treason. Cap. 15. Against some Exactions of Spiritu∣al Men within the Archdeaconry of Richmond. 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 8. That the King's Spiritual Subjects shall pay no Tenths whilst they are in their First Fruits. Cap. 19. Limiting Sanctuaries and Sanctuary Persons. Cap. 20. Concerning the Payment of Tythes within the Ci∣ty and Suburbs of London. Cap. 28. For the suppressing of Monasteries, Priories and Religious Houses, vest∣ing their Revenues in the King, and erecting a Court of Augmen∣tations. 28 Hen. 8. Cap. 10. For extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, prescribing an Oath of Abjuration of it, and Po∣pery, together with the Pope's Usur∣pations, and excellently setting forth the King's Supremacy and Parlia∣ments Authority in Matters Eccle∣siastical. Cap. 11. For the Resti∣tution of the Profits arising, during the Vacation of a Benefice to the next Incumbent. Cap. 13. Com∣pelling Spiritual Persons to reside upon their Livings. Cap. 16. Re∣leasing
such as had obtain'd pre∣tended Licences and Dispensations from the See of Rome. 31 Hen. 8. Cap. 16. Enabling such as were Re∣ligious Persons to purchase Lands, to sue and to be sued in all man∣ner of Actions, which they were disabled formerly to do by the Common and Canon Law. Cap. 9. Enabling the King to make Bishops by his Letters Patents, and to erect new Bishopricks, which he did. Cap. 13. For dissolving all Mona∣steries and Religious Houses, and vesting them in the King. Cap. 14. For abolishing diversity of Opinions in Matters of Religion, most fully and exactly demonstrating the Par∣liaments Jurisdiction in Matters of Religion. 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 7. For the true Payment of Tythes and Of∣ferings. Cap. 10. For the Punish∣ment of incontinent Priests and Wo∣men offending with them. Cap. 12. Concerning Sanctuaries and the Priviledges of Churches and Church-Yards. Cap. 15. Prescribing the manner of proceeding against He∣reticks, and impugners of the Act
for abolishing of enormous Opini∣ons in Christians Religion. Cap. 25. Dispensing with the Marriage be∣tween the King and the Lady. Ann of Cleve. 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 29. For enabling Religious Persons to sue and be sued. Cap. 31. Severing the Bishopricks of Chester and the Isle of Man from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and uniting them to the Province and Archbishoprick of York. Cap. 32. Making the Church of Whitegate a Parish Church by it self, and se∣vering it from the Parish of Over. All these Acts, and perhaps some few not here enumerated, evince beyond all possibility of contradicti∣on, that the whole Fabrick of the English Church, both as to the Doctrin, Discipline, Ceremonies, Censures, Rights, Jurisdictions, En∣dowments, Priviledges, &c. was from time to time ordered, mould∣ed, governed, altered, improved or impaired, by Authority of Par∣liament, and not by the King in right of his meer Supremacy; nor by the Clergy, upon the score of any pre∣tended
Authority derived from from Christ, or from the King as SUPREME HEAD on Earth: That no one Pin was fastned in this Tabernacle, but according to what the Legislative Body of the King∣dom prescribed, and directed from time to time: That this Age had no other Notion of the King's Supremacy by common right, than our Fore-Fathers had before the Pope, and his Faction grew up∣on our Constitution: That many Powers and Authorities given to King Henry the Eighth by Par∣liament, which are now either ab∣rogated or expired, as they shew, that our King's were not, nor are entituled to them of common Right, nor can justifie the execu∣ting any such Authority by Pre∣sidents in his Reign, which were grounded upon Laws then in be∣ing, but which are now of no force: so they shew unquestion∣ably, that there is a greater and more Soveraign Supremacy in Mat∣ters Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, in the King and both Houses of Par∣liament,
than is lodged in the King himself, or in the King and Convocation. It appears farther, that those Temporary Powers given to that King expiring with him, and the Act of 26 Hen. 8. Cap. 1. being now Repeal'd, the Legal and Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown in Matters Ecclesiastical, is the same now that it was Five hundred Years ago, notwithstand∣ing any thing that pass'd in this Reign; only that a new Course is now settled, and that by Act of Parliament too, for the Electing of Bishops and Prosecuting of Ap∣peals. Only one Thing more I shall add, viz. That in Matters Spiri∣tual, as well as Temporal, several Resolutions of the Judges being grounded on Temporary Acts of Parliament then in being, follow∣ing Judges both Ecclesiastical and Civil, meeting with such Resolu∣tions, and not considering that those Acts upon which such Re∣solutions were made, were but
Temporary or Repeal'd; they have made such Judgments to be Presi∣dents, to graft their Modern Opini∣ons upon. FINIS.
An Answer to CHAP. 4. SECT. 1. Of a late BOOK, Entituled, the King's Visitatorial Power Asserted, By way of APPENDIX. SInce the foregoing Papers were Written, a late Mercenary Wri∣ter, One Nathaniel Johnson, Do∣ctor in Physick, has publish'd a Book, Entituled, The King's Visitatorial Power, Asserted; in which Book he has in∣serted a long Section (how pertinent∣ly
to his main design, in that Trea∣tise, may perhaps be shewn here∣after) concerning the King's Supre∣macy and Power in Ecclesiastical Causes, and Visitations, page 144. &c. to page 160. In which Section, because he pre∣tends to set up an imaginary Personal Supremacy, quite different from what I have endeavoured to assert from some Remarks, upon Ancient Histories, and late Acts of Parliament, but agree∣able enough with some Opinions that have been espous'd of late, and made use of to warrant some late Proceed∣ings. I thought it might not be amiss to trace him through that Section, and submit to the Judgment of the Un∣prejudiced Reader, whether the Do∣ctor has afforded the World a right Scheme of the King's Ecclesiastical Su∣premacy. I beg the Reader's Pardon, if he meet with some few passages over a∣gain here, that were touch'd upon in the foregoing Discourse. I hope their usefulness will excuse the repetition of
them; and the Answer would not have been so clear without it. He tells us (pag. 144.) that long before the Reformation, several Kings of England permitted no Canons, or Constitutions of the Church, or Bulls and Breves of the Apostolick See, to be executed here [without their Al∣lowance.] Which I agree to be very true, only the Doctor saying [with∣out their Allowance] implies (and it appears by the whole drift of his Discourse in this Chapter, and indeed by the main Scope of his Book, that he would be understood) that With their Allowance such Canons and Con∣stitutions, Bulls and Breves might lawfully be Executed. Which I de∣ny: And hope to make it evident, that Our Kings could not by their own Personal Authority let in up∣on their Subjects a foreign Jurisdi∣ction. He adds (pag. 145.) that since the Supremacy has been Established by Act of Parliament in the Crown, The Kings of England may according to the
Laws in force, not only Exercise all the Powers they could, What Pow∣ers those are, no Man knows but Filmer, Brady, Johnson, Hicks, Sir. Ro∣ger L'Estrange, and a very few others of ye∣sterday. as Sovereign Princes; but likewise whatever the Pope de jure, if not de facto could, or did do, in the outward Regiment of Ecclesiastical matters; and conse∣quently, that whatsoever was done in Visitations by the Authority of the Popes, Metropolitans, or Diocesan Bi∣shops, may now be done by the Kings of England, as Supreme Ordinaries. Which is a very wild Assertion, and without the least Foundation of Truth. He does not here speak it out roundly, That the King may by the Law do whatever the Pope de fa∣cto did; but minces the matter a little by saying, Whatever the Pope de jure, [if not de facto] could, or did do: And, yet with the same breath, he says positively, that whatever was done in Visitations by Authority of the Pope, may now be done by the King. So that however the King may be limited, and tyed up in other Parts of his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to what the Popes de jure could do, in Visitations, at least he has Autho∣rity
to do whatever the Popes, Arch∣bishops, or Bishops actually did. The Doctor did not consider that the several Branches of the Suprema∣cy, now restored by Act of Parlia∣ment, are guided, directed, and li∣mited by positive and particular Laws, made about the time of the Reformation: And that the Act of primo Elizabeth, in that general Clause, which Restores the Supremacy, Ʋnites and Annexes only such Jurisdiction, and Authority, as had, or might be lawfully Exercised by any Spiritual Person, &c. Not that the Pope (to speak strictly) could Exercise any Jurisdiction lawfully within this Realm, for the Old Laws and Customs of the Realm, and the Statutes of Pre∣munire and Provisors were firm Bars to his Right; but a Jurisdiction may be lawful in it self (that is (for so I would be understood) the Acts of a Person Assuming Jurisdi∣ction, may be lawful in themselves) considered separate and a-part from the Person of him that Exerts it; though the Person Exercising such Ju∣risdiction,
have no legal Authority. If an Usurper should possess himself of any Government, and carry on the Administration of it, in the same Method and Course of Justice, that the Lawful Prince did, or ought to do, in strictness of Law there might perhaps be a Nullity in all his Acts; and yet, considered Abstracted from his Person, his Government would be said to be lawful; that is, according to Law, and the course of Proceed∣ings, that had been setled, and ob∣tained before his Usurpation. So, whatever the Pope did in this Nati∣on, as pretending to be Head of the English Church, which was not in it self contrary to the Law of the Realm in Church, or State; but might lawfully be done, though not by him, is by the said Act of primo Elizabeth, Ʋnited and Annexed, to what? Why, to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Whereas by the Act of Supremacy that passed in King Henry the Eighths time, All such Jurisdi∣ction, Authority, &c. was personally vested in the King, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors. But of that distinction more
shall be said, God willing, some other time. Pursuant to this imagination of the Pope's Power, being Translated to the King, he tells us, that latter Laws have devolved upon the King even the Power of the Pope in foro ex∣terno, pag. 145. He says (pag. 145, 146.) that during the Schism (in the Papacy between Ʋrban and Clement) King William Rufus claimed as other Prin∣ces did, a Right to declare to which Pope he would adhere: And that none should be received, as Pope, in England, without his Licence and Ele∣ction. Here if I understand the Do∣ctor aright, he takes for granted, that if there should happen a Schism in the Popedom, the King might declare whether, or which of the Compe∣titors himself thought fit, to be Pope within this Realm. Which I deny that he could do, without the Assent of the Clergy and Laity in a General Assembly.
He says (pag. 145.) that, if the Archbishop of Canterbury called, and presided in a General Council of Bi∣shops, King William allowed nothing to be appointed, or forbidden, unless they were accommodated to his Will, and were first ordained by him. These are the Words of Eadmerus, out of whom the Doctor Quotes them: (Eadm. Lib. 1. Fol. 6.) But if the Doctor would here insinuate, as he does, and consonantly to his own Hypo∣thesis, must mean, that the King's Will concurring with the Assent of a General Council of Bishops, could make an Ecclesiastical Law to bind the whole Kingdom, without the Assent of the Laity, that is what I deny; and hope to make it very clear in the follow∣ing Discourse. Whereas he says (pag. 145.) out of the same Author Eadmerus, that King William suffered not any of his Barons, or Officers to undergo any Ec∣clesiastical Censure, but by his precept. I hope it will appear, that this was not an Arbitrary Power assumed by
the King, but that the Law of the Realm was so. He says (pag. 146, 147.) that the Oath of Fidelity, which Anselme had taken to King William Rufus, was no ways like the present Oath of Su∣premacy. He says (pag. 148, 149.) As to the legantine Power, it is apparent by several Instances, that none Exercised any here without the King's leave. Which is true, and as true it is, and apparent by as many Instances, that the King singly could not give any such leave. He says (pag. 154.) that What Visitations were made of the Ʋniversity of Oxford by the Pope's Legates, do no ways infer that thereby the King's Power of Visiting is Exauctorated, but that whatever they did was in Subor∣dination to the King's pleasure, or as ordain'd by his Laws. The Doctor does well to disjoin the King's Pleasure and his Laws, for they did not al∣ways agree. But this Paragraph must
be altered to make it tolerable Sence; viz. Whatever the legates did in Vi∣siting the Ʋniversity of Oxford, if it were not contrary to the King's Laws, was in Subordination to the King's Au∣thority. Some other passages tending to the same purpose, with those alrea∣dy taken notice of, will offer them∣selves as we go along through the several parts of the Chapter. Whereas the Doctor says, that se∣veral Kings permitted no Canons, or Constitutions of the Church, or Bulls, &c. to be Executed here [without their Allowance:] Intimating thereby that those Kings might of their own Per∣sonal Authority give such Allowance, And that [with their Allowance] Fo∣reign Canons and Constitutions might be Executed here; I take leave to say, That it never was in the Pow∣er of a King of England legally to Subject his People to a Foreign Juris∣diction, nor to Oblige them to the Observance of any Law, without their own Assent: And therefore the
King's Allowance could not make a Foreign Canon Obligatory here, un∣less it were received by the People with their own Assent: Nor could his giving leave, legally Subject his People to Processes from Rome, as will abundantly appear by and by. But before I go on, I desire the Doctor to take notice of an Old Act of Parliament (for such it was, though the Word Parliament was not then in being amongst us) made in King Edward the Confessor's Time, if not before, and Confirmed by King Wil∣liam the First: Debet Rex omnia ritè facere in Regno & [per Judicium Procerum Regni.] Debet enim Jus & Justitia magis regnare in Regno, quàm voluntas prava. Lex est semper quod jus facit: Voluntas autem, Vio∣lentia & Vis non est Jus. And again in the same Chapter; De∣bet Rex Judicium Rectum in Regno facere, & Justitiam [per Consilium Procerum Regni sui tenere.] Ista verò debet omnia Rex in propriâ per∣sonâ, inspectis & tactis Sacrosanctis Evangeliis, & super sacras & sanctas
reliquias coram Regno, Sacerdotio & Clero jurare, antequàm ab Archiepis∣copis & Episcopis Regni coronetur. Lambard. de Priscis Anglorum legibus, page 138. & page 142. Hence we see that Judicium Procerum & Consi∣lium Procerum are Essential to the English Government: Without which Right and Justice cannot Reign, but a Perverse Will would Rule the Roast. Hence it was that King Edward the First, Prynn's Col∣lect. Tom. 3. Pag. 158. When Pope Gregory the Tenth sent Reymundus de Nogeriis his Chaplain, as his Nuntio into En∣gland, &c. amongst other things to Demand, and Receive from the King Eight Years Arrears of the Annual Tribute, and Peter-pence then due to the Church of Rome, Wrote to him a very remarkable Letter; In which, among other things, he tells him, That his last Parliament was Dis∣solved the sooner, by reason of his own Sickness, so that he could not then Super Petitione census ejusdem de∣liberationem habere cum Praelatis & Proceribus Regni sui, sine Quorum
Communicato Consilio Sanctitati Ve∣strae super praedictis non possumus re∣spondere, & jure-jurando in Corona∣tione nostra praestito sumus Astricti, quod jura Regni nostri servabimus illibata, nec aliquid quod diadema tan∣git Regni ejusdem absque ipsorum requisito Concilio faciemus. And there∣fore he deferred returning the Pope an Answer, till the next Session of Parliament; Pro firmo scituri, Pie Pater & Domine, quòd in alio Parlia∣mento nostro, quod ad festum Sancti Michaelis intendimus celebrare, habito & Communicato Consilio cum Prae∣latis & Proceribus memoratis, Vobis super praemissis ipsorum consilio dabi∣mus Responsionem. By this Letter it appears, that whatever did Diadema Regni tangere, could not, nor ought to be done sine Concilio Prelatorum & Procerum Regni: By which, as is evi∣dent enough by the Letter it self, a Parliament is meant. Now that the Bringing in of Bulls and Executing Process from Rome within the Realm, did Diadema Regni tangere with a Witness, will appear
by perusing the Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors. Anno 27 Edward the Third, cap. 1. Because it is shewn unto Our Lord the the King, by the Grievous and Clamo∣rous Complaints of the great Men and Commons, how that diverse of the People be, and have been drawn out of the Realm to Answer of diverse things, the Cognisance whereof appertaineth to the King's Court; and also that the Judg∣ments given in the same Court be im∣peached in another Court, [In Preju∣dice and Disherison of Our Lord the King and of his Crown] and of all the People of his Realm, and to the Ʋndoing and Destruction of the Com∣mon Law of the said Realm at all times used. Another Statute mentioning Cita∣tions out of the Court of Rome, and Provisions of Benefices, and Offices in the Church, says, that by means there∣of the Good Antient Laws, Franchises and Ʋsages of the Realm have been greatly Impeached, Blemished and Con∣founded, [the Crown of Our Lord
the King abated] and the great Men, Commons and Subjects of the Realm in Bodies and Goods damnified 38 Statute. Edwardi tertii, cap. 1, 2, 3, 4. The Statute of 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5. Entituled Praemunire for purchasing Bulls from Rome: The Crown of England sub∣ject to none; mentions frequently All these things, as being to the Disherison of the King's Crown, and against his Crown and Regality. And therefore in the five and twen∣tieth Year of King Edward the Third, the Commons prayed the King, that since the Right of the Crown of England and the Law of the Realm was such, that upon the Mischiefs and Damages, which happen'd to his Realm he ought and was bound by his Oath, with the Accord of his People in his Parli∣ament, thereof to make remedy and Law, That it may please him thereup∣on to Ordain remedy: Which he does accordingly by the Assent of the Great Men and Commonalty of the said Realm; having regard to a Sta∣tute made in the time of his Grand∣father,
(Anno 25th. Edward the First, against Provisions) which hold∣eth his force and was never Defeated, Repealed or Annulled in any Point, and by so much he is bounden by his Oath to cause the same to be kept, as the Law of the Land. The Laws of Praemunire and against Provisions were but Declaratory Laws of the Ʋsages of the Realm in opposition to Papal Bulls, &c. And here we see our Kings did not scruple to own that they were under the obli∣gation of their Coronation Oath to see to the Execution of them. Anno Grat. 1225. Magister Otto, Domini Papae Nuncius, in Angliam veniens, pro magnis Ecclesiae Romanae negotiis, Regi litteras praesentavit; sed Rex cognito litterarum tenore, Respon∣dit, Quod solus non potuit definire, nec debuit, negotium quod omnes Cle∣ricos & Laicos Generaliter totius Reg∣ni tangebat. Matth. Par. pag. 325. It was an Old Rule of Law in this Nation, the very Foundation upon which our Government is
built, and the only thing that dif∣ferences Freedom from Slavery, that Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tra∣ctari debet. And the Commons tell the King in Statute Twenty fifth of Henry 8. cap. 21. That his Graces Realm Recog∣nizing no Superior under God, but his Grace hath been, and is free from Subjection to any Mans Laws, but only to such as have been devised within the same, for the Wealth thereof, or to such other, as by Suf∣ferance of his Grace and his Proge∣nitors, the People of his Realm had taken at their free Liberty by their Own Consent to be used amongst them, and had bound themselves by long Ʋse and Custom to the Obser∣vance of the same, as to Laws Estab∣lished by the said Sufferance, Con∣sent and Custom, and none other∣wise. And the Judges Resolved in 12 Jacobi primi, that the King could not change the Ecclesiastical Laws
of the Realm. 12 Co. Reports, pag. But if he could let in Foreign Ca∣nons, and [by his Allowance] give them the force of Laws here, then he could change the Ecclesiasti∣cal Laws of the Realm, and then might the People be bound to o∣ther Laws, than such as by their own Sufferance and Consent they had submitted to; and then could the King do things Solus, which con∣cern generally all the Clergy and Laity of England; If the King's Allowance could Subject his Peo∣ple to Processes from Rome, then he could by Law depart with the Rights of his Crown, which by his Coronation Oath he is bound to maintain, as he hath so often and so publickly acknow∣ledged. The Doctor tells us (pag. 145.) out of Eadmerus, Lib. primo, pag. 6. That King William the Con∣queror introduc'd this here, That none in his Dominions should own the Pope, but by his Command, Nor
receive his Letters, Ʋnless shewed first to him, And if the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury called and pre∣sided in a General Synod of the Bi∣shops, he allowed nothing to be ap∣pointed or forbidden, unless they were accommodated to his Will, and were first Ordain'd by him, Nor suf∣fered any of his Barons, or Officers to undergo any Ecclesiastical Censure, but by his Precepts. These things he would repre∣sent to us, as Arbitrary Constituti∣ons made by the Sole Authority of that King; whom a few Men of late have endeavoured to represent under a strange Vizor. But these were really Laws made in his time by the same Authority, that made Laws in this Nation before he was Born, and after his Death. He caused Leges Episcopales to be amended: But how did he do it? Of his own Head, or by the Ad∣vice of such only, as himself thought fit to consult with? No; it was done Communi Consilio, &
Consilio Archiepiscoporum, Episcopo∣rum, Abbatum & omnium Procerum Regni sui. V. Seldeni Not. & Spe∣cileg. ad Eadmerum. pag. 167, 168. And the same Author in his Titles of Honour, pag. 580, 581, hath these Words; viz. In the Fourth Year of his (King Wil∣liam the Conqueror's) Reign, or Anno Domini MLXX. (which was the Year, wherein he first brought the Bishops and Abbots under the Tenure of Barony) Consilio Baronum suorum (saith Hoveden out of a Collection of Laws, written by Glanvill, as also the Author of the Book of Litch∣field) fecit summoneri per universos Consulatus Angliae, Anglos Nobiles & Sapientes & in sua lege eruditos, ut eorum Jura & Consuetudines ab ipsis audiret. And Twelve were returned out of every Coun∣ty who shewed what the Cu∣stoms of the Kingdom were, which being written by the Hands of Aldred Archbishop of York, and Hugo Bishop of Lon∣don,
were with the Assent of the same Barons for the most part, confirmed in that Assembly, which was a Parliament of that time. And so much also is shewed by that Law of King Henry the First; viz. Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo cum illis Emendationibus, quibus Pater meus illam emenda∣vit [Consilio Baronum suorum.] He goes on to shew other Instan∣ces of Parliaments, in King Wil∣liam the First's Time. And a few pages after (pag. 583.) calls one of these very Constitutions, which Eadmerus blames him for, A Law made by King William the First. Indeed the several General Coun∣cils held in his Time, of the Cler∣gy and the Laity, for the making of Laws, and determining Great Controversies; the Confirming of King Edward the Confessor's Laws, of which one was (as hath been said) that all things were to be done per Judicium & Consilium
Procerum Regni, and the tenor of such Charters of his as are extant, shew undeniably that, what Con∣stitutions are said to have been made by him, must be understood to have been made by him More Anglico, cum Assensu Ordinum Regni: As Mr. Selden expresseth himself in his Book de Synedriis. The First of these Four Con∣stitutions complained of by Ead∣merus, as Innovations, is, That none in his Dominions should own the Pope but by his Command. And yet af∣terwards, when in King Henry the Second's Time there was a Schism in the Popedom, between Alexander and Victor; of whom the latter having been Elected and Declared Pope, by a Council of German and Italian Bishops at Pa∣pia, the Emperour Illustres Fran∣corum & Anglorum Reges omnibus modis sollicitare curavit, ut ad per∣petuandam amicitiam mutuam sibi hâc in parte concordes existerent. Illi celebrem ex utroque Regno Episcopo∣rum
& Nobilium, loco & tempore congruo, conventum fecêre; where the Matter was debated in Conspectu Regum & Praesulum, coram Ʋniversâ, quae convenerat, multitudine Cleri & Populi: And Alexander was admit∣ted as Pope, and the Schismaticks Excommunicated. Nubrig. lib. 2. cap. 9. And after that, in King Richard the Second's Time, When there was another Schism betwixt Ʋrban and Clement, This Memorable Act of Parliament passed to declare Ʋrban the true Pope; VIZ. Pur ceo que nostre Seignor le Roy ad entendus, cybien per cer∣tains Letters Patents novelment ve∣nus de certain Cardinalx rebells con∣tre nostre Saint Pere Ʋrban a ore Pape, come auterment per comen fame, que division & discord sont parenter nostre dit Saint Pere & les dits Cardinals, les queux s'afforcent
a tout lour poar de deposer nostre dit Saint Pere de l'Estate de Pape, & d'Exciter & commover per lour meyns verrois suggestions les Roys & Prin∣ces & le Peuple Chrestien encounter luy, a grand perill de lour aulms, & a tresmale ensample; Nostre Sei∣gnor le Roy fist monstre ses dites Let∣ters as Prelates, Seignors & auters Grand Sages de son Royalme esteant a dit Parlement, Et vewes & enten∣dus les Letters avant dits, Et ewe molt deliberation sur la matter estoit per Les dits Prelates pronunciez & publiez per plusors grands & notables reasons illeoques monstrez en plein Parlement; cy bien per matter trove en les dites Letters que autre∣ment, que le dit Ʋrban etoit due∣ment esleu en Pape, & que ensy est, & doit etre veroy Pape, & luy come Pape & Chef de Saint Esglise on doit accepter & obeyir. Et a ceo faire s'accordent touts les Prelates, Seignors, & Commens en la Parle∣ment avant dit, &c. Stat. 2 Rich. 2. cap. 7.
Here the Whole Parliament heard the Reasons debated, and after a full Hearing agreed to admit Ʋrban. Now whereas the Government, as to the Essential parts of it, was in King William the Conqueror's Time, the same that it is now, saving some Inroads that have since been made by the Prerogative; And whereas in times subsequent to his, the King in Parliament determined who should be received as Pope, and who not; And since there is nothing more common with the Monks, than to mention things as done by Our Kings, which were either Judicial Acts of their Courts, or done by them in their Great Councils, and consequently were Acts of Parliament (of which some Instances will be given hereafter in this Discourse) upon what Grounds can any rational Man conceive otherwise, than that the Constitution afore-mentioned to be made by King William the Con∣queror, was a Law, or an Act of
Parliament made in his Time, And that his Commanding who should be owned as Pope within his Do∣minions, was to be a Command by him in Parliament; since the Law in his Time was such, That the King was to do all pub∣lick things no otherwise, than per Judicium & Consilium Procerum Regni. The Second Complaint of Ead∣merus, is, That None should receive the Pope's Letters, unless they were first shewed to him. By which if Letters of Provision only are meant; I shall have occasion to speak fur∣ther of them hereafter. If all Provi∣sions and Process from Rome be meant, then was not this introduced by King William, for that the bring∣ing in of Bulls, Citations, Exempti∣ons, Faculties, Dispensations, Pro∣visions, &c. from Rome, was in those Days, and antecedent to this Con∣stitution, contrary to Law, and in De∣rogation of the Rights of the Crown, and the Liberties of the People:
Nor could the shewing them to the King and his Personal Appro∣bation, or Allowance, give them any Legal Authority within this Kingdom, and consequently the Concurrence of the Great Council must be here understood, though not expressed by the Monk. The Third is, That If the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury called and presided in a General Synod of the Bishops, he allowed nothing to be Appointed, or Forbidden, unless they were accommodated to his Will, and were first Ordain'd by him. Which is such another Law, as that of the Twenty fifth of King Henry the Eighth, cap. 19. That the Clergy shall not presume to Attempt, Al∣ledge, Claim, or put in Ʋre any Constitutions, or Ordinances, Provin∣cial, or Synodal, or any other Ca∣nons, nor Enact, Promulge, or Ex∣ecute any such Canons, &c. in their Convocations, &c. without the King's Assent. This Law of King Henry the Eighth, was not Introductory
of a new Law; for there the King's Humble and Obedient Sub∣jects of the Clergy of this Realm of England acknowledged [Accord∣ing to Truth,] that the Convo∣cations of the same Clergy, are, always have been, and ought to be Assembled by the King's Writ: And that their Promise in verbo sacerdotii that from thenceforth they would not presume to Attempt, Al∣lege, Claim, or put in Ʋre, Enact, Promulge, or Execute any New Ca∣nons, Constitutions, &c. unless the King's most Royal Assent and Li∣cence may to them be had, &c. was but in Affirmance of the Old Law of the Realm, even before King William the Conqueror's Reign, appears abundantly by Sir Henry Spelman's Councils, where (I think) no Ecclesiastical Laws appear to have been made without the King's Assent before the Conquest, nor for some Reigns after.
His Fourth Complaint, is, That He would not suffer any of his Ba∣rons, or Officers to Ʋndergo any Ec∣clesiastical Censure, but by his Pre∣cept. This was afterwards One of the Laws of Clarendon. Vid. De∣cem Script. pag. 1387. Matth. Par 100. And the reason of it, gi∣ven by Radulphus de Diceto, is, Ne Rex ignorantiâ lapsus Communicet Excommunicato. Decem Scriptor. pag. 596. This Mr. Selden calls a Law first made by King William the First. Titl. of Honor, pag. 583. The Doctor (pag. 145, 146, 147.) relates the Controversie be∣twixt King William Rufus, and Anselm in such a manner, as If the Episcopi, Abbates & Principes Re∣gni had had no more to do in it, than to carry Messages betwixt him and the King. Whereas up∣on Anselm's desiring to go and fetch his Pall from Pope Ʋrban, whom the Nation had not then received for Pope, When the King
told him that he could not keep the Faith, which he owed to him, Simul & obedientiam Apostolicae se dis contra suam voluntatem, Ansel∣mus petivit inducias ad istius rei examinationem, quatenus Episcopis, Abbatibus, Cunctisque Regni Prin∣cipibus unà coeuntibus, [commun-Assensu definiretur,] utrum salvâ reverentiâ & obedientiâ sedis Aposto∣licae posset fidem terreno Regi servare, annon? For Anselm, whilst he was Abbot of Bec in Normandy, had submitted to Ʋrban, as Pope, and (as he told the Parliament af∣terward) had professed as much, when the King and they chose him Archbishop. This Question betwixt the King and Himself, he desired the Parliament might decide. Dantur ergo Induciae, atque ex Regiâ sanctione fermè totius Re∣gni Nobilitas quinto Idus Martii pro ventilatione illius causae in unum apud Rochingham coit. And the Mat∣ter was discussed and debated be∣fore them. Vid. Eadmer. pag. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, &c.
The Doctor tells us (pag. 146.) that When in the same King's Reign, the Archbishop was Sollici∣tous to have leave to go to Rome, and Visit the Successor of St. Pe∣ter, for the being better Instruct∣ed in the Government of the Church; he received Answer from the King, That if he went he should for cer∣tain know, that he would seize his whole Archbishoprick into his Hands, nor would he receive him for Arch∣bishop any more, like as now the Writ Ne Exeat Regnum is used with a Penalty specified. Notwith∣standing which the Archbishop went beyond Sea, and the King was as good as his Word. This the Doctor says, may be a document to some, not obstinately to oppose their Prince. But now, if by the Law of the Land, no Archbishop, Bishop, or other Great Man, might depart the Realm without the King's leave, then did Anselm's contempt
consist in Disobeying the Law, and not the King's Personal and Arbi∣trary Will and Pleasure. If any Man depart the Realm at this Day, after a Writ of Ne Exeat Regnum served upon him, he becomes a Fugitive, and the King may seize his Estate, as he did the Archbishops Temporalities. And yet we have no Act of Par∣liament for this now upon Record, but Custom Time out of Mind, which we call Common-Law. Yet among the Laws of Clarendon, this is one; VIZ. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis & Per∣sonis Regni non liceat Exire Reg∣num, absque Licentia Domini Regis. Decem Scriptores. pag. 1386, 1387. Matth. Paris. pag. 100. And Polydore Virgill, pag. 171. carries this Law up as high as to the Reign of King William Rufus;
Publico Edicto Vetuit (says he) Ʋnumquemque sine Licentiâ suâ, Ex Angliâ egredi; qui mos lexve dici∣tur, Ne Exeas Regnum: Quae ad∣huc, cùm ita res requirit, usurpa∣tur. And it appears by the Re∣gister, Fol. 193, 194. That Reli∣gious Persons purchased Licences to go beyond the Sea. And Bracton tells us; Lib. Quin∣to, Fol. 413. b. That those Writs were de Communi Consilio totius Re∣gni Concessa & Approbata: Of which more hereafter. And great Reason there was, that they, who were then strugling with the Govern∣ment, to Introduce a Foreign Ju∣risdiction, should, when they went beyond Sea, Assecurare Regem, quod nec in eundo, vel redeundo, vel mo∣ram faciendo, perquirerent malum sive damnum Domino Regi. Consti∣tution. Clarend. Suprad. But (as Mr. Selden says in his Metamorpho∣sis Anglorum, pag. 237.) Huc re∣feras (Scil. ad temp. Henrici Se∣cundi) an cum Polydoro ad Rufum,
an ad posteriora tempora rescriptum, quod in Regesto, NE EXEAS REGNƲM, habetur, haud ità multùm interest, nec quaestionem ac∣curare operae pretium est; Quis enim  tam  verum potis est eli∣cere? It being almost impossible to find out the Original of this Law; and it appearing by the Register, that whenever it did begin, it be∣gan by Authority of Parliament; and since nothing is known to the contrary, but that it might begin in King William Rufus his Time, to whose Time Polydere Virgill re∣fers it; and, if it did not, since Parliaments were frequently held then, and One famous one at Ro∣chingham during this very Contro∣versie betwixt the King and An∣selm, (Eadmer. pag. 38.) about his going to Rome, in which he asked leave to depart, and was denyed it; Who knows but there might then be a particular Pro∣hibition to him by the King in that Great Council? But be that how it will, the Truth in this
Matter lies too deep, by reason of the loss of almost all the Civil Laws made in the Reigns of Our First Norman Kings, through the Embezelment of Records, and the Carelessness of the Monks of those times, for the Doctor to draw a good Argument from hence of the Danger of disobeying the King's Personal Command. Nay further, if this Instance were never so much for him; First, It was in King William Ru∣fus his Reign, the Irregularities and Tyranny of whose Government, was such, and the Matters of Fact so lamely Reported to us, that no Argument drawn from what he might do, will be very con∣clusive to the Legality, or Illegali∣ty of any thing. And, Secondly, There is a very good Law made since,
VIZ. Ann. 14 Edwardi 3. cap. 6. to Protect the Clergy from incurring any such prejudice for the future, for not doing whatsoever they are bid to do: We Will and Grant for Ʋs and our Heirs, that from hence∣forth We, nor our Heirs shall not take, nor cause to be taken into our Hands the Temporalities of Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, nor other People of Holy Church, of what Estate or Condition they be, without a Just and True Cause, [ac∣cording to the Law of the Land] and Judgment thereupon given. The Doctor makes account (pag. 146, 147.) that the Oath, which he says Anselm had taken, where∣by he promised the King, Eadmer. pag. 39. lib. 2. se usus ac leges suas usquequaque deinceps ser∣vaturum, & eas sibi contra omnes homines fideliter defensurum, was no ways like the present Oath of Su∣premacy. Whereby he would re∣present
the Supremacy as a quite o∣ther thing, and much more Exor∣bitant, since the Reformation, than it was in King William Rufus his Time; Which is a great Errour. For the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Kings of England, was then almost entire and in puris natura∣libus; Foreign Jurisdiction had not then grown upon our Constitution: The Bishops indeed were warping Rome-wards, which caused the Go∣vernment to have a watchful Eye upon them, and to enjoyn Oaths upon them for security, against Ʋsurpations then feared, because at∣tempted; as after the Reformation they were enjoyned to prevent the return of them. But the Oath of Supremacy, prescribed by primo E∣lizabeth, being only to Assist and Defend all Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Preheminencies and Authorities, Gran∣ted, or Belonging to the Queen's Highness her Heirs and Successors, Or Ʋnited and Annexed to the Im∣perial Crown of this Realm, is the same in Substance with Swearing
in King William Rufus his Time, to Keep and Defend the Laws and Ʋsages of the Realm. For those Jurisdictions, Priviledges; Prehemi∣nencies and Authorities, which, ha∣ving been torn from the Crown, were restored by the primo Eliza∣beth; and by the several Acts of King Henry the Eighth thereby re∣vived, were in being, and actually enjoyed in King William Rufus his Time, and before and for some time after. He was the Supreme Governour of the Realm in Spiritu∣al, or Ecclesiastical Things and Cau∣ses, as well as Temporal. Witness that Law of King Edward the Confessor, revived and confirmed by King William the First: Rex, quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est Constitutus, ut Regnum terrenum & populum Domini, & super omnia San∣ctam Veneretur Ecclesiam ejus & Re∣gat, & ab injuriosis defendat, & maleficos ab eâ evellat, & destruat, & penitùs disperdat. Lambard. leg. pag. 142. And the several Bran∣ches afterwards lopped off from
the King's Supremacy, were endeavour∣ed to be preserved and secured by the Laws of Clarendon. The Third Chapter of which provides against the Exemption of Clerks from the King's Justice: The Eighth against Appeals to Rome: The Twelfth se∣cures the King's Right and Inte∣rest in the Elections of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, &c. These Constitutions, then called the Avitae Consuetudines Regni, Arch∣bishop Becket promisit in verbo sa∣cerdotali de plano se velle custodire. Similiter Episcopi promiserunt & Ju∣raverunt. Gerv. Dorob. Coll. pag. 1366. This was no other than the Modern Oath of Supremacy, without any material difference. The Archbishop did not pretend that the Laws of Clarendon, as Wicked and Unjust as he might think them, were any other than Explanations and Assertions of the Ancient Ʋsages of the Realm. His Suffragans tell him in a Letter, That the King desired only dig∣nitates Regibus ante debitas sibi ex∣hiberi.
Hoved. pag. 292. b. And in another Letter to the Pope on the King's behalf, they declare the same, ibid. pag. 292, 293. Our Archbishops indeed used to fetch their Palls from Rome, but that Entitled the Pope to no Jurisdi∣ction here. So that the Subject Matters of the Laws of Clarendon, then Enacted into Statute-Laws, were in King William Rufus his Time the Laws and Ʋsages of the Realm, and therefore Anselm's and Becket's Oaths were in Substance the same: And those Laws and Ʋsages having been usurp'd upon since, and the Usurpation purged by the Laws made about the time of the Reformation, the Oath of Suprema∣cy is now the same in Substance with those Ancient Oaths afore∣mentioned. Not but that the Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction, in some of its Branches may now be settled in another course of Administrati∣on, than it was so long ago. But those Alterations (which yet are not very considerable) have been
made by Acts of Parliament; by which if Men had been content to stand or fall, many Notions, that are now too rise amongst us, would never have been hatched. The Writ from R. de Glanville to the Abbot of Battle (men∣tioned by the Doctor pag. 148.) whereby he Commands him on the King's behalf, by the Faith which he owed him, not to pro∣ceed in the Cause that was de∣pending betwixt the Monks of Canterbury and the Archbishop, do∣nec indè mecum fueris locutus, was no other than a Probibition to him to proceed in a Cause depending before him, and the Abbots of Feversham and St. Augustine, as Judges appointed by the Pope to hear and determine it. They had cited the Archbishop to appear before them, they had sent him Comminatori∣am Epistolam, eique diem peremptorium praefixerant. They had no Legal Authority to Exercise Jurisdiction within the Realm; for the Pope
could give them none: And there∣fore the Chief Justice prohibits them in the King's Name. The Writ may be Read in Chron. Ger∣vas. Coll. pag. 1503. from whence the Doctor Quotes the Story: Though he relates it Knavishly enough. We find a Writ (saith he) to the Abbot of Battle, &c. wherein he Commands him on the part of the King, by the Faith which he owes him, and by the Oath, which he made to him, to do what he then enjoyned. Never telling us that the thing enjoyn'd, was the keeping of his Oath, and obser∣ving the Law, and that the Me∣thod observed by the King in send∣ing him this Injunction, was ac∣cording to the Ordinary course of Justice, and of proceedings at Law in the like Cases. But the Doctor would raise a little Dust by this, and a few other such pitiful Scraps, to amuse his Readers, and create an Opinion that the King may enjoyn any thing.
As to the Legantine Power (he says, pag. 148.) It is apparent by several Instances, that none Exerci∣sed any here without the King's leave, whether by the Grant of Pope Ni∣cholas to Edward the Confessor, he disputes not. But the Doctor takes for gran∣ted, that with the King's leave a a Legate might be sent and Ex∣ercise his Office here. Though what he Quotes for it out of Eadmerus pag. 125, 126. concern∣ing what passed betwixt King Hen∣ry the First, and Pope Calixtus at Gisors, makes nothing for his pur∣pose. Rex à Papa impetravit, ut omnes Consuetudines, quas Pater su∣us in Angliâ habuerat & in Nor∣manniâ, sibi concederet, & maximè ut neminem aliquando legati Officio in Angliâ fungi permitteret, si non ipse, aliquâ praecipuâ querelâ exi∣gente, & quae ab Archiepiscopo Can∣tuariorum, caeterisque Episcopis Re∣gni terminari non posset, hoc fieri
à Papâ postularet. The coming in of a Legate at the King's Request, to determine some great and dif∣ficult Controversie in particular, which could not be decided by all the Bishops of England, is one thing; and the coming in of a Le∣gate with a General Power to Ex∣ercise Jurisdiction over all the King's Subjects, and to hold a Le∣gantine Court is a quite other thing. The Doctor says (pag. 151.) that Anno Domini 1138, & Ter∣tio Regis Stephan. Albert or Albe∣ric Cardinal of Hostia, was the Pope's Legate and Consecrated Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, and cal∣led the Clergy to a Colloquium by Apostolical Authority, by which it appears, says he, That the Canons of the Church now obtained, and the King Assented to the Powers the Legate had, so that what was Decreed had the King's Allowance. It seems, provided what was De∣creed had the King's Allowance, all
was well, and there needed no more. But Gerv. Dorobern. Coll. pag. 1344. tells us that Praedi∣ctus Albericus Apostolicâ Legatione functus venit in Angliam, Domini Papae litteras ad Regem deferens; lectis itaque litteris coram Rege & Primoribus Angliae, licèt non in primis, vix tandèm pro Reverentiâ Domini Papae susceptus est. So that this Legate was admitted by the Consent of the Primores Angliae, as well as of the King. And con∣sequently, his Exercising his Of∣fice here, with such Assent, as a∣foresaid, is no Argument, that the King's Personal Assent to his Powers, without the Concurrence of his Primores, would have made them ever a whit the better. And when this Legate Celebrated his Synod at Westminster; there were present Episcopi diversarum Pro∣vinciarum, Numero XVII, Ab∣bates ferè XXX, & Cleri & Populi Multitudo Numerosa. See Spelman's Councils, Volume the Se∣cond, pag. 39. and Gerv. Dorobern.
Collect. pag. 1347. So that as the Assent of the Primores was had to his Entry, so the Multitudo Nume∣rosa Cleri & Populi Assented to the Canons then made. And the King's single Assent to either would not have been sufficient. Besides this, I shall take leave to oppose the Judgement and O∣pinion of King Henry the First to that of the Doctor, concern∣ing the King's having, or not ha∣ving Authority to Admit a Legate hither from Rome. When in his Reign Petrus, Monachus Cluniacensis came hither from Pope Calixtus, with a Legantine Power, perductus ad Regem, dignè ab eo susceptus est; Et expositâ sui adventûs causâ, Rex, obtensâ expeditione, in quâ tunc erat (nam super Walenses eâ tempestate exercitum duxerat) dixit se tanto negotio operam tunc qui∣dem dare non posse, cum Legati∣onis illius stabilem Authoritatem non nisi per conniventiam Episcopo∣rum, Abbatum & Procerum ac to∣tius
Regni Conventum roborari pos∣se constaret. Eadmer. Lib. 6. pag. 137, 138. He tells it him as a known Truth (constaret) that his Legacy could not be of any vali∣dity in this Nation, without the Consent of the whole Kingdom in Parliament: Which, by reason of his Wars with the Welsh, he was not then at leisure to call. The Words following are Remarkable; VIZ. Super haec patrias Consuetudines ab Apostolicâ sede sibi concessas, nun∣quam se aequanimiter amissurum fore testabatur (in quibus haec, & de maximis una erat, quae Regnum An∣gliae liberum ab omni legati ditione constituerat) donec ipse vitae prae∣senti superesset. So that this Pa∣tria Consuetudo of the Kingdoms being free from the Jurisdiction of any Legate, and which had been confirmed by the Pope, was not a Priviledge Granted to the
King himself, nor was he the Ob∣ject of that Papal pretended In∣dulgence; but the Kingdom, whom he declares that himself could not deprive of the Benefit thereof, without their own Consent. And therefore the King's Assent and the King's Leave, so frequently mentioned in the Monks upon this occasion, must be understood of his Assent in a Great Council, or Par∣liament. Hence it was, that when Jo∣hannes Cremensis came Legate hi∣ther Anno Domini 1125. And was permitted so to do by the King, being then in Normandy (for what private considerations be∣twixt the Pope and himself, I know not) it was look'd upon by the Wise Men of the Nation, as a notorious breach of the An∣tient and known Laws and Liber∣ties of the Kingdom. Quam gravi multorum mentes scandalo vulneravit, & inusitata ne∣gotii
Novitas, & Antiqui Regni Anglorum detrita libertas satis in∣dicat. Toti enim Regno Anglorum & circumjacentibus Regionibus cun∣ctis notissimum est, eatenùs à primo Cantuariensi Metropolitano Sanctissimo Augustino, usque ad istum Wilhel∣mum (Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum) omnes ipsius Augustini Successores Monachos, Primates & Patriarchas nominatos, & habitos, nec ullius un∣quam Romani legati ditioni addictos. Gervas. Dorob. Collect. pag. 1663. And when afterwards in King Henry the Third's Time Circa fe∣stum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli Otto sancti Nicholai in carcere Tul∣liano Diaconus Cardinalis, nescieba∣tur ad quid, per Mandatum Regis venit Legatus in Angliam, [Ne∣scientibus Regni Magnatibus,] plu∣res adversus Regem Magnam conce∣perunt indignationem, dicentes; O∣mnia Rex pervertit, Jura, fidem, pro∣missa in omnibus transgreditur. Nota bend. Nunc se matrimonio sine suorum amicorum & hominum naturalium consilio
Alienigenae copulavit; Nunc Lega∣tum, Regni totius immutatorem, [clam] vocavit, &c. Dictum est autem quod Archiepiscopus Cantua∣riensis Edmundus Regem talia fa∣cientem increpavit, praecipuè de Vo∣catione Legati, sciens inde in suae dignitatis praejudicium magnam Re∣gno imminere Jacturam. Matth. Par. 440. The Historian blames those that went to meet this Legate, and that made him Honourable Pre∣sents of Scarlet Cloath, &c. In quo facto (says he) nimis à multis meruerunt reprehendi, tam pro dono, quàm pro dandi modo, quia in panno & ejus colore videbatur legationis Officium & Adventum acceptari. Which is a remarkable testimony, that the King's calling in a Legate did not, in the judgment of those times, give him any Legal Au∣thority here, if it were done Ne∣scientibus Regni Magnatibus: i. e. (to speak in Eadmerus his Words) if he were otherwise admitted than per Conniventiam Episcopo∣rum, Abbatum & Procerum & to∣tius
Regni conventum. The same Historian (Matth. Par.) speak∣ing afterward (pag. 446.) of the same Legate, Rex (says he) spreto naturalium hominum suorum consilio, magis & magis, ut caepit, deliravit: Et se voluntati Roma∣norum, & praecipuè Legati, quem inconsultiùs advocaverat, mancipa∣vit, &c. And again, His & aliis deliramentis Rex omnium Nobilium suorum corda cruentavit. Consiliarios quoque habuit suspectos & infames, qui hujus rei fomentum esse diceban∣tur, quos idcircò magis habebant No∣biles Angliae exosos. But the Instance, which the Doctor himself gives (pag. 154.) of Henry Beaufort Bishop of Win∣chester, and Great Unkle to King Henry the Sixth, is as full against him, as any thing that he could have pitch'd upon. For that Bi∣shop, being Cardinal of St. Euse∣bius, was sent Legate into En∣gland Anno 1429. Which was Anno Octavo of King Henry the
Sixth: And was fain to be be∣holden to an Act of Parliament for his Pardon, for having offended a∣gainst the Laws made against Pro∣visors, by bringing in and Ex∣ecuting Papal Bulls within the Realm. For Anno 10. Henr. 6. The King, [by the Common As∣sent of all the Estates] pardoneth to the said Cardinal all Offences, Pu∣nishments, and Pains incurred by him against the Statutes of Pro∣visors. Vid. Cotton's Abridgement of Records, 10. Henr. 6. nu. 16. Which would have been needless, if either the King's giving leave to his Entrance, or Assent to his Decrees, could have justified his Proceedings, and added any Le∣gal Authority to them. By what has been said, I con∣ceive it to be very clear, that all Foreign Jurisdiction being utterly against the Law of the Realm, and an intolerable Usurpation upon the King's Crown and Regality, and up∣on the Rights and Liberties of his
Subjects, it was never conceived that the King could by his own Personal Authority, without the Consent of his People in Parlia∣ment, subject them to it; no more than he could subject him∣self and his Crown in Temporal Mat∣ters. Which that he could not do, we have these two Remarkable Authorities. When after the Death of Ale∣xander the Third, King of Scots, the Succession to that Crown was in dispute, and Ten several Com∣petitors claim'd it; and that Ed∣ward the First, King of England challenged a Jurisdiction of deter∣mining to which of them the Right of Succession appertained; the Pope that then was, pretended that it belonged to him, in Right of his Apostleship, to decide the Contro∣versie; and Wrote to the King a Letter, requiring him to desist any further Proceeding therein: In an∣swer to which Letter of the Pope,
the King wrote a long Letter con∣taining Historical Proofs of his being Supreme Lord of Scotland, and that the King of Scots was his Homager; and at the same time the Parliament of England, then Assembled at Lincoln, wrote another Letter to the Pope upon the same Subject: In which are these Words; VIZ. Ad observationem & defensionem Libertatum, Consuetudinum & Le∣gum Paternarum ex debito praestiti Sacramenti adstringimur, quae ma∣nutenebimus toto posse, totisque vi∣ribus cum Dei Auxilio defende∣mus, nec etiam permittimus, aut aliquatenùs permittemus, sicut nec possumus nec debemus, praemissa tam insolita, indebita, praejudicialia & alià inaudita Dominum nostrum Regem, [etiamsi vellet] facere seu quomodolibet attemptare, prae∣cipuè
cùm praemissa cederent in exhae∣redationem juris Coronae Regis Angliae & Regiae Dignitatis, ac subversionem Status Ejusdem REgni notoriam, nec∣non in praejudicium Libertatum, Con∣suetudinum ac Legum Paternarum. Sealed by One hundred and four Earls and Barons, and in the Name of all the Commonalty of England. V. Co. 2d. Inst. pag. 196. and Fox his Book of Martyrs, Vol. 1. pag. 387, 388, 389. By which it appears that the King could not legally, if he would, have given way to the Pope's determining the Controversie about the Succession in Scotland; since it belonged to himself in jure Coronae as directus Dominus Scotiae. The Second Authority shall be that of Rott. Parl. 40 Edw. 3. nu. 7, 8. Where it was resolved in full Parliament by the Prae∣lates, the Earls and the Com∣mons, that neither the King, nor any other could put the Realm
nor People thereof into such sub∣jection, [sans Assent d'Eux.] The Occasion was King John's having surrendred his Crown to the Pope, and received it back again, to hold it as a Feudatary to the Papal See. And it appeared to them by many Evidences, that he had done so [sans lour Assent] and contrary to his Coronation Oath. Mr. Selden, in his dissertatio ad Fletam, pag. 552, 553. gives this Account of it. Cum sub Edwardo Tertio in Ordinum consessu quaestio habebatur de donatione illâ decan∣tatissimâ Johannis Regis factâ Inno∣centio Papae Tertio & Successori∣bus Ejus, unde Ʋrbanus. Quintus tum annuum inde natum mille Mar∣carum, Angliae simul & Hiberniae nomine, Censum sibi tunc solvi pe∣tebat, tum Regnum utrumque jure tantum beneficiario, atque ut sedis Romanae Feudum, à Regibus nostris contendebat possideri; Ordines Ʋni∣versi, idque tam Generis Hieratici (quod mirere) quàm Proceres, seu
Senatus Populusque in Comitiis illis, solemni initâ deliberatione, responde∣runt unanimes, irritam planè fuisse Jo∣hannis Donationem illam, utpote tam [sine Ordinum Assensu,] quàm [juramento ejus Inaugurali Adver∣sam.] Et outre ceo (sic loquun∣tur Archiva) Les Ducs, Counts, Barons, Grands & Comens ac∣corderent & Granterent, que en cas que le Pape se afforceroit ou rien attempteroit per proces, ou en autre manner de faire de con∣streindre le Roy, ou ses subgitts de perfaire ceo que est dit, qu'il voit claimer cell partie, qu'ils resisterent & Contreesterent ove tout lour Puissance. And with this agreed the Scottish Laws; Et idem Rex Scotiae dicit, sicut prius, quod de aliquo Regnum suum contin∣gente, non est Ausus nec Potest hic Respondere, Inconsultis probis homi∣nibus Regni sui. Plac. Parl. Inter. Johann. Reg. Scotiae & Magdulph. 21 Edw. 1. pag. 157.
He mentions (pag. 155.) the Claims, which our Antient Kings made to Investitures, and the In∣terposing their Authority, even in Allowing or Disallowing the Persons of Bishops. And it is very true, that till the beginning of King Henry the First his Reign, they not only Claim'd, but actually did Invest Bishops and Arch-bi∣shops per Traditionem Annuli & Bacu∣li: And subjects in antient time, that Founded Churches, had the same Right of Collation or Inve∣stiture, whereby the Incumbents received full Possession, without Aid of the Bishop or other Church∣man. Vid. Selden's History of Tythes, cap. 6. sect. 3. And the Kings Right of Investing Bishops, because all Bishopricks were Royal Founda∣tions, was such, as could not be parted with, but by Act of Par∣liament. For that the Kings were bound by their Coronation-Oaths (as hath been said) Jura Regni
servar illibata, nec aliquid, quod Diadema tangit Regni, absque Prae∣latorum & Procerum requisito Conci∣lio facere. And therefore King Henry the First in a Letter to Pope Paschal upon this Subject of Investitures, which the Pope then contended hard to gain from him, tells him plainly; Si Ego (quod absit) in tantâ me dejectione pone∣rem, (viz. as to forego them) Optimates mei, imò totius Angliae Populus id nullo modo pateretur. Col∣lect. p. 999. And therefore, when af∣terwards they were given up, it was done in Parliament; Postmo∣dum Kalend. Augusti Clero & Popu∣lo ad Concilium Londoniae Congrega∣to, Adstantibus Archiepiscopis, E∣piscopis, caeterâque multitudine maxi∣mâ Procerum & Magnatum, statuit Rex & concessit, ut ab eo tempore in anteà nullus electus per dationem Baculi Pastoralis vel Annuli de Epis∣copatu vel Abbathiâ Investiretur per Regem vel quamcunque aliam perse∣nam saecularem Collect. pag. 1000.
And for the King's interposing his Authority in Allowing or Disal∣lowing the Persons of Bishops; Be∣fore the Reign of King William the First, Nulla erat Electio Prela∣torum merè Libera & Canonica, sed omnes Dignitates tam Episcoporum, quàm Abbatum Regis Curia pro suâ Complacentia conferebat. Ingulphus; pag. 509. And in King Willi∣am the Conqueror's time, Lanfrank was chosen Archbishop of Canter∣bury, Consensu & Consilio omnium Baronum suorum, omniumque Epis∣coporum & Abbatum totiusque popu∣li Angliae: Brev. Relat. de Will. Com. Normann. Auth. Anonym. Eligenti∣bus eum senioribus ejusdem Ecclesiae cum Episcopis & Principibus, Cle∣ro & Populo Angliae, in Curiâ Regis in Assumptione sanctae Ma∣riae: Gervas. Dorob. Col. pag. 1653. In the Reign of his Successor King William Rufus, Anselm was chosen in like manner. Vid. E∣admer. lib. 1. And in King Henry
the First's time, Radulphus, who succeeded Anselm, was chosen Archbishop at Windsor, whither Rex instinctu Dei permotus Episco∣pos & Principes Angliae in unum fecit venire, corum Consilium in Con∣stituendo Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi volens habere. Vid. Eadmer. Lib. 5. cap. 109, 110. Many Examples occur of other Bishops and Ab∣bots elected, either in Parliaments, or, which is all one, in Eccle∣siastical Assemblies, consisting of the same Members, that Parlia∣ments of those times were com∣posed of, betwixt the Conquest and King John's time. Vid. Spelm. Councils, Tome 2. pag. 39. ibid. pag. 119. But Elections were not uniform in those days: The Cler∣gy strugled hard to gain them wholly to themselves: And the Kingdom was sometimes disquie∣ted about the matter, especially in King John's time. Sometimes Elections were by the Chapter, sometimes by the Clergy and People
of the Diocess, sometimes in Great Councils. King Henry the Second endeavoured to have settled them by the Laws of Clarendon, cap. 12. Vid. Collect. pag. 1387, 1388. But the Pope broke in upon them, by forcing him to swear, when he was absolv'd for Becketi's Death, Quod Consuetudines, quae suis tem∣poribus contrà Libertatem Ecclesiae fu∣erant introductae, revocarentur in irritum: Radulph. de Dioeto; Coll. pag. 560. This altered no Right; but it gave the Clergy a colour to innovate upon him. But in King John's time the pretended Right of Election was yielded up to the Clergy by a Law Consensu Baronum. Only a Congé d'eslire was to issue, and Electi post Ele∣ctionem celebratàm debebant Domino Regi praesentari, & post confirmatio∣nem, ante administrationem in spi∣ritualibus vel temporalibus faciendam, ei Juramentum fidelitatis praestare. Matth. Paris. pag. 635. And so the Right continued till King Henry
the Eighth's Time, that it was altered by Parliament. Hence it appears that Our Kings had no Personal Inherent Right and Pre∣rogative in these Elections, since all were of Old to be made in Parliament, and since the several Legal Alterations, that have been made therein, have been made in and by Parliaments. Nor is it to be wondred, that whereas Subjects might Collate in those Days Churches of their own Foundation to any Clerk in Orders, and give him the Investi∣ture, even without so much as a Presentation to the Bishop; yet our Antient Kings Collated Bishop∣ricks, no otherwise than in Curia suâ: For though Bishopricks were Royal Foundations, yet they were Founded by Acts of Parliament, as will appear by and by: And one Great Reason, why our Kings at least in those Days, could not E∣rect Bishopricks and endow them
otherwise, was because they could not in those Days Alien their Crown Lands without the Assent of their Barons. Non poterat Rex distrahere Patrimonium Regni. And though King John told Pandulphus the Legate, Omnes Prae∣decessores mei contulerunt Archiepi∣scopatus, Episcopatus & Abbathias in thalamis suis: Monast. Burton. pag. 264. That must be under∣stood to have been done since the Norman Conquest only, though the contrary was frequently pra∣ctised even in those Days, and es∣pecially since the Constitutions of Clarendon: For the Instance that he there gives of Wolstan's being made Bishop of Worcester in King Edward the Confessor his Time, was far from a Collation in Tha∣lamo; if we believe himself, when he resigned his Pastoral Staff at the Confessor's Tomb: There con∣curred Electio, Plebis Petitio, Vo∣luntas Episcoporum & Gratia Pro∣cerum
(a full Parliament) as well as the Authoritas & Voluntas of the King himself. Matth. Paris. pag. 20, 21. As for our Kings seizing the Temporalties of Bishops into their Hands, and so suspending them à beneficio; (which the Doctor speaks of, pag. 155.) of which (he says) many Instances may be found in Mr. Prynn's Historical Collecti∣ons: I suppose he would not be understood, as if our Kings either might, or used to seize them ad Libitum, but by legal process, and for some contempt, for which by the Law they were liable to Sei∣zure. They were held of the King by Barony; and though the Bishops pretended to an Exem∣ption, as to their Persons, from the Laws of the Land, yet their Temporalties, which were held of the King, and for which they did him Fealty, were no-wise Exem∣pted; but that if they should com∣mit
Offences, for which the King might by Law capere se ad Baro∣nias suas, they, as well as the Laity, that held by the same Te∣nure, were equally liable to the Course and Rigour of the Law. What use this is of to the Do∣ctor, for the setting up some No∣tional Supremacy lodged in the King Personally, I know not as yet. Ir∣regularities and Oppressions might well be used upon such occasions, and Seizures made, when there was no cause, but the Statute of the fourteenth of Edward the Third, cap. 6. aforementioned, was pro∣vided to prevent such Mischiefs for the future. But the Doctor was very ill advised in quoting (pag. 155.) to clear the point, the Statutes of Provisions. For those Statutes, which every body knows, and the Doctor will not deny, to be only new Bullwarks to secure Old Rights, were yet such, as the King
could never dispense with: But when the Circumstances of his Affairs were such, that to gratify the Pope, and tye him to his Interest, he found it convenient to have some Relaxati∣on, made of those Laws, then were Parliaments called, and at their first meeting, one cause of their Convention declared to be, to provide remedy touching the Sta∣tutes of Provisions, for eschewing debate between the Pope and the King, and his Realms. And then we find leave given to the King, from time to time to dispense with those Laws, and that but for a time, and this declar'd to be a Novelty. Vid. Cotton's A∣bridgment, pag. 341. 346. Annis 15. & 16. Rich. 2. And the Complaints of the En∣glish Nation in Matth. Paris a∣gainst the Pope's Provisions, were grounded upon this,
VIZ. That Patroni Ecclesiarum, ad eas, cum Vacaverint, Clericos ido∣neos praesentare non poterant, sed conferebantur Ecclesiae Romanis: qui penitùs Idioma Regni ignorabant, & pecuniam extra Regnum asportabant. These Oppressions fell chiefly up∣on the Clergy, as appears by most of the Laws against Provisions, of which hereafter; for the Pope as∣sum'd a greater Power over them and Churches, of which they were Patrons, then he could pretend to over the Laity; and they sometimes comply'd with his Pro∣visions, and submitted to collate Italians and Foreigners, as at o∣ther times they did to heavy Exactions, insomuch that in the year 1240. misit Dominus Papa praecepta sua Domino Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo Edmundo, & Saris∣beriensi, & Lincolniensi Episcopis, ut trecentis Romanis in primis be∣neficiis
Vacantibus providerent; sci∣entes se suspensos à beneficiorum Col∣latione, donec tot competenter provi∣derentur. Matth. Paris, pag. 532. And it appears by the same Au∣thor, that these, and more were provided of Ecclesiastical Benefices in England: Praebendas, Ecclesias & varios redditus opimos plusquam trecentos ad suam vel Papae contu∣lerat (legatus Otto) voluntatem: id. p. 549. But many grievous Complaints and Petitions in Par∣liaments, and in Letters to the Pope, occur in Mr. Prynne's Hi∣storical Collections, and in the Par∣liament Rolls against these Provisi∣ons, as intolerable Grievances, and contrary to all Law and Reason. If at some times they were com∣ply'd with, upon condition, that the Persons recommended by the Pope, were of good condition, and worthy of Promotion, how does that relate to its being in the King's power even to admit the persons to the Dignity and Office, as the Do∣ctor
ignorantly and childishly as∣serts? But his conclusion, VIZ. That the Exercise of their Go∣vernment, was according to the King's Laws, I do not Quarrel with him about, for it was, or ought to have been so: But not according to the King's Pleasure. Nor would any unbyassed Man in Reading King Alfred's Laws, have readily made such an In∣ference, as the Doctor does (pag. 155, 156,) telling us out of L. l. Alvredi, that King Alfred re∣served to himself the liberty even of Dispensing with the Marriage of Nuns: Which he would repre∣sent, as a thing prohibited by the Canons only, and that the King reserved to himself a Power of Dispensing with it, though with∣out his Especial Dispensation he suf∣fered the Canon to take place: Now
the Marriage of Nuns was really prohibited by a Law of the State, by an Act of Parliament of that Age; For Brompton, giving us an Account of King Alfred's Laws, says thus; Ego Alfredus West-Saxonum Rex ostendi haec [omni∣bus sapientibus meis,] & dixe∣runt; Placet ea Custodire. And many Temporal Laws are amongst them, all Enacted by the same Authority. And the same Law or Canon that prohibits Nuns from Marrying, gives the King, and not only him, but the Bishop of the Diocess leave to Dispense; so that the Doctor might as well have argu'd for the Bishops as the Kings reser∣ving a Power to himself of Dis∣pensing: The Words are, Si quis Sanctimonialem ab Ecclesiâ abduxe∣rit, sine Licentia Regis vel Epis∣copi, &c. Then he says, That our Kings Presided sometimes in Councils of the Clergy of their Kingdom, though the
Pope's Legates were present, and Quotes Spelman's Councils, pag. 292, 293. Out of which Book it will not be amiss to give an Account of that Assembly, which the Do∣ctor in this place calls a Council of the Clergy. Anno Gratiae 787, Concilium Cal∣chythense Legatinum & Pananglicum a Gregorio Ostiensi & Theophylacto Tudentino Episcopis, & Legatis Ha∣driani Papae Calchythae celebratum est. In quo decernitur de fide pri∣mitùs susceptâ retinendâ, aliisque ad Ecclesiae regimen pertinentibus: Et de Conferendâ parte Archiepiscopatûs Cantuariae ad Ecclesiam Litchfelden∣sem, jam in Archiepiscopatum promo∣vendam. Habebatur in duabus Ses∣sionibus (says Sir Henry Spelman, rectiùs fortè concilia dicendis) qua∣rum prima fuit in regno Northanhym∣brorum, coram Alfwoldo illic Rege [& Magnatibus suis:] Praesidente è Legatis Gregorio Ostiensi Episco∣po. Secunda Sessio in Regno Mercio∣rum
fuit, coram Offâ Rege ibidem [& suis Magnatibus:] Praesidente etiàm in eâdem Gregorio ipso Ostiensi. So that here appears the Doctor's First mistake, in saying that the Kings presided, though the Le∣gates were present. I confess our Kings frequently did preside in Ec∣clesiastical Assemblies; nor was the Grandeur of Popes arrived in those Days to such an Extravagant pitch, as to Usurp Precedency before Kings and Emperors. But I observe this, to shew the Doctor's carelesness in his Quotations, not to argue any Inferiority of the Kings Persons, by reason of their not presiding, when they were Present. For we find Instances of Archbishops of Can∣terbury presiding, though the Kings were Present. The Doctor's Se∣cond mistake is, in calling this an Assembly of the Clergy: For, though this Council was Assembled for Ec∣clesiastical Matters, nor do we find any Temporal Laws made, or Temporal Affairs transacted in it,
(saving, that in the Twelfth Chap∣ter it is decreed what sort of Per∣sons shall be chosen to be Kings, and by whom) yet were all Per∣sons present, that in those Days constituted the General Legislative Assemblies of the Nation, which in latter Ages we have Christned by the Name of Parliaments. And this appears by the Letter, which one of the Legates wrote to the Pope, giving him an account of the Success of their Mission. Per∣venimus ad aulam Offae Regis Mer∣ciorum; at ille cum iugenti gaudio ob Reverentiam Beati Petri & ve∣stri Apostolatûs, honore suscepit tam nos, quàm sacros apices, à summâ sede delatos. Tunc convenerunt in unum Concilium Offa Rex Merciorum & Chinulphus Rex West-Saxonum, cui etiàm tradidimus vestra Syngram∣mata Sancta: Ac illi continuò pro∣miserunt se de his vitiis corrigen∣dos. Tunc [inito concilio cum praedictis Regibus, Pontificibus, Se∣nioribus terrae,] perpendentes quod
angulus ille longè latèque protendi∣tur, permisimus Theophylactum Ve∣nerabilem Episcopum, Regem Merci∣orum & Britanniae partes adire. Ego autem, assumpto mecum Adju∣tore, quem filius vester Excellentis∣simus Rex Carolus ob reverentiam Vestri Apostolatûs nobiscum misit, Virum probatae fidei Wighodum, Ab∣batem Presbyterum, perrexi in re∣gionem Northanhymbrorum, ad Os∣waldum Regem, & Archiepiscopum Sanctae Ecclesiae Eboracae Civitatis Eanbaldum. Sed quia praefatus Rex longè in Borealibus commorabatur, misit jam dictus Archiepiscopus missos suos ad Regem, qui continuò omni gaudio Statuit diem concilii: Note here the manner of re∣ceiving Fo∣reign Canons in those days. Ad quem Convenerunt [Omnes Prin∣cipes Regionis,] tam Ecclesiastici quàm Saeculares. And a little af∣ter; Qui omni Humilitatis Sub∣jectione, & clarâ voluntate, tam ad∣monitionem Vestram, quàm parvi∣tatem nostram amplexantes, spo∣sponderunt se in omnibus obedire. Then follow the Canons them∣selves:
And afterwards, these Words; VIZ. Haec decreta, Beatissime Pater Adriane, in Concilio publico, co∣ram Rege Aelfwaldo & Archiepisco∣po Eanbaldo, [& omnibus Episco∣pis & Abbatibus regionis, seu Senatoribus & Ducibus & Populo terrae] proposuimus, & illi, &c. se in omnibus custodire decreverunt, & signo crucis in vice vestrâ in manu nostrâ confirmaverunt. Then follow the Witnesses Names, of whom part are Secular, part Ec∣clesiastical Persons. And afterwards; His peractis perreximus, Assumptis no∣biscum Viris illustribus, Legatis Re∣gis & Archiepiscopi, &c. qui unà nobiscum pergentes, & ipsa decre∣ta secum deferentes in Concilium Merciorum, ubi Gloriosus Rex Offa [cum Senatoribus terrae] unà cum Archiepiscopo Janbrichto sanctae Ec∣clesiae Dorovernensis & caeteris Epis∣copis
regionum convenerat, & in Conspectu Concilii Clarâ voce singu∣la Capitula perlecta sunt, & tam Latinè quàm Teutonicè, quo [omnes] intelligere possent, dilucidè resera∣ta, qui [omnes] consonâ voce, a∣lacri animo, gratias referentes, pro∣miserunt se in omnibus haec Statu∣ta custodire. In this Convention the Canons of the six first General Councils were received: And se∣veral Constitutions made for the Government of the English Church. All which were Assented to by the Clergy and the Laity of these two Kingdoms of the Heptarchy: And by Vertue of that Assent, became incorporated into the Mu∣nicipal Laws of those Kingdoms. So that though this, and many other such Councils as this was, shew abundantly the King of En∣gland's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, in opposition to a Fo∣reign Power, yet no Argument can be drawn from hence to prove any other or greater power in
Ecclesiastical Matters to be lodged in the King, than he has in Tem∣porals: The Supreme Power in both being in the King, in con∣junction with his Great Council or Parliament, but not in him, separate and apart from them. Another Example produced by the Doctor, of our Kings having presided in a Council of the Cler∣gy, though the Pope's Legates were present, is out of Sir Hen∣ry Spelman's Counc. pag. 189. But in this he has as bad luck, as in the former; for, as in the former the Kings did not preside, but one of the Legates, so in this the King indeed presided, but no Legate appears by the Book to have been present. And the Acts of the Council begin thus; VIZ. In Nomine Domini Dei Nostri & Salvatoris Jesu Christi Congregatum
est Magnum Concilium in loco qui vocatur Becancelde, Praesidente in eodem Concilio Withredo Clementis∣simo Rege Cantuariorum, nec non Bertualdo Reverendissimo Archiepis∣copo Britanniae, simulque Tobiâ E∣piscopo Roffensis Ecclesiae, caeteris{que} Abbatibus, Abbatissis, Presbyteris, Diaconibus, Ducibus, Satrapis in unum glomeratis, paritèr tractantes, anxiè examinantes de statu Ecclesia∣rum Dei, &c. Here the King pre∣sides in a General Council of his own People, or in a Parliament assembled for Matters concerning the State and Government of the Church. And what use the Do∣ctor can make of all this, I know not. The Charter of King William the Conqueror, whereby he severed the Ecclesiastical Courts from the Temporal, and which the Doctor would have us believe, was an Act of the King's Personal Autho∣rity
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, was a Parliamentary Charter, or an Act of Parliament. Willielmus Dei gra∣tiâ, &c. Sciatis, &c. quod leges E∣piscopales, quae non benè, nec secun∣dum sanctorum Canonum praecepta, usque ad mea tempora in Regno An∣glorum fuerunt, Communi Consilio Archiepiscoporum meorum, & caete∣rorum Episcoporum & Abbatum & omnium Procerum Regni mei, emen∣dandas Judicavi. Propterea man∣do & praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de legibus Epis∣copalibus amplius in Hundret placi∣ta teneat, &c. This Mr. Selden understood to be an Act of Par∣liament, for having given an account of his Diaploma to Battle-Abbey, and recited it at length in his Notes & Specilegium ad Eadmerum; p. 165, 166. which was granted Assensu Lanfranci Ar∣chiepiscopi Cantuariensis, & Stigandi Episcopi Cicestrensis & Concilio e∣tiam Episcoporum & Baronum meorum:
says he, id genus etiam est sancitum ejus, quo Sacrum à Civili discriminavit Fo∣rum. The same Author speaking in an∣other of his Works of King William the Conquerour's bringing the Possessions of the Church under Military Service, of which, though Roger Wendover (out of whom Matthew Paris took the Rela∣tion) says, that Episcopatus & Abba∣thias omnes, quae Baronias tenebant in purâ & perpetuâ Eleemosynâ, & eatenus ab omni servitute Seculari Libertatem ha∣buerant, sub servitute statuit Militari, ir∣rotulans singulos Episcopatus & Abbathias pro Voluntate suâ quot milites sibi & suc∣cessoribus suis, hostilitatis tempore voluit à singulis exhiberi. Yet (says Mr. Selden) how it is likely he brought them to this kind of Tenure, may be conjectured by other circumstances of the stories of the the same time. And observe especially, That he held a Parliament the same Year; so that perhaps this Innovation of their Tenures was done by an Act of that Par∣liament. Seld. Titles of Honour, p. 578. Which I mention only to shew, that things said to have been done by the Conquerour, and especially Laws and Constitutions mention'd to have been made by Him, must not presently be
suppos'd to have proceeded from his own, single, personal Authority, but to have been made More Anglico, cum as∣sensu Ordinum Regni, as has been even now observed out of Mr. Selden. What follows in the Doctor (p. 156, 157) concerning the King's Temporal Courts, being Judges, whether a Cause be∣longed to the Jurisdiction of the Temporal or Ecclesiastical Courts, is very true: And so is the Account, that he gives of King William the First, his settling ma∣ny particulars to belong to the Jurisdicti∣on of the Ecclesiastical Judges, in a Coun∣cil at Illibon in Normandy, Anno 1080. But it is an inveterate Error of the Doctor's, to confound the King's perso∣nal Authority with his Authority in his Courts, and his Authority in, and with the Assent of his Great Councils or Par∣liaments. That Councel of Illebon, men∣tion'd by the Doctor, is related by Or∣dericus Vitalis in this manner; viz. An∣no ab Incarnatione Domini MLXXX, Rex Gulielmus in festo Pentecostes apud Illebonam resedit, ibique Gulielmum Ar∣chiepiscopum & [omnes Episcopos & Abbates, Comitesque cum aliis Proceri∣bus Normanniae] simul adesse praecepit. Ʋt Rex jussit, factum est. Igitur Octavo
Anno Papatus Domini Gregorii Papae sep∣timi Concilium apud Jullam — bonam celebratum est, & de statu Ecclesiae Dei, totiusque Regni, providentiâ Regis [cum Baronum suorum consilio] utiliter tra∣ctatum est. And then follow the Ca∣nons, all being concerning matters Ec∣clesiastical. Now what use the Doctor makes of this Paragraph, I know not. For the Jurisdiction of the King in his Courts, (where the Law of the Land is the Judges rule) to restrain All Inferi∣our Courts within their proper bounds, no man denies: And the King's Autho∣rity to limit, erect and appoint Consilio Baronum suorum, And unà cum Episcopis, Comitibus & Proceribus Regni sui, what Causes shall belong to the cognisance of Ecclesiastical Judges, and what not, no man, that is a Protestant, questions. How many Acts of Parliament in every Age might be reckon'd of this nature; vid. Stat. de Circumspecte agatis temp. Edwar∣di 1. Stat. de Articulis Cleri, tempore Ed∣ward. 2. & Statutum pro Clero, tempore Edw. 3. and innumerable others. Then the Doctor refers his Readers for farther satisfaction how far the Kings of England have exercised Ju∣risdiction in Ecclesiastical matters, to
Sir Roger Twiselen, pag. 108, 109, &c. who instanceth in eighteen particulars. I will not stand with the Dr. for the number, but referr him to Mr. Prynn's second Tome of his Chronological Vindi∣cation of the King's Supreme Ecclesiasti∣cal Jurisdiction, out of the Introduction to which Volume he might have named five and twenty. But because he has chosen to quote Sir Roger Twisden's eighteen, let us examin those Particulars, and Sir Roger's Authorities, upon which he grounds them, and it will presently appear how far they make for his Hy∣pothesis. 1. The first is, that they permitted none to be taken for Pope, but by the King's appointment. For which he quotes Eadmerus, pag. 26. But of this matter having spoken already, I shall say no more of it in this place. The Second is, That none were to re∣ceive Letters from the Pope, without shew∣ing them to the King, who caused all words prejudicial to him or his Crown, to be renounced. For which he quotes Ead∣merus, pag. 113. In whom are these words, in a Letter from Pope Paschal to King Henry the First, viz. Sedis eni Apostolicae Nuntii vel Literae, praeter jus∣sum
sum Regiae Majestatis, nullam in potestate tuâ susceptionem aut aditum promerentur. This was but the Law of England, not to be subject to any Foreign Power; asserted by a Law in King William the Conquerour's time, and afterwards over and over in opposition to Papal En∣croachments and Usurpations; confirm'd by the Statutes of Praemunire and Provi∣sors, and effectually secured by the Laws made at and since the Reformation, and particularly by that Remarkable Statute of 14 Henr. 8. cap. 12. concerning Ap∣peals. And that the King could not of himself let in a Forein Power upon his People, appears sufficiently by what has been said already. The two Passages quoted by Sir Roger out of Thorn, Col∣lect. pag. 2151, 2152, and 2194, shew that two Persons, to whom the Pope had conferr'd by Provisions, the Mona∣stery of St. Austin in Canterbury, were enforced, before their Admittance, to renounce all such words in their Bulls of Provision, as were prejudicial to the King and his Crown; i.e. to the Laws of the Realm, in and over which the King was Supreme Magistrate and Go∣vernour. After which renunciation made, they did fealty to the King, and were
by the Escheator put into possession of their Temporalties. The King might by Law have oppos'd these Provisions, but the Monks, who had the Right of Ele∣ction, being willing to receive the Per∣sons so collated, and the King to admit them (as any Private Patron might admit a Clerk to be collated to a Church of his own Gift, by Provision) it was very reasonable that the King should require a renunciation of such Clauses in their Bulls of Provision, as interser'd with the Jurisdiction, which the Law gave him over his Spiritual Subjects. And this appears by Sir Roger Twisden's third quotation upon this Head, compar'd with an Act of Parlia∣ment in Queen Mary's time. The quotation is out of Coke's 3 In∣stit. pag. 27. where the Form of the Renunciation is set down; viz. I re∣nounce all the words comprized in the Pope's Bull to me made of the Abby of, &c. the which be contrary or prejudicial to the King our Sovereign Lord, and to his Crown, &c. A true and Gonuine Expla∣nation of which, take from an Act of a Popish Parliament, viz. 1 & 2 Phil. & Mar. cap. 8. Be it Enacted by Authori∣ty of this present Parliament, That all
Bulls, Dispensations and Privileges ob∣tained before the Twentieth Year of King Henry the Eighth, or which shall hereaf∣ter be obtained of the See of Rome, not containing matter contrary or prejudicial to [the Authority, Dignity, or Prehe∣minence Royal or Imperial of the Realm, or to the Laws of the Realm,] now being in force, may be put in execu∣tion, &c. So that such Bulls, as were not contrary to the known Laws of the Realm, were allowed to be valid, so long as the Pope was acknowledged to be the Head of the English Church: But such Bulls, or clauses in Bulls, as were contrary to the Laws, were to be re∣nounced, as Prejudicial to our Sovereign Lord the King and his Crown; i. e. as this Law of Phil. and Mary explains it; to the Preheminence Imperial of the Realm, and the Laws of the same. Sir Roger's third Particular is, That Our Kings permitted No Councils, but by their liking, to assemble, which gained the name of Convocations; as that always had been and ought to be assembled by the King's Writ. For this Sir Roger quotes Eadmer. pag. 24, and the statute of 25 Henry the 8. c. 19. Upon this Head I have no Controversie with the Doctor
nor Sir Roger, I only assert, that such things as are the proper Business of Convocations, cannot be transacted by the King alone without them. His fourth particular is, That Our Kings caused some to sit in them (sc. in his Ecclesiastical Councils) to supervise their Actions and prohibit them, on the behalf of the King and Kingdom, ne quid ibi contra Regiam Coronam aut dignitation statuere attentarent. Here the Reader is to observe, that the Au∣thority quoted for this, is in Anno Dom. 1237. which was about the twentieth year of King Henry the Third, before which time the Clergy had turn'd the King and the Laity out of their Synods. And therefore it stood the King in stead to prohibit them, who were but a small number of his Subjects, and scarce half-Subjects, from attempting any thing to the prejudice of the Rights of his Crown, or the Liberties of his People, and the Laws of the Realm; which they had already made too great in∣rodes upon. As no such Prohibitions as these, can be produc'd in former times, so they were altogether useless and un∣necessary, when the Kings themselves and all such of their Subjects as were
admitted into Parliaments, sat and had Votes in Ecclesiastical Synods: as is un∣deniably evident by almost all the An∣cient Councils collected by Sir Henry Spelman, till within the Reign of King Steven; Who owing his Crown to the Clergy, was fain to suffer this and other Usurpations, to secure his crack'd Title. But after the Clergy took upon them to meet in Convocations, neither assembled by the Kings Writ, nor consisting, as the Ancient Synods had done, of the King and all the Estates of the Realm, Prohibitions to them are frequent, not to attempt any thing against the Law of the Land. Vid. Patt. 8. Reg. Johan. nu. 1. Rex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ab∣batibus, Archidiaconis, & omni Clero apud sanctum Albanum ad Concilium convoca∣to, salutem. Conquerente Ʋniversitate Mi∣litum & Baronum & aliorum sidelium nostrorum, audivimus quod non solum in laicorum grave praejudicium, sed etiam in totius Regni nostri intolerabile dispendi∣um, super Romescot praeter consuetudinem solvendo, & aliis perpluribus inconsuctis exactionibus Authoritate summi pontificis Concilium inire & Concilium celebrare decrevistis: Nos vero &c. Vobis precise mandamus & expresse prohibemus, ne
super praedictis vel aliquibus aliis Concili∣um aliquod in Authoritate aliquâ, in fide qua nobis tenemini, teneatis, vel contrae Regni nostri Consuetudinem aliquid novi statuatis, & à celebratione hujusmodi Concilii supersedeatis, quousque cum Ʋni∣versitate nostra super hoc Colloquium ha∣buerimus. This Writ appears to have been granted at the Complaint of the whole Parliament, and Commands the Clergy not to proceed in their Exacti∣ons, nor any other business contra con∣suetudinem Regni, till the King had spo∣ken with his Parliament about the mat∣ter. But I lay no stress at all upon the Parliament's being here a party. I pro∣duce this Writ only to confirm Sir Ro∣ger's fourth particular of the Kings pro∣hibiting the Clergy to attempt any thing against the Rights of his Crown or the Law of the Land. It is a known Rule, that whatever is forbidden by Law, the King may forbid by his Proclamation; and that whensoever any Court assumes an Authority, not warranted by Law, the King may prohibite them by his Writ. What more natural, then for the supreme Magistrate, to whom the Law has committed the Execution of it self, to prohibite all things that are contrary to Law?
As here we see the King, at the com∣plaint of the Ʋniversitas, prohibits the Clergy from attempting any thing con∣trary to the Consuetudo Regni, so in King Henry the Eighth's time there ap∣pears a prohibition to the King him∣self and the Clergy, not to do any thing contrariant or repugnant to the King's prerogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws and Statutes of the Realm. The Statute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. (which all men agree to be but declarative of the Com∣mon Law) enacts that No Canons, Con∣stitutions or Ordinances of the Clergy, shall be [made] or put in Execution within this Realm by Authority of the Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be contrariant or repugnant to the Kings prerogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws, or Statutes of the Realm. This Act had before provided, that the Clergy should not make, promulge or execute any Ca∣nons, Constitutions or Ordinances in their Convocations without the Kings Li∣cence and Assent, under the Penalty of a Premunire; so that without the Kings Assent their Canons would be Nullities, and themselves under a premunire for making or Executing them. And there∣fore when the Act provides in an after∣clause,
that they shall [make] no Ca∣nons, &c. contrary to the Kings prero∣gative, or the Laws of the Realm, this is a prohibition to the King and them not to make any such Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances, as are contrary to Law. Sir Roger's fifth particular is, That our Kings suffered no synodical decree to be of force, but by their Allowance and Confirmation. For which he quotes Florentius Wigornensis, Anno 1127. Where 'tis said, Rex auditis Concilii Gestis, consensum praebuit, & authoritate Regia & potestate concessit & confirma∣vit statuta Concilii à Gulielmo Cantuari∣ensi Archiepiscopo & sanctae Romanae Ec∣clesiae legato apud Westmonasterium cele∣brati. Now that Council consisted not of the Clergy only, but as Ecclesiastical Synods did in those days, of the Clergy and Laity; Confluxerunt quoque illic magnae multitudines Clericorum & Laico∣rum, tam divitum quam mediocrium, & fact us est conventus grandis & inestimabi∣lis. ibidem. And this we have heard be∣fore out of Malmesbury was necessary, quatenus quicquid ejusmodi Concilii Au∣thoritate decerneretur, utriusque Ordinis cura & sollicitudine ratum servaretur. Now, that the Acts of such Synods
were of no force within the Realm without the Kings Assent, I agree: as his Assent is necessary to make an Act of Parliament a binding Law in Tempo∣rals, so his Assent is, and till the Clergy had turn'd him out of their Synods, al∣ways was necessary and Essential to an Ecclesiastical Law. But what inference can be drawn from hence to prove any personal Supremacy in the King, separate and distinct from the Assent of his Peo∣ple in their Synods and Councils, I do not apprehend. But one Observation I cannot omit upon this Council, compar'd with that other held Anno Dom. 1175. & Ann. 21. Hen. 2. For whereas in the former the Laity were present, as well as the Clergy, we find the King gave his Royal Assent to their Canons, and so they be∣came Ecclesiastical Laws, binding to the whole Nation; In the latter the Laity were not present, by any account that I can find of it, and therefore to make their Canons general Laws the Kings Assent would not have been sufficient, nor was it singly had; for Gervas. Do∣rob. Anno Dom. 1175. pag. 1429. Col∣lect. tells us in hoc Concilio ad Emenda∣tionem Anglicanae Ecclesiae assensu Domi∣ni
Regis & primorum Regni haec subscrip∣ta promulgata sunt Capitula. And that the Clergy in those days, when they took upon them to hold Sy∣nods apart from the Laity, did not imagine that the King alone could give their Canons any Validity in Law, where they entrench'd upon or inter∣ser'd with the Laws of the Land, will appear by observing, that when in King Henry the Third's Time the Clergy in opposition to the Gravamina Laicorum, had made many provisional Articles for the enlarging their own Jurisdiction, pro quibus Episcopi Angliae fuerant pugna∣turi, Mathew Paris says thus of them; viz. Formati sunt Articuli circiter quin∣quaginta, quos praelati in seripta redegerunt, ut apto tempore coram Rege & magnati∣bus & praelatis lecti, effectum debitum sor∣tirentur. Additamenta ad Math. Paris. pag. 199, &c. so that it was the magna∣tes & praelati, as well as the King, and not the King without them, that could give life to them. Sir Roger's sixth particular is, That our Kings permitted no Bishops to Ex∣communicate or inflict any Ecclesiastical Censure on any Baron or Officer, nisi praecepto suo; concerning which I have spoken already.
The seventh is, That they caused the Bishops to appear in their Courts, to give an Account why they Excommunicated the Subject, This makes nothing for any personal Authority in the King. Whatever he does in his Courts, he does by his Judges, who have the Law of the Realm for their guide and Rule. And ought to keep all inferiour Courts within their Bounds; and therefore might and do yet every day grant Pro∣hibitions, when the Bishops and their Officials proceed to Excommunicate, where the Law does not allow that Censure to be apply'd. And if the Writ of Prohibition be not obey'd, but that the Bishop or other Ecclesiasti∣cal Judge proceeds notwithstanding, an Attachment is the next process. Vid. Fitz. Nat. Br. tit. prohibition. For Ex∣communication, whatever pretence of Divine Right the Clergy may have for their Jurisdiction, was always regulated by the Laws of the Realm, but never by the Kings Arbitrary Will and Plea∣sure. The Eighth is, That they caused such as were imprisoned, after forty days standing Excommunicate, to be free'd by Writ, without the assent of the prelate or
satisfaction giving; the King and his Judges communicating with them, tam in Divinis, quam profanis, and com∣manding none to shun them, though by the ordinary denounced Excommunicate. Now the ground of this is no other, then the Writ de cautione admittenda, by which the Bishops are commanded, quod accepta ab A. B. (the Person Ex∣communicate) cautione, ipsum à prisona, quâ occasione praedict. detinetur, delibera∣ri mandent; alioqui quod nostrum est in hac parte exequemur. To which Writ if the Bishop did not yield Obedience, then a Writ went to the Sheriff to de∣liver the Prisoner, if the Bishop should persist in his refusal to accept Caution. v. Regist. fol. 66. a. & Fitz. Nat. Brev. Fol. 63. Now these Writs in the Regi∣ster were made in Parliament, as Brac∣ton tells us; Lib. 5. Fol. 413. b. & sunt quidem brevia formata de certis ca∣sibus, & [de communi consilio totius Regni] concessa & approbata; And therefore (says he, and the Lord Coke out of him, 2 Instit. 407.8. Rep. fol. 48, 49.) nullatenus mutari possunt abs∣que consensu & voluntate eorum. The Acts indeed by which most of the Writs in the Register are appointed, are lost,
as all the Records of Parliament are before Magna Charta; but by Acts of Parliament yet upon record many writs are directed, and the forms of them express'd in the body of the Acts. So that Writs in the Register are the very Law of England; they are Statute-Law, and the oldest Statute-Law we have. And consequently the King's command∣ing the Bishops to discharge persons, that were in prison upon a Capias Excom∣municatum, and commanding the She∣riff to deliver them in the Bishop's de∣fault, is no Act of Personal Prerogative in them; But the ordinary course of the Law of the Realm, and warranted by Acts of Parliament, though, the Records of those Acts being lost, we now call it Common-Law. Sir Roger's ninth Instance is, That our Kings suffer'd no Legates to come into England, without their leave. Of which has been discours'd already. The tenth is, That they determin'd Matters of Episcopacy Inconsulto Roma∣no Pontifice. Which is true, they did and had good Right to do, but not In∣consultis Magnatibus. Witness the De∣gradation of Stigand Arch-bishop of Canterbury, temp. Willielmi primi. And
the intended deprivation of Wolstan Bishop of Worcester. The Controversie betwixt King William Rusus and An∣selm, about Anselm's going to fetch his Pall from Ʋrban: And that betwixt Lanfrank Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Arch-bishop of York, con∣cerning the Profession of Canonical Obe∣dience, which the former required of the Latter: the Chusing Bishops and Arch-Bishops: the Controversies betwixt King Henry the 2d. and Thomas Becket; all heard, debated and determined in General Assemblies of Clergy and Laity, and not by our Kings apart from their Great Councels. The Eleventh is, That they permitted No appeals to Rome. 'Tis true; nor did they ever determine them them∣selves, either in person or by Commission. And therefore the Statute of Clarendon, which gives Appeals from the Arch∣Bishop to the King, was never un∣derstood to be to the King in person, but to the King in his Court. As we may see by what Ger. Dorobern. Anno 1176. Coll. p. 1433: And Hoveden, fol. 313, 314: tell us of the statute made at Northampton in King Henry the second's time. Which both of them
call a renewing of the Assize of Claren∣don. Now in these Laws made at Northampton there is this close Expressi∣on concerning Appeals; Justiciae faci∣ant quaerere per consuetudinem terrae illos, qui à Regno recesserunt, & nisi redire vo∣luerint infrà terminum nominatum, & stare ad Rectum [in Curià Domini Regis,] Ʋtlagentur. So that, though King Henry, as far as in him lay, had given ways to Appeals to Rome (for when he was absolv'd of the Guilt, that he was supposed to have contracted by having occasioned the death of Thomas Becket, part of the satisfaction enjoyn'd him, was, quod licebit Appellationes libere fieri; Radulph: de Diceto. p. 560) yet the Kingdom afterward meeting in Parliament at Northampton, would not quit their interest; But renew'd the Laws of Clarendon against forein Ap∣peals; And explain the Appeals ad Re∣gem to be meant of Appeals ad Curiam Regis. But it is a common errour with Men, that are ignorant of our Laws, wherever they find they King's name in any Acts of Parliament, or Judici∣al Proceedings, to imagine, that the King has some Personal Authority out of his Courts; But for the present, I will
give but one Instance, to detect that mistake. The Stat. of Westm. 1. Enacts (cap. 15.) what persons shall be reple∣visable, and what not. Amongst others, those that are taken by [Commande∣ment le Roy] are appointed not to be bayl'd by that Statute. My Lord Coke, in his Commentary upon that Law; 2d Institut. pag. 186. says thus, viz. 1. The King, being a body Poli∣tick, cannot command but by matter of Record; for Rex praecipit and lex praecipit, are all one. For the King must command by matter of Record, according to Law. 2. When any Judicial Act is by Act of Parliament referred to the King, it is to be un∣derstood to be done in some Court of Justice, according to Law. The words of the Statute of Rich. 2. cap. 12. are, si non, que il sort per briefe, ou auter maundement del Roy. And yet, it was resolved by all the Judges of England, that the King cannot do it by any Commandment, but by Writ, or by Order or Rule of some of his Courts of Justice, where the Cause dependeth. And Fortescue, speaking to the Prince, to instruct him against he should be King; Melius
(says he) per alios, quàm per teipsum Judicia reddes, quo proprio ore Nul∣lus Regum Angliae usus est, & tamen sua sunt omnia Judicia Regni; licet per alios ipsa reddantur; sicut & judicum lim sententias Josaphat asseruit esse ju∣dicia Dei. The Great Case in tertio Caroliprimi of Habeas Corpus turn'd upon this point. The Judges indeed betray'd the Nation in that cause, as they have done in o∣thers in these Hundred years last past, as far as in them lay: but how that Judgment was resented in Parliament, the Reader may inform himself out of the 1st Vol. of Rushworth's Collections, and the 1st part of Doctor Nalson. The Law was declared upon that occasion to be, that Voluntas Regis est secundum legem et Justiciarios suos, in Guriâ suâ & non in Camerâ; according to 2 R. 3. f. The Twelfth particular is, that Our Kings bestowed Bishopricks on such as they liked: and translated Bishops from one See to another: concerning our Kings bestowing Bishopricks something has been said already. As for their trans∣lating Bishops from one See to another, I desire to hear any one Instance in any age of any Bishop translated by the
King, against his own will. The Pope pretended to such a power, and some∣times Exercised it: and that was one of the mischiefs, which occasioned the making of the Statutes of Provisors. But could never yet find, that any of our Kings attempted it. The Thirteenth particular is, Erecting New Bishopricks. The Instances given by Sir Roger, are 1st, the erecting of the Bishoprick of Ely by King Henry the 1st, Anno 1009. taking it out of Lincoln-Diocess. And yet nothing is more evident, then that this was done by Act of Parliament. The Instrument Runs thus; viz. In Nomine sanctae & individuae Trinitatis Patris & Filii & spiritus sancti, Anno ab Incarnatione Domini MCVIII Indictione. Anno Pontificatus Domini Paschalis Papae 2. decimo, Regni quoque mei similiter deci∣mo; Ego Henricus Providente Divina Clementia Rex Anglorum & Norman∣norum Dux, Wilhelmi Magni Regis Fi∣lius, qui Edwardo Regi Haereditario jure successit in Regnum; videns & Ecclesiae messem in Regno meo multam esse, & Agricolas quidem paucos, et ab hoc pluri∣mum laborantes in Messe, et in ipsa Lin∣colniensem Ecclesiam multa plebe foecun∣dam,
ex Authoritate & Consilio predicti Papae Paschalis, & Assenfu simul & prece Roberti Lincolniensis Episcopi, & totius Capituli sui, cum ipso annuente Domino Anselmo Beatae memoriae Cantuariensi Ar∣chiepiscopo, & Thoma secundo Venerabili Eboracensium Archiepiscopo, [& Univer∣sis Episcopis & Abbattibus totius An∣gliae, sed & omnibus Ducibus, Comiti∣bus & Principibus Regni mei] Elyense Monasterium &c. in Episcopalem sedem, sicut & caeteros Episcopatus Regni mei li∣beram & absolutam perenniter statuo & confirmo. vid. Mr. Selden's Notas & Spicilegium ad Eadmer. Et Dugdale's Mo∣nasticon. And what if All the Bishopricks of England, Erected both before and after, were Erected by Acts of Parliament, and not by the King's Letters Patents only? In King Edward the Elder's time, up∣on the Letter of Pope Formosus, Congre∣gata est synodus Senatorum, Procerum & Populorum, & Nobilium Gentis Angliae, In quâ Presidebat Plegmundus Archiepis∣copus. Tum sibi Rex cum suis, et Pleg∣mundus Archiepiscopus salubre Concilium iniverunt, and Constituted and Elected five Bishops in the Province of the Ge∣wissi, where there had till then been
but two, dividing those two Bishopricks into five by Act of Parliament. Spel∣man's Counc. Volum. 1. pag. 387, 388. Malmesbury de Gestis Regum Anglorum; Lib. 2. cap. 5. This Council Matthew Westminster, pag. 181. Anno Dom. 9051 calls, Concilium Grande Episcoporum, Ab∣batum, & fidelium populorum in Provin∣ciâ Geviseorum. In the same Council the bounds of their Diocesses were Limitted: which the same Historian describes. He tells us likewise, that in the same Council two other Bishops were chosen, One to the Bishoprick of Dorchester and another to that of Chichester. In King Henry the Eighth's time, six New Bishopricks were erected by the King's Letters Patents; viz. Glocester, Bristol, Chester, Peterborough, Oxford and Westminster. But those Letters Patents had the Authority of an Act of Parlia∣ment to warrant them, made in the One and thirtieth year of that King's Reign, cap. 9. Be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, that his High∣ness shall have full power and Authority, from time to time, to declare and nomi∣nate by his Letters Patents, &c. such num∣ber of Bishops, such number of Cities, Sees for Bishops, Cathedral Churches and Dio∣cesses,
by metes and bounds, &c. as to his most Excellent Wisdom shall be thought necessary and convenient. And also shall have power and Authority, to make and devise Translations, Ordinances, Rules and Statutes concerning them, All and every of them, &c. And that all and sin∣gular such Translations, Nominations of Bishops, Cities, Sees and limitation of Dio∣cesses for Bishops, Erections, Establishments, Foundations, Ordinances, Statutes, Rules &c. shall be of as good strength, force, va∣lue and effect, to all Intents and purposes, as if such things, &c. had been done, made and had by Authority of Parliament. This is most apparently an Enabling Act; Power is here given to the King by Authority of Parliament, and it is En∣acted, that the Contents of his Letters Patents, to be made for perfection of the Premises, shall be as valid, as if they had been Enacted in Parliament. So that, in that King's Judgment, force and va∣lidity was by this Act given to his Let∣ters Patents, which otherwise they would have been destitute of, and have been invalid for the End to which they were designed. This was but a Temporary Act, and dyed with that King, for no such Pow∣er
is given by the Act to his Successors. And therefore in King Edward the sixth's time a Bill was brought into the House of Commons, and read the first time, To authorize that King to make New Bishopricks by Letters Patents: As I find in a Manuscript Journal of King Edward the Sixth's Parliaments, Anno Regni 7. What became of it afterwards, I know not. It was brought in towards the End of the Session, and did not pass into a Law. But the bringing of it in shews, that the King was not conceived to have any such Authority of Common Right. Nor did that King exercise any such Authority. For the Bishoprick of Durham was in his Reign divided into two by Act of Parliament. And when it was restored to its former Estate in Queen Mary's time, it was done by Act of Parliament. Vid. Dr. Burnet's Hi∣story of the Reform. vol. 2. p. 215. Ra∣stal's Statutes, 1 Mariae, Parl. 2. That Act of King Henry the Eighth, by which he was impowered to Erect New Bishopricks, was Repealed 1 & 2 Phil. & Mar. And to the End, that by the Repeal of the Act, those Bishop∣ricks that had been Erected by vertue of it, might not be consequentially dis∣solved,
A Clause was inserted into the Act of Repeal, That all Bishopricks, Ca∣thedral Churches, Hospitals, Colledges, Schools, and such other Foundations then continuing, made by Authority of Parlia∣ment, or otherwise, according to the Order of the Laws of the Realm, since the schism, should be confirmed and continued for ever. So that then the Bishopricks, that had been newly Erected by King Hen∣ry the Eighth, stood upon this Founda∣tion, viz. A Confirmation by Parlia∣ment, notwithstanding the Repeal of 31 Henr. 8. cap. 9. But now, that the Statute of 1 & 2 Phil. et Mar. cap. 8. is Repeal'd by Primo Eliz. and this clause of Confirmation not excepted out of the Repeal, I know not upon what bot∣tom they stand at this day. So far were our Kings from assuming a Power to Erect and divide Bishopricks at their pleasure (as a late Author, in a Book intituled, A Vindication of the King's Sovereign Rights, &c. pag. 12. takes upon him to affirm) That they never so much as divided Parishes, nor could make Ʋnions and Consolidati∣ons of Parochial Churches without Au∣thority of Parliament. Witness the Sta∣tutes of 33 Henr. 8. cap. 32.32 Hen. 8.
cap. 44.37 Hen. 8. cap. 21.17 Car. 2. cap. 3.22 Car. 2. cap. 11.22 & 23 Car. 2. cap. 15. &c. Sir Roger mentions likewise the Bi∣shoprick of Carlisle, which was Erected by King Henry the First, Anno Dom. 1133. The Prior of Hagulstad speaks of this in General terms (Coll. pag. 257.) Consecratus est Adulphus Prior de Nostlia ad Ʋrbem Karleol, quam Rex Hen∣ricus initiavit ad sedem Episcopalem. Math. Westm. in like manner, pag. 241. Rex Henricus Novum fecit Episco∣patum, apud Carleolum, in Limbo An∣gliae et Galwalliae, et posuit ibi primum E∣piscopum, nomine Ethelulphum sancti Os∣waldi Priorem. Abbas Jorvallensis tells us the story in like terms, Collect. pag. 1019. Eodem Anno Rex fecit Novum Episcopatum apud Karliolum, quem Ar∣nulfo, Priori de sancto Bertulpho Contu∣lit. But it appears by Radulph. de Di∣ceto, Coll. pag. 505. that in this very year a Parliament was held, and a ve∣ry solemn one. Rex Henricus, Con∣vocatis Regni sui Principibus, filiam suam & haeredes filiae suae sibi successorres instituit. In which Parliament it is not unlikely that this Bishoprick of Car∣lisle was erected, notwithstanding these
loose Expressions of the Monks. For the same Authors express themselves in the same terms concerning the Bishop∣rick of Ely: Which yet was erected by Act of Parliament. Radulphus de Di∣ceto; Collect. pag. 501. Rex Henricus Abbathiam Elyensem ad Episcopalem mu∣tavit sedem, & Herveum ibi praesecit. Math. Westminst. pag. 238. Rex Hen∣ricus Abbbathiam Elyensem in Episco∣palem sedem commutavit. Abbas Jor∣vallensis; pag. 1003. Collect. Abbathi∣am de Ely ad sedem Episcopalem con∣vertit, & primum Episcopum Herveum Bangorensem constituit. So that no Argument can be drawn from these Historians mentioning the King's Found∣ing the Bishoprick of Carlisle, with∣out naming the Parliament, as a party to it, to prove that therefore it was not Erected by Authority of Parliament. For if the Charter of the Foundation of the Bishoprick of Ely had been lost, the same Argument would have lain against it. And all the Bishopricks in England, of whose first Foundations there is any particular Account given by our Historians, appear to have been Founded by Our Kings in Parliament, or by vertue of an Authority given by Act of Parliament.
I suppose it will not be deny'd, but whenever any Bishoprick in Particu∣lar was Founded, at the same time it was endow'd. Now Our Anci∣ent Kings could not out of Parlia∣ment endow Bishopricks, because they could not distrahere patrimonium Reg∣ni. And a further Consideration to this purpose may be drawn from the Exemptions, which the possessions of the Church enjoy'd from all secular service, Except the Trinoda necessitas; Which Exemptions, were all Granted by Char∣ters Assented to in Parliament, as ap∣pears undeniably by the several Char∣ters Granted in divers Kings Reigns suc∣cessively to the Abby of Crowland, All inserted in haec verba into Ingulphus his History of that Monastery; and by the Monasticon. In which it appears fur∣ther, that all Exemptions from Episco∣pal Jurisdiction, Except of the King's free Chappels, which were of his own Foundation, were granted in Parlia∣ment: I mean all such Exemptions gran∣ted by our Kings. For the Pope used to grant Exemptions by Bulls: and those Papal Exemptions were confirm'd by Parliament, temp. Henr. 8. King William the Conquerour Founded Battle-Abby
in Sussex, in the place where he overcame Harald; and Exempted it from Episcopal Jurisdiction. But whe∣ther he did it in Parliament, or not, let the Charter it self testifie; viz. Williel∣mus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, &c. Notum sit Vobis me Concessisse & confirmasse, cum Assensu Lanfranci Ar∣chiepiscopi Cantuariensis, & Stigandi Episcopi Cicestrensis, [& Consilio eti∣am Episcoporum & Baronum meorum,] ut Ecclesia Sancti Martini de Bello, quam Fundavi ex voto, ob Victoriam, quam mihi Deus in eodem loco con∣cessit, libera sit & quieta in perpetuum ab omni servitute & omnibus quaecun∣que humana mens excogitare potest, &c. Nec liceat Episcopo Cicestrensi, quamvis in illius Dioecesi sit, in Eccle∣sia illa vel Maneriis ad illam pertinen∣tibus, ex consuetudine hospitari, con∣tra voluntatem Abbatis, nec Ordina∣tiones aliquas facere ibidem, nec Abba∣tiam in aliquo gravare; sed neque su∣per illam Dominationem aliquam, aut vim aut potestatem exerceat, sed, sicut mea Dominica Capella, libera sit om∣nino ab omni ejus Exactione, &c. Hoc etiam Regali Authoritate & Episco∣polum & Baronum meorum Attestati∣one
constituo, quatenus Abbas Eccle∣siae suae & leugae circumjacentis per omnia Judex sit & Dominus. The Fourteenth Particular is, that our Kings have by their Writs commanded Bishops to keep resident. Which, conside∣ring that it was their Duty, incumbent on them by Law, what great Power does it argue in the King, to command his Subjects to do what the Law en∣joyns them? The Sixteenth is, That they have com∣manded their Bishops, by reason of Schism or Vacancy in the Popedom, &c. not to seek Confirmation from Rome, but the Metropolitans to be charged by the King's Writ, to bestow it on the Elected. For this Sir Roger quotes Rot. Parl. 16. Mart. 3 Hen. 5. nu. 11. Anno Domini 1414. Now that was done by Act of Parlia∣ment. Which, because it is observable to many purposes, shall be transcrib'd at large. Our Lord the King, considering the long Vacancy of the Apostolick See, by reason of the damnable Schism, which has now continued a long time in Holy Church, and is not known how long it may yet last, And that certain Cathedral Churches within the
Kingdom, which are of the Foundati∣on of his Noble Progenitors, and be∣long to his Patronage, have been for some while and are yet destitute of Parochial Government, because the Persons that are elected into the same, cannot be confirmed in Parts beyond the Sea, for want of an Apostle, Altho' our said Lord the King bath thereun∣to given his Royal Assent, to the Great decrease of Divine Service in the said Churches, substraction of Hospitality, Great peril of many Souls, Devastation and Destruction of the Lordships and Possessions belonging to the same, and the Impoverishment of such Bishops Elect; And that by possibility all the Cathedral Churches within the Realm, may become void in like manner, and so be destitute of Government, and the King and his Realm of Council, Comfort and Aid, which they ought to have of the Prelacy; And considering also that in divers foreign Parts since the Voidance of the said See, divers Confirmations have been and are daily made by the Metropolitans of the places, as he is credibly informed, and Willing for that cause, for ousting the said Mis∣chiefs,
chiefs, to provide such remedy, as it behoves, By the full and deliberate Advice and Assent of the Lords and Commons of his Realm in this present Parliament, Wills and Ordains, that the persons so chosen and to be cho∣sen within his Kingdom during the Vacancy of the said See Apostolick, shall be comfirmed by the Metropoli∣tans of the Places without Excuse or further delay in that behalf, And that the King's Writs, if need be, be directed to the Metropolitans, straitly charging them to make the said Con∣firmations, And to perform all that to their Office belongeth, As also to the Bishops Elect, that they on their part Effectually prosecute their Con∣firmations, that through default of such Metropolitans or Bishops Elect, dammage or prejudice may not ensue to our Lord King, and his Kingdom, and to his Realm, and to the said Churches for the Cause aforesaid, which God forbid. Here it is plain, that what Sir Ro∣ger ascribes to the King, was really done [by the full and deliberate Ad∣vice and Assent of the Lords and Com∣mons of his Kingdom in Parliament.]
And therefore that the supreme Juris∣diction in matters Ecclesiastical, was not, in the notion of that Age, Lodg'd personally in the King, but in the King by Law, in the King with his Parlia∣ment about him. Pursuant to this President we find in King Henry the Eighth's time a Nota∣ble Act in the 28th Year of his Reign; cap. 16. In which there is this clause; viz. And that it may be also Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, that all Arch bishops and Bishops of this Realm, or of any the King's Dominions, Consecrated and at this present time taken and reputed for Arch-bishops and Bishops, may [by Authority of this Present Par∣liament,] and not by vertue of any Pro∣vision, or other Forein Authority, Licence, Faculty or Dispensation, keep, enjoy and retain their Arch-bishopricks, in as large and ample manner, as if they had been promoted, Elected and consecrated accor∣ding to the due course of the Laws of this Realm, And that every Arch-bishop and Bishop of this Realm, and of other the King's Dominions, may minister, use and Exercise all and every thing and things, pertaining to the Office or Order of an Arch bishop and Bishop, with all
Tokens, Ensigns and Ceremonies there∣unto Lawfully belonging. This Act in the 2d paragraph had made void all Bulls, Dispensations, Breves &c. obtain'd at Rome, contrary to the statutes of Pre∣munire & Provisors: whereby many Bishopricks would have become void. To prevent which the Clause here recited, makes them legal Bishops not∣withstanding, and supplies all the Ce∣remonies of Election and Consecration. Which I suppose no man will take upon him to say, that the King might then have done, notwithstanding his Newly restor'd Supremacy. Sir Roger's 16th Particular is, that Our Kings placed by a Lay hand Clerks in Prebendary or Parochial Churches, Ordinariis penitus irrequisitis. But, if he had considered, that Originally all Church livings in England were Do∣natives, And that Presentations to Or∣dinaries, Admissions, Institutions and Inductions thereupon, obtain'd in En∣gland, in compliance with the Canons many years after the Conquest, he would not have mentioned that, as a special prerogative in the King, which was but common to him with All his subjects, that had been Founders and were Pa∣trons
of Benefices. Mr, Selden tells us in his History of Tythes, cap. 12. sect. 5. that it was not till about the year MCC that the Decretals and the Encreasing Authority of the Canons had settled the Ʋniversal course here of filling Churches by Presentation to the Bishop, Archdeacon, Vicar of the Bishop or Guardian of the Spiritualties: and that then the use of Investitures of Churches and tythes seve∣rally or together, practised by Lay-men, was left off, And a Division of secular and Ecclesiastical Right from thence been continued in practice. And in the same Section (pag. 392.) he says, that whilst the use of Lay-Investitures was in being all Churches so given were proper∣ly Donatives. For further satisfaction as to that Particular, I refer to him. Sir Roger's seventeenth Particular is, that Our Kings prohibited the Laity from yielding Obedience, or answering by Oath to their Ecclesiastical Superior, enquiring de peccatis subditorum. This take out of the Additaments to Matth. Paris: pag. 200. num. 9. from whence Sir Roger quotes it. Item, cum Praelati Ecclesiastici inquirere volunt de peccatis subditorum, prohibentur laici ne de veritate dicendâ, aut de credulitate aliquod jura∣mentum
exponant, aut Praelatis super hu∣jusmodi obediant; propter quod multo∣rum excessus & peccata mortalia incor∣recta & impunita relinquuntur, & sic praestatur audacia delinquendi, & peccan∣di facultas. Now this was no other, then protecting the Laity from being impos'd upon by the Oath ex officio. And innumerable Authorities might be cited, to prove that no kinds nor forms of Oaths can be made or imposed on the King's Subjects, nor prescribed to them in any new cases, but by Act of Parlia∣ment onely; And that no Bishop or Sub∣ject whatsoever hath any power to make or enjoyn any new Oaths or forms of Oaths, nor any Authority to administer an Oath to any Man, without some Le∣gal Commission from the King under the Great Seal, or some Act of Parliament, especially Authorizing him to give or take an Oath, unless in Courts of Record or other Courts, who have Authority to administer Oaths by Prescription. But Anno Dom. 1237. Otho the Pope's Legate in a Council at London made this Constitution touching Oaths in Spi∣ritual Causes in Ecclesiastical Courts, till that time not known, nor used in England, as appears by the words of
the Constitution: Jusjurandum Calumniae in causis Ecclesiasticis quibuslibet, & de veritate dicenda in spiritualibus quoque, ut Veritas aperiatur facilius, & causae ce∣lerius terminentur statuimus de caetero Praestari in Regno Angliae, secundum ca∣nonicas & Legitimas sanctiones, [Obten∣tâ in contrarium Consuetudine Non ob∣stante.] vid. Matth. Paris; 454. A clear resolution, that till that time the custom of England, and the Law of the Land was to the contrary, and that they could not enforce any Man to his Oath in such cases. After which, Grost∣head Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1246. Ʋpon the suggestion of the Fryers Predi∣cant and Minorites, raged more than was meet or Expedient (they are the words of Matthew Paris) against those of his Diocess, making strict inquisition in his Bishoprick by his Arch-deacons and Deans, concerning the Chastity and manners, as well of noble as ignoble (upon Oath) to the enormous hurt and scandal of the re∣putations of many. [Quod nunquam antea fieri consueverat] The King hear∣ing the Grievous Complaints of his people, Consilio Curiae suae scripsit Vicecomiti Hert∣fordiae in haec verba: Henricus Dei Gra∣tia Rex Angliae &c. Praecipimus tibi,
quod sicut teipsum & omnia tua diligis, non permittas, quod aliqui laici de Balli∣vâ tuâ ad voluntatem Episcopi Lincolni∣ensis, Achidiaconorum, vel Officialium, seu Decanorum Ruralium, in aliquo loco Conveniant de caetero, ad cognitiones per sacramentum eorum vel attestationes ali∣quas faciendas, nisi in causis matrimoni∣alibus & Testamentariis. Matth. Par. p. 716. And the very next year follow∣ing, in pursuance hereof, the King by Parliament Enacted and Commanded, That if any Lay-man were convented before any Ecclesiastical Judge for breach of Faith and Perjury, that they should be prohibited by the King: and that the Ecclesiastical Judge should be pro∣hibited to hold plea for all Causes against Lay-men, unless they were of Matrimo∣ny and Testament: All which Matth. Paris precisely relates; pag. 727. Which Prohibition and Statute nullified the Con∣stitution of Otho, and put a stop to this his innovation. But yet about nine years after Boniface Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury published this peremptory Con∣stitution in affront to them both; Sta∣tuimus quod laici, ubi de subditorum pec∣catis & excessibus corrigendis per Praelatos & Ecclesiasticos judices inquiritur, ad prae∣standum
de Veritate dicendâ juramentum, per Excommunicationis sententias, si opus fuerit, Compellantur; Impedientes vero ne hujusmodi juramenta praestentur (for the Judges, with many others then general∣ly oppugned and hindred the ushering in of this Innovation) per interdicti & excommunicationis sententiam arceantur. To evacuate which illegal Constitution, trenching both upon the people's Liber∣ties, and the Courts of Justice too; the Judges frequently Granted out sundry General Prohibitions to all or most of the Sheriffs of England, as is evident by the Register of Writs, Pars 2. fol. 36.43.50. Fitzherbert's Nat. Brev. fol. 41. A. Auxy home poit suer prohibition direct al Viscount que le Viscount ne permit ne suffer les lay subjects del Roy de vener a ascun lieu al citation del Evesque ad faciend▪ ali∣quas recognitiones, vel sacrament prestand. nisi in causis matrimonialibus & Testa∣mentariis. Rastal's Abridment of the sta∣tutes, Title, Prohibit. nu. 5. Ʋpon which Prohibitions this Attachment followed; The King to the Sherifs Greeting. Cause such a Bishop to put in sureties to appear before our Justices &c. to shew cause why he made certain Lay persons to be summoned and di∣strained by Ecclesiastial censures, to appear
before him at his pleasure, to take an Oath against their Wills, In Grave Praejudicium Coronae & Dignitatis nostrae Regiae, necnon contra consuetudinem Regni nostri. By all which and by the Petition of Right it self, it appears evidently that this Jura∣mentune Calumniae, or Oath ex officio was utterly against Law. For one of the Grievances complain'd of in that Pe∣tition, was, that the King's Subjects had had an Oath administred to them, not warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. Now what use the Doctor can make of this Particular; viz. of the King's prohibiting the Clergy from Op∣pressing his Lay-Subjects contrary to Law, I cannot discover. Sir Roger's eighteenth and last particu∣lar, is an observation in Matth. Paris; where the Ecclesiasticks having enumera∣ted several cases, in which they held them∣selves hardly dealt with, add, That in all of them if the Spiritual Judge proceeded contrary to the King's prohibition, he was attached, and appearing before the Justices, constrained to produce his proceedings, that they might determine to which Court the Cause belonged. By which, says he, it is manifest how the King's Courts had the superintendency over the Ecclesiastick. This
makes nothing for any Extrajudicial, Personal, Arbitrary power in the King in the Ecclesiastical matters, and is so far from impugning, that it corroborates my hypothesis. That the Temporal and Ecclesiastical Courts often quarrel'd about their Juris∣diction, and that the Clergy sometimes made and attempted to put in execution Canons directly contrary to the Laws of the Realm, thereby endeavouring to u∣surp and encroach upon many matters, which apparently belonged to the Com∣mon Laws, as, the tryal of Limits and Bounds of Parishes, the Right of Patron∣age, the tryal of right of Tythes by In∣dicavit, Writs to the Bishop upon a re∣covery in a Quare impedit, the tryal of Titles to Church-Lands, concerning Di∣stresses and Attachments within their own Fees, and many other things which belonged to the King's Temporal Courts; That the Temporal Courts granted Prohi∣bitions in these and other like cases; that the Clergy hereupon complain'd not to the King but to the Parliament, Ann. 51 H. 3. twice during the Reign of Edw. 1. and afterwards nono Edw. 2. may be read at large in the Lord Coke's second Institutes, 599, 600, 601, &c. So that the King
determined to which Court Causes be∣longed, either in his Courts of Ordina∣ry Justice, or, if the Clergy remain'd unsatisfied with the Opinions of the Judges, in his High Court of Parlia∣ment, and no otherwise. But we need not wonder that such a Prelate as Arch bishop Bancroft, whose Divinity had taught him that the King may take what causes he shall please to determine, from the determination of the Judges, and determine them himself, and that such Authority belonged to Kings by the Word of God in the Scripture, we need not wonder, I say, to find him in King James the First's time Exhibiting Arti∣cles of Abuses in granting Prohibitions, against the Judges, to the Lords of the Privy Council; As if the Lords of the Privy Council had any Authority to direct the Judges in their administration of Justice, or to set bounds to the Juris∣diction of any Court. Vid. 2 Inst. 601, 602, &c. & 12 Co. p. 63, 64, 65. By what has been said I hope it ap∣pears sufficiently, that the Ancient Ju∣risdiction of our Kings in Ecclesiastical matters was such a Jurisdiction, and no other than they had in Temporal matters, viz. in their Great Councels, and in their
Ordinary Courts of Justice: And that not only our Mercenary Doctor, but more learned and wiser men than he, have unwarily confounded that Jurisdi∣ction with a Fiction of their own brains, by which they have ascribed to the King a Personal Supremacy, without any war∣rant from Antiquity, Law, or History. Witness these loose Expressions in Sir Roger Twiden's Historical Vindicati∣on &c. It cannot be denyed, but the necessity of being in union with the true Pope (at least in time of schism did wholly depend on the King: pag. 2. The English have ever esteemed the Church of Canter∣bury in Spirituals, that is, quae sui sunt ordinis, without any intervening Su∣perior omnium nostrum mater comu∣nis sub sponsi sui Jesu Christi dispositi∣one: in other things, as points of Go∣vernment, the Ordering that of Right and Custom ever to have belonged to the King, assisted with his Coun∣cel of Bishops, and others of the Clergy, who was therefore called, Vicarius Chri∣sti, &c. pag. 21. The King and the Arch bishop, or rather the Arch-bishop by the King's will and appointment had ever taken cognizance of all mat∣ters
of Episcopacy, as the Erection of Bishopricks, disposing and translating of Bishops &c. p. 24. and innumerable others. But to go on with Dr. Johnston and draw to a conclusion; he acknowledges (pag. 157) that he does not find that by immediate Commission the Kings of England Visited before King Henry the Eighth's time. And if no such thing can be found, then what authority can our Kings now have to exercise such a Jurisdiction unless by vertue of some Act of Parliament made in or since his time? But (says he) we have sufficient grounds to judge, that whatever was done, was by the King's Power and Au∣thority: which is a wild, extrava∣gant, ignorant expression, and hardly common sense. And therefore (says he) Sir Edward Coke in Cawdrie's case, Lays it down for a Rule. That as in Temporal Causes, the King by the Mouth of the Judges in the Courts of Justice doth judge and determine the same by the Temporal Laws of En∣gland, so in causes Ecclesiastical and spiritual by his Ecclesiastical Judges according to the Ecclesiastical Laws
of the Realm: and that so many of the Ecclesiastical Laws, as were pro∣ed, approved and allowed here, by and with general consent, are aptly and rightly called the King's Eccle∣siastical Laws: and whosoever deny∣eth this, denyeth the King to have full and plenary power to deliver Justice in all cases to all his Subjects, &c. pag. 157. which that he has, he proves by the Preamble of stat. 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. And what then? May the King therefore erect New Courts direct∣ly contrary to positive Laws, Command things arbitrarily upon pain of suspensi∣on, deprivation, &c. and Command things contrary to Law by vertue of his Eccle∣siastical Laws? The Doctor concludes this Section with the Act of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. com∣monly called the Act of Supremacy (which now stands Repealed) And with 1 Eliz. by which (he says) all the Powers given by the Act of 26 H. 8. are restored to the Crown under the name of Supreme Governour. But, the former Discourse was design∣ed to be brought down no lower then to the end of King Henry the Eighth's Reign: And therefore I shall say no∣thing
in this place of the Act of 1 Eliz. but perhaps I may have occasion to shew hereafter that the Doctor understands the Act of 1 Eliz. as little, as any thing else that he pretends to write upon. FINIS.
