W1156 R27584 9959972 44415
DIALOGUES BETWEEN Philerene and Philalethe, A Lover of PEACE, and a Lover of TRUTH; Concerning the POPE's SUPREMACY. PART I. IMPRIMATUR, Liber cui Titulus, [Dialogues between Philéréne and Phi∣lalethe. March 27. 1688. GƲIL. NEEDHAM, R.R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Domest. LONDON. Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Angel in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXXVIII.
ADVICE TO THE READER. IT is above a year since this little Treatise hath been fit for the Press; and if the Author had pleased he needed not have delayed the Publishing of it so long; but as he did not undertake it with that design, so he did not consent to it, but at the sollici∣tation of a judicious and learned Friend, for whose Advice he had the same regard, as for his Commands. You will not find in these Discourses that delicacy of Expression, and that justness of Speech which are the ornament and beauty of the greatest part of the works of this Age: For besides that the stile of Dialogues ought to be plain and easie, the Author never made any ac∣count of that high-raised and lofty Eloquence, which, as a Learned Man of our Age says,Monsieur Nicole dans l'art de penser. seduces men into error by its counterfeit splendor. He always thought that solid Eloquence consisted in Matter, and not in Words; and that it were incomparably better for a Man to say a great deal in few words,Vid. Plutar. in Phoc. than little or nothing at all in a great many. He ever esteemed the Conciseness of Cicero before the Copiousness of Demosthenes; and always held this maxim of the Fathers concerning Eloquence in Holy things, That the Eloquence of those who make Religion their Subject, ought to consist in the weight of their Matter, and of their Reason; and that they ought to explain themselves after an easie manner, that all sorts of people might under∣stand them. When we speak of God, says St. Cyprian,Cypr. ad Do∣natum. the Discourse we make use of to prove the Faith, ought not to depend upon the strength of Eloquence, but of Matter. The Church, says St. Athanasius,Atha. Orat. de semente. is not a School of Sophisters
nor of Orators. And the famous St. Augustin,Aug. lib. 4. de doc. Christ. c. 15. &c. tho he were one of the most eloquent of his time, freely declares, That a Man were better be reproved by the Gramarians, than not under∣stood of the people; and that a Preacher of the Gospel ought chiefly to endeavour to make himself to be understood and heard with desire, and with a spirit of submission, of his Audito∣ry; which he may better arrive to by the Piety of his Prayers, than by the Artifice of his Discourse. If you take good heed, you shall find that false Teachers have always hid themselves under the vail of false EloquenceVid. 1 Cor. 2. 1 Cor. 11.6, &c., and that it is out of this Golden Cup that they have made men drink the mortal Poyson of Error; whereas the Apostles and all Orthodox TeachersVid. Irenae. lib. 1. Advers Haeres. Valent. Orig. lib. 11. de principiis, & lib. 4.5. contra Cel∣sum. taking a contrary way, made it their glory to use a great simplicity of speech, wanting that which St. Paul calls the enticing words of mens wisdom. The Author hath followed these noble and glorious methods, and without putting himself to the trouble of ending his Periods in their just measure (keeping however to the purity of the language, as much as possibly he could) he hath ap∣plied himself chiefly to the weight and force of his Reasons. You will find in him, I hope, sufficient to perswade and to convince you, pro∣vided you bring with you an easie, peaceable, and wholly unprejudiced mind: This is the spirit that runs throughout this whole work; and it was this spirit that began and finished the design, the Author ha∣ving not proposed to himself any other aim than that of animating Christians to the searching out of Peace and Truth, two the greatest happinesses that ever men can arrive to. Furthermore, If this little Treatise hath the good fortune to please, we may furnish you with some others which the Author hath composed at more leasure, and which he hath enriched with some particular ob∣servations which he hath made, by Reading the most Ancient and the most Learned Fathers of the Church. Accept however of this, with the same mind that he offereth it to you. Quod Gloriosus fratres quam subjici & vinci a veritate: superet te veritas volentem nam & invitum ipsa super∣abit. Aug. in Psalm 57.
DIALOGUES BETWEEN PHILERENE and PHILALETHE. PART I. The First Dialogue. NOtwithstanding the Difference between Philalethe and Philéréne as to their Age, they were both of them persons of so great Worth, and their Incli∣nations were so much alike, that scarce had they seen one another three or four times, but they contracted a very strict Friendship. As they never were better pleased than when they were together, they oftentimes left their ordinary Employments, for the Satisfaction of seeing one another; and conferring together, as well concerning things which they had Read, as those they had Heard of. In this Design they often went to walk upon a River-side, from whence they could discover one of the finest and richest Countries of all France. And as they were both of them men of great Learning, and of a clear Apprehension, they went always home greatly satisfied with their Conversation.
They made use of the first fine days which the Spring af∣forded, to renew their desireable Conversation, which the severity of the Winter had interrupted: And the first time they met, having given Assurances of their mutual Affection, and shewed how glad they were to meet in a place where they might freely discover their most secret. Thoughts to each other, Philéréne spoke thus to his Friend; Have you not heard talk, my dear Philalethe, of the present Affairs? I mean, of the Deliberation which the Assembly of the Clergy hath taken? I have, answered Philalethe, heard something of it, but I cannot give you a full Account o'nt; if you know it, you will oblige me to tell it me. Philéréne. I need not tell you, my dear Friend, that my Lords the Bishops of Tournay, of Meaux, of St. Maloes, of Vaur, of Châalons, and of Aleth, had been named by the As∣sembly of the Clergy, to examin the Six Propositions of the Sorhonne, presented to the King in 1663. because you know it already. But what perhaps you do not know, is, That the Clergy did Assemble the 17th. of the last Month, after the usual manner, and took the Report of these Prelates. My Lord Bishop of Tournay, who was Head of the Commis∣sion, began the Report, and delivered himself very Learned∣ly upon this Occasion. The next day in the Evening the other Commissioners were heard; and they discoursed upon this Subject with great Learning. The 19th. in the Morning they spoke every man in this turn upon the Subject of their Commission; and at Night, the Company being re-assem∣bled, they, by a general Consent, approved of a Declaration, which contains these following Propositions. The First is, That neither the Pope, nor the Church it self, hath any Power, directly nor indirectly, over the Tem∣porality of Kings; That they cannot be deposed; and that their Subjects cannot be absolved from their Oaths of Alle∣giance to them upon any account whatsoever. The Second is, That the Council is above the Pope, ac∣cording to the Doctrine established in the 14th. Session of the
Council of Constance; which the Assembly declares to have had the full Power and Approbation of the Church. The Third is, That the Use of the Pope's Power ought to be limited by the Canons, and that he can do nothing to the Prejudice of the Ancient Customs and Liberties of the Galli∣cane Church. The Fourth is, That the Pope hath the Chief or Principal Authority in things which concern the Faith; but so, that his Decisions are not certain without the Churches Consent. The Assembly ordered at the same time, That this Decla∣ration should be written in Latine, and sent to all the Prelates of France, to be Signed by them; and that the King should be petitioned to make an Edict for the Execution of it through∣out the whole Kingdom. Philalethe. This is Brave, and looks like the Apostolical Vigour and Heroick Courage of our Ancient Prelates. Philér. This is not all. These Lords Commissioners were dispatched away to the King; and having given an exact Account of the Behaviour of the Clergy, they demanded an Edict in the Kings Name, for the Execution of their Decla∣ration. His Majesty granted them the Edict, which was made as followeth. And by this Edict the King ordains, That this Declaration shall be Registred in all the Courts of Parliament of the Kingdom, and in all the Faculties of Divinity and of the Canon-Law: And his Majesty doth Prohibit, under grievous Penalties, even Foreigners within his own Kingdom, and all, as well Seculars as Regulars, to teach any thing contrary to what is contained in this Declaration. This Edict hath been executed. The Parliament of Paris hath Registred this Declaration of the Clergy with that Zeal and Readiness that cannot be too much commended, and which all other Parliaments of the Kingdom ought to imitate. Phila. It cannot be denied but that our Prince is incom∣parable in all his Actions; that France never saw upon the Throne a Monarch of so High a Character, and of so great a Power; that he maintains most worthily upon all occasions, the Glorious Title of Lewis the Great, which his Heroick Acti∣ons
have acquired him. And that the Parliament of Paris hath done well to express the great Zeal which they have al∣ways had for the Rights of the Crown, and for the Liberty of the Gallican Church, against the Enterprizes of the Court of Rome. You may have read in our Histories what here∣tofore Philip the August, Philip the Fair, Charles the 6th, 7th, and 8th, Lewis the 9th, 11th, and 12th did: You know also the Conduct of the same Parliament under all these Great Princes, to maintain according to their Will and Pleasure the Rights of the Crown, and the Privileges of the Gallican Church. And I believe also, that you have heard of the De∣crees which this Honourable House hath sent forth under Lewis the 13th. against the Scandalous Books of Saterel and of Bellarmin: But we may say without excess, That Lewis the Great in this Conjuncture, hath shewed more stedfastness and greatness of Mind, in the Opposition which he hath made against the Attempts of the Court of Rome, than all his Illu∣strious Predecessors ever did. And it cannot also be denied, but that the Parliament of Paris hath gone on worthily in the Footsteps of their Glorious Ancestors. Philér. It is not in this single Affair only, that this Ho∣nourable House of Parliament have shewed their Zeal to Second the Intentions of his Majesty, and to maintain the Rights of the Crown, and the Privileges of the Gallican Church: They have also given notable Proofs of it in the Affair of Father Buhi the Carmelite. Phila. I have also heard of a Thesis which this Father had maintained the 4th. of December last; and it was said, that they had caused him some Trouble about it at Rome; but I do not precisely know, what were the Propositions which this Fa∣ther did maintain. Philér. If my Memory doth not fail me, I think there were Six: The First of them is, That there are some Eccle∣siastical Laws to which the Pope himself is subject. The Second is, That he cannot upon all occasions dispence with the Canons of General Councils. The Third is, That he cannot Depose Kings, nor impose Tributes upon their Estates without their Consent. The Fourth, That Bishops hold their Jurisdiction from God. The Fifth, That the Faculty
of Divinity at Paris, doth not esteem the Pope to be Infallible. And the Sixth, That the Right of the Regale is neither a Fancy nor an Usurpation. These Propositions greatly stirred up the Pope against this Father, he ordered the Commissary General of the Carmelites to declare him deprived of the pri∣vileges of his Order, and uncapable of performing any fun∣ction, either Administration of the Sacraments, or Preaching. This Command was sent to the Superior of the Carmelites of the place MaubertA Street in Paris so called. to whom this Commissary General had given advice of the Noise that this Thesis of Father Buhi had made at Rome, and of the misfortune wherewith the whole Order was threatned. This Father demanded a Copy of the Letter of his Superior, that he might consult his Friends about it, which was granted him; The Affair coming at length to the King's ear, there came forth a Letter under the Seal, to the Superior, forbidding him to execute any Order from Rome against Father Buhi, without the King's knowledg and consent: Yet notwithstanding this, the Superior caused the Order to be Registred, which he had received from the Commissary General of the Carmelites the 18th of February last. But the Parliament shewed the same vigour in this Af∣fair as in that of the Declaration of the Clergy; for after many proceedings made at the instance of the Attorny Gene∣ral, the Parliament ordered that the Superior of the Carmelites should be admonished for his Disobedience, and expresly for∣bad the execution of the Order against Father Foelix Buhi; to which they added, That he should continue in his Function of Divinity Reader, expresly forbidding any person to molest him; and at length they Order that the Commissary Gene∣ral's Letter should be razed out of the Register, and laid aside: And this by order of Parliament, the 14th day of April 1682. Phila. The Parliament did very bravely in this Affair, and shewed that the same spirit of Zeal and Courage still reigns in that Honourable Assembly. Thilér. But ought not we to fear that this should cause some rupture with the Pope? Into what confusion and disorder might not so unfortunate an accident cast us?Greg. Naz. Orat. 12. Were we not better to Sacrifice somewhat to the good of our peace, which
is the greatest Legacy that our Saviour left to his Apostles,Joh. 14.27. Pacem meam do vobis? What is there more precious than Union and Concord, since that Jesus Christ gave so great a Character of it to his Disciples?Joh. 13.35. In hoc cognoscent omnes quia mei Discipuli estis si dilectionem habueritis ad invicem. What is there more prejudicial than disunion and discord which destroy the most flourishing States? Omne regnum divisum contra se deso∣labitur & domus divisa contra se non stabit. Matt. 12.25. Phila. I agree with you, that we ought to do our utmost to obtain Peace; that we ought to sacrifice our own Interests; nay, that for so great a good we ought to relinquish things that seem to us of importance. Ipsum enim nomen pacis amabille, says St. Austin; but you must own too, that we ought to do nothing for Peace to the prejudice of Truth; St. Paul joyns these one with the other,Eph. 4.15. Veritatem facientes in Charitate. And God, who calls himself Charity, calls himself also Truth; I know also that the Fathers of the Church exhort us greatly to avoid Schism as a mortal poison; but a Peace made against the interest of Truth, is not a real Peace; and when we cannot make it, and maintain it, but at the prejudice of this Trurh, it were better that a Scandal should arise, than that Truth should be abandoned. Satius est, says St. Bernard, ut scandalum oriatur quam ut veritas disceratur. Philér. How! My dear Philal. Do you think that the Propo∣sitions of the Clergies Declaration, and of Father Buhi's The∣sis, contain such essential and such important Truths, that it would be a crime not to defend them, tho it were to the di∣sturbance of the Publick Peace? Phila. Yes, Dear Sir, I am very well perswaded that all these Propositions are founded upon Texts of Scripture, up∣on the Canons of Councils, and upon the perpetual and con∣stant Tradition of the Church, principally of the Gallican Church; and by consequence, I believe that we ought not to depart from them any ways, and that we cannot do it without danger: But because it will be a matter of long Discourse, I shall defer the examining of it to another walk.
The Second Dialogue. PHilalethe and Phileréné, who were no less desirous to en∣tertain each other upon the subject whereon they had begun, than to enjoy the fine weather of the Spring, came the next day to the place appointed for their Conversation. Scarce had they walked a turn or two, talking of indiffer∣ent matters, but Philalethe, to make good the promise he had made the day before to his dear Friend, began thus: I told you yesterday, says he, that the Propositions contained in the Declaration of my Lords the Bishops, and in the Thesis main∣tained by Father Buhi, are of greater importance than you thought of; and that they contained in them, Truths too evident, and too necessary to be let go for the motives of a deluding Peace. To convince you of it, we will make it the subject of our present Discourse: I believe that the first and chief of these Questions, and which ought to serve as a foun∣dation to all the rest, is that which concerns the Authority of Councils, which hath ever been most venerable among Chri∣stians, and which I believe to be of Divine Right, and above the Authority of the Pope: And in this I rely upon the Scripture, and the perpetual and constant Tradition of the Church. I believe, answered Philéréne, as you do, That the Autho∣rity of Councils is of Divine Right; and no Christian that ever I heard of hath yet disputed it: But I know not whether you can so clearly prove as you hope for, that this Authority of Councils is above that of the Pope, for that many Learned men hold the contrary, and there seems to be nothing in An∣tiquity decisive upon this matter. The Council of Constance was the first that in this case pronounced in favour of Coun∣cils; and what that Council declared about it, was not in an absolute sence, but in some certain respects, and for some certain occasions.
Phila. I acknowledg that there are some famous Doctors who are of this opinion, That the Pope is above the Council; but it cannot also be denied, but that the number of Learned men who hold the contrary Opinion is much the greater; and you shall scarce find a Man of Learning in all France, but he adheres to their Party. Philér. I am not for entring upon this particular discourse, but you will oblige me, to shew me by good Reasons, that the Authority of Councils is the supream Authority in the Church; and that Believers ought not to acknowledg any other upon Earth in things which relate to Faith and Disci∣pline. Phila. To be as good as my word to you then, in what I promised you, I suppose you know the Original of Councils. A Man of your reading in the Divine History, cannot be igno∣rant that God himself established them, when he commanded Moses to take to him Seventy Elders for the Government and Conduct of his Ancient people; and you know without doubt that the Jews had not only their Council of Twenty three, which they called the Lesser House of Judgment, but also their Council of Seventy, wherein presided their Anaci, which Council was composed of Sacrificers, Priests and Scribes of the Law, and was called the Greater House of Judgmen. Our Councils have been formed after this Model, and the Apostles began them at Jerusalem. But to remove all difficulty, our Question seems to be clearly decided by our Saviour in the 18th of St. Matthew, when he referreth them who had any difference, to the Church, if they could not decide it by ano∣ther way, Dic Ecclesiae, you see our Saviour referreth his Disci∣ples to the Church, without excepting St. Peter himself; for which reason St. Augustin says very pertinently,Ep. 112. Tra. 118. in don. lib. 1. pebapt. con. Donat. cap. 51. That the Church is the last and supreme Judgment; that St. Peter sig∣nified the Church, when our Saviour said to him, That what∣soever he should bind on Earth, should be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever he should loose on Earth, should be loosed in Heaven; that it is the Church which received the power of the Keys, and that if any one despiseth her when she correct∣eth, he ought to be looked upon as a Publican and a Sinner.
It is furthermore the Church which is called the Support and Pillar of Truth.1 Tim. 3.15. Columna & firmamentum veritatis. If you take good heed to this expression of St. Paul, and to the Reasons whereon he grounds it, you will agree that the Church is the depositary of Truth, and that she hath the su∣pream jurisdiction over her Children for their behaviour; for it is certain in this Text, that St. Paul alludes either to the Pillars which were erected in the Heathen Temples, upon which were fixed the Statues and the Deities which were there worshipped; or to the Two Pillars of Solomon's Temple, one of which was called Jakin, and the other Bohas; and that he would have us understand by it, that it is the Churches Office to declare, to establish, and to maintain the Truth. Philér. I see very well that the Church being the Spouse of Jesus Christ, she is made partaker of the advantages and pri∣vileges which Marriage endoweth her with; and that she being his Body, is as it were clothed with his Majesty: But St. Peter, Was not he made the Head of this Church? Did not Jesus Christ make him his Lieutenant and Vicar, when he said to him, that upon him he would build his Church?Matt. 16.18, 19. Tu es Petrus & super hanc Petram, &c. Was it not to St. Peter that he gave the Soveraign Authority, when he said to him, Dabo tibi claves Regni Coelorum & quodcunq, ligaveris super Petram, &c.? Phila. It is true, that all Catholick Divines do acknowledg St. Peter as the Ministerial head of the Church, and Prince of the Society of the Apostles; but this was not a principality of Dominion, which our Saviour expresly forbiddeth his Apo∣stles:Matt. 16.18, 19. Luke 22.25. Item. Matt. 20.25. Reges gentium Dominantur eorum vos autem non sic. For which reason St. Bernard says, in the 3d Book of his Conside∣rations to Eugenius, Imperium interdicitur, Ministerium indicitur. But this is only a Primacy of Order,Lib. de unit. Eccl. Propter bonum unitatis, says St. Cyprian; who assures us furthermore, that all the Apostles, Erant pari consortio Honoris & Authoritatis praediti. Besides, Was not St. Peter a Member of the Church? St. Au∣gustine and St. Cyprian says he was, and that with a great deal of reason; since that all Believers compose but one body, to whom Jesus Christ, as the Head, doth communicate the spirit of Life. It is then manifest, that the Member dependeth
upon the Body, and not the Body upon the Member. Also St. Ambrose says upon this Subject, in his Commentary upon St. Luke, That the Church is above St. Peter, Ecclesia est super Petrum. This evidently appears by what St. Luke says in the 15th of the Acts, concerning the first Council that was held among Christians, in which Assembly of the Apostles and Mi∣nisters of the Church at Jerusalem, the question which St. Paul and St. Barnabas related to them on the behalf of the Church of Antioch was decided; but they decide it not by the Autho∣rity of St. Peter, but by that of the Holy Ghost, and of them∣selves, Visum est spiritui sancto & nobis, &c. Also in the 21st of the same Book, St. James and St. Paul say, that they had made this Ordinance. St. Jude and St. Silas are sent, not on the behalf of St. Peter, but of the whole College of the Apo∣stles. Add to this, That St. Peter himself was sent with St. John, by the Apostles, to those of Samaria, after they had re∣ceived the Word of God, as it is related in the 8th Chapter of the same Book, which proves invincibly, that St. Peter was not the Soveraign Master of the Society of the Apostles, but that he was in some degree their inferior, whatsoever the place were that he held amongst them; (not unlike the first Sena∣tor in the Body of a Senate) it being the right of a Superior to send an Envoy. Philér. I apprehend very well what you say; But can it be denied, but that Jesus Christ promised somewhat particularly to St. Peter, in the 16th of St. Matthew, when he said to him in particular, Ego vero dico tibi, &c. Phila. I could tell you as a great many Catholick Divines do, That St. Peter having answered in the name of all the Apostles, Jesus Christ gave him nothing in particular; but what he received, he received in the name of all the Apostles, and of the whole Church of which he was then the Type, as St. Austin says, in the 1st Book of his Retractations, Cap. 21. speaking of St. Peter, Typum gerebat Ecclesiae cui sunt traditae claves, which is founded upon the Text of the 20th of St. John, where Jesus Christ gives equally to all his Apostles, the power of forgiving and of retaining Sins. I could say with St. Chri∣sostome upon this passage, and withDe Verb. Dom. Serm. 13. Tract. in Joh. 12.4. Serm. de di∣vers. 118. in Psal. 86.97, &c. St. Augustine, That this Rock whereon Christ promiseth to build his Church, was
that firm and solid Confession of Faith which St. Peter had just then made; or else Jesus Christ himself, who was this Cor∣ner-stone whereon was placed the mystical building of the Church. Et super hanc Petram quam cognovisti, says St. Augustin, dicens tu es Christus Filius Dei viventis, edificabo Ecclesiam meam, id est, super me, ipsum Filium Dei edificabo Ecclesiam meam, super me edificabo te, non me super te.Cyril. lib. 4. de Trinit. St. Cyril,Hil. lib. 2. & 6. de Trin. St. Hilary,Amb. in c. 2. de Episto. St. Ambrose, andHiero. lib. cont Jov. c. 19. St. Hierom are of this opinion; but to deal freely with you, it is none of mine: For I had rather take this Text, asTert. lib. 1. de pud. cap. 21. Tertullian and St. Cyprian, and say with these other Doctors, That Jesus Christ spoke in particular to St. Peter, and promised him some Prerogatives above his Col∣leagues. And to justify my Opinion, I observe first, That St. Peter answers in particular concerning his Faith. Now Faith is so internal a thing, that nothing but the Conscience of each particular person can answer for it; and by conse∣quence we cannot say that this Apostle answered in the name of the whole Society of the Apostles. When it concerned some outward thing which was obvious to the senses, this Apostle might answer in the name of all his Brethren, as when he says to our Saviour, We have left all to follow thee. Omnia, &c. But when the question was concerning a motion of the heart, he could not answer for any but himself. Secondly, You must observe that our Saviour promiseth a particular recompence to the Faith of Peter; for which, after that the Apostle had said, Tu es Christus Filius Dei vivi, He Answers him, Ego vero dico tibi quia tu es Petrus beatus es Simon Barjona, to make him know, that he would reward particu∣larly the strength of his Faith, and the fervency of his Zeal. For this reason he puts him in mind of the new name he had given him, Tu es Petrus, says he, and furthermore, & super hanc Petram edificabo Ecclesiam meam. He makes him under∣stand by this, That he shall not bear the name of Peter in vain, since he intended to build his Church upon this Foundation∣stone; and tho the Evangelist St. Matthew changeth the Term, yet it cannot be inferred from thence that he changeth the Subject; because that Cephas, the Syriack term, which our Sa∣viour used, when he said to Simon the Son of Jona, Thou art Peter, signifies a Rock; so that to translate the Syriack letter
which Jesus Christ made use of, we must say, that our Savi∣our said to Simon the Son of Jona, Thou art a Rock, and up∣on this Rock will I build my Church. And it cannot be de∣nied, but that St. Peter was a fundamental stone whereon Je∣sus Christ did build his Church, since that in the 21st of the Revelations, the Apostles are called,V. 14. Fundamenta coelestis Jerusalem. You will be fully confirmed in this opinion, if you observe that the Church is oftentimes compared in Scrip∣ture to a Temple, to a House, Believers are the living Stones of it. Jesus Christ is the Corner-Stone, and the Apostles the Foundation-stones: And of these St. Peter is to be accounted the first, because he laid the first foundation of this mystical build∣ing. To these two Observations I would add a third, drawn from the Hebrew Language, amongst whom those who beget Children are called the Foundations of Houses. Who then can doubt in either sense, but that St. Peter is one of these Foundation-stones; nay, the very Foundation-stone it self, since that by his Preaching, full of Faith and of Zeal, he laid the first Foundation of the Christian Church, and begat Chil∣dren unto God, as well of the Jewish People as of the Gen∣tiles? I say the same thing of what our Saviour added, That he would give him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: These Keys are Keys of an Authority; not of Dominion and of Em∣pire, but of Jurisdiction and of Direction, such as belong to a Steward, and such as God promised to lay upon the Shoul∣ders of Eliakim in the 22d of Isaiah: We may also say, that Jesus Christ alluded to the Custom of the Jews, who invested their Doctors by the ceremony of delivering to them the Keys; or to the Custom of the Pharisees, who attributed to them∣selves the power of binding; who called every thing bound which was prohibited; and that loosed which was allowed of. No Man therefore can deny but that St. Peter was esta∣blished the principal Doctor of the Christian Church, and that the Keys of Heavenly Knowledg, whereof he just then gave an admirable proof, were committed to him. He loosed both the Jews and the Gentiles: Those from the Observation of the Ceremonies of the Law, and the Traditions of their forefathers, which was a grievous burthen; these from the
false Opinions and false Worships wherein they had been bred: And he confirmed both the one and the other in the belief of the Mysteries of Salvation, and in the practice of the Maxims of the Gospel. In all these respects, who can doubt but that St. Peter received in a particular manner the Keys of the King∣dom of Heaven? Philér. All that you have said seems to me to be very good, and very solid; but what had St. Peter to his own particular in all this? Are not the other Apostles, as well as St. Peter, these Foundation-stones of the Church, in the sense which you have observed? Were not the other Apostles, as well as St. Peter, established the Infallible Doctors of the Church? Did not they all make use of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven in binding and loosing upon Earth the sins of Men? Phila. I agree with you in all you say: But though these Privileges were common to all the Apostles, that doth not at all hinder St. Peter's having them after an Eminent manner; and in this respect he had certainly some Prerogatives above his Brethren. They were all of them Foundation-Stones whereon Jesus Christ built his Church: But it may be said, that St. Peter laid the Foundation of this mystical building after a most singular manner, not only because he set the first hand to it, but also because he built this House all the World over, by the means of those, who having been taught immediately from his mouth, and dispersed at length throughout the World, Preached the Gospel every where. They all received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, but St. Peter was the first that with his Keys opened the Doors of this Kingdom, and made a larger use of it than the others. You see also that he was the first called to the Apostleship; That he shewed also a particular zeal and love for his Master, who distinguished him from the others by his favours, and by the name of Peter which he gave him; But all these Prerogatives give him only a Primacy of Order, and not of Dominion; an Authority, not of Empire and of Monarchy, but of Precedency and of Direction, such as that of a first President in a Senate, or of a famous Philosopher among those of his Profession; for which reason,Dial. . cap. 4. St. Jerom says of St. Peter, that he was the
first of the Apostles, as Plato was the Prince of the Philoso∣phers. Philér. I am convinced of the truth of what you say; But doth it not appear in the 21st of St. John, that Jesus Christ gives, even an Authority of Dominion to St. Peter above his Brethren, whom he distinguisheth by the name of Sheep, as other common believers by the name of Lambs? Phila. You can conclude nothing from that Text in favour of the Monarchical authority of St. Peter; for in this place, according to the opinion ofCyril. Alex. lib. 12. in Joh. cap. 64. St. Cyril of Alexandria, and ofCyril. Hie∣ros. Catech. 2. St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Jesus Christ did only renew to St. Peter the dignity of his Apostleship, which he enjoyed but as the other Apostles did, that he might not think he had lost it by his three times denying his Master; and for this reason it is, that he bids him three times to feed his Sheep. It is to no purpose to seek after a Mystery in the terms of  and , and of  and , since that the two first signi∣fy at the bottom the same thing, and the two last are given indifferently to Believers in the Scripture. The holy Fathers do also hold, that the Apostles received the same right, and the same power as St. Peter, when our Saviour said to him, Pasce oves meas, according toBasil. de vit. solit. cap. 23. consti. cap. 42. St. Basil,Greg. Naz. in Test. Epist. St. Greg. Na∣zianzen,Ambrose. in pass. St. Ambrose, andAug. de Agon. Chr. cap. 30. lib. quest. vet. No. Test. quest. 57. & Tract. 47. in Joh. St. Augustin. We might add to this whatTertull. Carm. Tertullian says, That all the Apostles had an equal power, and that they were all the same as St. Peter was, asCypr. lib. de unitat. Ecclesiae. St. Cyprian explains it; and that they had all the same dignity, as PopeAppend. com. Theod. Ep. 8. Gelasius says. Philér. I am very well satisfied as to your first proof, and I think you have shewed sufficiently by the Holy Scripture, that the supream Authority is in the Church, and in the Council which represents it; That St. Peter himself, tho he were the Prince of the Apostles, was subject to it; and that he was not looked upon as the supreme Judge in things that concerned Religion, but as the first Minister in the College of the Apo∣stles. I desire you now to pass on to your second proof, and to shew me by the perpetual and constant Tradition of the
Church, that the Popes who have succeeded St. Peter, were never considered as the supreme arbitrators of things con∣cerning Religion, but that the Soveraign Authority to which the Popes themselves ought to be subject, was esteemed ever to be in the Council. Phila. I will readily perform the promise I made to you; but I would have you observe by the by, That the Bishops of Rome have not succeeded St. Peter in the charge of his Apostle∣ship, which was a personal employment, and particular to those whom Jesus Christ had immediately called, whom he had Bapized by his Holy Spirit, and enriched with extraordi∣nary gifts, by which means these blessed people were Infallible, and possessed a soveraign and Independent Authority in the Church, and a Ministry which was not restrained to a certain place, but which was dispersed throughout the whole World. I would also have you observe, That the succession of the Bi∣shops of Rome to St. Peter, was but in the charge of a Bishop, whereof St. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles did communi∣cate the Rights or Prerogatives to their successors; and that this Charge hath this common Right with the Apostleship, that it confers the power of Preaching the Word, of administring the Sacraments, and of using the power of the Keys; but it gives no infallibility or power of exercising the Ecclesiastical Ministry all the World over. After this Observation, which is not amiss to our purpose, I come to what I promised you. And I observe in the first place, that in the most Ancient Monuments of Christian Antiquity, I find no traces of this Supreme Power which the Roman Bishops of the last Ages would attribute to themselves. We have the Epistles of St. Ignatius, which are of an Apostolick Character; but there is not so much as the least foot-step of this supreme Authority attributed to the See of Rome; This Holy Prelate speaks of the Church of Rome as of other Churches; He calleth it the Church sanctified and illuminated by the will of God, with∣out giving it the least authority over any other; and in his 7th Epistle to those of Smyrna, he directeth it to the Bishop in the name of the Church, and acknowledgeth nothing above him, which he would never have done, had he believed the Bishop of Rome to have been not only above other Bishops,
but also above a Council. St. Justin Martyr, in his Apology for the Christians, gives an account to the Emperor Antoninus, of the behaviour of Believers in his time, but there is not one word of a superior and supreme Master that resided at Rome, and made his Soveraign decision concerning matters of Reli∣gion. St. Polycarp, the Disciple of St. John, as Eusebius relates it, in his Book of Ecclesiastical History, came to Rome to con∣fer with Anicetus, who was there Bishop, concerning the day whereon he was to keep Easter; but yet he followed not this Bishops Opinion, which without doubt he would have done, if it had been true, that the Bishop of Rome had been at that time held the supreme Judge of the Church. St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, in his Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome, asLib. 5. cap. 2, & 24. Eusebius saith, sharply reproves him for separating from his Commu∣nion the Eastern Church, because they would not keep Easter upon the same day that he did. How could this Bishop have reproved things of this nature, if he had believed that Victor had been in this conjuncture the absolute judge, to whose Decisions, and to whose Tribunal the Church was obliged to submit? There were several Synods held both in the East and West; There was one in the East, where Policrares Bishop of Ephesus presided, wherein far from acknowledging the Bishop of Rome for the Arbitrator of the whole Church, they condemn his opinion, as Eusebius witnesseth. Was not there a Council also held in France, our own Country, wherein the Bishop of Rome had no share? But St. Irenaeus presided and wrote a very pressing letter to Victor, to oblige him to retain Communion with the Eastern Churches? Do you think now seriously, that things would have been carried thus, if they had believed that the Bishop of Rome had held a Soveraign authority in the Church? Some time afterwards, the Heretick Novatians, whose Picture Cornelius Bishop of Rome hath drawn in his Epistle to Fabian Bishop of Antioch, being deprived of the Roman Chair, which he had usurped, and where he had published this Er∣ror, That they ought not to be admitted to Repentance who had fallen into grievous sins; Cornelius did not undertake of himself to condemn this Error, which he would have done without all question, if he had thought himself to have been
the soveraign Arbitrator of the Church, but he assembled at Rome a Council of Sixty Bishops. There were also held with∣out any order of Cornelius, many Councils in divers places, namely at Antioch, which had been an horrible attempt had Cornelius been the absolute Magistrate of the Christian Com∣mon-wealth. Matthew, Bishop of Arles, having joyned him∣self to Novatian, Faustinus Bishop of Lyons did not address himself to Cornelius, but to St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, who wrote to the neighbouring Bishops of France, and to the Bi∣shop of Rome, to exhort them to do their Duty; and in this Letter he saith, That he held in his own hand the ballance of the Church Government: Doth not all this then demonstra∣tively prove, that the Bishop of Rome was not at that time looked upon as the Monarch of the Church? I add to these Examples that of the famous Council of Antioch, held in the year 265. against Paulus Samosatenus, wherein assisted more than 270. Bishops. This sworn enemy of our Saviour's Di∣vinity being relapsed into the Heresy which he had formerly abjured in an Assembly held in the same City, and because he could not be brought back to his Duty, by the Letters and Remonstrances of the neighbouring Bishops, it was their Opi∣nion to call a Council; and to this purpose Helenus Bishop of Tharsus, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, invited Dyonisius of Alexandria, chief of the Diocess of Egypt, and Firmilian of Caesaria in Cappadocia, chief of the Diocess of Pon∣tus, to the Convocation of a Council, which was at length holden at Antioch, without the order of Faelix Bishop of Rome; and they did proceed against Paulus Samosatenus, tho it doth not appear that any body, I won't say, presided, but so much as assisted on the behalf of that Bishop; and at length they ended the Assembly by a Synodal Letter which they sent to Dionysius, whom they thought yet in possession of the Roman Chair (tho he were dead in the Month of September the year before) to Maternus Bishop of Alexandria, and to all their fellow Bishops, Priests and Deacons, throughout the whole Earth, and to the whole Catholick Church under Heaven. This had been a very irregular proceeding, if the Bishop of Rome had been the supreme Magistrate of the Church. We may add to this, what the Council of Alexandria did in regard
of Origen under Demetrius, for they condemned this Doctor whilst he was yet living; and also under Theodosius, in whose Reign they Anathematized his Doctrine and his Memory, and all this without the Order, Intention, or Authority of the Bishop of Rome, which they had not dared to have under∣taken, had they believed that this Bisop had had the supreme Authority in the Church. From all this Truth, which I have told you thus at large, may be gathered. That in these Primitive Ages of Christianity, the See of Rome was really considered as the first in place, as the Chair of St. Peter, and the Center of Priestly Unity, as St. Cyprian calls it, in his Epi∣stle to Cornelius; but that it was not looked upon as the su∣preme Tribunal of things that concerned Religion. Philér. I gather from this Discourse, that you have now made, that in these Primitive Ages, wherein the Holy Bishops of Rome aspired to no other Crown than that of Martyrdom, and shared nothing amongst them but the Cross; before the Spirit of Ambition and of Dominion had entred into the heads of any of these Prelates, That the Spirit of Charity and of Humility, which is the spirit of the Gospel, did per∣fectly animate them, and that all the Bishops living in this good understanding, and in this union which Jesus Christ re∣commends so strictly to his Disciples; they did communicate from one to the other the exigencies and necessities of their Churches; that to heal the evils which molested them, they chose out themselves the remedies which they judged most convenient; and the most effectual means, and that which they oftenest made use of, was the Convocation of Synods, to whom the Grace of the Holy Spirit as St. Cyprian says, was never wanting for the good and edification of their Flocks. And this which you have now related, brings into my memory many such like methods of our Ancient Bishops of France, which I think I have read in St. Gregory of Tours; But can you shew me in the following Ages this same method of acting, and this Tradition of the Church which you have called perpetual and constant? Phila. I hope I shall make good my Promise; I own that the Heathen Emperors having embraced Christianity, the Church having been enriched by their liberality, and her Mi∣nisters
raised to a degree of Honour more considerable in the World by the effects of these Princes Piety, things began to put on another face, and the Bishops to take place according to the dignity of the Cities wherein they exercised their Mi∣nistry, and to change that deference and honour that was given them before, into a sort of jurisdiction, as many people have own'd, and among othersIn Anno 39. Cardinal Baronius, and as may be gathered out of the 17th Canon of the Council of Calcedon; But whatever alteration the Conversion of Emper∣ors and of Kings, might have caused in the condition of the Prelates, and in the Government of the Church, it cannot be denied but that the Church Government remained still the same in substance, and in what was essenrial to it, and that they were always vigorously opposed, who endeavoured to innovate and to introduce in the Church a Monarchical Go∣vernment; so that the Soveraign Authority remained always in the Councils, who in these latter Ages have openly decla∣red themselves against those who would have robbed them of this privilege. The first example that I remember, which justifieth the So∣veraign Authority of the Church, and which proves that the Bishops of Rome were dependants on it, is that of the Coun∣cil of Arles, assembled, if I am not mistaken, by the Emperor Constantine, in the year 314, and composed of 200 Bishops, called together from divers Provinces of the Empire. You know that the Causes of this Councils being called, were the differences that happened between Donatus of Casanigra, and Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, who had been deposed by an As∣sembly of Bishops (wherein Secundus the Bishop of Tigifis, and Primate of Numidia presided) these differences having divided Africa, some Synodal Assemblies having established Cecilian, and others Donatus. I will not pretend to give an account of this History, which you may have read in divers Authors,Euseb. lib. 15. Optat. Mil. cont. advers. Parin. lib. 1. and particularly in St. Austin in his Epistles 68. and 162, where you may see how Constantine commanded the Proconsul Aelius to hear all Parties, and to give judgment, and that the Donatists were were there condemned by the Sen∣tance of the Proconsul. The Schismaticks then applied them∣selves to the Emperor, who, to put an end to their differences,
named first of all Matronus Bishop of Cologne, Delicius Bishop of Autun, and Marinus Bishop of Arles, and to these three he at length joyned Melciades Bishop of Rome, and Fifteen other Italian Bishops, of which number was the Bishop of Milan; these Nineteen Bishops gave their judgments in favour of Ce∣cilian; the Donatists being condemned, Appealed from this judgment, and accused their Judges of being too precipitate. What now did the Emperor Constantine? He did not tell these Sectaries, that the judgment that had condemned them had been given by the Soveraign Judge of the Church; but he called a General Council in the City of Arles, to examin the matter over again, which had been judged by the Bishop of Rome, and the other Eighteen Bishops, which was done in the presence of two Priests, and two Deacons whom Sylvester, that succeeded Melciades, had sent thither, who sat also no higher than in the 5th place. The condemnation of the Donatists was confirmed in this Assembly; they also decided the question concerning the Baptism of Hereticks, and gave it otherwise rhan the Bishop of Rome had adjudged it, or St. Cyprian ex∣plained it; which decision held the just medium between these two Opinions. From hence it appeareth clearly enough, That the Bishop of Rome did not believe himself above the Council, since that he suffered what he had already adjudged to be examined in the Council: It appeareth also, that both the Bishops of those days, and the Emperor Constantine, believed the Authority of Councils to be Soveraign, and that in mat∣ters of Faith a Council may decide otherwise than the Pope, since that the Council of Arles did pronounce concerning Baptism of Hereticks otherwise than the Pope did. You may see also no∣table proofs of this same spirit which animated the Bishops of those times in the famous Council of Nice, composed of 318 Bishops, Assembled in the 325. year of our Lord, under the same Constantine. The reason why this Council was called, was, as you know, the Heresy of Arrius, which set all the East in confusion, and the difference among the Churches concerning the day whereon they should keep Easter. You know without doubt, that this Heresiarck having appeared in the year 315, Alexander his Bishop endeavoured to reduce him from his Error. He called together two Councils of all the
Bishops of Egypt, of Lybia and of Pentapolis, who depended upon his See, and in these Councils Arrius was Deposed and Excommunicated without the mediate or immediate inter∣vention of the Bishop of Rome, to whom Alexander thought it sufficient to gie advice of all that passed in the Councils; but the Emperor seeing to his great regret that all the care of Alexander could not hinder the great progress of this Here∣sie, he made the famous Hosius to come from Corduba, and sent him to Alexander to endeavour to end the difference. All the endeavours of this famous Prelate proving fruitless, he joyned his Prayers to those of Alexander, and they both of them humbly intreated his Imperial Majesty to apply a speedy and an effectual remedy to this evil, by the Convocation of an Oecumenical Council. This Great Prince, who had no∣thing more at heart than the Glory of God, and the good of his Church, gave a favourable answer to the intentions of Alexander and of Hosius. He Assembled a Council at Nice, a City of Bithynia, which was opened the 22. of May, in the year 325, and ended the 25th. of August in the same year. Never was there in any Assembly so much Learning and Piety; whatever there was either Learned or Holy in the whole Earth you had in that blessed Assembly, which hath been and ever will be a Rampart to the true Christian Faith. St. Sylvester Bishop of Rome not being able to be there himself, assisted by his Envoys, who were Vitus and Vincentius, Presbyters of his Church. The Admirable Hosius there presided, and they there solemnly condemned Arrius and his Doctrine. They there re∣gulated the difference about Easter, and Ordained that it should be Celebrated the Sunday after the Full Moon of March. They made in all Twenty five Canons, whereof the Fifth doth prohibit Bishops to receive to their Communion those who should have been Excommunicated by others; and because those who were Excommunicated might complain that they had been unjustly proceeded against, it was Ordain∣ed, that the justice of their Excommunication should be exa∣mined in the Council of Bishops of each Province. And the Sixth Canon gave bounds and limits to the Diocesses of Me∣tropolitans, according to the Ancient Customs, that those who were subject to their inspection might so remain, but also
that no greater extent should be given them; and that accor∣dingly the Bishop of Alexandria should have power in Egypt, in Lybia, and in Pentapolis, and the Bishop of Rome in the Diocess which was under him: Quia (says the Council) Episc. Rom. pariter Mos est. A man must wilfully shut his eyes not, to see in all this pro∣ceeding, that in those days it was a vain thing to doubt of the Supreme Authorities being in the Council, and that all Bishops, he of Rome not excepted, were subject to it. For first of all, you see that when Arrius would have taught against the pu∣rity of the Faith, Alexander having used the way of giving him particular admonishment, had no recourse to the Bishop of Rome for the condemnation of this Heretick, but himself assembled the Council of the Great Diocess whereof he was Head; which certainly he would not have done, had he thought that the Supreme Authority belonged absolutely to the Bishop of Rome. Secondly, Hosius and Alexander having conferred together, and found that the only remedy for this Heresie was the Convocation of a General Synod, addressed themselves to the Emperor Constantine, to desire him to call it: If they had believed that the Soveraign Tribunal of the Church had been the See of Rome, why did not they cite Ar∣rius thither? Why did they take the way of a Council, which is the longest and the most difficult? or at least why did they not apply themselves to the Bishop of Rome to call it, as hath been done since the Popes have raised themselves above these Ancient Rules? Thirdly, If the Bishops of the Council had believed that the Bishops of Rome had had the Supreme Au∣thority, why did they place Hosius Bishop of Corduba in the Chair of President, rather than Vitus and Vincentius the Popes Envoys and Deputies, as hath been practised in the late Councils of the Latin Church? Fourthly, If these Fathers had believed that the last Decision of Ecclesiastical Affairs be∣longed to the Pope, how would they have dared to start the question upon what day they should keep Easter, since that the Bishop of Rome had explained himself long since upon this matter. Fifthly, If the Fathers of this Council had look∣ed upon the Pope as a Superior Judg over the Council, how could they have Ordained that those who had been Excom∣municated
by one Bishop, could not be received by another? And how could they have committed to Provincial Synods the Examination of the validity or invalidity of Excommuni∣cations? Might not they rather have permitted those who were grieved by the sentence of Excommunication, to appeal to the See of Rome to quash or to confirm it as they should think fit? Lastly, Since they regulate the power of the Bishop of Alex∣andria, after the example of the Bishop of Rome, within the limits of the Ancient Usage, doth not this shew that the Bishop of Rome should not extend his power over other Churches than those which had been under him by the Ancient Customs; and that he should govern these Churches after the same manner as the Bishop of Alexandria did govern those of Egypt, of Lybia, and of Pentapolis, which depended upon him, and that so his Authority was restrained within certain bounds, and subject, as well as that of the Bishop of Alexandria and other Metropo∣litans, to the Authority of the Council? Philér. You have, methinks, sufficiently shewed by all that passed in this Holy and famous Council of Nice, whose con∣duct and form ought for ever to be a Pattern and Model to the Church, that there is no other Soveraign Authority in the Church, than that of Oecumenical Councils; but to confirm me the more in this opinion, do me the favour to shew me, that in all other Councils of this nature, they acted after the same manner. Phila. As I have already promised you, it is just that I keep my word to you; but it shall be, if you please, in very few words, and touching only upon what concerns our subject; for should I make a relation of all, it would be impossible for us to end it in this Discourse. The second Oecumenical Coun∣cil held against the Heretick Macedonius, who disputed the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, was called by the Emperor Theo∣dosius, in the City of Constantinople,Anno 383. though the Pope Damasus desired that it might be held at Rome, as you may see in the Synodal Epistle of this Council written to Damasus, to Am∣brose, and to many others assembled at Rome, and related byTheod. lib. 5. cap. 9. Theodoret,Soc. lib. 5. cap. 8. Socrat.Soz. lib. 7. cap. 7. Sozomen,Nicephor. lib. 12. cap. 1. and Nicephorus. This Council wherein the Pope Damasus neither assisted in person, nor by his Deputies, Established Nectarius Patriarch
of Constantinople, and Flavian Patriarch of Antioch. It made two Canons which are for our subject, namely the Sixth and the Third, the Third importeth, that after the Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of Constantinople ought to have the same Privileges of Honours, &c. And the Sixth says, that the Bishop shall be judged by the other Bishops of his Province; and that in case of Appeal the matter shall be ended by the other Bishops of the Diocess; and lastly by a General Council. You see then, my dear Philéréne, that it was the Council which created Patriarchs; which is an act of Supreme Authority, and which clearly sheweth that the Authority of Patriarchs is subalterne and dependant. You see that the Councils regulate the place of Patriarchs, giving the second to him of Constantinople, be∣cause that this City was the new Rome, and placing after him the Patriarch of Alexandria. This sheweth that they followed the same order in Ecclesiastical Sees, as in Bodie; Politick; and that their addition of Honour and Glory was attributed to the Rank and to the Magnificence of the Cities where they were Established. You see that the Council doth not at last send Appeals from the Judgments of the Bishops to the See of Rome to be there finally determined, but to an Oecu∣menical Council; which sheweth evidently that this Coun∣cil did not believe any thing above an Oecumenical Coun∣cil, and that every thing ought to be subject to it. Philér. But do not you know, my dear Philalethe, that Baro∣nius, and after him Binius, have shewed by many reasons, that the third Canon of this Council is counterfeit; and that they have affirmed that the Sixth is not to be found in the Roman Code, nor in the Abridgements of Caranza, and of Sagittarius? Phila. I know very well what the Cardinal Baronius hath said to make the Third Canon of this Council be suspected; and I know the attempts of the Latin Collectors; but you must consult the Originals in Greek, which is sufficient to de∣feat entirely the reasons of Baronius. We see in the Greek Ori∣ginals the Seven Canons that this Council made, among which are the Third and Sixth in the order and in the terms which we have them. Add to this the Evidence of 630 Bi∣shops, who assisted in the Council of Chalcedon, and who in
the 20th Canon of this Council, make mention of the 3d Canon made by the Fathers of Constantinople. Philér. This gives me some sort of satisfaction; but I have one scruple more upon this Subject, which is, that it is not likely that the Council of Constantinople, that was composed of 150 Fathers, would pronounce, upon this matter, quite otherwise than the Councill of Sardica had done, which was composed of Three hundred Bishops, and held in the year 347, who in their 3d and 7th Canons reserve last Appeals to the See of Rome. Phila. I agree with you in what you say concerning the Council of Sardica; But first of all, this Council was not re∣ceived as Oecumenical, tho it were called for that intention. It was added to the Roman Code in the year 527. and it was afterward received in the year 591. to the second Canon of the 6th Council, but as a particular Council, and it was pla∣ced after the Councils of Constantinople and of Ephesus. St. GregoryGreg. lib. Ep. 24. himself doth not reckon it among the Oecumeni∣cal Councils. Besides, you must observe what was the cause of the making of these Canons, and in what terms they were exprest. The Cause was the evil dealing which the famous St. Athanasius met with at the hand of the Eastern Bishops, who were all Arrians, or Demi-Arrians. By the 12th Canon of the Council of Antioch, which was held in the year 341. it was carried, That a Bishop being deposed by the Synod of his Province, ought to address himself to a greater Synod, and undergo their judgment, and by this greater was under∣stood the Patriarchal Synod, from which there was no Appeal, as may be seen, Nov. Just. 123. cap. 22. In the 15th Canon of the same Council it is said, That when all the Bishops of a Province were of one Opinion, there was no Appeal. Now St. Athanasius had been condemned by the Synod of his Dio∣cess, where he suspected almost all his Judges, since they were his Enemies; as had plainly appeared in their Cabal at the Councils of Tyre and of Antioch, where the Eusebians were the Masters. What could this Holy Bishop do less than have recourse to Julius Bishop of Rome, who was Orthodox, and to his Council composed of Fifty Western Bishops, to save himself from their oppression? Was not Julius and his Coun∣cil
now obliged to maintain, in this conjuncture, the Interest of this Man's Injured Innocence, and likewise of the Son of God, who was himself persecuted in the person of his Ser∣vant? This they did with a great deal of Zeal and Prudence. They declared this Holy persecuted Man Innocent, and admit∣ted him to the Communion of the Bishop of Rome, who wrote to his passionate Judges, exhorting them to appear, not before himself, but before a Synod composed of lawful Judges, according to the decisions of the Council of Nice, which or∣dereth, that what hath been treated of in one Council, shall be examined before another. These unjust Judges made a very ill return to the Kindness and Charity of Julius; they sent him back a most injurious Answer; and besides, being broken up from Sardica, where they had been Assembled by order of the Emperors, Constance and Constantius, to hold a General Council according to the advice that Hosius had given to Constance, and retiring to Philipopolis, they there held a Factious Cabal, wherein these unworthy Prelates Excommu∣nicate Julius, Hosius, and all those who had received St. Atha∣nasius to their Communion. What now did the true and lawful Council of Sardica in this Case? On one hand they ex∣communicated these wretched men who had bee so rash as to excommunicate him, and confirmed the Sentence given by Julius, and by his Council, in favour of St. Athanasius; and on the other, that the Catholick Bishops who should be agrie∣ved by the Sentence of the Eastern Bishops, who were the most part of them Arrians or Semi-Arrians, might find a means to free themselves from their oppression, they declared by the 3d and 4th Canons, That if any person should find himself agrieved by the Sentence of any Synod of his Province, he might have recourse from their judgment; in which Case the Bishops of the Province who had judged, should write to Julius the Reasons of their Judgment; That if these Reasons were approved of by Julius, the Judgment should hold; but if on the contrary, the Reasons were not found pertinent, the Bishop of Rome should write to the Bishops of the neigh∣bouring Province to examin the matter over a-new, and to judge of it according to the Canons: Wherein you see, that the design of the Council was only to justify the conduct of
St. Athanasius, who had had recourse to Julius Bishop of Rome, and likewise the behaviour of Julius and of his Council, and to provide an effectual remedy for the misfortune of Schism, to preserve Innocence from being oppressed in an evil con∣juncture. But you cannot conclude, from the behaviour of this Council, that the Pope was looked upon as their Superior; on the contrary, it appears plainly, that it was the Council that did acts of Superiority; be it for that they examined a-new the affair of St. Athanasius, which the Pope and his Council had judged, or for that the Council wrote to the Pope to publish his Decrees in Sicily, Sardinia and Italy; or because they accepted the excuse which the Pope made them for his absence; all which things are acts of Superiority: To which we must not forget to add, that the Fathers of this Council calling the Pope in the Letter which they wrote to him, their Brother and their fellow Minister, makes it very apparent, that they did not acknowledg him for their Supe∣rior. Besides, let me advertise you, as we proceed, that this Council was not composed of 300 Bishops, as you have said, they were but about 100. and they all Western except Macarius and Asterius, who were of the East. It is true, that the Em∣perors Constance and Constantius had called together this Coun∣cil of Bishops out of these two Empires, and that there came to Sardis to the number of 150. as St. Athanasius witnesseth; but all the Eastern Bishops, who were for the most part Arri∣ans, retired to Philipopolis. And altho St. Athanasius saith in some places, that the Council was composed of 300 Bishops, it is because it was subscribed by a great number of Prelates that did not assist at it. Philér. Can you shew me that the same Spirit reigned in the two other great Councils, namely in the Council of Ephe∣sus, and in that of Chalcedon? Phila. The thing is not difficult; you know the History of these two Councils, and are not ignorant that the first was called by the Emperor Theodosius in the year 431. as may be seen inSocrat. lib. 1. cap. 33. Socrates, and inEvag. lib. 1. cap. 3. Evagrius, and that it was Assem∣bled against the Heresy of Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, who divided Jesus Christ into two persons. Celestin Bishop of Rome, being advertised of this Heresy, by Cyrill Bishop of
Alexandria, called together at Rome his Synod, which con∣demned it, and excommunicated Nestorius. Cyrill, who, for his part, had done all that he could to convince and bring back this wandring Sheep, Assembled also his Synod, who did no less than that of Rome had done; but as these particular Councils were not a sufficient remedy, there was called an Oecumenical one in the City of Ephesus, whither Celestin sent his Legates, namely two Bishops and one Priest, and wherein presided Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, after whom the first of Celestines Legates was seated. Here were made Eight Canons, of which the eighth makes chiefly for our purpose: For to restrain the attempts of the Patriarch of Antioch upon the li∣berties of the Churches of Cyprus, it ordaineth, that not only in Cyprus, but in all other Diocesses and Provinces of the World, no Bishop should usurp any Province, which from the beginning had not been of his dependance; and that every Province should preserve inviolably the Rights which she hath had from the beginning, and according to the Ancient Cu∣stom. Who can say but that this Council doth all the acts of a Supreme Authority? And that the Bishop of Rome doth none at all? If he had had any, after that he and his Coun∣cil had condemned Nestorius, it had not been necessary to call a General Council for it; the first of his Legates would, with∣out question, have presided in this Council, and this Holy As∣sembly would not have undertaken to make General Decrees, which limit the Power of all Bishops, without excepting even him of Rome. You have also read, without doubt, what the same Socrates says of the Council of Chalcedon, called by the Emperor Mar∣tianus in the year 451. to stifle the Heresy of Eutiches, who confounded the two Natures in Jesus Christ; you may thence have learned, that a General Council having been called by Theodosius the second, in the City of Ephesus, Eutiches, by the intrigues and artifices of Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria, set himself in this Factious Cabal, against Flavian, Patriarch of Constantinople, who was there deposed, because he had de∣posed and condemned this Heretick; for which Reason this unhappy Assembly was called Latrocinium, or the Robbery, that at length the Orthodox Bishops, as namely Leo the great, Bi∣shop
of Rome, as may be seen in the 23, 25, and 26 of his Letters, intreated the Emperor to call an Oecumenical Coun∣cil, which because Theodosius either could not or would not do, Martianus, who succeeded him, did it, having Assembled this Council, not at Rome, as Leo would have had it, but first at Nice, and then at Chalcedon, as is to be seen in the 43, 44, 49, 50, and 51 of this Popes Epistles. This Council composed of 630 Bishops, restored the memory of Flavian, by condemning and deposing Dioscore and Eutiches. They made many Canons; in their 17th it is ordained, that the order of Parishes in the Church should be according to the Politick and Civil form. In the 29th. they Decree, that a Clergy-man, having a differ∣ence with his Bishop, shall be judged by the Synod of his Province; and if a Bishop hath a difference with the Metro∣politan of the Province, let him address himself to the Exarch of the Diocess, or to the Bishop of the Royal City of Con∣stantinople. And in the 28th they do ordain, That according to the decision of 150 Fathers of Constantinople, Privileges equal to those of old Rome, should be given to the most Holy See of New Rome, because she was honoured with the seat of the Empire and of the Senate; and that in things Ecclesiasti∣cal she ought not to be held in lesser dignity, tho she took but the second place. A Man must wilfully shut his eyes, not to see that this Council did not consider the Bishop of Rome, as having in his hands the Supreme Authority, since that they do not send the differences that might happen between Bi∣shops and their Metropolitans to him for their last determina∣tion, and that they make the Bishop of Constantinople equal to him in Ecclesiastical Affairs, reserving to him simply the pri∣macy of Order, because his See was the City of Rome, where the Emperors and the Senate formerly did reside: To which we ought to add, what we read in the Letter of the Fathers of this Council to Leo Bishop of Rome; where they say freely, That they had appointed and confirmed what had been alrea∣dy ordain'd by the Council of Constantinople, tho Leo's Legates opposed it, wherein they tell him, that he ought to acquiesce, not only for the conservation of Order, but also out of De∣ference to the Emperors, who had given them so absolute an Authority, that their Judgments passed for a Law, reflecting
without doubt, upon the Ordinance of Valentinian the third, made in favour of the See of Rome. Lastly, We ought to observe, That the Fathers who composed this Council, found∣ed not the Privilege of Episcopal Sees, but upon the Civil and Politick Prerogatives of the Cities where they were; which sheweth, That the Eminence of that of Rome, was not found∣ed upon the Primacy of St. Peter, who had been the first Bi∣shop of it, so much as upon the dignity of the City. I could add to the Authority of these four great Councils, that of the second Council of Constantinople, which is the Fifth Oecu∣menical one, called by the Emperor Justin, in the year 553. to condemn the writings of Theodorus Mopsuestia, those of Theo∣doret, and the Epistles of Ibas to Maris; for this Council solli∣cited Vigilius, Bishop of Rome, to judge the Question which they were handling, not separately from them, but conjointly with them: And the Emperor Justinian, in his Letters to Eu∣tichius of Constantinople, and to Apollinarius of Alexandria, de∣clares, That the care of Emperors hath always been to extir∣pate Heresies, and to preserve the purity of the Faith by the means of Councils; which sheweth clear enough, what supe∣rior Judge was acknowledged in the Church: I might joyn to the Authority of this 5th Oecumenical Council, that of the 6th and 7th, which make but one, this last having only added some Canons to the decisions of the sixth, which was held under Constantine Pogonatus, in the Palace called Tullum; since that, in the 36th Canon of this last Council, were confirmed the Canons of Constantinople and of Chalcedon, which made the Bishops of Rome and of Constantinople equal in Ecclesiastical Af∣fairs; and condemned Honorius, Bishop of Rome, with many others, as tainted with the Heresy of the Monotholites; but our Discourse hath already been so long, that I ought not to tire out your patience any further. Philér. I am not at all wearied with your Discourse; but it is not fit to exact too much upon your kindness, but to re∣fer the other reflections which you can make upon this Subject, to another conversation.
The Third Dialogue. PHilér. You were so kind, my dear Philalethe, in our last walk, to make me hope for some more of your reflections upon the subject whereon we were discoursing. I'le be obli∣ged to you if you will impart them to me now. Phila. I will pursue this matter since you desire it; but you will not take it amiss if I abridg it as much as I can. After the Authority and Judgment of Oecumenical Councils, I see nothing of greater force than what passed in the African Coun∣cils, and namely in the Milevitan Council held in the Month of August of the year 402, wherein St. Austin assisted, as appear∣eth in his 117th. Epistle: In this Council they confirmed what had been decreed against the Donatists by a former Coun∣cil of Carthage; and in the Sixth Council of Carthage, which was the Univesal of Africa, begun in the year 418, and con∣tinued to the year 423. In the first of these Councils they made a Canon, which is the 22, or the 31 according to Bal∣zamon, by which it was Ordained that Priests, Deacons, and other Clergymen should appeal from the Judgment of their Bishops to the other Neighbouring Bishops, and from them to the Council of Africa, or to the Primate, and to no other up∣on pain of Excommunication, as it hath been Ordained here∣tofore concerning Bishops. You may see it thus expressed in the Greek Copies in Zonaras, and in some Latin Copies, and in the Council of Rheims held under Hugh Capet where this Mi∣levitan Council is alledged. It is true that1 Cans. 2. qu. 6. Gratian excepts Appeals to the See of Rome; but that was added of his own head, since it was Appeals themselves which these Fathers did design wholly to prohibit. In the second of these Councils, which is the Sixth of Carthage, composed of 207 Bishops, of whose number was St. Augustin, and wherein presided Aure∣lius Bishop of Carthage, they again had reason to renew this Decree against Appeals beyond Sea; and see here the occasion: Apiarius Presbyter of Sicca in Numidia, was Deposed and Ex∣communicated
for his Crimes by some Bishops; he Appealed from their Sentences before the Pope Zosimus, who by the judgment that he gave declared him innocent, and delivered him from the Penalties to which he had been condemned. This Apiarius having acknowledged his fault before the Council, and there asked pardon for it, was restored to the Exercise of his Charge, but not in the Church of Sicca, by reason of the Scandal he had there given. This wretched fellow falling a∣gain into his Disorders, was Deposed by Sylvanus his Bishop. He Appealed again from this Judgment to Celestin, who then held the See of Rome. The Pope sent the Bishop Faustinus to the Council, with two Presbyters, to maintain these the Rights of his See. Faustinus acquitted himself very well in his Commission: He represented that by virtue of the Canons of the Council of Nice, it was allowable to Appeal to the See of Rome, and demanded that the Milevitan Canon should be an∣nulled, which prohibited Appeals beyond the Seas. The Bishops being surprized upon what Faustinus had said, because he ci∣ted a Canon wholly unknown to them, consulted the Copy of the Acts of the Council of Nice. The procedure in the Af∣fair of Apiarius having been lawfully done, they confirmed the condemnation from which he had Appealed, and wrote a Synodical Letter to Celestin, which was Superscribed in these Terms, To our most Dear and Honourable Brother Celestin. And in this Letter they desire him not to receive to his Commu∣nion those whom they should Excommunicate, according to the Decrees of the Council of Nice, which have subected as well inferior Clergymen as Bishops to their Metropolitans, willing that Affairs should be determined where they began; assuring themselves that the Grace of the Holy Spirit would never be wanting to every Province; and after having shew∣ed him the inconveniencies that would follow these sorts of Appeals, they give him to understand that they had not found in the Acts of the Council of Nice which had been sent them from Constantinople, and from Antioch, this Canon which Fau∣stinus had alledged. Not satisfied with this Letter which con∣tained their Opinions, they make a Canon which renewed that of the Milevitan Council, signifying that Priests, Deacons, and other inferior Clergymen should not Appeal beyond the Seas,
but to the Primate of their Provinces, as hath been often re∣solved concerning Bishops. Who is there now but seeth that the Fathers of this Council did not believe that the Bishop of Rome had the Supreme Authority in the Church, since that not only his Legate Faustinus did not preside in it, but was seated after Valentinus Bishop of the first See of Numidia; that they examin over again the Affair of Apiarius, as though it had not been judged by the Bishop of Rome; that they give him only the name of Brother, and will not at all permit that any Clergy∣man of Africa should appeal to Rome? Philér. This indeed appears very strong; but do not you know that it is generally agreed, that in the Milevitan Canon, there is nothing said of the Bishops? and that the clause that concerns them hath been since added? that besides the Canon produced by Faustinus to his Colleagues, was in some respects a Canon of the Council of Nice, since that it was of the Coun∣cil of Sardica, which is but an Addition, a Supplement, and as it were the Seal of the Council of Nice? Phila. These Interpretations appear to me but weak; for the Milevitan Canon in the Greek, and in some Latin Copies, doth comprehend the Clause concerning Bishops. Besides, the Fa∣thers of this Council of Africa, in the Epistle which they wrote to Celestin, make it known sufficiently that they did not understand that Bishops could appeal beyond the Seas, no more than other inferior Clerks, seeing that at the same time which they wrote this Epistle, they had before them not only the Ap∣peal of Apiarius, but also that which Anthony Bishop of Fossat had brought against the Sentence of his Provincial Synod be∣fore the Pope Boniface who restored him; for which reasonEpist. 162. St. Augustin wrote a Letter to Celestin, this Popes Successor, con∣cerning these pretended Additions to the Council of Nice; for that of Sardica was called by different Emperors, in a far di∣stant place, and after a considerable Interval of time; for Mo∣tives and Reasons also different, as every body knoweth that hath any knowledg of History. If this Council had been a Supplement of the Council of Nice, as they pretend, why is it not placed in the order of Oecumenical Councils? Whence comes it that the Fathers of the Council of Carthage, amongst whom were St. Augustin, Aurelius, and Alipandus, the most famous Bishops of their time, were ignorant of this Canon?
And why did not Faustinus say plainly, that this Canon was tru∣ly of the Council of Sardica, rather than that it was of equal authority to the Council of Nice, to which it was but the Sup∣plement and the Seal? I will not enlarge to you upon what passed in the year 397, in the Council of Turin, where they judged the difference that was between Proclus Bishop of Marseilles, and Metropolitan of the first Province of Narbonne, and the Bishops of the second Province, who would not depend upon him; and the contest that there was between the Bishops of Arles and of Vienne, concerning the honour of Primacy, and the right of Ordina∣tion; which the Fathers of this Council would not have da∣red to undertake, had they believed that the Soveraign Autho∣rity had belonged to the Bishop of Rome. You may learn the same thing from what passed in the Council of Toledo, against the Priscilianists, and of the conjunction which these Fathers make of Ambrose Bishop of Milan, and of Siricus Bishop of Rome. Nor will I entertain you with the Council of Francfort, called by the Emperor Charlemagne in the year 794, wherein assisted the Bishops of France, of Germany, and of Italy, wither the Pope Adrian sent his Legates, and wherein the Canon of the second Council of Nice concerning the Religious Worship of Images was annulled, though this Council had been appro∣ved of by Adrian. I will not speak to you neither of the Coun∣cils which were held in France our own Country, which vi∣gorously opposed this immoderate Worship which the second Council of Nice would have established, and which the Popes maintained to their utmost. In good faith now, if the Fathers of the Council of Francfort, or if the Prelates of France had believed the See of Rome to be Soveraign, would they have spoken, would they have acted as they did? I come now to the Council of Constance held in the year 1414. whose Authority and Decision my Lords the Bishops make use of to support their opinion. He that will penetrate well into the spirit of this Council, must take the thing in its original, and observe that a lamentable Schism had raged near 30 years, and produced a great many evil effects during the Pontificate of Peter de Luna, called Benedict the 13th. and under that of Angelus Corrarius, called Gregory the 12th, Anti-popes; the Cardinals of either party being Assembled, agreed for the
putting an end to these Schisms, to call a Council at Pisa: This Council being Assembled in the year 1409. declares, That this Affair belonged to them, as they represented the Universal Church, and they condemned Peter de Luna, and Angelus Corra∣rius, as notorious Schismaticks, defenders and favourers of Schism, Hereticks, and as having deviated from the Faith, &c. After the deposing of these two Anti-popes by the Council, the Cardinals who there assisted, chose Peter de Candia Pope, who was called Alexander the 5th, and who lived but about Ten months: After his death the same Cardinals elected the Cardi∣nal Balthasar of St. Eustace, who called himself John the 23. or 24. Thus there were three Anti-popes who condemned one ano∣ther. To find out a remedy for this disorder, the Emperor Sigis∣mond advised Pope John, to order that the Council of Pisa should be continued in the City of Constance, whereupon this Pope called thither all those that had a deliberative voice, the Emperor, and all Christian Princes. Pope John opened the Assembly in the Em∣perors presence; and in the second Session he would have re∣nounced the Papacy, provided his competitors would do the same; but they refusing, they were all three judged and con∣demned by the Council; Pope John for many crimes whereof he was accused and convicted, and the others for the same reasons that they had been condemned at Pisa; and they chose Odo Co∣lomna Pope, who called himself Martin the 3d or the 5th; And to the end that no man might doubt of the power which the Council had of Judging Soveraignly in all Ecclesiastical Affairs, they, in their 4th Session, made this following Canon: The General Council lawfully Assembled in the name of the Holy Ghost, and representing the Catholick Church militant, holdeth immedi∣ately its power from Jesus Christ; to which Council, all manner of Per∣sons of what estate or quality soever, nay the Pope himself, is bound to obey in things which concern the Faith, the extirpation of Schisms, and the General Reformation of the Head and Members. And for as much as in the 39th Session this Council did or∣dain, that for time to come there should be held a General Coun∣cil at the end of every Ten years, and that the next Council should be called in Five years, and the following one in Seven, the Council accordingly was called together at Pavia, where it began, and was afterward continued at Siena, and finally in 1431. it was transferred to Basil, where it was decided according to
the Council of Constance, that it was a most Catholick truth, that Councils were above Popes, and that Popes could not by their own wills either dissolve, or prorogue Councils from place to place. P. Have you no other proof which justifieth this Opinion? And have not there been Popes who have acknowledged the superiority of Councils? Phil. There are many other proofs which might be made use of, which are even of the same kind as those whereof we have already spoken; for we might remember several examples of the Ancient Bishops of Rome, who have suffered their judgments to be examined in General Councils; and have submitted themselves to their Decrees; nay there are some who have de∣sired that the Decrees which they had made might be examined in Coun∣cil; and amongst others, Leo the Great, who demanded of Theodosius, that what he had decreed, as well as what had been decreed in the pretended Council of Ephesus, should be examin'd in a Gen. Council. There have been also many other Popes that have acknowledged the Tribunal of parti∣cular Councils, and amongst others the Pope Damasus, who disputing with Ʋrsicinus concerning the Pontificate, submits himself to the judgment of a Synod, which decided this Affair; and when this Pope was accused of Adultery by two Deacons, Concordius and Castorius, he justified himself before a Council of 44 Bps. Assembled at Rome, in the year 378. I could add the evidence of several Popes upon this subject, and amongst others, that of Zozimus, who in his 1st Ep. says, That the Authority of his See cannot add nor change any thing against the Ordinances of the Holy Fathers, which is a mark of subjection, and of dependence. And also that of Gregory the Great, who, in some place protested that he reverenced the Authority of the four Great Councils, like that of the four Gospels. Philér. Were I not afraid of trespassing upon your patience, I would desire you to give me some particular account of our Gadican Church, and to let me know, whether she always believed the Superiority of the Councils above the Popes? Phila. I will do it, my dear Philéréne; but it shall be but very short, that I may not tire you. It cannot be doubted but that in the first Centuries, our Churches of France acknowledged the Authority of Councils as superior to all others, since that in the question concerning the day of Celebrating Easter, our Prelates with∣out the knowledg and participation of the Pope, called a Synod, where∣in St. Irenaes presided, who by order of the Synod wrote a Letter, ex∣treamly pressing, to Pope Victor about this Affair, as may be seen in Eu∣sebius; which this Bishop would never dare to have done if the Pope had been considered in the Gallican Church as the Supreme Magistrate of the Church; and the Decretal Epistles attributed to the first Bishops of Rome, cannot be objected to the contrary, because that these Epistles have such visible characters of being counterfeited, that it is beyond all doubt. And in the Council of Arles, above mentioned, our Bishops of France shewed sufficiently that the Pope was subject to the Authority of Councils, since that they examined an Appeal brought before them from the Popes Sentence. Since that time divers Synods have been held in France by the order and permission of our Kings, to treat of things con∣cerning the Faith or Discipline of the Church, wherein they judged of aith by the Oracles; of the Scripture, and by Tradition; and of Discipline
by the Canons of the Church, that is to say of Councils. Such was, for ex∣ample, that which, was held in the reign of our K Clovis at Orleance, &c. Also the second Council of Mascon Ordained, that Provincial Councils should be called by the Metropolitans, and that of the whole Kingdom by the Bishop of Lions, with the Kings permission. It is true, that the Gal∣lican Church received a great abridgment of its Liberties in the year 445, by the Ordinance of Valentinian the 3d, who made the judgments of all the French Prelates subject to the Pope But this Ordinance of Va∣lentinian received divers oppositions in France, as it were easie to justi∣fie by many famous examples. In the 8. Century the Churches of France received another blow, by introducing the Code of the Roman Canons, which Charlemaign obliged himself to receive in France, as well as the Roman Office, in acknowledgment of the good turns which Po. Adrian had done him, who in an Assembly of 15 Bishops, and many Abbots de∣clared Charlemaign Patrician, or a Nobleman of Rome, and acknow∣ledged that it was in his power to Elect Popes, to regulate the Apo∣stolick See, to institute through all the Provinces Archbishops and Bi∣shops; in a word he invested him with all the Rights which the Ro∣man Emperors enjoyed: Nevertheless this great Prince found in the ex∣ceution of his promise great opposition from the Clergy whom he for∣ced to receive the Code of these aforesaid Canons by constraint, Minis & Suppliciis, says the Original; nor were these Canons received but by the Authority of our Kings, having been published but under the name of Charlemaign, and as Ordinances made by him His Successors have trod in the same footsteps, always ordering that the Laws which they made by the advice of the Prelates of their Kingdoms, and which are to be read in their Capitulars should be published under their Majesties Names, and that the Popes themselves should be subject to them C. de Capi, & destin. 10. and C. nos de Compet 2. Quest. 7. But whatever increase the Authori∣ty of the Pope had gained in France by this Ordinance of Valentinian, and by this Introduction of Charlemaign, this did not hinder our Bishops from shewing upon all occasions a great deal of vigor in maintaining their Privileges, and the Authority of the Church. It is manifest by divers Examples which History affordeth, and chiefly by that of Hincmare B. of Laon; this Prelate was censured and condemned for his ill actions by a Synod held at Vervins; he would have appealed to Rome, but far from ha∣ving any regard to his appeal he was forthwith condemned for his dis∣obedience, in a Synod of ten Provinces held at Attini. We may add to this example of Hincmare, that of Arnulph A B. of Rheims, who was con∣demned and deposed for several crimes in an Assembly of many Bishops held at Rheims, who declared that they acted by the Authority which had been given to the Apostles, and which had been left to them. This suffi∣ciently sheweth that an Apostolick spirit reigned in the souls of our Pre∣lates, and that in spight of the enterprizes and attempts of the Court of Rome, they maintained this general opinion of their worthy Predecessors, That they held their charges and the authority which belongeth to them from God, and not from the See of Rome. They shewed the same zeal in the A B. of Sens his Affair at the Synod of Pontignon, and in that of Saire, concerning a Church in the Diocess of Tours, held by a Cardinal
sent by John the 20. Which they call a Sacriledg and a contradiction to the Holy Canons, which ordain that a Bishop can do nothing in anothers Diocess without his consent. And in that of Geofry Bishop of Chartres, in whose place one Ivo had been surrogated by Pope Ʋrban 2d, whom Richarius A B. of Sens, Mertropolitan of Chartres, together with the Bi∣shops of Paris, Troys, and Meaux opposed. They also shewed this same spirit in the advice they gave to Philip the August, to appeal to the next Council from the Sentence of Innocent 3, as from an abuse, in the Prag∣matick Sanction which St. Lewis made by their advice; and in the Council which they gave together with others assembled at Paris in the year 1209 to Philip the Fair against the enterprizes of Boniface 8, not to mention the famous Book call'd Somnium Viridarii, writ and publish∣ed by the order of Charles the Fifth, called the Wise; no of the Laws and Rules wich Charles the 6. his Son made against the Usurpations of the Court of Rome, which sheweth sufficiently that the Authority of the See of Rome was not looked upon as the superior Authority in France. But after that the Council of Constance had formally explained it self upon this matter, men spoke bolder in France than they had done in for∣mer times. Charles 7th. forbad the French Prelates to go to the Council called at Ferrara in the year 1427. And he himself called in the City of Bourges a great and famous Assembly of the Princes of his Blood, Offi∣cers of his Crown, Prelates and Ecclesiastical persons, members of his great Council, Doctors in Law, as well Divine as Humane, and Professors of the Universities, together with the Legates of Eugenius 4th. After that the Doctors of the Universities had represented in the name of the whole Gallican Church, her former state, her Rights, and the attempts which had been made upon her Liberties; they besought his Majesty to remedy this disorder, that he would be pleased to Authorize some De∣crees and Canons of the General Councils of Constance and of Basil; such as that is which declares, that General Councils lawfully assembled, and representing the Church militant, have their power immediately from Jes. Christ, and are above the Pope, which Councils they themselves had judged ought to be observed. Wherupon the King approved & confirmed the aforesaid decrees & ordered all people to observe and keep them in∣violaby. This is that which was called the pragmatick Sanction. 32 years afterwards Lewis 11. being won by the flatteries of Pius 2d, and through evil suggestions, as may be seen in the Book of the three Estates of the year 1483, revoked the Pragmatick Sanction without any consultation of the States before hand, or of the Gallican Church. The Kings At∣torny General, and the Rector of the University of Paris formally op∣posed the Registring the Kings Letters concerning these his Decrees. The Court of Parliament it self represented in writing the great evils that would happen upon the abolishing of so just a Sanction, to so good effect, that Lewis 11th. far from abolishing it, gave orders for its confirmation, as amongst others that of the 16 of August 1478, whereby it is forbid∣den to go the Rome to seek after any Benefice, or to pay in any money, upon pain of Confiscation of Body and Goods; and to prevent Anathe∣ma's from Rome, he caused his Parliament of Paris at the request of his Attorny-General to pass an Act, that in case the Pope should undertake
any thing to the prejudice of his Ordinances, he should appeal to the next Council. The Estates of the Kingdom, whereof the Clergy is the first Order, be∣ing Assembled at Tours, present a Petition to King Charles the 8th, in the first Article of which, they desire His Majesty to keep, and maintain in∣violably the Pragmatick Sanction of Bourges, founded upon the Decrees of the Councils of Constance and of Basil. And in the National Council, which Lewis the 12th Assembled in the same City of Tours, in the year 1510, the observation of the Pragmatick Sanction was fully resolved upon. Observe how our venerable Prelates have ever maintained the Interest and the Privileges of the Church, against the attempts of the Court of Rome, and how they make appear to the whole World, that they do Re∣ligiously keep in their hearts the Sentiments which they had received from their Ancestors, & that they believed that the supreme Authority re∣sided in General Councils; and that how eminent soever that of the See of Rome might be, it was still dependant upon theirs. This is the Doctrine which hath been taught and maintained by the University of Paris, as may be seen in the Writings of her most famous Doctors, such as are the ChancellorTract. de potest. Eccles. Gerson, James Almain, &c. to which to may add a great many more, asNi. Cus. de concord. can. lib. 2. cap. 2. the Cardinal of Cambray, Nicho, Cusan,Pan. in cap. signif. extrav. de elect. the Abbot Panormitan,Abulensis in cap. 18. Matt. quaest. 108. Abulensis,Fran. vict. T. de potes. Eccles. Franciscus de Victoria,Alph. a Cast. lib. 7. de just. pun. haer. Alphonsus a Castro, and all the Divnes of the Council of Trent, which is spoken of in the 7th Book of the History of this Council, who maintained with our Bishops of France, and those of Spain, that the jurisdiction of Bishops, and their re∣sidence was of Divine Right. Philer. All that you have said, perswades me sufficiently, that the Au∣thority of Councils is above that of the Popes; but there are some scru∣ples that I desire to be resolved in, before that I can cordially embrace your Opinion; These scruples arise from two things wherein you will agree with me. The one is, That the Popes have been ever desired to confirm Councils, which without doubt had never been, if their Autho∣rity had not depended on that of the Popes. And the other is, That the Title of Head of the Council is given to the Pope, and namely in the se∣cond Councils of Ephesus and of Chalcedon. Phila. What you say cannot be disproved, but I think that the conse∣quences that you draw from these Principles are not right; for you must in the first place acknowledg that the consent to, an confirmation of General Councils, was desired of all great Sees, which did not regard the Decrees of Councils as Obligatory, till after they had themselves consent∣ed to them. Thus the Decree of the Council of Ephesus against Nestorius, was of no force in the East, till that John of Antioch, and all the Metro∣politans depending upon his Diocess had agreed to it; And the judgment of the 5th General Council against the Tria Capitula, was without force till the Diocesses of Africa, France, Spain, and of Illyricum had confirmed it; not that the confirmation and consent demanded by General Councils of Great Sees, besides that of Rome, did infer that the Councils did de∣pend upon these Sees, as all men do agree. Nor can you infer, That the Councils did depend upon the Pope, upon pretence that they demanded his consent and confirmation to their Decrees.
You may add to this, That Superiors have many times desired their Inferiors to confirm their Acts; The Council of Sardica desired all the Churches to whom they send their Synodal Epistle, That they would confirm what they had Decreed. The 15th Council of Toledo confirmed the Decrees of the 6th General Council, at the request of LeoConc. Toled. cap. 2. lib. 1. the 2d. Pelagius the first desired his Clergy to confirm his demand concerning Ordinations. Julian, Bishop of Cales, the Popes Legate at the Council of Chalcedon, says, in his Letters to the Emperor Leon, That this Prince had commanded all Bps that they should confirm the Doctrine; of the Holy Apostles; and in the year 465, the Prelates of the 3d Province of Lyons, being Assembled at Rennes, under Perpetuus Merropolitan of Tours, sent their Decrets to Victorius and Thalassius of Angiers, who were not present, that by their Authorites they might confirm them; which clearly proves, that the confirmation of the Decrees of Councils by the Popes, is not a mark of the Popes superiority over Councils. Now for the quality of Head, which was given to the Pope in the Councils of Ephesus and of Chalcedon, as you have observed, besides that they were his own Legates that gave him this Title in the Council of Ephesus, Act 2. and that St. Cyril of Alexandria, and Juvenal of Jerusalem presiding, the Council suf∣ficiently shewed that they did not own the Pope as the Soveraign Head of the Church; I say, that this quality of Head carried with it no prehe∣minence of Magistracy and of Dominion, but only a preheminence of Order, of Direction, and of Excellence. And it is in this sense that Gregory Nyssen said in the second General Council, That by the death of Meleti∣us, the Council had lost its Head; and there is nothing more ordinary a∣mong Authors, whether they treat of Politick or Ecclesiastical Affairs, than to give the Title of Head and Chief to them who preside in Socie∣ties. It is in this sense that the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon give Pope Leo, who there presided in the person of his Legates, the name of Head of this Council, according to the Order of the Emperor Martianus. Besides, if the Title of Head, in matters of Faith and of Religion, hath been given to some Prelates, as to Nicephorus Bishop of Constantinople, to the Patriarch of Alexandria, to St. Athanasius, to St. Basi, to Nicetius Bp of Treves, to Gregory of Tours, and some others, by reason of the Emi∣nence of their Sees, or because of their Learning, of their Piety, and of their good Conduct; With how much more justice may the Bp of Rome have been honoured with it, he who was, not only the Metropolitan of some Bps, or the Exarch of a Diocess composed of Ten Provinces, but who, to speak withEpist. 52. Theodorus Studita, was the first of the whole Body of the Church, and who occupied the first See of all Christendom, and the See which was esteemed the most eminent, either because it had been oc∣cupied by St. Peter and St. Paul, two the most famous of the Apostles, the first of which is called, even by the Holy Fathers, the Prince of the Society of the Apostles; or because it was established in a City, wherein resided the Majesty of the whole Roman Empire, and which was the Capital City of the World? Philr. I am fully satisfied, and thank you for the kindnes you have shewed in discoursing with me so long upon this matter, I now perceive the Truth and the importance of it; and I profess my self, without more ado, to be of your opinion; but it is time for us to think of retiring. FINIS.
