w755 9634398 43867
Sot's Paradise: OR, The HUMOURS of a Derby-Ale-House: WITH A SATYR UPON THE ALE. The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.
THE PRINTER TO THE READER REader what e'er the Author truly meant I know not, but he told me his intent Was not to Lampoon, or Reflect on any; But thro' Necessity he writ, like many, In Pinch-Gut Times, to get the Ready Penny. Suppose (said I) you've anger'd some Bravado, I hate the standing of a Bastinado? Poh, poh, said he, such Dangers never heed, I'de such a Cockscomb Ridicule indeed, Each Sentence should have Gaul and Venom in't, Which you, to recompence your Drubs, shall print:
Mortals have oft, to their distruction, found, Poets, like Gods, can at a distance Wound. I thank you Sir (said I) such Verse, I doubt, S'But a poor Plaister for a batter'd Snout. He prest the Copy forward, I seem'd shie, Till by these words he brought me to comply. The Characters are random writ, God knows, Slightly dispatch'd; design'd, like Salesmens Cloaths, For no one in particular, but where They best by chance shall fit, for them to wear. Nay then, said I, if any Sot can find His Picture here, and not as his design'd, And Angry be, I'll hire the Author then, To whet his Wits, and Write as Keen again: Since I can justly say (to save my Bacon) I no Offence intend, I pray let none be taken.
Sot's Paradise: OR, The HUMOURS of a Derby-Ale-House, WHEN anxious Thoughts my troubled Brains possest, And the wild Hag rid straddling o'er my Breast, Loaded with Sorrow, I pursu'd my rest. My Pockets far too empty were for Wine. That Noble Juice! That Cordial of the Vine! By Humane Race so justly held Divine. To ease my Cares I stumbl'd into R—'s, Sots Paradise, so Fam'd of latter days; For Derby-Ale, it bears away the Bays. Thro' Entry dark I th' Tippling Mansion sought, Whose close Dimensions rais'd a Jealous thought I'd been Trappan'd and in a Mouse-Trap caught.
Like Weesel thro' a Cranny thus I crept; And as he Screams, so I a Murm'ring kept; Now Paus'd and Swore, then Gropt, and forward step't. Through stumbling craggy Ways the Godly steal To Heaven, whence I concluded, without fail, This narrow Path must lead to Heavenly Ale. But in this Pot-gun Passage did I meet A bulky Sot, who forc'd me to Retreat; And shot me, like a Pellat, to the Street. I gain'd the Barr by several Essays, Where mourning Widow sat with doleful Face; And on each Hand a Room, but ne'er a Place. I turn'd to th' Left, and did amongst them squeese, There heard some Belch, some Fart, and others Sneeze; Buzzing and Humming like a Hive of Bees. This Room I did for Ease and Cleanness chuse, The Chappel call'd, from having Seats like Pews, Where grizled Sots sit nodding o'er the News. With painful jostling I a Place possest, Sat down, then Belch'd and Farted like the rest, Thump'd with my Fist, and cry'd I broke a Jest.
In comes a Female Tapstress, Pale and Wan, Sod'n with the fumes of what she'd Drank and Drawn, Looks worse than the green Girl who wants a Man. Sir do you please, I pray, to have your Ale Drawn New, or with a little dash of Stale? I gave her answer, and she soon turn'd Tail. One sage old Bard next Chimney Nook was got, Fix'd as a Statue, motionless he sat, His Eyes regarding neither Who nor What. This speechless Image most I did admire, No Derby could this Mortal Lump Inspire, Who like Old Puss, sat Purring o'er the Fire. One whim he had was often put in play, By Name salute this Monumental Clay, He Huffs and Puffs, starts up and runs away. Then in thrusts one, strives hard to get a Place; Witty in Words, and Satyr in his Face, Thus boldly speaks in Derby-Ales disgrace. Pox on't, said he, I Yesterday stept in, And drank Nine Tankards to divert my Spleen, It fail'd, and now I'm come to drink Nineteen.
At Squire's I heard a Beaux so Damn and Sink it, Four Tankards numb'd his Wits, you wou'd not think it; He swore we all are Clod-skul'd Sots who drink it. This much disgruntl'd all the swilling Herd, Who grin'd, and at him enviously star'd, In answer not a Mortal wag'd his Beard. One Gapes, a second Nods, a third he Winks, A fourth he Smoaks, a fifth blows Pipe and Drinks, Not One in Ten that either Talks or Thinks, Thus seldom Speak unless 'tis to complain Of Phthisick, Stone, the Gout, or some old Pain That grieves them sorely, when the Moon's i'th' Wane. Here worn-out Sinners at their Ails repine, (The Herd thus sympathetically joyn) All Grunting o'er their Hogwash-Ale like Swine. Up rises now and then, a brawny Sot, Before the Fire he turns his Arse about, Hauks up his Flegm, then Spitting staggers out. With me this smoaky Clime did not agree, These Sots too Grave were, that's too Dull, for me; No Talk is worse than much Loquacity.
Willing to take a General Survey, T▪ observe the Difference in Mortal Clay, I stole from thence, to the next Room made way. This call'd the Bear-Garden, where at a Table I heard, amongst a wild Promiscuous Rabble, More Tongues confus'd then ere were known at Babel. A Beau repeating to his friend a Novel, Two Lawyers in Dispute began to Cavel, A fifth, with Chalk, was scoring out an Oval. And, being as cunning as a Hocus Pocus, Had laid a Wager with a John a Nokus, He'd with a Thred and Pins find out the Focus. A Scholar, next, of Batchelor's Degree, Standing four Years at Ʋniversitie, Rose up and flung a Witticism at me. I lik'd the Sport, and did retort the same; I hit him Home according to my Aim; But could not get his Hair Brain'd fury tame. So Learn'd he seem'd, so Witty in Discourse, He'd hold me all the Money in his Purse, Tho' I seem'd Man, he'd prove me but a Horse.
I gravely said it did his Skill surpass, And, in return, I instanc'd him a Case Wherein a Scholar prov'd himself an Ass. He smelt a Rat, and found he was mistaken, Shut up his Brains, true knowledge had forsaken, And dwindl'd into News to save his Bacon. A little Captain, tho' of great Renown, Cock'd up his Hat, swore Zoons; and then sat down, Out-chatter'd all the Magpies in the Town. He talk'd of Heros, Hectors, and Bravadoes, Of Gashes, Slashes, Cuts, and Carbonadoes, Of Cannons, Mortars, Bombs and Hand Granadoes. The Valiant Pigmy, eagre to declare His Broils in Taverns, not Exploits in War, Teas'd me with Nonsence more than I could bear. The Di'lect he retain'd he learn'd at Nurse, And that his Words might be of greater force, He tagg'd each Sentence with an Oath or Curse. A Dapper Blade was Squeez'd among the rest, Who would have made each Word he spoke a Jest; Aim'd at much Wit, but little he possest.
Like Ill Rung Bells he did Confus'dly Nock His Ill Tun'd Words to hammer out a Joak, Whose Tongue out-run the Larum of a Clock. This Mortal prov'd a Midnight Magistrate, Who ask's us, Why so drunk, and why so late? Little in Person, tho' in Office Great. He Huckles much, tho' what by that he means, Let Oldish, Shirley, or such Learned Brains, T' inform the World, imploy their Skilful Pens. Next sat a Drone, whose VVits had but a Dull-Edge, His Gravity and nice Grammatick Knowledge, Spoke him some Senior Cock's comb of a Colledge. He Learned Reasons offer'd unto some, VVhy Gerounds end in di, in do, or dum, They grave attention gave, and sat hum Drum. Next him a Spark bedaw'd with Golden Twine, So very Grave, and eke so very Fine, I took him for some Statesman on Design. Some humble Lord, so generously free, Seeking Applause and Popularity, Came here to Court the good Mobility.
I turn'd about, and view'd him for a space, No Sword he'd on, and in his Mein no Grace, Dulness instead of Grandure in his Face. My Judgment err'd, I quickly found its failure, No Honour in his Speech, in's Looks no Valour, A Lord, thought I! Wounds, this must be a Taylor. When e're he spoke, it matter was of fact, So Emphatical his Words, and so compact, No Strowling Player could be more exact. Against him Teague, an Irish Barber sat, Who has a Thousand Whimsies in his Pate, Makes Wigs, tunes Bagpipes, does the Lord knows what. By chance, said I, What is't a Clock I Pray? After some time he'd study'd what to say, He Answer'd, By my Shoul 'tis Shaturday. Each loving each, as truly as a Brother, In all things act alike, Speak, Drink and Smother, Delight, as Monkeys, to Buffoon each other. Like the Twin-Stars, these two United are It's no great matter whether both appear, If you see one, in him the other's there.
The Ale at last to these weak Noddles stole, Supply'd the want of Brains in every Skull, And made them Merry, tho' it made me Dull. The Taylor begg'd of his Reverse a Tune, Teague for his Bagpipes sent, and fix'd his Drone, Then Play'd Dundee's Farwel, and Sung O hone. This pleas'd the Mob, and made them hoop and hollow, As when the Brindled Dog, against the Fallow, Pins down the Bull, and makes him Roar and Bellow. I Teas'd and Tir'd with this Bear-Garden Play, In doleful dumps did for Ten Tankards Pay, And Sick not Drunk I homewards steer'd my way.
A SATYR UPON Derby-Ale. BASE and Ignoble Flegm, dull DERBY-ALE, Thou canst o'er none but Brainless Sots prevail; Chokes them if New, and Sowr art if Stale. Thou drown'st no Care, or do'st thou Elevate; Instead of quenching Drouth, do'st Drouth create, Makes us dull Sots at an expensive rate. Old English Ale, which Upstart Fops disdain Brew'd by our Grandsires, Chear'd the Heart of Man, Quench'd Drouth with pleasure, and prolong'd their Span. But thou! Poor Slime, thou art not Ale, for why? Thou neither Cheares the Heart, or Brisks the Eye; The more we Drink the more we still are Dry.
Rare Fat'ning Swill, to Belly up Lean Guest, It feeds a Man in fix Months to a Beast, And gives him bulk for a Church-Ward'n at least. Puff'd up with thee, Dispirited, Debas'd, We into Gray's-Inn reel (O Pump be prais'd) There Quench that Drouth thy Treacly Dregs have rais'd. One hearty Draught prepares for Pipe of Funk, Three Tankards whets my Appetite for Punk, Four makes me Sick; but Ten wont make me Drunk. O'er Nipperkins of thee six Hours I sit, Till spent my Total, and benum'd my Wit, Thus nothing have, and just for nothing fit. Our Wits, or Thoughts, thou never canst advance Above th' affairs of Poland, or of France, Wounds! Thou'rt a Booby to a Cup of Nantes. Thou'rt fit for those who are from Troubles free, Thou Cur'st no Spleen thou art unfit for me, I'd's live almost drink Adam's Ale as thee. Thou mak'st us Fat in little time, 'tis true, The same will Swins-Flesh and Potatoes do; They covet Flesh, not Brains, that follow you.
Thou Noble Ale! Mere Caudle, and unfit For Men of Care to drink or Men of Wit, Poor English Coffee for a ploding Cit. Guzzle for Carmen, Foggy and unfine, For nothing fit but to Exhaust our Coin, Water to Brandy, and small-Beer to Wine. Forgive my drowsy Muse where e'er she nods, She's not Inspir'd or Tutor'd by the Gods, She Rhimes o'er Ale, others o'er Wine, that's odds. What if you say she's Dull, it's no great matter, Cross Muddy Ale's a heavy Theam for Satyr, Tom Brown be judge, or honest Ben Bridgewater. FINIS.
