A3289 E340_31 R200889 99861513 113650
THE ANSWER OF THE COMMISSIONERS of the NAVIE, To a scandalous Pamphlet, published by Mr ANDREWES, BURRELL. Printed by WILL. BENTLEY, Anno Dom. MDCXLVI.
To the Right Honourable the High Court of PARLIAMENT. SOme dayes past, there came to the hands of us the Commissio∣ners of the Navie, a Pamphlet, published in print by Andrewes Burrell, concerning the Navie, (a businesse then depending before the Honourable Committee of the Admiralty.) We much wondered at the boldnesse in the manner of subscri∣bing, and at the Scandals, through the whole body of the Pamphlet; he daring to direct it unto your Honours; and therein scandalizing the Navie-royall of the kingdom, and all the Officers of the same; as Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Rear-Admirals, Commissioners, Collectors, Trinity-house, and others; yea, and beyond this, some of your Members, and in truth, the honour of both Houses of Parliament. We are confident those aspersions and brain-sick Notions, so plainly dis∣covering his discontentednesse, and self-ends, and so apparently tending to the destruction of the Royall Navie, will not get the least credit with your Honours: But, lest this Pamphlet should work such ill effect abroad, that after your Honours happy government, protection, and defence of this Kingdom, in these Civill Broils, by the Navie Royall, as with Walls and Bulworks, from all forraign Invasion; your Honours proceedings should upon this mans writing be calumniated, by the disaffected party here at home; and your Royall Navie, (formerly so formidable) become con∣temptible to forraign States and Princes: and we knowing that the great affairs of State will not afford time unto your Honours, to take a par∣ticular examination of this businesse, to the discovery of the folly, and de∣sperate malice of this Gentl. and we being intrusted by your Honours in the government and care of the Navie Royall, have thought it not the least part of our duties, to make bold, by our Answer unto this Pamphlet, to present unto your Honours the true state of the Navie, to discover the destructive effects so much aimed at, and desired to the Navie in the Pam∣phlet, to stop the mouths of Enemies and ill-affected, to satisfie the well-affected, and to vindicate the honour of the Parliament, whose provi∣dent and prudent care for preservation of the Navie, and guarding of the Seas, in these times of danger, we shall make appear to exceed all former Ages.
Master Burrell, in the beginning of his Preface, begins to tell a Story, That he was forced out of his Countrey, for his affection to the Parliament, and of his taking the Covenant, and of being pressed every Lords day to discover what he knew to be advantageous or hurtfull to the Parliament; when indeed and in truth, the one was, because he would contribute little or nothing to the Par∣liament, having lived here a long time obscurely; and the other, because for his private advantage and advance of his Fortunes, he would be an Officer of the Navie: But at last, being rowsed up (as he saith) by Church-men, he complained to the Right Honourable the Lord Say, the Navie was sluggish, and did sail so sluggishly, that it could not perform those Services which the Parliament expected; and to that purpose presented a paper to his Lordship, intituled, Observations upon the Navie, by Andrews Burrell: which paper he presented to the Earl of Warwick, and from his Lordship it was sent to be disputed before us the Commissioners of the Navie, with whom (saith he) it died. Answer. Now may it please the honourable Houses of Parliament, That it is true, we received an Order from the Right Honourable the Earl of Warwick, as also from the Honourable Committee of the Navie, to send for Master Burrell, to hear his opinion concerning the reducing of the Navie into a better posture, as he pretended, for sailing: We likewise sent for all the Master Shipwrights of England, Captain Batten being pre∣sent with us. Being come together, we demanded of Master Burrell, in what manner he would do this great work: His Answer was, He would cut them down to one Tire of Ordnance, by which means they should sail a great deal better. We demanded of him, What he would do to adde quality to them; for in cutting them down, without doing something under water, would be to small purpose: His Answer was, That he would keep that private to himself. We desired him to give it in writing how he would perform this Service, if he did make a triall of one of the old Ships, in regard it would be a great charge to the State; which he pro∣mised to do, but never came near the Office more, nor ever heard we more of him, till now, that he hath set out this Scandalous Libell. And indeed what he propounded to us, which was to cut down the first, second, and third Rate-Ships, and to bring them to one Tire of Ordnance, is so ridi∣culous, and will so disable the Navie, that it will make them, in case of forraign invasion in capable either to offend the Enemy, or defend them∣selves; all other Princes Ships of the first, second, and third Rate, having two or three Tire of Ordnance. Besides, as they are now built, having great Floors, and great Breadths, if they should be cut down, they would be so unruly Ships in the Sea, that in a Sea-gate they would roul so much, that no man would be able to ply the Ordnance, or stand upon the Deck. Besides, if they should meet with a Storm, be in danger to roul their Masts by the Board, as appeared by the Rainbow, and Vantguard, which were built
in 86. little more or lesse: after this Modell proved so defective Ships in the Sea, that they were forced to bring on another Deck upon them: The Victorie, in 87, was cut down for a triall, at the instance of Sir Iohn Haw∣kings, from three Decks and an half, to one Tire of great Ordnance; which being done, the Queen commanded, in 88, that he should go Commander of her, because he was the Projector; but when he came up to the King of Spains Ships with two Tire and three Tire of Ordnance, they tore his Ship, and kill'd his men so fast that he was not able to endure the Spaniards broad Sides, but was forced to leave them; So that when the Ship came home, the Queens Majestie understanding how much the Ship was disabled by cutting down her Decks, gave Order for her Decks to be built again; and ever after she carried two Tire of Ordnance fore and aft. And indeed the Ships of the Navie, of the first and second Rate, are the best built Ships in the World, both for defence and offence, carrying two Tire of Ordnance; and if not laden with Victuals, but kept light and clean, will saile as well as any Ships of their burthen and force that do belong to any Christian Prince, having been a terror to their Ene∣mies; witnesse Anno 88. for if there had not been such Ships at that time, but such reformed Ships as Master Burrell endevoureth to have, the Spanish Armado doubtlesse had overrun them, and with their strength of Ordnance, having two and three Tire, would have been too hot for their coming near them: yet such was the strength of our Ships, most of them having two Tire of Ordnance, and well mann'd, that (by the blessing of God) we gave them the overthrow: And ever since the Navie hath been preserved and built in a better posture then in those dayes, and more serviceable for the honour and preservation of the Kingdom. And because your Honours may be satisfied, how necessary great Ships are with two Tire of Ord∣nance, for the defence of this Kingdom, we shall onely instance in two Ships which are yet lively in our memory. In Anno 1640. Don Antonio de Kendo came into the Downs, with a Fleet of Ships from Spain, and having rid there some time, the Admirall Van Trump, with six of the best Ships in Holland, attended the motion of Don Antonio his Ship; the rest of his Fleet, consisting of eighty Sail, attended the rest of the Spanish Fleet: Don Anto∣nio when he had refreshed his men, and fitted himself, weighed Anchor out of the Downs; the Admirall of Holland did the like with six Ships; and coming without the Goodwyn-Sands, the Admirall of Holland came up with the Admirall of Spain, as far as his transome; but received such entertainment, that he durst never more come up with him, nor any of the Ships in his company, notwithstanding the Admirall of Spain stayed for them with his top-Sails down, and main yard a crosse; such great force had this great Ship with two Tire and an half of Ordnance, that the Hol∣landers durst not deal with her. The Admirall of Portugall, being another great Ship of that Fleet with two Tire of Ordnance, fought with sixteen
States Men of War almost a whole day, yet never could take her, and be∣ing offered any quarter that they would demand, scorned it: At last, when the Hollanders saw they could not take her, two of their Men of War desperately ran aboard of her, with two Fire-Ships, where they all burned together, untill they were consumed. And indeed, if they had not used that Stratagem, they had never destroyed her. By this, your Ho∣nours may perceive the great difference between Ships of two Tire of Ordnance, and one Tire, as Master Burrell would have them. In the next place he makes a long Narration of the Sally-Fleet, where Cap∣tain Rainsborow was Commander, and saith, He findes in his Iournall these words, (We did give them chase all day, and at night we lost them:) which great deficiency (saith he) renders the Navie to be in a contemptible condition. Ans. Now let any Sea-man judge, whether Captain Rainshorow's Fleet could be in a fit condition, to chase light and clean Vessels that came out of Sally that night, when he had been two Moneths from England, and grown foule, and four Months Victuals in: Besides, those small Vessels which he chased, were (when he first saw them) two Leagues from him, which was a long chase to fetch up, and would hold a good Sailor chasing all day: Besides, if the Men of War had contemned them, (as Master Burrell saith,) why did they run from them, and would not fight? For by their running away, it is evident they were not contem∣ned, but feared: And yet he confesseth, that Fleet performed better Ser∣vice, then Englands Navie did in 44 years before. In the next place, (because we will touch onely what concerns our selves) Master Burrell discovers where the fault hath been, That the Navie hath not been reformed, and how the Right Honourable the Earl of Warwick, hath been misled by the Officers of the Navie, and the Brethren of the Trinity-house, who should have advised his Lordship to make choice of nimble Ships for Warlike Service: & that if the Brethren of the Trinity-house were so knowing as they seem, and so well affected as they ought, they should have sent forth for their own Adventure, one Ship and one Pinace, that should have sailed as nim∣bly as the Queens Ship: Such an example (saith he) peradventure would have moved the dull Officers, to hearken to the reducing of part of the Navie into a serviceable posture for these times, and to make choice of better Ships, which they have hired at dearer Rates. For Answer thereunto, We wonder much at the boldnesse of this sick∣brained man, that he should question the judgement of that noble Earl to be misled by us, as if his Lordship were not a Sea-man himself, to discern what is fit to be done, for the making of fit and nimble Ships for Service, better then Master Burrell, who scarce ever saw salt water, and conse∣quently never saw Service. And for the affection of the Trinity-house, we are confident, that divers of that Corporation, have set out many Ships
and Pinaces, for the Publike, in these distracted times, to their great losse and hinderance, as some of the Members of the honourable House of Commons can witnesse: but never heard that Master Burrell, nor his As∣sociates, set out any Ship or Pinace, in defence of the Parliament of Eng∣land, since these Wars began. And for the reducing of the Navie into such a posture as Master Burrell would have it; we hope never to be guil∣ty of so great a disservice to this Kingdom: And although Master Bur∣rell saith, we have made bad choice of Ships, and at dear rates, to serve the State; we shall make it appear to the honourable Houses, that they have been the best Merchants Ships in this Kingdom, and taken up at no other rates, then hath been given long before we came in Office, in the most peaceable times. In Folio 4, Master Burrell quarrels with the Trinity-house, and talks of Toles and fair Immunities coming in by the industrious Sea-men, and chalks them out their duty to take care for the common Sea-men, and not to suffer thousands of them in discontent to run out of the Kingdom. Ans. As for the Toles and Immunities, which the Trinity-house re∣ceive, they receive it with one hand, and pay it with the other, to the wid∣dow and fatherlesse of that Corporation, and to such as have received wounds and hurts, in the Parliaments and Merchants Service; for which they have two pence a voyage out of every common Sea-man, and no more if the voyage be three years long; yet the malice of Master Burrell would make the world beleeve, the Trinity-house receives much, when indeed their whole comings in (since these distracted times) doth not re∣leeve half the poor belonging to that Corporation. And for the common Sea-men, they need not be discontented, having had an Augmentation of four shillings in a Moneth more then ever any King or Queen in England gave them, besides other Immunities granted them by the Parliament: Neither do we beleeve that any are gone over, except such as are Malig∣nants and Enemies to the State, which are better out of the Kingdom, then in it. In the next place, he roves by way of Multiplication, in which, it seems, he is not skilfull, for instead of 500, he saith, the Officers of the Navie sent out their Prest-masters into Suffolk and Essex, to presse 900 Sea-men, and out of the River of Thames, 200 Water-men; but at the day of their appearing, of all that number, there appeared at Chatham but 224, whereof 124 were Water-men: and then makes his Inference, as if there were a scarcity and un∣willingnesse in Sea-men, and Water-men, to the Service of the Parlia∣ment. To which we Answer, That we did send out Prest-masters to the fore∣said places for 500 men, and not for 900, (as Master Burrell falsely saith) to the end we might not make a scarcity of men in this City for the Mer∣chant-Ships, in regard we were to set out a Fleet of 6000 men, whereas in
time past our predecessors for such Fleets, never prest lesse then 2000 men in the Countrey: yet such was the willingnesse of the Sea-men and Wa∣ter-men, to serve the Parliament, that the Ships are all mann'd long since, and at Sea; and we writ our Letters down to the Prest-masters to stay their hand; and of those that were pressed, came to Chatham (as appears under the Clerk of the Checks hand) 358 men, besides Water-men. By this the honourable Houses of Parliament may perceive the malice of this Gentleman, who not onely strives to blast your faithfull Servants, but as much as in him lies, seeks to bring the honourable Houses in a dislike with the common Sea-men, that so some rigid courses may be taken against those that hitherto have done them faithfull Service. In the next place, he falls foul of the Ship that carried over the Queens Maje∣stie, and inserts some words in Captain Battens Letter to the Parliament in these words; If my life and all the Kingdom had lain at Stake, I could not prevent her going over, for (saith he) the Ship that carried her, sailes two foot for my one. Then he makes his inference, and would have Captain Batten speak in his own language, as if he would have said (saith he) that other Na∣tions can make nimble Ships, but England is grown dull, and must be conten∣ted with sluggish and unserviceable Ships. Then he further addes, that if the Parliament had spent every year a million of Pounds, they that have wasted one million in three years, would not of themselves have endevoured to build or purchase one Ship or Pinace fo nimble as the Queens Ship. Ans. By this your Honours may perceive, he still hammers upon one Anvill, that is, as much as in him lies, to disparage the Navie-Royall, and to infuse into Strangers minds how unserviceable they are, that so he might blast the honour and reputation of the whole Navie, which hath been and is both famous and terrible to all Nations; and onely for this cause, that so great a Ship as the Saint Andrew, being foul at that time, could not fetch up a clean tallowed Frigate, new come out of Port, having the ad∣vantage of the wind, and being a speciall Sailor, and fitted for that pur∣pose to carry away the Queen. And for the spending of so much money, we know it is far short of that Sum; yet thus much we dare aver, that if these times be compared with precedent times when such Fleets have been set forth, the honourable Houses will find by the Accompts, that ne∣ver more frugality was used, then since the Parliament had the Navie in their hands. In the next place he saith, he was unexpectedly nominated a Commissioner for the Sale of Prizes and Prize-goods, and saith, he would have attended the Service faithfully; but at his entrance into that trust, he was unfitly opposed in the Sale of a nimble Pinace, which by a strong hand was estranged from the Parliament, without Candle-light: and being so opposed, he was much dis∣couraged, because he knew himself best able to serve the Parliament; and thereupon desisted, and came no more amongst them.
Answer. That it is true, he was nominated a Commissioner for Prizes, and Prize-goods, but not unexpectedly, for he expected 300. l. per annum, but after he had sat two or three dayes with us, and heard that we were to re∣ceive nothing but our labour for our pains: truly he then very unfitly left us, and never sat more amongst us. And for being opposed in the sale of a nimble Pinace, which by a strong hand was estranged from the Parliament; we wonder that all this time he hath not discovered it; that so those persons may be punished according to their demerits: and therefore we humbly de∣sire the honourable houses of Parliament, to cause this businesse to be exami∣ned; and that Master Burrell do discover what Pinace that was, and who it was that estranged her from the Parliament. In the next place, Master Burrell saith, That before and since that time some nimble Ships and many Pinaces have been taken, but most of them by disasters; and if those Ships and Pinaces had been contrived into Men of War, and set out in the room of those sluggish Ships which he complains of, the Parliament would have been much better served, with the saving half of that vast charge which hath been spent at Sea; yet saith he, it is certain the best of those Ships and Pinaces, have been estranged from the Parliament, which makes the abuse the greater, and therefore makes a quere to examine what price was paid the Parliament for Plunkets Ship. Ans. It seems now Master Burrell will confesse that some nimble Ships and Pinaces have been taken by the Parliament Ships, but yet to eclipse the taking of them, he saith, Most of them were taken by disasters, which we con∣fesse to be true; for it was a disaster befell them that were taken. And as for those ships that were taken, they that were good Sailors, and fit to be made men of Warre were fitted and equipped, and are now in the service of the Parliament to the number of seven good Ships, and sixteen Frigates, and not estranged from the Parliament, as Master Burrell sets forth, and doubt∣lesse will save charges, in regard the Parliament payes not fraight, though not half the charge, as Master Burrell saith: And as for Captain Plunkets Ship, if Master Burrell had inquired of Master Morris Thomson, amongst other things he would have told him that she was stranded about Arundell by five States-men of warre, and seized on by Sir William Wallers army, and condemned in the Admiraltie as Prize to Master Thompson and others for losses received by the Dunkirkers, so that as we conceive nothing was due to the Parliament; yet we humbly desire the honourable Houses, to examine Master Burrell, because he saith, It is certain that the best of those Ships and Pinaces were estranged, that he may declare in whose hands those Ships and Pinaces are, that so the Parliament may be righted, and the offenders receive condigne punishment. In the next place in his old ridiculous strain, he falls a praising of Plunkets Ship for failing, although he never saw her sail, and dispraising of the great new Frigate before he knows what she wil be, as he doth all the rest of the Navie:
Then he falls to telling of a story, and saith, he believes that all the Ships in the Navie in three years have not taken so many Prizes, as Plunkets Ship hath taken in these two years, and that some of those Prizes were very rich, but by estranging that Ship of Plunkets, the Parliament hath lost all those Prizes. Ans. Your Honours may perceive what Master Burrells intentions are by his language; that is, still to dishonour the Royall Navie, calling them slug∣gish, and praising of Flunkets Frigate for a nimble Saylor, when there is twentie sail of Frigates and Ships now in the Parliament service, that fail as well, and many of them better. And whereas he falsely saith, that Plunkets Ship hath taken more Prizes in two years, then the Parliament Ships have taken in three; we shall referre your Honours to the Collectours for Prizes, and Prize-goods; and they will tell your Honours that the Parliament Ships have taken a hundred and ten Merchant Ships, and thirty nine Men of War have been taken and sunk, which had his Majesties Commission; besides ma∣ny Spaniards, French, and Dutch that have been delivered back at the earn∣nest request of the Ambassadours. And we never heard of more then six Ships taken by Captain Plunckets Frigate, and most of them being Merch∣ant Ships. In the next place, he begins a large discourse, that in November last, he un∣derstood that there was three Frigates to be built for the State, and that he was designed to build one; and was shewed a paper from a principall Ship-wright, which be had received from the Officers of the Navie, directing him how he should build one of the Frigats, that when she was built, she would never do any good service: but saith Mr. Burrell, that which troubled the Ship-wright most, was the price; for (saith he) if they give a slight price, they must expect slight Frigates. Then (saith Master Burrell) I took the paper into consideration, and I acquainted the Ship-wright with my dislike of it, and told him I would move the Lords of the Admiraltie so to order the businesse, that those Ship-wrights that did build them, should build without direction from the Officers of the Navy: and that they should have an indifferent price for them, which was that which Mr. Burrell aimed at, because he would build one: Then he sets forth the man∣ner and form of his Petition to the Lords of Admiralty in two sides of paper, and tells their Lordships of ten Whelps built by the direction of Sir Iohn Penning∣ton; and rakes up the ashes of his dead body, and saith, the builders were so misled by him, that all those vessels proved sluggish. Then he layes down positive rules and directions, how the Frigates should be built, as punctually, as Archime∣des the Mathematician, but still hath a care of his interest, and desires that the Builders might not be disheartned in the price of them. Then he propounds 300l. to be deposited, that is to say, to each builder an 100 l. and the Frigates to sail into Downs, and from thence to the Isle of Wight, and then round about the Island, and so to Ports-mouth; and that Frigate that cometh in there first, to be repu∣ted the best Frigate for service, and that the Ship-wright that built her, should have the 300 l. for his service. Then (saith he) before I offered these pro∣positions
to their Lordships: I conferred with Master Pet, and Master Castle, whether they were willing to build two of the Frigates, upon the forementioned tearms, or not, and if they would build each of them one, be would build the third: So when I found (saith he) Master Pet and Master Castle to like my propositions, I presented them to the Honourable Earle of Warwick, and Lord Say, and proved before their Lordships, that if the Frigates were built, accord∣ing to the directions of the Officers of the Navie, the Frigates would prove unser∣viceable to the State: But (saith Master Burrell) this took no effect. Soon after came forth other directions worse then the first, That one of the intended Frigates should be built 70 Tons bigger then the other two, whereas by my propo∣sitions they should be all of equall burden: And secondly, Master Pet Iunior, should build the bigger, and Master Pet senior the two lesser Frigates, by which subtile plot (saith he) all emulation was laid aside. For answer to the needfull, of what Master Burrell hath falsely suggested: In the first place, your Honours may perceive what Master Burrell drives at: the first is a good price, not for the good of the Kingdome, but for his own ends: because (saith he) I was designed by their Lordships to build one. In the next place, he would brand the Commissioners of the Navie, in giving di∣rections for the building of unserviceable Frigates, when indeed they gave no directions for them, but gave the Master Ship-wright order, to draw out their own dimensions, which accordingly they did, which we have ready to produce under their hands: And if the ten Whelps built many years since proved deficient, it doth not follow these Frigates now a building, should prove no better Saylors. But Master Burrell in that strikes at the Com∣missioners of the Navie, wounding us through Sir Iohn Penningtons sides, as if these Frigates would be unserviceable, because he falsely suggests, we gave directions therein: And for his propositions to try their Sailing round about the Ile of Wight to Portsmouth is so ridiculous that we need not trouble our selves about it, for all Sea-men know that there can be no triall of Ships in that place, the tydes running counter, and one Ship may be in the tyde, and the other out, which may make great difference, and indeed lies more in the skill of the Pilot then in the Ship, in observing the setting of the tides, and consequently to take the advantage of it; by which your Honours may per∣ceive how Master Burrell will undertake to tell your Honours, that which he understands not. And for his proposition to the Lords to build those Frigates by the great, their Honours utterly refused it, knowing it a dishonour to the Parliament to build Ships out of his Majesties yard, having the best Ship-wrights in the Kingdome to perform that service; and one, who had given such testimony of his Art and skill in building of a Frigate, for the right Honourable the Earle of Warwick, that a better Saylor is not in England, nor Dunkirk: but the Lords told Master Burrell, if he would build one to trie his skill, he should have his Majesties yard at Portsmouth, to build in, with timber, plancks and materialls needfull; which Master Bur∣rell refused to do, and saith, it was a dishonour cast upon him, and for no
other cause, but that he could not build one by the great, that so he might get two or three hundred pound by the Parliament: And if the other Ship∣wrights are discontended (as Master Burrell saith) because they did not build them by the great (as we believe they are not) yet we marvell that Master Burrell should suggest, that Mr. Pet the builder, acts against his affection, or desires, being the King and Parliaments servant; unlesse he would bring the Parliament in dislike with the Ship-wrights, and so to bring them under a Cloud, as he hath endeavoured to eclipse the Trinity-house. And as for the subtile plot (as Master Burrell calls it) in causing Master Pet Junior, to build the great Frigate and Master Pet senior to build the two lesser; it is false and untrue, for Master Pet Junior, builds one of the small ones, and Master Pet senior, builds the other small one; and this we did to the end they might use the utmost of their skill to try who could build the best Saylor. And because we had experience of the good performance of Master Pet senior, in building the Constant Warwick, he was appointed to build the great Frigate likewise: By all which your Honours may perceive, how he hath falsly traduced the Commissioners of the Navie, the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Trinitie-house; the principall men of the Corporation of the Ship-wrights; and all he drives at, is by his unjust aspersions to bring the Parliament and them at ods, that so he might accomplish his own ends. And thus we hope, we have given your Honours satisfaction in the building of the Frigates. In the next place, being the moneth of May, he still sings his old tune, in dis∣praising Englands Navie, which Master Burrell would have as weak as his brain; and tells strange Stories of the mungrell Dunkirk, the contempti∣ble Irish, and the insulting Dutch, that they will not honour the Parliaments Ships nor acknowledge them Master of the Seas: And then by way of Inference, brings in his Maiesties horses as fat as himself; how they were tired being led down to Barwick with empty saddles, and then compares the dead with the li∣ving, in these words; As these Royall horses were clogged with too much flesh, even so the Royall Navie is clogged with too many men; too much victuals, too many pieces of Ordnance, to much timber, and too much plank; and then ads further to make the Royall Navy more contemptible, he saith, the Ship-wrights were commanded to make the Ships now in the Navy, Ships for shaw, as well as for service, and to carry many pieces of Ordnance never to be used, but at Feasts, Salutations, and Landings. The example (saith Master Burrell) is lively in the Royall-Soveraign, an admirable Ship for costly Buildings, and cost in keep∣ing; and which ads to the miracle, the Royall Ship (saith he) is never to be used for the Kingdoms good; And that the Navy for swift sayling in Queen Elisabeths dayes, was famous, and farre exceeding those times. To which we answer; As for the honour of the Narrow-Seas, it hath been kept in as much honour and reputation as ever; witnesse the right Ho∣nourable the Earle of Warwick, who hath commanded all Ships, where
ever his Honour came, to render due obedience: and Captain Owen in the Guardland, commanding a Squadron of foure or five Ships under the right Honourable Earle of Warwick, was sent out by his Lordship to seek out the Kings Men of Warre. and all other that transported Armes or Ammuni∣tion, to his Majesties Quarters, and being in the Channell, came in amongst sixtie sail of Hollanders, whereof five or six Men of Warre; and did not onely make them all strike, but sent Captain Gilson in the Warwick Fri∣gate, who took out of the midst of the Fleet the Tiger of Roterdam, and brought her away in despight of all those Men of Warre, and sent her to London: The next was Captain Batten, who being alone in the Constant-Reformation off of Beachy, met with the Vice-Admirall of Holland and foure great Ships more; and although they suffered him to shoot divers shot at them, before they would strike, yet when they saw his resolution, they lowered their top-sails, and did homage. Captain Ellis in the Providence, and Captain Thomas in the Warwick Frigate, commanded White the Vice-Admirall, and three more, to strike in Torbay, which they did accordingly, though with some shot before they did their duty. And for the Royall horses being tired in being led down to Barwick, it is not so with the Roy∣all Ships, for they are never weary with sailing: And for too many Men, Ordnance and victuals, we know other Princes Ships that carry more, and yet not of their burthen: And as for Timber and Plank, we shall refer that to the judgement of the best Sea-men, and Ship-wrights in the Kingdome. But we wonder much at the impudence of this Gent. who dare fay, the Royall Ships of the Navie were built for show, and carry many pieces of Ordnance never to be used, but at Feasts, Salutations, and Landings; when there is not one piece of Ordnance in any Ship of the Navie, but is both usefull and serviceable for a defensive and offenfive Warre: And to bring the Navie into a more contemptible condition, he makes the Royall-Sove∣raign, (the best Man of Warre in Christendome) to be incapable of doing service for the Kingdomes good. When Captain Rainsborow, whom Ma∣ster Burrell confesseth in his time, was the most eminent Commander in this Kingdom, had the triall of her in the channell of England, and at his return reported to his Majestie, that he never set his foot in a better conditioned Ship in all his life, And as for her Force, she is not inferiour to the greatest Ship in Christendome. And for the Ships in Queen Elisabeths dayes, so famous for Sailing; this Kingdom was never better furnished with good Saylors and Ships for defence, then at this present, farre exceeding those times. By these and the precedent Articles, your Honours may perceive how under a specious show of a well-affected man to the State, he covertly by his Calumnies, seeks to bring the Navie into a contemptible Condition; not onely in the opinion of this Nation, but also of Strangers; that so they may be incouraged to attempt that, which they never hitherto durst put in practice.
In the next place, Master Burrell propounds how the Royall Navie with a lit∣tle charge, may be reduced into a serviceable postare, and into such a Warlike po∣sture, as will inable the Parliament to recover and maintain the Soveraigntie of the Seas, as in the Raign of Queen Elisabeth of happy memory. Answer. It is strange that Master Burrell should know more, then all the Ship-wrights in the Kingdom being a man that many years hath had no practice, and consequently lesse experience. And as for the little charge in reducing the Navie, the cost that will be spent in cutting down one of the first and second Rate-Ships and finishing them, will build the hull of a ship of the fourth Rate that shall carry thirty pieces of Ordnance, that will do more service then they will do when they are cut down to one Tire of Ord∣nance; for the reasons given in our first Article. And as for the Sove∣raignty of the Seas, it is true, that since these distracted times, the Hollan∣ders have been very insolent in wearing their Flags, as they have formerly done: But such hath been the valour and courage of our Commanders, that as often as they have been met withall, they have been compelled to do their dutie. In folio 9. Master Burrell saith, that when the Royall Navie shall be reduced into a serviceable posture, the Parliament may save a fourth part of that vast charge, which hath been spent at Sea, since these distracted times. To which we answer, We do not know what Master Burrell calls redu∣cing the Navie, but we conceive it is rather a destruction of the Navie, to cut down the first, second and third Rate-Ships, which are walls of Brasse to defend this Kingdom: And as for saving a fourth part of the charge, that hath been spent at Sea since these distracted times, we are yet to learn; although we have constantly followed Marine affairs these thirty years, and upwards, how ever we desire that Master Burrell will give reasons how the fourth part of the charge may be saved, and such Fleets maintained at Sea, as have been set forth these foure yeares past, without dimunition of the strength and glory of the Navie. We come now to Master Burrells last quere, where he desires the Honourable House of Commons to examine what the Kings party would have attempted, that they have not freely effected; have they not (saith he) been supplied from be∣yond Seas with Ordnance, Armes, and Ammunition, and imported and exported eminent Traytours? and have not both Irish, and Turks, landed in this Kingdom, and carried away Men, Women and Children? Answer. Although it be true that this quere belongs not wholly to us to answer our Office being no other then to act by the Parliament, and Com∣mittee of Lords and Commons of the Admiralties Order to equip, victu∣all and Manne the Ships, destinated for the Guard of the Sea; as also to in∣form their Lordships of the repair of Ships Docks and Houses in his Maje∣sties severall yards, &c. We thought it our duty to give an answer in the just vindication of those Noble Lords and Commons of the Committe of
the Admiraltie, who sit at the Helm; that there hath been as much care taken to prevent the landing of Irish, the transportation and importing of Traytors, The bringing in of Ammunition, as the wit of man could invent; and truly if Dunkirk being a small Town, in one year took from the Hol∣landers, notwithstanding the great Fleets they yearly set out, 80 Sail of Ships: how much more might the Kings men of Warre, being assisted by the French, Hollanders, and Dunkirkers, who seemed to be the Parliaments friends, carry in Armes, Traitors and Ammunition, into the Kings Quar∣ters? yet they paid dear for it; For although some escaped yet many were taken, witnesse a States Man of Warre, going into Scarborough with Pow∣der and Armes; The King of Denmarks Ship bound in for Newcastle, laden with Armes, and divers French men, and Hollanders bound into Bristoll, Falmouth, Dartmouth, Scarborough, and Newcastle, with Armes and other provisions, which the Collectors for Prize-goods can certifie, one and other, to the number of 110. Sail, besides many Ships with his Majesties Com∣mission. And as for the Turks landing in Cornwall, they landed in his Ma∣jesties Quarters and not in the Parliaments; and if Posts and Intelligence might have gone along that Coast, they might have been prevented, the Parliament Ships being at the seige of Plymouth, in defending that Town, but never heard of it untill too late, and that from his Majesties Quarters. And thus we hope, we have answered Master Burrells false aspersions and calumnies, cast upon the Right Honourable the Lords and Commons of the Admiralty, the Commissioners of the navie; the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Trinity-house, with the principall members of the corporation of Ship-wrights, and all for his own ends, to get into imploy∣ment.
The ANSWER of the COMMISSIONERS of the NAVIE, to the Generall Charge, intituled ENGLANDS OUTGAURD, or ENGLANDS ROYALL NAVIE, surveyed and lamented by ANDREWES BURRELL Gentleman, sometimes ser∣vant in the Navie. IN the first place, Master Burrell saith, that there is not one Ship in the Navie that hath taken any one of the Kings Men of War, since these Warres began; and that the greatest Commanders which the Parliament hath sent forth; as Admiralls, Vice-Admi∣ralls, and Rear-Admiralls, are so farre from subduing any of the Kings Men of Warre, that there is not any one of them that have shot one shot in anger, since these distracted Wars began, though many hundred thousands of pounds have been spent in guarding the Seas. Ans. That is false, and scandalous against that noble Lord, and worthy Gentlemen that have commanded the Parliament Ships; for we shall make it appear, that since these Wars began, the Parliament have taken and sunk 39 Ships and Pinaces, Men of War, who had his Majesties Commis∣sions: the names of the Ships, with their Captains that took them, for better satisfaction, we have here under inserted. Viz. Captain Batten, in the Saint George, took the Bonaventure, Ad∣mirall of Ireland; the Swallow, Vice-Admirall; and the Robert-Frigate: Captain Swanley, in the Leopard, took the Globe, Admirall of Bristoll; the Providence, Vice-Admirall; Discovery, Rear-Admirall; and the Henrietta Pinnace Regis: Captain Smith, in the Swallow, took the Fel∣lowship, and Hart-Frigate: Captain Pecket, in the May-flower,
took the Providence Regis: Captain Thomas, in the eighth Whelp, took the May-flower, Admirall of Falmouth, and chased on shore her Vice-Admirall and Rear-Admirall at Brest; also he sunk a Frigate of Sir Nicholas Crispes: Captain Thomas, Captain Ellison, and Captain Whitty, being all in company, took one Man of War: Captain Ellison, in the Providence, sunk a Man of War of Foy, and also the Fortune of Dunkirk: Captain Stansby, in the Providence, and Captain Rew, in the Robert, took Brown Bushell's Frigate, called the Cavendish: Captain Pet, in the Mari-rose, took the Roebuck-Frigate of Dunkirk: Captain Cop∣pin, in the Grey-hound, took the Constant, Captain Skinner Commander of her: Captain Clark, in the Josline, took the Swan-Frigate, &c. Cap∣tain Haddock, in the John, took a States Man of War laden with pow∣per Regis: going to Scarborough; and also the Salvator: Captain Beddall, in the Hector, took the Black-horse, and Captain, Denton's Ship, and two Men of War of Scarborough; and likewise an Ostend Man of War, bound for Scarborough: Captain Gattensby, in the Prosperous, took a Danish Man of War laden with Arms: Captain Stansby, in the Provi∣dence, took the Jennet, a Dunkirk Man of War: Captain Gilson, in the Constant Warwick, took the Royalist: Captain Cox, in the Royalist, took a Dogger-Boat of four Guns: Captain Pilgrim, in the Sampson, took a Dogger-Boat: The Irish Squadron, took the Welcome-Pink, Encrease: Tryall-Pink, Charles Trough, Peter-Frigate, and the William and John; Captain Wodward, in the Roebuck, took a Dunkirk-Frigate of Falmouth; which Frigate is now in the Service, as most of the rest are. Besides at least 110 Merchant-Ships, trading in and out of those Ports in defection to the Parliament with Ammunition. Money, and Goods, that have been taken and made Prize by the Parliament-Ships, to a large Sum; and many that have been restored to well-affected persons; and divers that on the earnest request of the Spanish French, and Dutch Em∣bassadours, that have been delivered back unto them. By which it doth appear that some shot have been made in anger, and not onely at Sea but it is well known to the Parliament, that the Navie hath not had the least share in preserving of Plymouth, the Isle of Wight, Hampton. Portsmouth, Weymouth, Lyme, Hull, Wales, and Ireland, and divers other places which otherwise had been in the hands of the Kings Forces at this time: Neither must we omit the great service done in the Downs, in Anno 1642, where, by the wisdom and valour of the Right Honourable Robert Earl of Warwick, Admirall in the James, Captain William Batten, Vice-Admirall in the Saint George, and a mixture of Sea-men, Commanders of the best of his Majesties Ships, then in the Downs; At which time there was a Message sent from his Majesty, by the hands of Sir John Pennington and Master Villiers, directed to the Earl of Warwick, therein requiring the delivery up of the Fleet into the
hands of Sir John Pennington, appointed by his Majesty to be Admirall: This Message being spred amongst the Commanders and Sea-men in the Fleet, it invited the greater part of the Gentlemen, who commanded di∣vers of those Ships, then present, to submit unto his Majesties Message, and to stand upon their guard, refusing all commands, the Earl of Warwick laid upon them in obedience to the Parliament. The names of the Captains and Ships on either side, are hereafter expressed. Commanders that submitted to His MAjESTIES Message. Sir John Mince, Rear-Admirall in the Victory. Captain Fog. in the Reformation. Captain Slingsby, in the Guard-land. Captain Burley, in the Anthelope. Captain Wake, in the Expedition. Captain Fox, in the Lyon. Captain Hill, in the tenth Whelp. Commanders who continued in obedience to KING and PARLIAMENT. The Right Honourable Robert Earl of Warwick, Admirall in the James. Captain Batten, Vice-Admirall in the Saint George. Captain Thomas Trenchfield, in the Vnicorn. Captain George Hatch, in the Mary. Captain Richard Swanley, — Charles. Captain Brian Harrison, — Vauntguard. Captain Richard Owen, — Entrance. Captain Henry Bethell — Mari-rose. Captain Martin, — Martin. Captain Thomas Ashley — Sampson. But it pleased God, that by the integrity of the Sea-men (who faith∣fully stood to that Noble Lord,) the Commanders of such Ships that re∣volted from the Parliament, were quickly suppressed and reduced to his Lordships obedience, who placed other Captains in their room: which was a very great Service; and indeed (under God) the protection of the Parliament and Kingdom: for had his Majesty been possessed of that
Fleet, he would thereby have been Master of the Seas, and blockt up the City of London in their Relief and Trade: By which all men may see, that the many hundred thousands of pounds, which (Master Burrell saith) hath been spent, is not wasted in vain, as he maliciously sug∣gesteth. In the second place, Master Burrell saith; The Officers of the Navie have been advised how they may make part of the Navie able to subdue the Kings Men of War, with the saving of one 4th part of that vast charge which hath been spent at Sea: but in opposition to any good advice, they will not be moved to reduce one of the old Ships for a triall; and though the Kingdom perish, they will persist in deluding the State, commending and supporting the Title of a Royall Navie, when in truth it is unserviceable, I beleeve I may safely say, contemptible, in the esteem of Strangers. Ans. We cannot but wonder at the imbecillity of this man, who con∣trary to the opinion of the ablest Sea-men and Ship-wrights of this King∣dom, would cut down the best Ships in the Navie, and make them nimble Frigates; as if the three Frigates now building, and near twenty more now in the Service, were not (by Gods assistance) able to subdue half a dozen which are left untaken of his Majesties Men of War, and the most of them of so small force, that they are not considerable, if any of the Parliaments Frigates meet with them. And for saving of one 4th part of the charge, we beleeve, if he bring the Navie into such a posture as he pretends, from Ships to Frigates, he may very well save one 4th part of the charge, both in men, Victuals, and Ordnance: But we desire to know of this Dull Carpenter, how he will do this without disabling the Navie: And for supporting the Title of a Rovall Navie, we dare presume to aver and maintain, and that in despite of Malignants, and all Enemies to the King and Parliament, That no Prince in Christendom hath so many brave Ships for a defensive and offensive War, as the Kingdom of England hath at this present; having of the first rank 4 Ships, that carry from 50 to 80 peeces of Ordnance, 12 Ships of the second rank that carry from 44 to 50 peeces of Ordnance, 9 Ships of the third rank that carry from 36 to 44 peeces of Ordnance, and of the fourth rate, 3 Ships which carry from 24 to 32, 2 Ships of the fifth rate carrying from 16 to 20 peeces of Ordnance, 3 of the sixth rate carrying from 10 to 16 peeces of Ordnance, besides 20 Ships and Fri∣gats which the Parliament hath bought and taken. And if these Ships ap∣pear contemptible in the eyes of Strangers, we shall refer it to the judge∣ment of any moderate man: As also whether it be fit, that Master Bur∣rell should publish to all Strangers, That the Navie of this Kingdom is in an unserviceable condition; when it doth appear to all men, that it was never better managed, nor in a better posture, then now it is. In the next place, Master Burrell saith; The Officers of the Navie do know that the Navie hath not performed any good Service for the Kingdom, since
these distracted Wars began; yet such is their plotting, that they will continue it in an unserviceable condition. Ans. The Officers of the Navie do know, that the Navie hath performed many good Services for the Kingdom, as it is set forth in our Answer to the first Article: And our plotting hath never been otherwise, then for upholding and maintaining the honour of the Navie. In the fourth place, Master Burrell saith; That the Officers of the Navie being thus resolved to accomplish their own ends, they suffer the Royall Navie to lie rotting at Chatham and Portsmouth, at a dear rate, a rate that exceeds all former Presidents; and that they hire the worst of Mer∣chant-Ships and Colliers, to serve in their room: and that he is hold to say, they are more sluggish then any Ships in the Navie; and some of those Ships are belonging to the Officers of the Navie, and some to Parliament∣men. Ans. To which we Answer, That it is false; for the Ships of the Navie were never better repaired, upheld, and maintained, then since they were in the hands of the Parliament, as by our particular Answer hereafter shall appear: And as for their lying in Harbour, and Merchant-Ships take up to serve in their room, it will appear that there hath been yearly employed at Sea, as many of the Ships of the Navie, as was held in the wisedom of the Parliament fit, for the number of men assigned for the yearly guard of the three Kingdoms: which men, had they been employed in the Ships of the Navie, most of them being great Ships, would have contracted a vast charge, and not have spread sufficiently to guard the three Kingdoms: For example; There hath been employed yearly from 60 to 70 Sails; viz, upon the Coast of Ireland and Lancashire, 25 Ships; for the guard of Severn and Wales, 5; for the guard of the Channell of England, 15 Ships; for the guard of Guernsey, and those Islands, 3; for the Downs to attend Convoys, 8; and for the guarding of the North Coast, and Kingdom of Scotland, 12 Ships. By which it will appear, there is a necessity of hiring Merchant-Ships, in regard the Na∣vie consisted but of 32 Ships when we came in Office; and the hiring of Merchant-Ships is no other then what hath been usuall in all times of War, time out of mind: And if the whole Navie should be year∣ly employed; besides the vast charge it would contract, it would be too great an adventure for the Kingdom to undergo: for if the Fleet should by casualty of Weather, or by accident of War, miscarry, there would be no reserve left to make another Fleet, and so the whole Kingdom ex∣posed to danger; whereas if six or eight of the greatest Ships be left in Harbour, with the assistance of thirty or fourty of the Merchant-Ships, (which may be alwayes had in the River of Thames,) they will make a sufficient Fleet to encounter any Force that shall come against them: Be∣sides,
the Merchant-Ships do cost the Kingdom nothing near the charge that the great Ships of the Navie stand in; and yet they run the adventure of their Ships; Ordnance, and Ammunition: If in case the great Ships of the Navie be employed in the room of Merchants, the State bears the adventure, which in case of losse of a second Rate-Ship, will amount to 25000 pounds. We say not this to discourage the Parliament from building of more nimble Frigates, which may lessen the hiring of Merchant-Ships, if there should be the like occasion; but to let your Honours know, there hath been nothing lost in taking up Merchant-Ships, in the room of the great Ships of the Navie. And further, if all the Navie should be constantly employed yearly at Sea, they would be so out of repair in two or three years, that the Sea would be left unguar∣ded by them, and so be forced to hire all Merchant-Ships. And as for such Ships Master Burrell saith belong to Parliament-men, and the Offi∣cers of the Navie; we refer you to our Answer to Master Burrells parti∣culars. In his fifth Article, Master Burrell affirmeth, That those Captains that have been most valiant, have been discouraged; and those that have deserved punishment, preferred to places of trust; and in particular, Captain Man, with others. Ans. In Answer to this charge; because we will not reiterate things twice, as in some things we are forced to do, in regard of Master Burrells wandring progresse; we shall herein refer our selves to his particular charge, wherein we doubt not but to give your Honours satis∣faction. In the next place, he makes a long discourse of Services done by Captain Man and Captain Gilson, in two nimble Frigates, against Mucknell in a great Ship; and makes his inference, That if two nimble Frigates can destroy so great a Ship as Mucknells, with 42 peeces of Ordnance, there is no Ship in the World able to encounter a Ship of the second rank, being fortified with 20 Demi-canon, every shot weighing 32 pounds. Ans. For Answer thereunto: It is false that those 2 Frigates, although accompanied with another good Ship of 20 peeces of Ordnance, all three having 62 Guns, and manned with 280 men, yet did destroy Mucknells Ship, she not being of the force of a third rate Ship in the Navie; But rather foiled them all, and forced them to leave her; by which means, the next day, she went for Silly, where in going in (for want of a good Pilot) she was cast away: Whereby it doth appear, that Master Burrells Observation is grounded upon a false Principle; For if a Merchant-Ship was able to defend her self from three Frigates, armed with whole Culverin and Demi-culverin, and not with small Ordnance, (as Master Burrell saith,) much more might she have done against one Ship with one Tire of Ordnance: But on the contrary, had one of his
Majesties Ships, of the second or third rank, come up with Mucknell, for∣tified, as now they are, with two Tire of Ordnance; doubtlesse Muck∣nell must have submitted: And we do beleeve, That if any such Ship had been in view of Mucknell, she would have sailed as well as Mucknell's Ship, and not been liable to that foule aspersion of being sluggish, where∣with Master Burrell brands them. In the next place, Master Burrell saith, There is a want in the Fleet, of Pi∣stols, Pole-axes, Swords, and Fire-works. Ans. To which we Answer; It is not the duty of our Places to fur∣nish any Ammunition, but belongeth to the Officers of the Ordnance: yet we do verily beleeve, that for all such Arms as are usefull for service, are by them supplied; the rather for that we have heard no complaint from any Commander employed in any of the Kings Ships: but as for such Mer∣chant-Ships as are taken up by us, they are furnished with Pistols, Swords, Pikes, and all other Arms for War, fitting for defence and offence. In his eighth Article, Master Burrell reciteth the new Frigates, and would lay an aspersion on the Officers of the Navie, That they should give to the Master Ship-wrights Directions in the building of them; and that when they were built, they would not be so serviceable as they should be, the work being de∣stroyed before it be begun. Ans. What Master Burrell sets down in this Article, is false and un∣true, we having already set forth, by whose Directions these Frigates were built: and if they prove unserviceable, (as we beleeve the contrary,) yet they cannot be so bad as the Mari-rose, built by Master Burrell, being the most sluggish Ship in the Navie; which we have lately had in the Dock, and caused to be lengthened Aft, with other works done unto her, ende∣vouring to make her a serviceable Ship. And as for the work being de∣stroyed before it be begun, that seems to us a Paradox, and carrieth no more truth with it then what else he hath set forth. In his ninth Article, Master Burrell begins to tell his old Story with a piece of Non-sence, in these words: Vnlesse the Parliament do thus at an excessive charge, send many great sluggish Ships to Sea, the honour of the Sea is lost, and so lost, that it cannot be regained; and yet in a contradiction salves up the mat∣ter and saith; But by reducing the Navie into a serviceable posture for these times, into a nimble condition, with one Tire of Ordnance and no more, and some Drakes for close Fights, with this caution; the greater the Ship is, the greater the Ordnance, and number of men, as the Ship can well accommodate. Ans By the first part of Master Burrellls Non-sence, he would have sluggish Ships sent to Sea, or else the honour of the Sea is lost, but at last saith, That the Navie must be reduced into a serviceable posture for these times; as if the Navie were to be altered upon every turn of the Tide; and in stead of having the Navie maintained for the strength of the Kingdom
against all forraign Forces that should invade the Realm, he would bring them to one Tire of Ordnance, pretending to suppresse the Kings Men of War, which are no other then small Frigates, Dogger-Boats Sloops, and the like: and then indeed he would make Englands Navie contemptible, both at home and abroad. Then he layes down what manner of Ordnance he would have put into the first, second, third, and fourth Rate-Ships. Ans. For Answer thereunto: This Gentleman it seems would go about to teach Minerva, to instruct others, that know better then himself: And whereas he would have none but whole Canon, Demi-canon, whole Culverin and Demi-culverin, according to their severall ranks; we con∣ceive that the Ordnance of his Majesties Ships are already so well propor∣tioned and with such good advice, that there needs none or Master Bur∣relis Reformation. In the next place he saith, The common Sea-men are so grosly co∣zened of their thirds of Prize-goods, that many thousands have left the Kingdom; and those that remain, so dis-heartened, that no good Service can be expected. Ans Although this charge concerns not us, yet to our knowledge it is most false, as the Collectors for Prize-Goods will make it appear, when they shall be thereunto called. And for the many thousands of Sea-men that have left the Kingdom; this is as true as the rest: for we could never learn of any that deserted the Parliament, but such as have alwayes lived as Pirats and Robbers at Sea formerly; the Kingdom being better without such than to have them. The Gentlemans Conclusion is, That Ship that doth not sail well, cannot serve well; and that man that denieth this truth, and cannot shew a better remedy for a Reformation of the Navie, that man is wilfully ignorant, or a Traitor to the State. Ans In this particular we shall be brief, and conclude; He that sets forth falshoods and endevoureth to destroy the Navie, (being the Walls of the Kingdom,) and produceth no better reasons, is either grosly igno∣rant, or an Enemy to the Kingdom. And thus we have gone through Master Burrells false suggestions, scan∣dalous informations and notorious falshoods; and for the Vindication of our integrity, we humbly submit to the Justice of the High Court of Par∣liament.
The Answer of the COMMISSIONERS of the Navie, to the Particular Charge of Master ANDREWES BURRELL, ab∣stracted out of his Generall Charge. MAster Burrell in his first Charge, saith, That divers of his Maje∣sties Ships have been suffered to lie rotting in Harbour; as also foure of his Majesties Ships were lately condemned to be sold; yet such is the providence of the Officers of the Navie, that those rotten Ships are still continued, and do cost the Common-wealth, 1500. l. per annum, to keep them above water; and that by two other Ships, the State may save 1800. l. per annum, and neither weaken, nor dishonour the Navie. Answer. To which we answer, That it is false, and scandalous; for we shall make it plainly appear, That not onely those ships mentioned by him but the whole Navie is in a farre better condition, then when his Majesty left the Parliament. And first for the Soveraign; she was carved, graved, and trimmed, both under water, and above water, and made fit for the Kingdoms service, the last Summer. And that since his Majesties ab∣sence; there have been repaired in drie Dock, the Saint Andrew, Victory, Charles, Vnicorn, Vantguard, Constant, Convertine, Guard-land Bonaventure, Anthelope, Swallow, Mari-rose, and Warwick Frigate, besides the Triumph, Providence and Iohn in the Dock; which Ships when his Majestie left them, were all defective, and most of them unserviceable. And as for the Non∣such, Asserance, Saint Dennis, and Adventure, they were cast three years or more, before his Majesties departure from the Parliament; yet his Majesty would never suffer them to be sold, untill new Ships were built in their rooms. But the Parliament, at one instance, being informed of the yearly charge of those Ships, gave Order in October last, to put them to sale; which was done accordingly, but in regard the Winter was come, and the charge would be great to the buyer to bring them up to London, no man offered a penny for them; but now the time of year is come, and three new Frigates upon the stocks, and shortly to be lanched, we have put them to
sail. And for what other Ships, not herein mentioned, they are trimmed every year; and kept as well, as ever they were, since the Kingdom stood. And as for the two other Ships which Master Burrell mentions in the Na∣vie, in which 1800. l. per annum, may be saved, and neither weaken nor dis∣able the Navie; we confesse, That is a good service, if Master Burrell can make it good, and we desire the Honourable Houses, that he may give rea∣sons how it may be done, without weakening the Guard of the Navie. In the next place, he saith, That the May-flower is an old Ship, and hath for∣merly been a Collier, and desires to know how many Men of Warre she hath taken for the 18000. l. she hath received of the State. And that the John is an old slug∣gish Ship, and hath not taken one Prize, nor that her company have hopes to take any hereafter. And that the Nicholas is a very sluggish Ship; by which be would inferre, that the Parliament imployed none, but sluggish Ships. Answer, Concerning these worst of Merchants Ships, as Master Burrell is pleased to call them, the May-flower, John, and Nicholas: As for the May-flower, she hath been ever held a good sailer as most in the River, and of good force, insomuch, that she fetcht up, and fought with three Dunkirk Frigates in Seavern; and had taken them, if an unfortunate shot had not killed the Captain, by name Captain Cock: Besides many good ser∣vices done by her upon the coast of Ireland, both in the relief of Youghall, and taking Dingley Couch; she likewise took the Providence-Regis, in Humber, and after beat the enemy from a Fort upon Humber, and took their Ordnance. And as for the John, she is no Merchants Ship, but belongs to the State; yet when Captain Haddock was in her, she tooke a States Man of War, which was laden with Powder, Arms, and Merchants goods bound into Scarborough; which Powder and Arms were of great use to the Scot∣tish Army, when they came first into Sunderland; with other Ships laden with Iron, Deals, &c. all which were made use of by the said Army. And after Captain Zachary came into her, under God, the said Ship and her company had not the least share in taking in of Scarborough, in keeping the enemy from water, as also all relief by Sea, although attempted by the Kings Men of War; and in a skirmish on shore, the Captain lost his life. And as for the Nicholas since she hath been in Ireland, she hath done as good ser∣vice as any Ship whatsoever; although Master Burrell brand her, yet Cap∣tain Crowther the Vice-Admirall in his letter to us, desired that she might be continued in the last winters service, being an active Ship. And as for the 18000l. received for the May-flower, we think it is far short of that summe. Yet when victualls, wages, wear and tear, are deducted, there will no great matter remain for the Adventure, which remains yet unpaid, and due from the State; as likewise to all other Merchant Ships that are in the service; by reason of which we had much adoe to get a competent number of Ships, to serve for this Summers expedition. By which your Ho∣nours may perceive how Master Burrell seeks to disgrace the Merchants
Ships, as he hath done the Royall Navie: yea those Merchants Ships that have done the Parliament best service, as in his next Article will appear. In the third place, Master Burrell begins to racke his memory, and complains of divers other good Ships, and saith, they are Colliers, and calls them the worst of Ships; as the Hector, the Dragon, the Green-Dragon, the Hopefull Luke, and the Exchange. And that there were seven Dunkirk Frigates, offered to be sold to the Officers of the Navie, for lesse then 5000 l. But the Officers of the Navie refused them, and thought it better thrift to bestow 11000 l. upon three Frigates, and that when they arebuilt, (if they be built according to the directions given by the Officers of the Navie to the Master-Ship-wrights) he believes (as he doth all things else) that they will not be serviceable, as those of Dunkirk and (saith he) those Dunkirk Frigates so offered to this State, being encouraged by the King, and manned with discontented Sea-men for want of their thirds; have taken many Ships and goods from the Merchants of London, to an inestimable value. Ans. In the third Article, concerning the taking up of Colliers, which Master Bur ell calls the worst of ships: And first for the Hector, Captain Beddall, she hath done very good service; first in taking a Ketch laden with Butter and Coals which came out of Newcastle which vessell she fetcht up in foure houres chase, meerly by sailing; the next he took was Galliot Hoy, which came out of Newcastle with three thousand and odde pounds in mo∣ney to buy Armes, as likewise letters of credit for three thousand more, the rest Coals and Grindstones; in five houres chase she fetcht her up, notwithstanding, she was a choice vessell for sailing, taken up for that pur∣pose; and Captain Cork, Treasurer to the Earle of Newcastle, (who was imployed to buy the Armes) was in her, and brought prisoner to Dover. The next she took, was a Kings Man of Warre, called the Black-horse, which he chased a shore, and after took her, and brought her to London: thenext he chased Captain Denton a Scarbrough Man of War a shore, which was then cast away; and after chased another Man of Warre, with divers provisions bound for Scarbrough, which he chased till he had spent, his mast; and after took him, and carried him into Burlington; the next was a Colli∣er, conveyed by Brown Bushell, which he took, and sent into Hull. Since that, he rescued two North-Seamen, out of the hands of a Scarborough Man of Warre, with diverse other good services which did conduce to the benefit and honour of the Parliament, which the said Captain Beddall can give a more particular Accompt of; and this is one of the Ships Mr. Burrell calls a Collier, and the worst of Ships. This Ship hath been victualled, and manned by the State; and hath taken more prizes, then foure times her fraight amounts unto, the Ships Hull hired for 62 l. per mensem: And in∣deed these Ships (although by Master Burrell called Colliers) yet by rea∣son of their great force, and small draught of water, are the most fit Ships for that Coast, except Frigates, especially in Winter time. As for the Dra∣gon, and Green-Dragon, they were taken up by the Committee for New∣castle,
to carry Souldiers to Holy-Island: and afterwards in regard of their good service there, and at Barwick, they were taken up by Order of the Honourable Committee of the Navie, to guard the Northern Coast where they afterwards performed very good service, in so much that Captain Greens Ship called the Green-Dragon (which Master Burrell calls the worst of Ships) took divers Prizes and being in fight with one, the Captain was slain, and yet the Prize was taken. The Hopefull-Luke was a Merchant Ship, and no Collier, and the first voyage that ever she made: And the Ex∣change was never imployed in the service of the State. And as for the seven Frigats so mentioned in his charge, we heard of it upon the Exchange, and did acquaint the Honourable Committee of the Navie therewith; and although money (at that time) was so scarce, that the Committee could hardly find money to pay Marriners wages, and set forth our Fleet; yet notwithstanding, they bought the Warwick, Cignet, Starre, Hind, Lilly, and Crescent Frigates, which are now in the service. By this your Honours may perceive how farre we have been from opposing the buying or building of Frigates, but have rather endeavoured to increase the number of them, being now at least twenty. And whereas Master Burrell saith, they might have been bought for five thousand pound: he doth not tell your Honours, That they would cost to be set to Sea, double the first cost, as by experi∣ence we have found in the aforesaid Frigates. And whereas he chargeth us with giving directions to the Ship-wrights, for the building of three new Frigates, it is false; for the master Ship-wrights, with the Assistants of the Master of their Hall and the Master Carpenter of the East-India, Company, gave us under their hands, the dimensions and scantlings by which the said Frigates should be built; and we doubt not, but they per∣forming their duty, one of these Frigates will be more serviceable, then three of those mentioned by master Burrell. And as for the discontented Sea-men, where with the King hath manned his Ships, we are sure they had no cause to be discontented, neither with the Parliament nor us; for the Honourable Houses of Parliament, have been pleased to augment their wages foure shillings in a moneth. and give them the one third of all they took, which to moderate men should have been an engagement: but in regard we are not of one mind, as well by sea, as by land, and some had rather live Pyrates, then in an honest calling, there may be some Eng∣lish (although not thousands) out of their ill affection to the Parlia∣ment, that have deserted the Cause, and yet in the Kings Men of Warre, there are three strangers for one English man. And as for the Merchant Ships that have been taken, some have been surprised in going from their Convoy. And if Dunkirk, being a small fisher-town, taketh from the Hollanders, every year at least eightie, or a hundred sail of ships, and some years more; notwithstanding, their great Fleets, set out every year for suppressing of them; how much more may all those Ports of Flanders,
France, Holland, and Denmark infest our Coasts, and yet in all this time, they have not taken any considerable Ship of force. In the fourth place, He falls upon some Members of Parliament, to wit, Ma∣ster Vassall, and Master Bence, That they are owners of some slaggish Ships now in the service; as if their Ships were not as well able to serve, as any other Ships in the Kingdom, and likewise would fain make all the Commissi∣oners of the Navie, Owners of such Ships as are unfit for the service of the State; when indeed and in truth, Master Burrell careth not what Ships they have, so he may have their places. Then he saith, he hath a new complaint which he hath (worn thred-bare, and as false as the rest) testified by wit∣nesses, (and never a word true.) And that is, that the best of Prizes have been estranged from the Parliament, and possessed by the Officers of the Na∣vie, and their associates; And that those Ships have taken many rich Prizes, and when they have taken them, the Officers of the Navie have paid them off with the Parliaments pay, not allowing those that have been most valiant, one penny for their shares, when the Prizes taken, have been worth 11000 l. And when the Sea-men demanded their shares, one of the Officers threatned them with imprisonment: By which unkind usage (saith Master Burrell) many thousand common Sea-men have been occasioned to leave the Kingdom, and to serve against the Parliament. Then Master Burrell doth beseech their Honours to give him leave to acquaint them. that there is a Danish Ship now in the River of Thames, and saith, it is said, she was taken from the Danes by authority of Parliament; but saith, he knowes not whether Prize or no: But this he knoweth for certain, that Ship is fitter for the Parliament, then for any Subject in the Kingdom: and wheresoever the mystery lieth (saith wise Master Burrell) that Ship was worth foure times so much money, as she was sold for. Answer, Master Samuel Vassall doth owe part of the May-flower, which is a serviceable Merchant Ship, and hath been often imployed, both in the Straits, and in the West-Indies, by diverse Merchants in London, being fortified with twenty eight peeces of Ordnance, and three Decks, and ne∣ver understood by us to be a Collier, or sluggish, as afore is declared. Master Alexander Bence, oweth a sixteenth part of the Blessing, being a fit Ship for a Man of Warre, as any Ship of her burthen, in the River of Thames, and no sluggard, as Master Burrell would have her. And as for the Angel, we know of no such Ship in the service. And whereas Captain Crandley, and Captan Morris, are said to be owners of the Anne Percie, it is not true, although the Ship be without exception, fit to serve any Prince in Chri∣stendome And whereas master Burrell saith, that Captain Crandley, and Captain Tweedy owe part of the Honour and Providence; it is true Cap∣tain Crandley, owes part of the Providence, though not in the service, as likewise the Honour lately burnt. But as for Captain Tweedie, to be owner of either of them, or of any other Ship in the service, it is false and untrue; although both the said Ships were, and are serviceable both for the State,
and Merchants, as appeared by the Honour, which fought with six of the Kings best Men of Warre, off Holy-head in Wales, and beat them into Bri∣stoll, and yet not in the States service. And whereas we are charged with severall Prizes taken by the Parliaments Ships, estranged from the Parlia∣ment, and possest by the Officers of the Navie, and their associates, and paid with the Parliaments pay, and their chief Commanders Irish: We an∣swer, it is notoriously false and scandalous, as what else touching this Ar∣ticle; And we desire your Honours would be pleased, that he not proving it, we may have vindication, and be repaired in our reputation, which to us is as dear as our lives. And as for the Danish Ship, we know of such a Ship taken by Captain Batten, and after delivered by the Honourable Hou∣ses of Parliament, to the Merchants Adventurers, together with her goods brought from the East-Indies, which was by them sold, in satisfaction for their wrongs received from the King of Denmark; and whether sold cheap or dear, it no way concerneth the State, nor us. By this your Ho∣nours may perceive the malice of this filly ignorant man, that will inform your Honours with that, which he cannot in the one, nor dare not in the other, make good. Master Burrell recites diverse Captains, by name Captain Man, Captain El∣lison, Captain Wills, Captain Wild, and Captain Wappell; which he saith have done very good service, but never received any reward, or preferment; And would make the world believe they are as discontented as himself, insomuch, that he saith they would leave the Kingdom; when to our knowledge three of them are now at Sea, in the service of the Parliament in three good Ships; and are neither discontented, nor unrewarded, as Mr Burrell would have them to be. Ans. As to the fifth Article touching Captain Man so much commended by Mr Burrell for his valour, wherein he saith, he hath deserved a gold chain for his service against Mucknell; we confesse had he and his consorts perse∣vered and taken Mucknell, they all had well deserved a good reward, but leaving him to harbour himself in Silly (where he run his Ship upon a rock) we cannot conceive how he or they have deserved a reward; yet for his in∣couragement, we suppose the Honourable Committee of the Admiralty hath well preferred him, from the command of a small Frigate, to command one of the best third rank Ships in the Navy. As for the good service of Captain Ellison, we are well satisfied; but that he hath not received any shares, of what is due, we cannot believe; or that he should make any such complaint unto Master Burrell, and not rather unto those, who would do him right. As for Captain Iohn Wills, we marvell he should com∣plain of all others; for to our knowledge, he is well satisfied in the Service, being Captain of a small Ship, the Lucie, he left the said Ship, and lived ever since on shore; and if he be such a man, as Master Burrell sets down, that he was intended to leave the Kingdom, and to seek employment in other Countreys; truely he is not to be trusted by the Parliament: for satisfaction of which, it will be necessary to question him before he takes
the command of Captain Plunkets Ship, being appointed by her owners to be Commander of her, in the States Service. And as for Captain John Wild, he hath been employed in the Service; and what his deportment was, we leave to the relation of the Right Honourable the Earl of War∣wick: but in his last employment, he was Captain of the Cignet-Frigate upon the North-Coast, where we were given to understand, that in that Service, he and Captain Wills in the Lucie, took 4 Ships in Lynne-Deeps, belonging to that Town, when the Earl of Manchester was before it: his Lordship having taken the Town, the owners of the said Ships petitioned his Lordship, for restoring of the said Ships and Goods; upon which his Lordship was pleased to grant them their Ships and Goods again, they pay∣ing the Captains 400 pounds salvage, viz. 100 pounds amongst them and their Marriners in money, and a bond of 300 pounds to pay to the Cap∣tains at a certain time; which we understand they have received, but ought (in our opinions) to be accountable unto the State, in lieu of the Ships and Goods which were Prizes: besides they pillaged the said Ships, as by com∣plaint to us from the owners: By all which it doth appear, he hath no cause to complain for his thirds: And if he be such a man as Master Bur∣rell makes him to be (which we do not beleeve,) we leave it to your Ho∣nours grave Wisdoms to consider whether he be so fit a man as Master Bur∣rell makes him, being one of those (as Master Burrell saith) that out of dis∣content would leave the Kingdom. As for Captain Wappall, he had al∣most starved his men upon the Coast of Ireland, insomuch, that they brought away the Ship for want of Victuals, when Sir Charles Coote had most oc∣casion to use him after the taking in of Slego, the businesse being taken into examination before us; and this is another of Master Burrells men, that would leave the Land; which, if so, are not fit men to be trusted by the State. And as for Captain Hawkeridge, we doubt not but the Right Ho∣nourable the Earl of Warwick knows him well; and questionlesse, if his Lordship had sound him so capable of employment, as Master Burrell pre∣tends, he had been preferred as other men. And as for his Giant Captain Hodges, as Master Burrell calls him, he alwayes served in a private Man of War; by which employment, he made so good use of his time, that he hath purchased a great Ship, with which he is gone for Venice, laden with Merchants Goods; and not out of any discontent, as Master Burrell would have it but for his own advantage. In the sixth place; he saith, That divers persons are employed in the Parlia∣ments Service, that have deserved punishment; and in stead thereof; have been preferred to places of trust; and nominates Captain Shaftoe. Ans Concerning Captain Shaftoe, we did receive information, that he released (after he had taken) one Leyton; who afterwards (as is said) went into New-castle: Captain Shaftoe, after his coming to Town, did acquit himself, by divers witnesses, of that crime; and will be ready at all
times (being now Commander of Holy-Island) to give the Honourable Houses further satisfaction. As for his Bill for his Ships Pay mentioned by Master Burrell, to be branded by Master Holland, in regard of the crime above-said; it is true, it was so done by him against our consent, long after he had signed it; but in regard we could not lay any just charge to Captain Shaftoe, and the money belonging to the owners, and not to him, for the Service of the Ship; we could not in justice, but take off the brand of the Bill; Captain Shaftoe being a responsible man, to answer any thing that afterwards should be laid to his charge: and to our knowledge, he is a man that hath been faithfull to the Parliament, having done speciall Services in landing in Northumberland, by the command of Captain Edward Hall, with the Anthelopes men and his own, being about 150, and coming to Colonell Hagerstons house, being very strong, summoned it, and took part of the out-houses, and after, the Colonell himself thinking to escape away, his horse was shot under him, & so taken as also his Son in the House; where they found store of cloth for Souldiers coats for the Colonells Regiment, which he was raising: the taking of the said Colonell, and bringing him∣self, and some prisoners, was the break-neck of that Regiment; which was at that time an excellent piece of service: In the next place, he most despe∣rately entred into the Port of Holy-Island, the Castle and Island being for the King; and having not above 100 men, he first took the Town and the Island, and afterwards summoned the Castle, and had it delivered to the use of the Parliament: for which good service, the honourable Houses made him Captain thereof, where he remains to this day. And as for Ma∣ster Hollands forbearing 14 moneths to sit in Commission for this and ma∣ny other abuses, as Master Burrell pretends; we humbly desire, that Master Holland may be examined, what these abuses were, and by whom commit∣ted, that, if so, they may receive condign punishment. In the seventh place, Master Burrell chargeth Captain Peacock with treason∣able practices, and saith, That he took a Vessell, whereof was Master, one Hixon, laden with Arms and Ordnance for his Majesty, and when Captain Peacocks men would have gone on board to search her, he denied them, and told the men she was laden with Apples, bound for Scotland; and after private conference in the Cabine together, Peacock set Hixon at liberty, and Hixon went into New∣castle, while Peacock was in sight of him, and there delivered divers pieces of Ordnance, and other Ammunition for the King: for which treachery, saith Master Burrell, Peacock did neither suffer punishment nor fine, although the Articles against him were exhibited to the Officers of the Navie, and proved against him; yet notwithstanding the great complaint, Peacok is lately made a Captain of one of the Parliaments Ships. Ans. As for the charge given against Peacock, we found no just proof against him, referring him to his defence presented to the honourable Com∣mittee of the Admiralty, by which we doubt not but he hath given full
satisfaction, before their Honours admitted him into the service again, be∣ing now Captain of the Warwick-Frigate. In the next place, Master Burrell chargeth one Bramble with cowardize, and saith, he was to convoy William Hazard in the Gift of God, from Ireland, with fifteen Masts for the Service of the Navie; and Bramble commanding one of the Parliaments Frigates fortified with sixteen peeces of Ordnance, met with two of the Kings Men of War, and at the sight of them (as Master Bur∣rell saith) ran from his charge, and left Hazard to the mercy of the Enemy, who carried him into Falmouth; for which cowardly Service, Bramble was put out of the said Frigate, by the space of a year; but of late preferred to be Cap∣tain of one of the Parliaments Ships. Ans. Concerning Captain Bramble leaving of his Convoy, which came from Ireland, with fifteen masts; It is true, that two Frigates chased his Convoy in the morning, at break of day; and she being so far a stearn, could not recover her before the Men of War had possession of her, (as we are informed:) and since that, he hath been Master of the Anthelope with Captain Hall; where he behaved himself so well, that the said Cap∣tain Hall recommended him to the owners of the Ark, a Merchant-Ship, whereof he is now Commander. The ninth and last Quere (as he saith) is of great concernment, and thinks it not fit the common Sea-men should be acquainted with it; and further saith, he finds them so full of discontent, that if he should give them any encouragement, he fears they would be offensive to the Parliament, because (as Master Burrell saith) they have been grosly cozened in their thirds of Prize-goods, taken by Captain Swanley and Captain Moltons Squadrons, worth a great value, but (he saith) obscured by transaction. Then he falls again upon Reformation, and re∣ducing the Navie into a serviceable posture for these times, and such a Reforma∣tion, as will enable the Parliament to recover the Soveraignty of the Seas: And the jest is, he will defend England it self from being invaded by Turks and Land∣robbers; and saith, The honour of the Sea is lost, and the money spent little bet∣ter, than cast into the Sea. Ans. Concerning the fear he hath of the common Sea-men, of their coming to clamour at the Parliament-door; we beleeve there are no such men, except promoted by Master Burrell and his Agents. And for the Prizes taken by Captain Swanley and Captain Moltons Squadrons, we re∣fer them to the Collectors for Prizes and Prize-goods, who can give a very good account thereof. As concerning the Gentlemans conclusions, of his mark and aim for reforming of the Navie into a serviceable posture; We hope we have given a full satisfactory Answer to your Honours: But we wonder that he should be so impudently bold, as to charge the Parlia∣ment with the expence of so much money to be spent at Sea, or rather cast into the Sea; when it appeareth, that the Navie, under God, hath not had the least share in preserving the Kingdom, for the reasons given aforesaid.
And as for the honour of the Sea, we dare be bold to say, it hath never been better upheld, then since our Fleets have been abroad; where they have been, and still are Masters of the Seas, in the face of the Parliaments Ene∣mies. And as for the Reformation of the Navie so much mentioned by Master Burrell, we know not what he means, unlesse it be to destroy it, if it be no other than what by him is set forth; and in former times would have been held treason, in any Projector that should have endevoured to put the same in practice. And we much wonder, that he, or any man, dares presume to inform the Parliament, to bring Englands Royall Navie into such a contemptible and weak condition, as this Gentleman would do by his Reformation, contrary to the opinion of the most skilfull Sea-men and Ship-wrights of the Kingdom: And therefore we could wish, that Master Burrell, so much insisting upon a Reformation of the Navie, would first re∣form himself of such grosse ignorance of which he now stands guilty. And thus we hope we have answered both his Generall and Particular Charge, referring both it and our selves to the grave Wisedom of the honourable Houses of Parliament, from whom we hope to have vindication, and repa∣ration, for those many unjust aspersions and false accusations against our persons and reputation, set forth by Master Burrell, in his Pamphlet. Postscript. THen he writes his Postscript, and shews of what rank the Ships shall be, which he intends to reform; and then he saith, If the State had ten times as many Pinaces, and ten times so many Fri∣gates as are now employed, the honour of the Sea cannot be main∣tained by them: It is the Ships of the Navie that must, and (if they were reduced) that can recover and maintain Englands honour; It is the Ships of the Navie, and not the Pinaces and Frigates. And then begins to make his recantation, as he thinks and saith, That whereas he saith the Admiralls, Vice-Admiralls, and Rear-Admiralls, have not shot one shot in anger, since these distracted Wars began, his intention was, and is, that they have not shot one shot in anger, viz. in offence or defence, in a Warlike manner, against any of the Kings Men of War, or any other Ship that hath affront∣ed them. Concerning reforming the first, second, and third rank-Ships, we have given so full an Answer already, that we shall not need to reiterate it again; Onely in the ten times so many Pinaces, and ten times so many Frigates, the honour of the Seas cannot be maintained: It is the Ships of Englands Navie (saith Master Burrell) that must maintain the honour of the Sea;
which we agree unto; but not to reduce them into the posture of Frigates, with one Tire of Ordnance, as Master Burrell would have them. And as for the Admiralls, Vice-Admiralls, and Rear-Admiralls, That his meaning is, they have not shot one shot in anger, in offence or defence, in a Warlike manner, against the Kings Men of War; He makes the cure worse then the disease, and abuseth not onely that Honourable Lord, but all other Commanders, as if they did not know how to defend themselves, or of∣fend an Enemy, in a Warlike manner. FINIS. Imprimatur NA. BRENT.
