A3519 E2121_1 99871840 170576
ROYALL PSALMES, OR, SOLILOQUIES OF D. ANTHONY, KING OF PORTINGALL. Wherein the Sinner confesseth his Sinnes, and imploreth the Grace of GOD. Translated into French By P. DURIER. Into English by Baldwin St George, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the Prince's Armes in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1659.
A Tres-Haute et Tres Illustre PRINCESSE Francois de Lorraine, Duchesse DE VENDOSME. MADAM, IL me semble que ces Pseames, qui sont sortis d'une main Royale, ne pouvient r'entrer en de plus il∣lustres mains que les vostres, Ils ont esté Composez par un Roy, & Je les presente à une Prin∣cesse, dont la vertue n'est pas moins estimable que les sceptres & les Cour∣ronnes. Je scaybien que n'ayant pas cet'esprit de pieté qui est si necessaire
pour faire valoir les ouvrages de cette nature, Je n'ay pû aussy leur donner cette ardeur salutaire qui touche les pecheurs, & que leur premier autheur leur a si utilement donnee, mais c'est Assez que l'on scache que vostre Gran∣deur ne les a pas ded'aigne pour croire qu'ils seront profitables. Ainsi, Madame, je les ay seulement comen∣cez, en leur donnant des paroles pour les faire entendre en nostre Langue & j'espere que vous les acheverez par vostre approbation, Je ne chercheray point icy d'artifice pour obliger vo∣stre Grandeur de les recevoir favora∣blement, Je suis assuré, Madame, que vous n'y verrez rien qui ne vous plai∣se, puis que vous n'y verrez rien qui ne réjouisse les Anges Mesmes. C'est un pecheur qui se repent de ses fautes qui implore la miserecorde de son dieu, & qui fait de sa conversion, la plus grande felicité qu'il puisse trou∣ver sur la terre. Il ne parle pas de lan∣gage de la cour, parce qu'il scait bien que ce n'est pas le langage de dieu.
Il aime mieux concevoir de bons de∣sirs, que de prononcer de belles paroles; & pour-veu qu'il puisse dire qu'a pec∣che, ill croit estre assez eloquent, Je m'imagine done, Madame, que vouz aimerez le pe∣cheur en ce glorieux estat & que vous vous divertirez quelquesfois à luy voir répandre des larmes, dont le repen∣tir est la source. C'est un divertise∣ment, qui n'est jamais desagreable aux ames vertueuses & sainctes, & y est en cette occasion qu'on peut legiti∣ment souhaiter de voir souspirer son pro chain. Jesuis Madame,  De vostre Grandeur le tres-humble, tres-obeissant, & tres-fidelle Serviteur, DURYER.
To the truly HONORABLE, Noble, and most vertuous Lady, The Lady ANNE INGOLDSBY. MADAM, MY apprehensive quil drew∣in its bashfull Inke, at the presumption to fron∣tispiece so mean a pre∣sent, as a Translation, with an Inscription to a Person of so much Honour, so much worth, so thronged an Inventory, and so compleat a Synopsis, of all Perfections. But embold∣ned, first, by the Precedent of the French Translator; secondly, encouraged by the
Piety of the Subject; moved thirdly, by the Noblenesse of the Author: It hath distil∣led some obliged drops towards this Dedi∣cation to your Ladyship of a French treatise, done into the English dialect, to an unparallel'd Mistriss in both, of a Pious subject to a pious Patronesse, of a No∣ble Author to a Noble Lady. Madam, you shall here behold a Royal Convert: The Angells rejoyce at the Conversion of a sinner; and, as your vertues intitle you to their Fellowship, and something above mortall in your beauty to their resemblance, you must necessarily partake of their Joy, and fill up the quire of that Coelestiall Hi∣erarchy with your Allelujah's. And seeing nothing but a little Clay (which although in reference to your Ladyship's amiable Symmetry, is stamped with a preparative Angelicall Impresse) detaineth you from the present enjoyment of their blessed So∣ciety; you cannot neverthelesse but be alike moved with them, and will (I hope) afford the Gracious Influence of your Protecting beames to the unworthy Interpreter of these welcome Tydings, and crown him
(which is the highest ayme his ambition levells at) with a Crown, studded and enammell'd with your smiles. As this Consideration seemed to extenuate my boldnesse; So, the Universall engaging sweet∣nesse of your disposition, the obliging Pro∣digallity of your favours to me in parti∣cular, and the deep sense of gratitude to your noble family and relations, VVarran∣ted the Inscription, and Commands the Subscription of Madam, Your Ladiship's most humble and vowed Servant. B. St. George.
ROYALL PSALMES: OR, SOLILOQUIES OF D. ANTHONY, KING OF PORTƲGALL. Wherein the Sinner confesseth his Sinnes, and imploreth the Grace of GOD. WHence shall I exhale tears enough to pay a deluge for the strayings and disor∣ders of my soul? When I throw my Considerations on the past∣trod paths of my life, and cast a specu∣lative
optick on the passages of my youth, horror and sadnesse arrests my survey. This reflection on my selfe re∣verberates to my soul nothing but trembling, nothing but condemnation, nothing but dispaire, nothing but con∣fusion. I know what I have bin, I have known what I ought to have bin, I know not now what I am. I appre∣hend what I shall bee: And the lesse my sorrow is for offending God, the more the apprehensions of it, is enlar∣ged. Why cannot I repent more, that I may fear lesse? Alas! I have bin long under thy scourge (O Lord) and the heavinesse of thy hand makes me feel the weight of my transgressions; yet cannot I fix a repentant kisse to that Rod. Long hast thou lured me, yet I re∣maine still unreclaimed; long hast thou rais'd and plai'd thy Batteries to force a passage to my heart; yet I, so much my owne enemy, deny an amicable Inter∣veiw to one who brings and offers life. A thousand evills cast up their trenches
round about me, death threateneth me in the van, flank, and reare; and al∣though I am storm'd with all sorts of calamities and afflictions, yet my soul hath not one hostage-teare to ransome my salvation. These ills have not only ataqued mine age; my life and suffer∣ings comenced together, from my youth I am a man of sorrow: In fine, I may on the counters of my dysasters, cast up the single moments of my life; and now I suffer, because suffering taught me not repentance for my faults. O the admirable prudence of the heavenly and great Physitian! O the immense goodness of the King of kings the Soveraign of heaven and earth! O the bountifull opennesse of that hand that stroweth about its favours! O my God, thou underbladders't me with greifs, that I may not sink in pleasures, that I may learne to rejoyce, with∣out making my Joyes criminall, thou delegates sorrows finite, to attone for sorrowes Infinite; thou dismantles my body of comforts, to cloathe my soul
with salvation. The wounds that thou inflicts, are but to open an easier expe∣dient to my cure; and thou endanger∣est not my present life, but as a preser∣vative to a life more happy, more glori∣ous, more triumphant. But alas! what is necessary for me, falls so little under my cognizance, that I check at the physick of thy mercifull prescripts, I dread those afflictions, whose rigorous violence ought to instruct, and ought to be received as effects rather of mercy then of choler: so that I fail in dis∣tinguishing the counter-poysons thou tenderest: and how shall I distinguish them, being not to be cured but by af∣fliction? yet I desire to be freed from an affliction so wholsome. To conclude, can there bud any hopes of a cure but from griefs? Seeing sicknesse and dis∣seases are the fruits of pleasure, let me suffer them, (O Lord my God) but to the end that my sorrows may be con∣verted into Ioyes, and I rejoyce with thee; teach me how my sufferings may meet with thy divine pleasure and my owne salvation.
PSALM II. TIme with a swift current tides away yeares and dayes, yet my unhappinesse still fixeth my condition; I am still a sinner, still call downe the viall of my God's Indignation. Having been constantly wracked on the wheel of so many afflictions, so many miseries; they have not forced from me so much as one good thought, one sensible de∣testation of my sins, the sole Axle∣tree whereon my misfortunes turne. I regard not how I lend an advantage∣ous foot to each dayes sinfull trips, but have not regard to recover my foyls; I still patch up my old iniquities with new offences, and step from petty trespasses to capital; how shall I en∣tertaine the stroak of my last hour? how shall I fly? where shall I conceal my guilty head, when Judgment sum∣mons to an appearance, and I am cited to bring in my audit for my manifold receipts? at what a blush will my in∣excusable sloath & negligence, tongue∣tied
stand, when I shall behold the awe of thy enthroned Majesty, and must passe a strict scrutiny for the least pec∣cadilloes in my behaviour and con∣cernments? I wil reply then, my God, I am over-charged, O let thy mercy be an advocate in my cause: who am I and where shall I find eloquence to make my tongue fertill with a rejoynder to thy Justice? but what shall I do if thou urge a plea? I must with a trembling bashfullnesse wrap my face in confu∣sion and acknowledge I have not im∣proved the stock wherewith I was en∣trusted, I must confesse I have misdis∣bursed it in vanities, and that it hath served as an exchequer to maintaine my lusts, and that I have lavished it in living sinfully. Alas? did I say [in li∣ving]? it is not an expression fit to cloath that condition; I should rather say in dying. I imagin'd I lived in the dayes of my voluptuousnesse, but now a thorough-conviction lyes upon my soul I was dead, because I lived without Thee, the only true life. How should I
live when my memory affords not one instance that I have lived with thee: In fine, (O my God) since the life of a sinner is death; I may truly conclude, my death anticipated my life; as yet I am not acquainted with life, but stil re∣main in an empty channel cut off from my God the head and fountaine of life. My corrupt inclinations still. impreg∣nated my tender age with occasions of offending thee, I was scarce enfranchi∣sed from the womb, when I sell into the bondage of sin: At my nativity, my cheeks were bedewed with teares for sins I was conceived in and knew not. And I had scarce dryed up the teares for the sins of another, but I began to commit sins my self which I did know, yet have not lent them one teare. I have delighted my selfe in the sins of my infancy, and with my impurities prophan'd the innocency of that age which nature intended the Sanctuary and sacred treasury of all the purity of this life. I have breathed nothing but concupiscence, I have been the shame∣full triumph of my base and sinfull af∣fections,
and a web so thick hath spread it selfe over the eye of my understan∣ding, that I could not discern between light and darknesse, between the smooth calmenesse of the mind, and the tempestuous Billows of sensual∣lity. In an age so ignorant and so little studious of good, I have given a quick∣er care to the world then to heaven, I have bin driven down the swift torrent of a deceitfull voluptuous stream; and, as if I had been carried away more with the love of torments then re∣wards, I have acted here on Earth whatsoever might further my inevita∣ble precipice into hell. From a corrup∣ted infancy I have proceeded to a de∣bauched puberty; my sins have shooted up with my yeares and have grown whilst I grew. My vaine and vitious loves, put on me the shape of a mad∣man or barbarian; and at the same time I was philtred and enchanted, by their lushious witchcrafts. I became mine own enemy, and willingly ran into the fatall embraces of my own ruine. The dayes of my puberty were graduates
in the schooles of sinne. Through the course of sinning I passed to the degree of my Youth, which has left behind it no other tracts but the soyls and sul∣lyings of vice; every moment that adds to my age adds to my sins. I have bin young, I have attain'd the viril consi∣stency of a man, and disseising vice hath alwayes held the signiory of my Soul which owed allegiance unto vir∣tue. Age hath swan-plum'd my el∣der head, yet it so little maturates my judgment, that I tread not in the paths of thy heavenly directions; and as if I were a child, at a double Jubilee of yeares, old and crasie as I am, yet do I the actions of a Child. What time hath bin so unprivy to my faults that it may encourage the least plea of Innocency? Alas! my God if thou should'st gratifie me, to expect untill I pick'd out one moment of Innocency in my whole life, to move in arrest of Judgement; what advantage could I take of that fa∣vour, since my life affords not one mi∣nute but loaden with a sin? Thou art Just (my God,) thy Judgements are
Justice it selfe; thy decisions match the merits of the cause. When I seek for appeasing inducements, I find in me nothing but provoking motives. All my accounts carry the justice of a mer∣rited fear, And I cannot reckon them without summing up my transgressi∣ons. I have bin alwayes active in ini∣quity, I have constantly footed the dan∣ces of the wicked, their instructions have been alwayes my charming mu∣sick. I have wallowed in vices like a swine in the mire, whose repast is or∣dure and filth; nor have I fancied my selfe, in other than in things vaine, de∣tractious, and blasphemous; whatso∣ever was wholesome became nauseous; and that only had the gust to tickle my wanton palate which was mortiferous, my Bosome-councell were the wicked. I had no enjoyment but in the society of the reprobate; my ambition was to aim at the wretched grandure of an e∣minent sinner. I was dextrous in excu∣sing, slow in accusing my selfe. To steel; and harden my heart, was the butt of my bended endeavours; and the not∣acknowledging
my selfe a sinner, the more aggravation it heaped on my sins, the lesse minorations is left my excuses, I was negligent in procuring Balsome for my wounded soul, sleighted all re∣cipe's, and grew enraged against those beyond the limits of all reason and re∣spect vvho forced a seasonable Chirur∣gy. I have knit my fists at the instruct∣or, and opened my armes to the flatte∣rer; my eares have not admitted-in thy peace-propounding-trumpets, but given audience to those that came without thy orders. In fine, (my God,) the vani∣ty of the world hath been the whole course of my studies. All my discourses were lies, in the addresses of all my af∣faires, I have courted darknesse before light. See here the landskip of my acti∣ons, see the card of my whole life! Where is there any thing to be found but provocatives of thy just indignati∣on? So that I will answer thy interro∣gatories with nothing but humble con∣fessions; and since thou hast taught me, selfe-accusation proves the most accep∣table excuse, I will sue out my Justifi∣cation
with the bare acknowledgment of my crimes; rase out from thy memo∣ry the disorders of my youth, and in∣dite me not at the Barre of thy Justice. It is impossible for man to be justified before thee: but, if I must passe thorough thy judgments, turne me over (O God) to the Bench of thy Mercy, and remem∣ber I am the workmanship of thy own hands, although a sinner. If my sins provoke, let thy mercy appease; let its intercession merit the repentance of him that adores thee; let it bound thy justly-incensed wrath; In fine, let it snatch me out of the fiery embraces of hell, to the end my soul may eccho forth thy praises, and trump, through∣out all the corners of the earth, the effects of thy clemency.
PSALM III. WHat an aggravated unhappi∣ness is it, to have incensed the author of happiness, to have offended the purchaser of Salvation, and to have despised so superciliously his pre∣cepts? I have willingly quitted the pathes of felicity, and like a stray sheep wandred and straggled within the shot and command of all occasions, that might gape after and design my de∣struction; I have roved every where, and every where been assayled by troops of sorrows, griefs, and misfor∣tunes. I have been wildred in the Meanders of perdition and iniquity. I have left no place unbeaten, that I might spring to my self repose and consolation; but I retriv'd them not, because I minded not Thee, my God. Without enquiring after the territo∣ries of peace, I have travelled through a Barren land, the demeansns of death and sinne, where horror and pain en∣camp, and where the Soul lyes senten∣ced to the Marshalsey of everlasting
torments. Whilst I glittered in pomp and dignity, I was dasl'd with their coruscancy; and as if I had been Nabucadonoser'd into a beast, Woods and Caves were my shelters. Whilst I was mired in pleasures, I was plung'd in troubles, my couche was prepar'd on a precipice; at the same instant both sleep and ruine crept upon me; such a mist interposed the beames of my rea∣son, that I expected anchorage in the midst of so many stormes, and so many perils. What course shall I steere, in what creek shall I secure my selfe, be∣ing beaten on a lee-shore, amidst the shelves and shoales of encompassing dangers? The hopes that convoyed my youth are dispersed and vanished, and I am become like to one ship∣wracked, who having lost his vessell sends a watery eye after his floating treasures: scourged hither and thither by the tyrannous winds and no less im∣perious waves, I am farre from har∣bors, can kenne no land that gives hopes of escape, I let my self be dri∣ven on the rocks where I must most
miserably perish. The Enimy hath planted his Ambuscadoes and I never mistrusted, I have walked without fear or suspition over the pit-falls he hath covered for me; and, as if I were ac∣cessary to my owne perdition, I have clapp'd an extinguisher on the light that should guide to their discovery. I have soothed my self in my sinnes, nor could I fasten in my Imagination the least opinion of homage due from my youth to the Signiorie of death. Thus my Soul being over-reached by the vanity of that false position, gave entertainment to all extravagant ap∣petites. I held forth a willing arme to ushering sensuality, and was carri∣ed wheresoever her policy and ty∣ranny led me. Why, said I, (disputing with my self) should I dream of death? why should I fixe my thoughts on the end before the middle hath taken up my considerations; life enough is left unspunne to meditate a recollection, a suddain conversion waites on my will at all seasons. Thus have I grown old in my impieties, thus are my ill
customes become habituall, and thus as a Gally-slave to sinne, chain'd to its oare, I must obey. I am like unto a lu∣natique that hates both life and body, and armes his fury against the one and the other, untill his totally sopited and besotted reason leaves to command his actions. But alass, the bent of my hate is of a nature more strange, more pernitious! The lunatick fastens on his body, bends but his fist and blows a∣gainst clay: but my obduratenesse in sinne makes me fasten on my Soul, and conclude its wounds in murther. Ha∣ving thus climbed by degrees to the top of Iniquity, day after day I irri∣tate my God, and my obstinacy calls upon the justice of his fury and my perdition. I have been often forced to smoother the inveterate and wicked flames that prey upon me. But it is im∣possible to secure my heart from them; their fewell is in mee, they are lodg'd in my bones. O my God, spread thy gra∣cious wings over me! I am not able to quench this destroying fire, but with the saving fire of thy divine love. I
have not strength enough to cast off the yoke of sinne: thy assistance must work my dis-ingagement, and thy suc∣cors must prove the reserves to my weaker forces. My deserts (I must con∣fesse) dare not move for these favours; but, since thy goodnesse causeth the sunne to comfort the good and bad with the radiancy of an equall Influ∣ence; and that thou layest thy obliga∣tions on the unworthy, and on those that beg them not at thy hands; I can∣not conceive thou wilt be so thrifty of thy spirituall riches towards one that begs with the vehemency of so Intent an ardour, and with the deep sense of so much sorrow for his offences. Move thy compassion towards me, give eare to the humble sute of a poor wretch, thou that art rich in mercies thou that gloriest in the facility of par∣doning, thou that washest away the evill habits of the will, thou that hearkens to the complaints of the cap∣tives, thou that breakest the Netts we pitch for our selves, thou that buyest our liberty when we sell our selves to
slavery, and imploy the false liberty (men think they injoy without thee) a∣gainst thee: stretch forth thy hands that the worke of thy hands may not per∣rish, that I may not fall into the bot∣tomlesse pitt that affords not one drop of watter to quench the everlasting flames that tortures sinners: deliver me from the Jawes of the roaring Lyon who searcheth me for his prey, and vvill not leave off his bloodthirsting scent: thou, vvho art my Protector, and in vvhose mercy all my hopes cast an∣chor, let the effects of thy mercies an∣swer the hopes of them; because I have hoped in thee my God, I shall not be confounded; and having in the con∣clusion tasted the returnes of my pray∣ers, I vvill beare a part to thy glory vvith the heavenly Quires of Angells and blessed Spirits.
PSALM IV. MY nightly couch hath been cur∣tain'd about with melancholy; feare and terrour have given their un∣welcome attendance to my fancy, my conscience makes mortal and re-itera∣ted thrusts, nor am I dexterous enough to ward its passes; and the least wound I receive, is from the tuck of an Enimy. I cannot allay my disquieting thoughts; hovering Illusions interrupt my sleeps, instead of affording its naturall repose, it ministers to my inquietude. It is an impossibility, sleep should attaque my eye-lids; if a wearinesse stroak my tem∣ples with the hopes of a slumber, a rest∣lesnesse in me frustrates its blanditions. I feele a late, what devouring fire creeps through my entrailes which re∣ceivs recruits from my watchings. The food disrelisheth that relished before. I mingle teares with my Beverage, my forehead is bound about with confusi∣on, shame spreds it selfe over my face. When I ruminate on my offences to∣wards my God, and in how many
sundry wayes I have abused my owne abilityes and his favours. The study of vanity hath Ingross'd the sum of my dayes, I grow pale with cares oppo∣site to my good, permitting my selfe to be carried away with the extravagan∣cy of my conceipts and the Injustice of my desires: my losse is become Irrepa∣rable, I have let slip the time destin'd for the working forth of my salvation, I fed my Imagination with dreames, my eyes seem'd to entertaine nothing but realities, and they proved meere delusions. In fine, I have deceived my self; my vanities and ravings have con∣spired my ruine, my aymes reached heaven, and the depth of Hell received me; and since my veterane sins teeme new offences, and one abysse draweth another Abysse, my soul enervated by vice is become feeble, and I am now as rottenness in the Nosthrills of men. My wishes catch at impossibilities, and the imaginary possession of them renders me not unlike to one, who dreaming golden dreames, at his awaking is sei∣sed with a regretfull corrosive for his
vanished treasure. I am but a worme, (my God) yet such a stranger to my selfe I have had an aspiring boldnesse rearedme over the tops of others heads; all my discourses have beene tipped with fastuous affectation, I conceived the elixar of wisdome to consist in that pride. I became intolerable to those re∣sembled me, a fantastique groundlesse choler hath often hurried me on to be injurious. This cruell passion was so in∣nate, my soul itselfe nursed it with∣out the least incouragement of a provo∣cation: so long as it raigned in me, not only my selfe, servants, and relations, but I my self participated the fury of its tyranny. And, without consideration how God upraided me not with the Im∣mensity of his favors, I hit my freinds in the teeth with scarce obliging civilities. I have murmured under the pressure of my misfortunes, I have placed my hopes in man, and waved my confidence in God. I entertained truth with deafness, wholsome documents with offence, the instructor with anger, the pilots of salvation with dislike; my genius hath
bin abusive. I have courted vengeance for the least affront or punctillio, and anticipated the prerogative of God, whose prerogative it is to revenge. I have bin disrespectfull to the Main∣tainers of a good cause. Retorts, although seasoned with sweetnesse and humility, moved my choler: what was good in the good squared not with my humor, Brawls and contentions made up my divertisements, I was a skilfull pioneer in undermining the friendship of Bretheren, and in manu∣ing discord and hatred amongst them to the best advantage: good instructions have touched my theory, but were ne∣ver welcomed by my practise; they have knockt at my eares, but were not ad∣mitted into my heart. I have carressed evill counsellors, whose endeavors were to please, they have filled a choise place in my savour. But I fancied not a tell-troth, nor those that with a whol∣some freedome both hinted at my im∣perfections and persued them with a pious correction. I have not stretched forth my hand to those in distresse, and
who snatched at my needful assistance. I have not shared my morsells with the poor, whom death had beleagured with famine and necessity. I have tur∣ned mine eyes from the begger and the sick, lest a sensible compassion should triumph over my avarice and engage an Almes. I have had no care to discharge my debts, nor to restore the depositums to those who confided in me; with the greater facility. To answer my unlimitted desires, I have bankrup't my neighbor by borrowing what I ne∣ver restored: I groped after wealth, but as an easier expedient to sin. I have ap∣peared rich upon a vaine and sinfull account, but alwaies poor upon a cha∣ritable one. I wanted nothing to enter∣tain my concupiscence, I wanted every thing to treat piety. I have banished moderation from my trencher, & with horrid excesses overcharged nature that is satisfied with a little, and is the very schoolemistris of temperance. I have paied a strange Idolatry to my Belly, I have built my glory upon an earthly foundation, which could threa∣ten
nothing but distruction. The most exquisite rarities have been searched for to furnish out my table, I have fai∣gned inconveniencies to excuse my ni∣cities; necessity hath been often urged as a pretext for my gluttony: my com∣placency hath bin with addultresses, I have loved the conversation of the in∣continent. My impurities have ari∣ved to such a pitch that I have not con∣fidence to expresse what I have had confidence to commit. I have bound out my eares and tongue apprentices to vanity; with a favorable attention I have sucked in flatteries; and when in my opinion my prayses came short, I have made them up with them of my owne mintage. When an occasion of applause has bin offered, I have bin tic∣kled with applauding my selfe and with the applause of others. In terrestri∣all delicacies I have forfeited the cates of heaven; if at any time the apprehen∣sive horror of death and Judgment dreweth me sorth of that pitt which the entregues of worldly pleasures hath sunck for us, at the same instant
I slip back againe, I am like to a dog that returnes to his vomit. I am dead as to good workes, I still live in sinns, and although a neere borderer on the frontiers of death, neverthelesse undis∣maied with the terrour and dreadfull∣nesse of its approaches, I run upon it, But (O my God) let thy great compas∣sion antevert that great day, that fear∣full day, that day of teares and groanes; prepare me by death to the commence∣ment of life, that I may fill the whole creation with encomiums of thy mercy. Behold (O Lord,) behold the posture of my soule, behold the streights my con∣cupiscence hath brought it in, behold the stripes of that Fury; preserve me from the power of an enemy that will prove inconquerable, unlesse thy aux∣iliary forces intervene. Knock off the shackles & bolts of death, (O my God) that I may chaine my selfe to thee, who alone art the true life; and that have∣ing cast away the care of all things, I may follow thee, who art more consi∣derable then all things. Lord my God, God of mercy and salvation, whisper to
my soul, I am thy safeguard, thy pray∣ers are accepted, let it be done unto thee according to thy petition; let such a voice (my God) draw my attention, that following thee I may encounter thee, encountring thee I may never de∣part from thee untill thou returns me whole. For where shall I find physick for my greifs, if I repair not to thee my God; and who can prove a more ex∣pert physitian for my infirmities than he who hath stoop'd from heaven for the reparation of mankin'd, and to ap∣ply remedies to his maladies? who can better bestow life than he, in whose hands is both life and death? who can be a better pledge for my salvation amongst the gulphs and precipices of this world, than my God and my Savi∣our? Save me then, enlighten me then, thou art both the author of salvation and life, to those repose their trust in thee. And as thy power (my God) had no alpha, let thy glory have no omega; that we may magnifie thee, that we may adore thee, that we may erect im∣mortal trophics to thy honour and ren∣der
everlasting thanks to thee, who art the eternall fountaine of mercyes. I have bin estranged from thee, and al∣though my estrangenesse was an act of my owne will, thou hast not failed to answer the beginning of my invocati∣ons with a timely assistance: The quick applications of thy remedies have even prevented my complaints, the very will to be cured perfects the cure, and to will life is a motive sufficient to thy goodnesse that we receive it; the extent of thy bounty is so large, thy graces commonly anticipate the prayers of a repenting sinner. I will confess, my God, and that will be a satisfactory allay to thy indignation, how that I am consci∣ous of my Iniquities, how that I am ac∣quainted with my evill doings, and do wil a present cure. Yea, my God, it is ne∣cessary I know them, that the horrour I have may be implanted in my bones, and that my soul may be affrighted at the terrible Image my memory copieth forth. I discover to thy Divine Majesty my imperfections and my sins, to the end thy Mercy may rase and pumice
them forth, and thou maiest enlighten the darke capacity of my soule that misleads me to a rebellion against thee. As thou wilt not the Iniquity, so thou desires not the death of a sinner, but that he be converted and live: the dead shall not praise thee (my God) none but thee living, none but we shall be thy Panegyriks, Quiresters, and Trump, through all ages, the fullnesse of thy mercies and the tenor of thy bounties.
PSALM, V. BEfore thee (my God) have I sum∣med up my miseries, not for thy information, not to make known the Condition wherein I stand, nor the paths I trace in the world; because al∣ready they are fallen under thy eternall prescience, and from eternity thou hast numbered my foot-steps. Thou piercest through the obscurity of darkness, thou disclosest all clossets, there is nothing can withdraw it self from thy sight, to thee are all things present, thou dive'st into the Cabinet-counsells of our hearts, our most secret thoughts to thee are patent. I will therefore lay open my miseries that thou maist uncover thy mercy, and spread over me thy protecting wing: I will reveale my se∣crets that thou mayest conceale them, that thou mayest be satisfied with the humility and brokennesse of my heart, that by a sacrifice so propitiatory, I may invite a plenary expiation of my offences. I have hitherto cast up an au∣dit of things horrible, yet the reckon∣ing
falls short of what I have commit∣ted. My conscience allarums me with continuall assaults, continually repre∣sents the horrid Ideas of my trespasses, and ingenders in my soul a worm that bites and corrodes without intermissi∣on, but why may not the knawing cor∣rosive of this worm consume all impu∣rities, and in consuming them consume it selfe? My God, let it not so feed that it may live eternally, let it feed that it may dye, and that, by feeding, by de∣grees it may leave to feed. But alas! how deplorable is my case. I believed the latitude of my confession had cir∣cumscribed my sins, but I must confesse it admits of larger bounds, my memo∣ry still affords fresh instances of a de∣served fear from thy Justice; and as it swells with the whole iniquity of my life, it is no sooner delivered of one particular, but it groweth big with particulars more heinous, more crimi∣nall. Were the sand of the sea multipli∣ed into figures it were an arithmetick too skant to cast up my transgressions. Were my tongue centupled it were still
impossible to count one of a million: so that my greif is the more intense by reason all my impurities come not within the compasse of my memory, be∣cause the wedgery of new offences drive and peg out the old ones. But (my God) those I will not wrap up in silence my remembrance hath bundled up, I will remove my affection from them, that I may the more firmly settle it on Thee, that thou weighing the humility of my soul and an eye floating in teares, thy severity may be abated, and thy ten∣der sweetnesse encouraged. Thou who art the reall sweetnesse, the sweetnesse that entraps not, the blessed sweetnesse, the sweetnesse most assured and perma∣nent. I have entertained kindnesse with envy and malice, charity with disre∣spect. Kings Princes and the ministers of the Gospel have been under the lash of my tongue, with outragious mur∣murings I have scandalized them; en∣comiums of the good received reproof, the actions of the wicked approbation; if at any time the just were justly applauded, at the same time my endea∣vours
were to sully their reputations with impostures. I have sifted out their most hidden failings. I have bin so censoriously rigid towards them, into grand crimes have I aggravated their petty trespasses: on the contra∣ry, if the wicked received their due salary of a just infamy, and conse∣quently fell into disrespute and dis∣credit with the world, I have imme∣diatly backed them, I have extolled their imaginary vertues, and pre∣fer'd them before the just; and perhaps have proved the ultimate cause to their perdition. I have combined with the thiefe in purloyning my neigh∣bor's goods; and that nothing may be wanting to compleate my iniquity, I have fathered the scandall on the son of my mother; my friends and relati∣ons could not secure themselves from my frauds, nor shelter themselves from my calumnies. What inundations of miseries and misfortunes was possible to breake in upon mortalls, my mali∣cious wishes poured on my neighbor's head. In his death have I often laied the
foundation of my hopes. I have not spred a protecting wing over the inno∣cent; and as if the dysasters of the un∣fortunate were a pleasing harmony to me, with inhumane reproaches I have tun'd their afflictions, to the highest key. The greatest part in the world hath suf∣fered in the rashness of my judgment, I have condemned for sins things with∣out the evidence of the least suspition, I have perceived the moate in my bro∣thers eye without seeing the beame in my owne, I have bin lulled in sloath and Idlenesse, shunn'd honest labors and vertuous exercises, I have drowned my time in a voluntary lethargie. My God, my thoughts were never busied about thankefull returnes for thy fa∣vours; nor hath thy lawes and thy power taken up my meditations. Thou knowest (O God) how sleep hath often quitted its nightly quarters on my eylids, and my minde that entertain'd the thought of every thing else, was only unhospitable to the thought of thee. It hath flown every where, but never perched on thee. I have prepared
for bed, I have setled my selfe to sleep, I have awaked without dreaming of thee. I have been alwaies without thee because I dwelt so much with my self; nor persued I any thing but dark pas∣sions which constantly widned the dis∣tance from thee. If at any time ejacu∣latory thoughts soared towards thee and pried into the wonders thou hast perpetrated for mankind, before they vvere yet flegg I smoothered them. I have permitted my selfe to be philtred by the svveet poyson of the vvorld's vanity The endeavours I use to teach my speculations thy grandeurs, are not unlike the endeavours used tovvard that of sleep, vvhich vvhen the en∣chanting flattery of it once overcomes, there ensueth none more sound. I have voted often the settlement of my con∣science, but still adjourn'd it till the morrovv; the hopes to amend one day hath cutt off all hopes of amendment. I have placed my felicity on a tottering and deceitfull basis, I leaned on a reed, a broken staffe, vvhen I thought my
footing most sure, I miserably dropped into the fire; and nothing but my fall could convince me of the seeblenesse of my support. My ambition hath snatch∣ed at unlavvfull honors, I burnt vvith an imoderate desire of hoarding up ri∣ches and squeezing profit out of every thing. These uncurb'd lusts have bogued me in sinfull plunges and troubles. I have shaken hands vvith all the vvick∣ed, vvith all the unrighteous, and all those vvhose lives vvere irregular and disorderly. I have dishonoured friend∣ship, that sacred tye, that ought to ob∣leige to none but the vertuous: yes (my God) I have disgraced it vvith concu∣piscences, and have prophaned its san∣ctity vvith the impurity of my affe∣ctions, I have fancied my selfe in pasti∣mes vvherein lodg'd the cause of my perdition, and the fuell to that fire vvhich consumed me; and instead of blocking up the passages to obstruct the inroades of death, I have opened him fresh avenues. All my members have been so many portalls to receive him
into my soul. VVhen I have ben sullied vvith new offences, I have not bin clen∣sed from my old iniquities: on the contrary they have rather bin the seeds of so many crimes which estranged me from thy face. That is the reason I have been deprived of the consolation, thy presence affords, and that I wander like a desparado, a stranger to his own pathes. But alas! what will betide me if I depart from thee? who will throw his eyes on me if thou avert thine, and as a reprobate deny me the favour of thy aspect? No doubt I shall prove odi∣ous to men, both a subject of scorne and derision, vvhen they shall demand of me, Where is thy God? why hath he e∣clipsed his face from thee? What shall I do when outlawed from thy Protecti∣on? whither shal I go hemmed in on all sides and deserted of thee? With teares and sobbes will I search thee out, I will implore thy mercie, I will beseech thee not to abandon me, and that thy just indignation may not move thee to draw off thy lookes from the guard of
thy servant; because my enemies per∣sue me, as if I fled before them, they persue me (My God) to inslave me and to carrouse my blood. It behoofs me therefore to take covert under thee, to flye to thy Protection from whom I have so long fled. Thou art my strength (O God) my refuge, my assurance. It is thy power alone can countenance me, thy consolation which can cheere me in the day of my miseries and affli∣ctions. As there is no God but thee, there is no Saviour but thee, Thou my God to whom my miseries and infir∣mities are patent, before whom Hy∣pocrisie is unvailed, forget both my old and my new offences; let thy mercies divert the pursuites of my enemies; file off the bolts I have so cruelly been sha∣ckled with: there is none my God can do it but thee, who crowneth with sal∣vation those that put their trust in thee, and renders the poore and weake tri∣umphant over the proud; and the migh∣ty shade not the divine radiancy of thy lookes from me. Disdaine me not
(O God) be unto me a salvation and as∣surance, a redeemer. I am poore and miserable, thou art accustomed to glad the poore and the miserable with the splendor of thy rayes. If thy justice hunt to unkennell me, let thy mercy earth me; defend me through thy good∣nesse that makes thee patient and me penitent. Thou art meek, thou art pati∣ent, thy mercy overpoiseth thy wrath, there is nothing more proper to thee, than to compassionate the miserable, to pardon sinners: the whole world hath tasted of thy loving kindnesse because thou art omnipotent, thou connives at the transgressions of mortalls that thou maiest be pleased with their repen∣tance, thou forgives because thou loves the world because it is the architecture of thy owne hands. Dart thy saving glances on me, that I may turne to∣wards thee, disingage my afflicted soul from the desperate extremities it is re∣duced to, that my lips may overflow with thy praises, and that I may break forth and say, Blessed be the Lord, who
hath not permitted me to fall into the hands of my enemies: they had destroy∣ed me, had not thy timely succour pre∣vented; my soul was like to a bird en∣tangled in the snares of the fowler. The nets are broken, and I am delivered.
PSALM VI. WHat shall I do, a miserable and unfortunate object? The mon∣ster, sinne, spawn of the bottomlesse pit, hath stained his jawes with the slaughter of my soul. I have bin led a sad spectacle of my enemie's triumph. My God! he hath stript me of all those habiliments, wherewith thou didst cloath me; I am now abashed to lay open my nakednesse before thee, I issu∣ed out of thy hands, accomplished with all the graces and riches might furnish out a compleat happiness; and without seriously weighing the slēderness of my guard to secure them, I have picquered with all occasions, that might dismount me, and cast me into perdition. The Blazon of my soul is char-cole-sable, it hath forfeited the livery colour of in∣nocency, and hath bartered for poison, celestiall viands. That I might habit my selfe in the mode of a sinner, I have cast off thy pretious equipage and ac∣coutrements.
I have bin to my selfe both a defacement and a destruction; me-thinks I am moulded into the ab∣solute portraiture of the first mans dis∣obedience. In fine, (my God) sin hath so miserably metamorphosed my con∣dition, thou wilt scarce discern in me the stamp of thy creating impression: Is it not justice then, like a rotten sheep, to exclude me the flock? If an awfull trembling creep through the heavens at thy sight, what confidence can lead me into thy presence, who am nothing but impurity? If from sinfulnesse I am lapsed to brutishness, what impudence can brazen me, to discover my face a∣mongst the Elect? I will neverthelesse returne to thee, although feare and shame struggle within me; I will lay hold on that fatherly bounty where∣with thou embraces all men, as a guide to conduct me into thy bosome, as the affection of a parent persues his run-a∣way child, and metes with usury his submissive return: So I hope (my God) as thy love was abundant in my flight,
my reclaiming will give it encrease. But alas! want of force and ability la∣meth the will I have to return; I feel the resistance of a cruell power, that stayes me. I feel not the interruption of chains and cords; but the interrup∣tion of my own will, wherewith my enemy hath forged fetters impossible to be knocked a sunder. My shelter is farre from thee, because thy Salvation is far from sinners. I shall expire in this so wild a bondage, unlesse thy heaven∣ly supplies sally forth, and my God have an eye over me; I am plunged in the mire and have no strength to reco∣ver my selfe; a Harricane of temptati∣ons doth no lesse wrack my soul then the foaming waves of an enraged sea buffets a miserable Bottome. All hope of disingagement from these encom∣passing dangers fades, if the hopes of thy protection blossomes not. Alas! the more I essay to preserve my self from Shipwrack, the more I strike upon the rocks and flats. Both within and without to my selfe, I am my owne fa∣tall
foe: domestique enemies are every where embattailed against me; I throw me eyes on every side, and discover not one in whom to repose a trust: a Lac∣quey, Fear, waites at my heeles; and wheresoever I go, not one faithfull friend answers the diligent scrutiny of my search: but how should I find faith? why should I challenge it from men, when I have forfeited mine to God? In my miseries and afflictions, I have appealed to every one for comfort, I have found none amongst those that filled the van in my affliction, that would lend me any consolation. I have never been happy in a true friend, such have been numerous that were nothing but aire, and smoaked forth volleys of vaine promises; they have been rather dumb (my God), because they vented nothing concerning thee, and because their words were so many sins. I have met with men void of charity, who swelled my faults with aggravations that I might burst into dispaire, who outragiously loaded me with detracti∣ons
and endeavoured that my soul might sink under their malice as well as my reputation; the impious swam in my favours: and declining the right paths, I have been a proselyte to their prophanenesse. I am by little and little arrived to that pitch of irregularity, that although through the interpositi∣on of thy grace, I have not bid farewell to religion, yet have I taxed many things in it, as frivolous and worthy of disdaine. In fine, my God I cannot bor∣row an excuse from any Considera∣tion, I have known thee in truth, but worshipped thee neither in truth nor in spirit, on the contrary I have turned truth into lies, I have obeyed the crea∣ture before the creator, I have fished for delight in things deceitfull and transitory, instead of diving for it in truth eternall. But (O my God) since thou hast informed my knowledg with thy true religion, shake off that drowsi∣nesse, my iniquities hath hung upon me: so guard my eyes that it may resist the sleep of death, which invades my
soul, enlighten my eyes draw them up towards thee, to the end that through thy light they may behold thee who art the light eternall, which is never deficient, never extinguished; which comprehends whatsoever can be ima∣gined sweet and delectable, that they may greedily feast themselves on the vision of thee, that they may run-over with joy, that they may wish for no∣thing but thee, that they may be con∣vinced thou alone art truely amiable. Thou art the true light that conveyes light to all that come into the world. Dart one of thy rayes, that it may dis∣sipate the gloomy darknesse is gathered about me; worke in me a disposition to come under thy wholsome lawes, to the end that my soul, enflamed with the fire of thy love, may languish after none but thee, and seek for no plea∣sures, but what thou reaches to her O Lord. I say, my soul let me say, Thine, thine it is by creation, mine only by gift and donation; preserve a creature
thou hast framed according to thine own image, of whom thou wert pleased to become both the moulder and the mo∣dell. Let not the pretious gift where∣with thou hast endowed me, where∣with thou hast honoured me with pre∣cedence above all the workes of thy hands miserably perish, and become a prey to the mouth of Hell. Stigmatize me in every part, let corroding ulcers and putrefactions creep through my flesh, let wormes and noysome verm∣in consume me; doe but thou pardon my soul, and stretch not forth thy hand towards it armed with tempests; con∣duct me into thy pathes before our He∣mispheare do leave off the departing sunn, who (being now upon his last complement) add force to thy call and compells me to thee: force me (ô God) with all the Artillery of violence, that I may surrender my self to thee and not perish. Supplant my heart of marble with a heart of flesh, let thy spirit wield the scepter there, that thy precepts may oblige my footsteps and thy com∣mands
my observance: let not anything in me (my God) be the motive of these savours, whose unworthinesse in the abuse of so many mercyes hath wholly incapacitated, but thy holy and vener∣able name alone. I must acknowledge the tardinesse of my arrivall at thee, and to me it is punishment enough it was no timelier. But, my God, I am sa∣tisfied thou streightens not the time and limits it to those would come and find thee out; with an equall acceptancy thou receives the tardy and the early. Although sin be an object of thy hatred, it overskips the sinner; nor dost thou rejoyce at his perdition. Although the delay be tedious, yet thou expects with patience. (My God) sweet and taking is that expression, wherewith thou re∣vives the already drooping hopes of my soul. Although (say'st thou) thy other loves have merited my jealous indig∣nation, returne yet unto me, and I will enfold in mine armes. What a pleasing charme is couched in that saying which influenceth the sinner with an encou∣ragement,
although the weaknesse of his forces bring diffidence and dispaire? If the wicked do pennance, he shall in∣duce the acquittall of his transgres∣sions; he shall live and not die. Can it be imagined then (sayest thou) that the death of a sinner is the effect of thy will? It fills me with consolation to hear thee parabolize how the Shepheard find∣ing his lost sheep with joy, heaved it on his shoulders; and how the woman who had found her piece of silver which she had lost, prepared a congra∣tulatory Gossoping for her neighbors. When I turne over thy holy Writ, an inundation of joyfull teares breaks forth; when I incounter the story of the father and the prodigall son, strike the organs of my eares with that sound which rouzeth soules from their dead slumbers. Let it not only find a recep∣tacle in mine eare; but enlighten me also with those divine Rayes, which convey to mens understanding, the hor∣ror of their sinns, and at the same time
overpovver the darknesse of them, let thy voice alvvaies eccho in my heart, say unto my drowsie soul, Hovv long vvilt thou permit the lethargy of death to sit pale upon thy temples? how long shall those cruel bonds retain thee cap∣tive? It is time that thou arise, that thou tread better paths, that thou re∣turne to me who hath ransomed thee. Returne, returne, Shunamite, returne that I may have a respect for thee. Re∣turne, cut of all delaies, pluck off all re∣mora's and hasten to me, because I am thy Lord, I am thy God, who calleth thee, who wipeth away sins, and wraps in oblivion things past. My God, when my eares are solaced with this divine rhetorick, with assurance I will conclude and say, let thy hopes my soul war∣rant repose, because thy Lord load's thee with his bounties, lay aside all fear and goe in quest of him, and although the weariness of so many evill journeys hang on thee, neverthelesse hasten thy steps as thou intends to accelerate thy
content, let not the sense of thy sins dis∣courage thee. When thou shalt be as scarlet, thou shalt become as white as snow, thy sins shall be crossed out, they shall vanish as a small cloud, startle not at the censure of Bold and Presum∣tuous, seeing thou fals rather under the praise of Obedience. My soul, dispatch, go to him, he comes not to call the just but the sinfull. The God offended by thee, the same will be thy saving God, the God that will cause thee to triumph over sins thy mortall enemies. Why trembles thou to set forward? It is not a severe judge cites thee before him but a mercifull father that bec∣kens, who would give thee a test of his kindnesse: Go, go freely whither mercy calls, lest one day a court of justice summon thee. In thee, I now cast an∣chor, my Saviour and my God, to thee I will confesse my sins without the least bashfull tincture of a Blush, because the committing of them before men & the rebelling against thee never covered
my face with a just confusion. Let the grumbling pharisee murmur, Who can pardon sinns but God alone. This is the voice of my God, the effects of whose breath is never abortive. This God that calls me overflowes with gracious sweetnesse, his wrath dams not up the current of his mercy; My Saviour! relying on thy promises it shall not be a fained return to thee. Thou art my Anchorage, and I hope thou wilt prove my Inheri∣tance in the land of the living. Prostrate before thy majesty, I will leave to fear, because thou hast pleased to call me: but lest thy eyes should nauseate my impurities, I will buck them in my teares, they shall flow continually, my couch shall bear a watery testi∣mony of my sorrowes; and that I may render me acceptable to thee, I will be lesse acceptable to my selfe. In conclu∣sion, my God, I will endeavor not to a∣buse the graces thou hast lavished on me with so prodigall a liberality; and since I feel thy motions working in me
I will repent my selfe of my sinns to the end that purified by repentance from a refined and cleansed heart I may sing thy praises, and say with thy prophet, Who is like to thee? How glo∣rious shall thy prayses hang on the lips of a sinner, and of him who having sown in tears shall reap in Joy.
PSALM. VII. I Am mouldy with afflictions, cankred with troubles, rustyed with miseries unexpressible: Gild me (my God) with the Beames of thy Compassion. The Torrents of ini∣quity rise upon me, they have o∣ver-flowed the confines of my Soul, like the proud streames of a swelling current. My sinnes, bank∣ed up by dissimulation, not unsluced by confession, nor laved forth by a∣mendment, are grown to such a height, they have usurped over my head, they have bowed my under∣standing and my will to the domi∣nion of concupisence, or rather to the servitude of the Divell. Alass! on every side, are mortall sally-ports to my Soul, from the bottom of my foot to the top of my head there is nothing which is not over∣spread
with serping ulcers; my enemy hath tripp'd up my heels, and like a barbarous Incensed Ty∣rant he hath sequestred me of all things, but my understanding; to the end that the consciousnesse of my evill and ruine, might hang more weight on my sorrows. It had been an act of favour to have de∣vested me of all the functions of my Soul; but alass he hath spoyled me of them as to good, and left me them as to evill. He hath rocked my Soul into so deep a slumber; al∣though its wounds fall under its discovery, they fall not under so much sense as to wish a cure and urge a remedy. When what was necessary called upon mine ears, then a deafnesse choaked them up. I locked out the revelations of thy Truth; but when a necessary un∣attention should shut out things unprofitable, and the sollies of the
World; then my eares gaped and sucked them in, with a greedy thirst. The taste of things celestiall was unsavory, with a loathing Antipathy I nauseated whatsoever might nourish vertue in my Soul, nothing slid more deliciously off my palate then Terrestrial Gusto's. I have not made the works of my God the prospect of contemplations, upon this Account I have shared more of the beast then of the man: on the contrary, the vanities of the earth, have dallied my Speculations with pleasure; with a lust unsatiable I have been enamoured to them. The old Enemy of mankind hath not onely surprised the five Ports of my senses, to cut off the passages of Salvation; but likewise secured to himself all the members of my bo∣dy. He hath so well placed his am∣buscado's, it was impossible to de∣cline them. When I was most Indu∣strious
to disappoint him, I have mi∣serably dropped into his clutches: my Seeing has bin criminall and my not-seeing; my understanding, and my not-understanding; my dis∣course and my silence; my standing and my sitting, my sleeping and my waking, my walking and my reposing. In fine, (my God) I have perverted the use of my senses and all my members to actions shame∣full and destructive; unchast desires scortched me up; there was neither law natural, divine, or humane that I have not been a trepasser against, I have onely observed the law of sinne. Alass, would I could not say I had observed it, but that I would observe it no longer: but because I am the very same, and feel no al∣teration, I persue worse principles and tread in paths more perilous: my will shakes a Scepter over me, my Soul is gangreen'd with cor∣ruption,
and is it selfe the cause and core of its own evil. I often quarrel with my selfe, that it should be irk∣some to me to live, but not to sinne; my understanding is privy to my folly, which adds the more to my confession, and in my own censure justly casts me, Thou who embra∣ces pleasures with such a pathe∣tick dotage, why wallows thou so long in the mire, wherein thy concupisences have bogg'd thee? Why do the affaires of the world goad thee with such pricking cares? Why hunt'st thou with such a ra∣venous sent after things transitory and perishing? Why miscalls thou those things good thou purchases with so much paine; yea often at the price of thy salvation, things which with fear thou possessest and must quit with sorrow. VVhy (my soul) dost thou forget thy race and the nobility of thy extraction, why
art thou not ashamed, with so much cowardice and pusillanimity to sub∣mit to the power of thy body and senses, which were placed under the Legiance. Why givest thou en∣tertainment to the charmes of the deceitfull promises of the world's witch-craft? How art thou igno∣rant that the embleme of the great∣est good is but an exhaled meteor that radiates for a vvhile and in∣stantly vanisheth. Blush, blush then miserable sinner because thou hast declined the Creator to divert to the creature; that in the end, with a judgment rectified, thou may'st discerne the delusions that abuse thee. Behold how thou wea∣ryes thy selfe in the persuit of a false good, and like to the Issue of a metamorphosed Arachne, who spins her own entrails and weaves them into subtle nets onely to mesh flyes in; so toylest thou with many
labours and troubles in the search of a small prey, not considerable in any thing but in its traine of tor∣ments, wherein it will engage thee. Once more blush that thou hast plowed that, whence thou couldest reap no profit. Deplore the time thou hast mis-husbanded, to the end that out of the very shame of it, thou may'st at least gleane some harvest. Pay thy heart to God, and thou discharges a due debt. Verily when I ruminate these discourses my indignation is kindled against my selfe, that I should not bequeath that to heaven which I so freely bestow on earth. I am offended with my selfe when the reproaches of my conscience allarum my con∣siderations, when I compare the loss of so great riches with the little ad∣vantage of so small gaines. The knowledge of good lead's me not to it, but the light of evill allures
me. My enemy hath school'd my will, and adapting me to his desires, he hath rendred me almost as de∣testable as himselfe. He loads me with Irons, and committs me to the black Rod of sinne. But, my God, since thou art the God of might and of power, and holds jurisdiction over my life, dislodge not thy auxilia∣ry bands farre from me. Draw them forth in my aide, shade me under the umbrella of thy wings, that my adversaryes may not have the view of my ruine; and that my enemy, proud of my destruction, may not have cause to boast, he hath trium∣phed over me. Break the cords that spansel me and hinder my pace to∣wards thee. Knock a-sunder the chaines of sinne I am so strongly fettered in, give my enemy a tast of thy might, let me have cause to make thy altars smoak with the sacrifices of joy, and sing with thy
saints, What expression is large enough to cloathe the power of the Lord? Who is capable of the praises of God, who hath plucked my soul out of the nets and gins of death, who hath elbowed me for falling, and preserved me out of the throat of the lyon in my miseries. At whose eares shall my Invocations knock, if not at thine (my God,) whom our forefathers Invocations have so pro∣fitably moved? if not at thine eares (my God,) who never frustrated the hopes built upon thee? Take me then under thy protection and let the whole world combate me, nothing shall dismay me; I will fling a scorn∣full eye on the assaults and approa∣ches of my enemies, as long as thou embraces my quarrell and stands by me. Sift my heart, sift my affecti∣ons, and winnow out all that is con∣rary to thee. Cast my soul in a new mould, create in me a second faith,
to engraft thy graces, that they come not within the possibility of wither∣ing; so that, having bid adieu to the vanities of the world, and its deceiving pleasures, even the sinner himselfe may be allowed praise for the purity of his desires. My wishes ayming only at thee (my God), let my petitions and supplications find audience. Then will I say with assurance, My soul, ô Lord, is in tra∣vail with no desires but what thou father'st. I am convinced, we cannot pray unlesse thou quicken our pray∣ers with wholsome inspirations, we cannot ascend to thee without thou lend a pulley. Draw me then (O Lord) enlighten my Theory, that it may mend my Practice, that begin∣ning well I may end well: draw me, my God, before my old Inveterate habits smother my nevv resolutions; and my perverted vvill and confirm∣ed in evill, overmaster this dayes
designes for my good: Seeing I pur∣pose what is just, let me not relapse into my former Injustices. Capaci∣tate thee for thy grace and my salva∣tion, spred thy rayes over me, dispell thy darknesse which envellopes me. Invest me in those pretious garments which make me acceptable to thy eyes, dismantle me of those fatall robes wherein sin hath cloathed me. In conclusion, (my God) burthen not thy remembrance with my transgressions. Work an universall change in me, that becoming a new man I may bring to thy service a new soul, new fervours; and that constantly persuing thee I may have relish in nothing but in Jesus my Sa∣viour and my Master. Laus Deo. FINIS.
