C2418 E430_9 R206084 99865272 161496
THE KINGS MAJESTIES LETTER TO THE QUEEN; CONCERNING The differences betwixt the English and the Scots, and the great distractions within the City of London; together with His Majesties promise to His Consort the QUEENE. Wherein is discovered the late proceedings of the KING, touching the French Army, and their Designe. With certain Propo∣sals to the Kingdome of England. PErused and examined by a perfect Copy, and published for generall satisfaction of all His Majesties Subjects. London, Printed for G. Oreton, and are to be sold neere the Royall Exchange in Cornhill. 1648.
THE KINGS MAJESTIES LETTER TO THE QUEENE CONCERNING The proceedings betwixt England and Scotland. &c. WORTHY SIR, LEast new discoveries should cause old actions to be forgotten, in remuneration of your former courtesies, I thought it no lesse then part of my duty, in a brief manner, to put you in mind of some few particulars, wher∣by you may the better satisfie your selfe and others in things of this nature; not that it is any way pleasing to me
to me to rip open old offences, after renewed repentance, but obstinacy and perversnesse deserves no lesse then sharpe re∣proofe wheresoever it is found. Therefore, I desire you to consider of the enclosed Paper, being entituled, A Letter from the King to the Queen, but in∣tercepted. However, mistake not my meaning in perusing of it, who am SIR, Your unfeigned friend and Servant, T. WILSON. Cowes-Castle, 24. Febr. 1647. Postscript. SIR, Vpon the close of this Letter, I thought meet to put you in mind of some few Copies to be sent down into these parts, to be dispersed amongst the Inhabitants in the Westerne Counties, that so the true sense of former actions, may be made apparent to the weakest capacity, I remain Yours to serve you, T. W. A perfect Copy of the Kings Letter to the Queen, inter∣cepted, and sent to London, DEARE HEART, I Will be ever constant to the rules and grounds thou left with me, not dassenting in the least from my former princi∣ples, but commending thee for thy dexterity and activity, and I
think none more fit to be a means of a glorious peace then thy self; and without thy company I can neither have peace nor com∣fort, for I value thy love above all earthly things, and that is my contentment; for all my actions are inseparably joyned with thine, and shall ever tend to serve and please thee, and no dan∣ger of death or misery, shall make m doe any thing unworthy of thy love, and I hope the difference between the Scots and the English will encrease, and the dissenions at London, are ra∣ther increasing then ceasing; and be confident, I will not de∣sert the Papists, mine and thy best friends. And fear not, I will not engage my self before I have an an∣swer from thee, nor consent to go to London before the disban∣ding of the Army, or a firme peace be setled. And I conceive France, is the best way for transporting the Duke of Lorraines Army over into England. And I give thee power in my name, to promise to whom thou think fit to trust with so great a secret, that I will suspend all Laws against the Roman Catholiques in England and Ireland, as soon as God shall enable me I will take them away by a Law, so as by thy meanes and favour I may have so powerfull an assistance against my Rebels of England and Scotland, as may deserve so great a fa∣vour, and enable me to do it; and also to promise them in Ire∣land, if you can have it no cheaper, that I will joyne with their Forces against Inchiqueen, &c. And if I had had but two of my mind, I would never have called them a Parliament; and the argument that prevailed with me, that the calling of them did not acknowledge them to be a Parliament▪ upon which consi∣deration and condition I did it, and no otherwise, and accor∣dingly it is registred in the Councel book, with the Councels u∣nanimous approbation: and I pray consider above all earthly things, that my contentment is inseparably joyned with thine, for all my actions shall ever tend to serve and please thee. I re∣maine eternally thine. C. R.
Certain Proposals to the Kingdome of England, touching the late proceedings of the King. I. COncerning bleeding Ireland, That not long before the Rebellion in that Kingdom broke forth, there was of∣ten private meetings at White-hall, by severall great per∣sons, who since proved the most bloudy Actors in that de∣testable war. II. That when the King first heard of that horrid Rebellion, and of the massacre of one hundred thousand of his Prote∣stant Subjects (he being in Scotland) divers standers by then did discover by the Kings severall questions to the messen∣gers, and by his gesture, that he had little sorrow for so hor∣rible and treacherous a massacre. III. That at the first beginning of the Rebellion, his Majesty was often pressed to publish a Proclamation against them by the Proclamation of England, and to be read in all the, Churches of this Kingdom, but could not fully accomplish it, having only a grant of 40. to be printed, and none issued out, but by his Majesties special command. IV. That by the countenancing of the Irish Rebellion, the Re∣bels in all their Papers and transactions of businesse, stiled
themselves the King and Queens Army, saying, they had good warrant under black and white for their proceedings, and crying out against the English Parliament and Puritans, as the Kings enemies and theirs, and divers depositions and pa∣pers, extant and in paint to that purpose, before these unna∣turall wars began, that they have the bread Seale for their warrant. V. That his Majesty granted a strong Commission to Gene∣neral Oneal, General of the Irish Army, as did appear by the great controversie betwixt the said Oneal, and General Mon∣rose, that he who could shew the best Commission from the King should submit to each other. VI. That the Kings designes and welfare do much depend up∣on the good successe of the Irish Army under command of the Lord Taffe, as appears by the Lord Digbie, touching the late battel betwixt the said Taff, and the Lord Inchiqueen. VII. His employing the Lord Taff in England, and many other Irish in his Army against the Parliament of England, and their Army. VIII. That divers strange Chaplains, not long before these trou∣bles began, were authorized to preach at White-hall, for the raising up of the Kings Prerogative; and set before him, by way of emulation, the broken Parliament of France, and that he was Lord of all the Kingdome, and that all mens estates were his. IX. They also declared, That if the King, like Nebuchadnezar, should set up a golden Image to be adored, the people if they refused that Idolatry, are bound to suffer death quiet∣ly,
and not resist the King, as if whole Nations were made for the pleasure and will of a King, and be subject to him, as the Beasts were to Adam: and such men as these generally were preferred by the Bishops, which when they had ano∣ther head the Pope, the matters of State many times went ve∣ry justly for the interest of the Common-wealth; but of latter times were meer servants to Prerogative, and against all interest of the Common-wealth. X. That King Charles hath often said, that Parliaments were factious, because they were ever opposite to Tyrannicall Prerogative, and Court-designs. XI. The under-hand dealings wath the King of Denmark, as appeareth by the Kings owne Letters and practises with the Army raised against the Scots, and with the Scots Ar∣my. EXamined by the Original Copy, and printed for generall sa∣tisfaction of all the Free-born people of England. FINIS.
