C3986 E1535_3 99867849 170064
CHURCH-INCENSE: OR DIVINE EJACULATIONS: Composed by that eminent and faith¦ful Servant of God, Mr. Hen. Church, published since his death by his Son, Mr. N.C. Mr. of Arts of EMANUEL Colledge in CAMBRIDGE. My heart is enditing a good matter, &c. Psalm 45.1. For we have our Conversation in the Heavens. Philip. 3.20. . Democrates. 'Tis the part of a Divine soul ever to minde some good thing. London, Printed for J. Rothwell at the Fountain and Bear in Cheap-side. 1655.
Imprimatur, EDM. CALAMY.
To the Worshipfull THO. ARNOLD Esquire, &c. THE reason (Worthy Sir) why this Piece of Mr. Henry Church comes of no lesse errand, then to call you Patron, is ma∣nifold: but more-es∣pecially twofold.
1. The Author there∣of was your intimate and familiar Associate. He was great with you: You were good to him. 2. The work it selfe is choice. He left many very rare and precious thoughts turn'd into inke. This is the very Quintessence of them all. As for him, Who was ever so sad for his de∣parture, as your selfe? O surpassing Love! O right David and Jona∣than!
O my noble Friend, God can, and God alone can retribute your fa∣vourable Courtesies to your loving Antece∣dent now in Heaven, and his living Rela∣tives yet on Earth. Behold, eminent Sir, your near & dear friend once dead, but alive a∣gain and again. Behold him yet a∣live, tum Libris, tum Li∣beris; in the off-spring of his Minde, and of his Body.
Behold him alive here, sighing after his Creator, panting after his Redee∣mer, breathing after his Comforter. Behold him alive, con∣versing with you a new; helping you to converse with the Lord of Life, & teaching others to live. Accept of this my poor thanks for your Worships rich love unto the deceased Author. Accept it also as a cordial Congratulatory
to your Worship of that favour you have obtained of the LORD lately. For so Solomon terms it, Prov. 18.22. The most high God prosper, dignify, blesse, and sanctify your most worthy selfe, your vertu∣ous and much-honoured Consort, the Lady ANNE ELDRED: your pious and learned Kins∣man, Mr. GEO. AR∣NOLD (whose names (after your own in chief)
may adorne not only my Epistle, but also Gods Gospel) and all your Wor dear Relations with all manner of exter∣nal, internal, eternal Fe∣licity. This is the un∣feigned Apprecation and Heart-wish of YOUR WORSHIPS Unworthy Servant in the Lord, NAT. CHURCH.
IMPARTIAL READERS, I Appeal to your own con∣sciences, What felicity can there be on this side Eternity comparable to the Communion of Saints; whether with GOD by Prayer, with each other by Conference, or with our own souls by Divine Meditati∣ons? Let Men and Angels judg, if there be any Heaven on
Earth parallel to a celestial emprovement of terrestial E∣mergencies. As for the worth and excel∣lency of an Ejaculatory spirit, it is of weighty concerne to all people, at all times, in all places, on all occasions. And (as the Author himself writes, these up-dartings of soul are not only expedient upon extra∣ordinary account: As when a Christian comes before a wicked Magistrate, to pray in heart, LORD, give me courage, a mouth, and wisdom, &c. When none perceive, & we cannot pray solemnly. At the hour of death, when the heart is on∣ly
alive, then to pray with that heart. But also upon every ordinary occasion; as when we awake with GOD, and go to rest with him; lift∣ing up our hearts and mind to him. VVhen we go forth, return home; at Meat, at work; alone, in company. These holy desires do shew that there is spiritual life in us. Mr. Wil. Struther, in his Christian Observations, hath this notable passage, So long (sayes he) as there is Evil in the world, Malice in Satan, VVeakness in our selves, and Goodness in God, we cannot want matter of continual prayer.
Mr. Tho. Cobbet of New-England, in his new-extant Treatise discourses of Ejacula∣tions in special, very rarely; & of Prayer in general, most pi∣ously and copiously. Mr. Tho. Fuller in his Good thoughts in bad times, and more good thoughts in worse times, treats of the Use and Priviledg of EJACULA∣TIONS very acutely. And in∣deed that whole Enchiridion of his has an up-darting ten∣dency, and points whither he is bound. Dr. Hall of Exon has done much this way in his Vows, Meditations and Soliloquies. The variety of Writers that
have steered this course with their Pens, I must wave, lest the Epistle sink the Book. Here it is, Christian Friends: If you reap any Counsel or Con∣solation therefrom, let the LORD have your praises, and let him have your Prayers, who wishes you All better then himself. Nathanael Church.
The Contents. 1. What these holy Eja∣culations are? 2. Who have had these E∣jaculations? 3. What doth hinder these Ejaculations. 4. How to obtain, these E∣jaculations? 5. Scruples removed concer∣ning Ejaculations. 6. Uses Applicatory for E∣dification.
OF Church-Incense, OR Divine Ejaculations. First, what these ho∣ly Ejaculations are. THey are a Dart∣ing-up of our Thoughts to the LORD: or secret Passages between the
Soul and CHRIST. They are short (but sweet) Prayers; rather cordial, then vocal, i. e. more from the Heart, then the Voice. The word is taken from a darting forth: because the Heart hath recourse to GOD. The Latine word Ejacu∣latio is a casting a farre off: Ejaculator is one that throweth a Dart, or stingeth a Stone, &c. To Ejaculate is to mount up to Heaven; to have se∣cret recourse to the most high; to have sweet com∣munion with Him, who is invisible.
Holy Ejaculations are the breath of the Soul. The more a man hath of these, the more heaven∣ly he is, and acquainted with the Almighty. So much for what Eja∣culations are. Secondly, Who have had these Ejaculati∣ons. 1. DAVID had them. Psalm 25.1. Unto thee O LORD, do I lift my Soul. Soul is the Desire. 2. MOSES had them. Exod. 14.15. Why cryest thou to me, saith GOD. Ex∣positors
render it, He cry∣ed with inward groanings. 3. ABRAHAM'S Ser∣vant had them. Gen. 24.45. He prayed in his Heart. 'Tis said it was cum Animo, with his minde: therefore inwardly, as An∣cient Commentators note. 4. NEHEMTAH had them. Nehem. 2.4. So I prayed to the GOD of Hea∣ven. &c. The place shews, it was an Ejaculation. 5. THE LORD JESUS had these holy Ejaculati∣ons John 11.33. he groaned in the Spirit and was trou∣bled.
And v. 38. Groaning in Himself he came to the Grave. Verse 41. He thanked his Father, who had heard Him. Now GOD hears the Desires, Psalm 10.17. He searches the Heart, and knowes the minde of the Spirit. Romans 8.27. Our groanings are not hid from Him Psalm 38.9.
Thirdly, What doth hinder Ejaculations. In General, All sinne. For That separates our Souls from GOD. Isay 59.2. But your ini∣quities have separated be∣tween you and your GOD: and your sinnes have hid his Face from you, that He will not heare. As Mudd and Stones in a Spring do hinder the vent of Water from issu∣ing forth: So our Sinnes do hinder our heavenly De∣sires and quell our Souls.
Sin disables a man from looking-upward. Psalm 40.12. But in Particular, there are some sinnes, which do much hinder our converse with GOD, as, 1. Covetousness. A gree∣die desire of Earthly things. This is as Bird-lime to clog the Soul and hinder it from mounting upwards. They that mind earthly things are none of those that have their conversation in Heaven. Phil. 3.19, 20. 2. Pride of Heart. GOD resisteth the Proud, 1 Peter 5.5. and is not
conversant with them: They have no recourse to GOD, no acquaintance or communion with Him. They seek not GOD. Psalm 10.4. And GOD beholds them a farr off. Psalm. 138.6. 3. Sinnes against con∣science do much hinder our sweet converse with GOD: They dead and damp our Spirits. A dull Instrument cutts not: How should a dull Spirit, that is not cherished, be active and lively? But a good conscience makes us to joy and rejoyce in GOD. 2 Cor. 1.12.
4. Excessive eating and drinking dulls the Spirit exceedingly, and makes it heavy and unwieldy. They, whose GOD is their Belly, do minde earth∣ly things. But We must have our conversation a∣bove the Earth. Philip 3.19, 20. 5. Malice and rancour hinder our ejaculatorie de∣votion. There can bee no sweet Recourse to GOD, where is bitter Malice to∣wards Men, and revenge∣full Desires. Gen. ch. 4. verse 4, 8, 16. Matth. 5.23.24. 6. Conformity to the
World breaks our Ac∣quaintance with GOD and the Godly. 2 Tim. 4.10. Demas hath forsaken Me, having loved this present World. Following the corruptions of the Times looses our Friendship with GOD, and makes us estranged from Him; from Delight in Him, and Communion with him. James 4.4. Know ye not, that the Amity of the World is Enmitie with GOD? So much Sweetnesse gained in the World: so much sweetnesse lost in GOD.
7. Neglect of holy Du∣ties, as Reading, Hearing, Conference, Meditation, Prayer, Preparation for the Sabbath, and Keeping it holy, &c. The holy Fire goes out, when this heavenly Fewel failes. 1 Thes. 5.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, verses com∣pared together. 8. Coldnesse in prayer at other times. Rom. 12.11. Fervent in Spirit, serving the LORD. For as there is a Sound after Bells have ringed, and Instruments have tuned: so Ejaculati∣ons
do follow our Devo∣tions; which being but colde, our Ejaculations ei∣ther do slack, or cease. Fourthly, How to ob∣tain these Divine E∣jaculations. The Helps to them are such as these. 1. We must deny our selves: so shall we be more fit for converse with GOD. Amos 3.3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? 2. We must pray and
deavour to be new-born: For the unregenerate have no converse with GOD. 1 John 1.6. If we say that we have Fellowship with Him, and walk in darknesse, we lye and do not the truth. 3. We must nourish Faith. By Faith, wee have sweet Recourse to God, and lift up our souls to Him in whom wee do believe. 2 Tim. 1.12. Psal. 121.1, 2. 4. We must perfect our Love. For our Love carries our Hearts to the Object be∣loved.
Judg. 16.15. How canst thou say, I love thee, when thine Heart is not with me? And verse 16, Hee told her all his Heart. Lovers have secret passages, unknown to others: So it is between the Lord and a Soul inflamed with an holy Love. Psalm 25.14. 5. We must make choice of heavenly societie, and take time for heavenly Exercises. The way to have Communion with GOD is to have Communion with the godlie. 1 John 1.6, 7.
The way to delight our selves in the LORD, is to delight in his Saints, in his Sabbaths, in his Ser∣vices. Psalm 16.1.2. Isa. 58. end. 6. We must check our Hearts for their dul∣ness, and bewaile our for∣getfulnesse of GOD, and our deadnesse of Spirit. We must chide our Soules, as the Marriners did Jonas. Jonas 1.6. What mean∣est thou, O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy GOD. We must make use of outward occasions to force our Minds Christ-ward.
VVe are to mount up∣ward by striving. Nothing is easy and excellent. 7. We must keep a narrow VVatch over our Thoughts. Look often to the Temper and Disposition of the INNER-MAN. Examine the Heart of∣ten: then elevate the Soul occasionally by secret ac∣knowledgments of sinne, and earnest Desires of Grace. Psalm 4.4. Commune with your own Heart upon your Bed, &c. Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our wayes, and
turne again unto the LORD. 8. We must inure our Hearts to secret praises for particular Mercies. When we have received a Blessing, we should with speed prayse GOD for it secretly, before wee do it solemnly. We must endeavour to be much-affected with Gods Favours: To be quick in Returne, and often Thank∣full: To be evermore bes∣sing and praising the LORD. This is the way to have our Conversation in the Hea∣vens. Phil. 3.20.
And to be still with God, Psalm 139.18. 9. We must Cherish and feed holy Motions. Quench not the Spirit, 1 Thes. 5.19. But Stir-up Grace. 2 Tim. 1.6. Put in Execution holy motions. Defer not, Delay no Time. This is the way to pre∣serve the INWARD∣MAN: to attain to a right Temper, and to be much in Ejaculations. 10. We must diligent∣ly observe GODS dayly Pro∣vidence. If we will give the LORD
our Hearts, our Eyes then must observe his ways, Prov. 23.26. We should not incon∣siderately let slip any re∣markable Occurrences of GODS Power, Wisedom and Goodness to our selves or others. If we ponder and me∣ditate how GGD hears our Prayers, answers our Doubts, relieves our wants, prevents our Fears; Wee shall not want Occasions, if we want not Hearts to lift up.
Fifthly some Scruples Resolved concern∣ing Ejaculations. Scruple 1. May not a Christian con∣tent himself with these E∣jaculations, and use no Mor∣ning, nor Evening Sacri∣fice? Answer. No. For GOD must be glorified with our Bo∣dies, as well as with our Spirits: 1 Cor. 6.20. And our Mouths must shew forth his Praise: Psal. 51.15.
Scruple 2. Where are we in the Scrip∣ture commanded to pray in our Families? Answer. 'Tis gathered by sound Consequence and good Example. Joshuah and his House would serve the LORD. Josh. 24.15. To serve, is to wor∣ship: Exod. 20.5. To worship, is to pray: John 9.31. So then, Joshuah and his House would pray. So CHRIST and his Family prayed.
And a Curse is prayed for upon the Families that call not upon GOD. Jer. 10. last. Scruple 3 Have not the Unregene∣rate these Ejaculations? We see many good desires come from them: as, Blessed be thou of the LORD, Judges 17.2. Let me dy the death of the Righteous. Numb. 23.10. Answer. They may have Flashes, as sparks falling on the Sea: they are soon out: they differ from the Rege∣nerate.
1. In the rise of them; Worldly Hopes, or Fears cause them: In the Regene∣rate they are raised by Gods Spirit: Romans 8.26. They arise out of Love and Respect to God: Psal. 18.1. 2. In the Unregene∣rate they are only good wishes. 1 Sam. 15.13. In the Godly they are real Prayers. 1 Sam. 1.12, 13. 3. In the unregene∣rate they are temporarie; soon gone: In the Godly they are ha∣bitual. Psal. 34.1. Isai. 26.9.
4. In the unregenerate they come onely from the Lips, and so may be custo∣marie: Jer. 12.2. In the Regenerate they come from the Heart. Psal. 25.1. And so are more con∣stant, Job. 27.10. Psalm 108:1. Scruple 4. Do not some attain this holy temper, that they walk thus with GOD without interrup∣tion? Answer. Those in Heaven do so. But on Earth we have the first-fruits only.
As here we see darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12. &c, So we Converse with God but weakly: Mat. 26.41. We have but little Re∣course to God, and that with much adoe. ibid. vers. 40, and 43. Yet Some have more then Others: though none perfectly, but sincerely. Isa. 26.8. Scruple 5. Have not many so much worldly businesse, that they cannot attain these holy Eja∣culations? Answer. These are for them e∣specially:
that by them they may have recourse to God secretly, because they cannot do it solemnly. Scruple 6. Some pray Morning and Evening, and never labour for these. Answer. As a whelp following his Master over a style, frisks about the Field, and meets his Master again at the other style at the End of the Field: So do these Pray in the Morning, but do rove all day in their Hearts, and then do Pray at Night again.
But an ingenuous Childe goes over the style, runs by his Father over the Field to the other style: So these Christians are an in∣genuous People, that keep close to God all the Day. see Psalm 25.5. Prov. 23.17. Scruple 7. It is impossible to attain to this in this World. Answer. Examples do shew; that as it is no Novelty: so 'tis no Impossibility. Enoch walked with God. Gen. 5.22, 24. So did Zachariah
and his wife, Luke 1.6. And the Apostles had their conversation in Hea∣ven. Phil. 3.20. Scruple 8. This is the way to dash all mirth. To be ever pray∣ing, ever setting our selves before God, is to fall to a Me∣lancholy. Answer. 1. GOD is the Foun∣tain of Joy. To have re∣course to Him, is the on∣ly way to be full of Com∣fort. Those in Heaven are conversant with God, and full of joy. Psal. 16.11.
2. This is the way to attain to the right use of Mirth and Recreations. To be made more heavenly in them: Phil. 4.4. To be more mode∣rate in their use: verse 5. And better after wee have used them. To be more fit for good Duties. And more prepared for Heaven, by our wise and holy Carriage in Mirth and Refreshments.
Sixtly, Uses for Edification. And they are these four. 1. Information. 2. Exhortation. 3. Consolation. 4. Direction. Use 1. First, for Infor∣mation. This shewes there is an inward, hidden, spiritual Life, conversant with God; as well as an outward, na∣tural Life, manifested to men. 2 Cor. 5.7. Which inward Life Christians
should Aspire after. Col. 3.1, 2, 3. Use 2. Exhortation. We should Use the means to attain this holy Communion with God, by abstaining from Sinne and all Evills, which quell and dul the Spirit: as Earthly∣mindednesse, Excessive love to the World, Sinnes against Conscience, Pride of Heart, Intemperance, Passion, Cold∣nesse in holy Duties. And wee should la∣bour to nourish Faith and Love, and check our dul∣nesse, and to endeavour to quicken our Spirits: We
should watch our Hearts, and cherish good Motions, oftentimes answering good Motions with holy Ejacula∣tions, as when the Lord says, seek my Face: let our Hearts reply. Lord, thy face will I seek, Psalm 27. ver. 8. Use 3. Consolation. To shew how neces∣sary and comfortable these Ejaculations are; ordinary, as upon all Occasions whatsoever; and extraor∣dinary, as at death, and in persecution; when Chri∣stians are brought before Tyrants, they may in their
Hearts have recourse to GOD, and say, LORD de∣liver me from this Wolfe. LORD give me a Mouth and Wisdome to answer. LORD stand by thy servant. And the like. Yet the Enemy knows nothing, when God knows the Groanes. So at Death: when Hands do dye, and Eye∣strings do break, and the Vital Spirits (as the last refuge) flee to the Heart: when the Tongue cleaveth to the Roof of the Mouth, and a Christian cannot swallow his spittle; then these Ejaculations may be
usefull. And the Lord that searcheth the Heart, knows the Desires and inward Groans. Thus they may be use∣full Ordinary and Extra∣ordinary, in Life and in Death; and may be the last service we perform on Eath. Use 4. Direction. To shew some Forms for daylie practice, and re∣newed occasions, according to the several Passages of Gods Providence. When we awake. Lord I am still with thee.
Psal. 139.18. When we arise. Raise me, O Lord, from sin and sorrow. When we apparrell our Selves. Cloath me, O Lord, with the Righteousnesse of thy Sonne. When we go forth. Let thy presence O Lord go with me. Exod. 33.15. When we Return. Lord, Blesse my Habi∣tation. Prov. 3.33.
At our work. Blesse, LORD, the work of my hands. Psalm. 90.15. At our meat. Blessed be thy Provi∣dence. Lord, feed my soul. When we are to speak. LORD give me wisdome. Having Sinned. LORD, I have done evill. When we are Dull. LORD, quicken me. LORD, let thy Spirit re∣vive me.
When we feele a good Motion. Lord blesse this motion, and increase it. In Temptation. Lord, strengthen thy ser∣vant. Lord, assist me with thy Grace. Lord, help me by thy Spi∣rit. In heavinesse. Comfort the soul of thy Servant. When we see the Godly. Cause me to love all thy Saints.
When we look on our Child. Lord, let this Child live a life of grace in thy-sight. When a Crosse befalls us. Lord, teach me to profit. Lord, fit me with Pati∣ence to bear it. When some come to speak with us. Lord, blesse the occasi∣on, whatsoever it be. When wee put off our Clothes. Lord, teach me to put off the Old Man.
In Bed. Lord, bring me to thine eternal Rest. Let me close mine eyes in thy Favour. When we meet a Preacher. Lord, let thy Ministers be clothed with thy Righteous∣nesse. In Opposition. Lord, bow their Hearts to Thee. Lord, restrain them from doing me hurt. The Occasions are in∣numerable. Sometimes in respect of Sinne: Some∣times Mercies are renewed. Enemies arise: or Friends shew kindnesse.
Comforts are want∣ing: or joy increases. Our Hearts begin to be dead: or Grace makes them to relent. It goes ill with the Church: or good successe be∣falls them. As a Cunning Gamester at Tables; let what Cast come, that can come, He turns it to fur∣ther the Game: So, what∣soever befalls us, let us turn it to further our Af∣fections to GOD, and car∣ry these, or the like Ejacu∣lations in our Memory. Remember me, O my God, in goodnesse, Neh. 5.19. Teach me thy Statutes. Ps. 119.12.
Shine on me with thy Fa∣vour. see Psalm 4.5, 6. Raise my Soul to Hea∣ven: see Cant. 1.4. Fill me with goodnesse. Increase Grace in me. Enflame my Heart to love thee. Shew me the beauty of Holinesse. Sanctifie me, O Lord, throughout. 1 Thes. 5.21. Powre thy holy Spirit upon me. See Joel 2.28. O let me never forget Thee. Fill me with Joy and Peace in believing. Ro. 15.13. Be Thou the surpassing Sweetnesse of my Soul. Remember me with the
Favour of thy People, Psalm 106.4. Quicken me according to thy loving-kin dnesse, Ps. 119.88. These, or the like, as Gods Spirit shall dictate, will be as Salt to keep our Souls from putrifying. As God said to Elijah, 1 Kings 19.9.13. What dost thou here, EliJah? So may we say to the Redeemed Soul groveling about Earth; What dost thou here, thou Redeemed Soul? Awake, Arise, look to thy Maker, Isai. 17.7. to thy Redeemer: let Him be thy
Treasure, thy Joy, thy Sa∣tisfaction, the Mirth of thy Spirit. Arise, my Love, my Sister, may Christ say. Arise, my fair one: the price of my Bloud: come, walk in the Galleries of Heaven: seek the things above. Col. 3.1, 2. These Meditations shall make us to begin our Hea∣ven here. Objection. You that have written this, come short of the same your self. Resolution. True, I have but an
Earnest in respect of the Fulnesse; a Drop in respect of the Ocean: the First∣fruits in respect of the Har∣vest. Yet it is not with Me, as it was with Her, who said, Video meliora: deteriora sequor. I see the better: but follow the worser. But Contrary. 1. I blesse God for that measure I have received. 2. I think basely of my self, that it is none other∣wise with me. 3. I think highly of those that go before me; on whom God hath bestowed a more excellent Spirit.
4. I endeavour my self to obtain a more holy Frame and Temper of Heart. 5. I use the Means to whet the inward Man. So then, I follow the Bet∣ter, I see; though I am led Captive to the VVorser, which I do hate. FINIS.
Seasonable Directi∣ons to Christians, how to behave them∣selves in these times of Fear and Danger. 1. LEt a man now examine him∣self, whether he be in the state of grace
or no. Let us trie our Faith and Repentance. If we will not try our selves, we are like to be tryed; it is our wisdome to do it be∣fore hand, Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own Work. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith: prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates? 1 Cor. 11.31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. 2. We should carefully wean
our minds from the love of of the World. A thing hanged on a pin, is easily heaved off, but things glewed together, are hardly sundred: David loved Absolom too much, which made him so much lament when he lost him. Excessive Love to the World, will make the Crosse ten times the heavi∣er. We should inure our selves to some Hardnesse: abate some things of Food, Ease, Apparrel. A Delicate person can hardly suffer. See 2 Tim. 4.10. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
3. We should be twice as much exercised in Religious duties as before. Mat. 26.14, 15, 16, 17. When Judas was plotting; Christ went to the Passo∣ver. When God comes to visit, let him finde us neither idle nor ill employed. Let us be moved with re∣verence, to use means, to save our Selves, and our Families: See Psalm 32.6, 7. and Isai. 26.20. 4. We should labour to get and keep a good Consci∣ence. Then though we have Troubles without; yet we
may have Peace within. Compare Acts 24.16. with 2 Cor. 1.12. If a good Conscience be our Exercise now; it shall be our Joy hereafter. 5. Pray, Sue, and en∣treate evermore for the Fa∣vour of God. It will be intolerable to apprehend the wrath of God, and the wrath of Man both at once: See, Ps. 55.16, 17. Psalm 145.18, 19. Psalm 143.9. 6. Let us acquaint our selves with Gods Truth, and make much of the Pro∣mises. They being stored up,
will be as strong waters to keep us from fainting: and as a precious Cordial to re∣vive our poor drooping Spirits. See 2 Peter 1.4. Psal. 12.5, 6. and 50.15. Jam. 1.12. 7. Get into the Heart the sound and experimentall Knowledge and Love of the Truth. It is the Truth we are like to suffer for: We cannot suffer for that wee do not know, much lesse for that we do not love. See Psal. 1.1, 2, 3. Psalm 119.92. and v. 165. 8 We should labour to en∣courage and Comfort one a∣nother,
in these evil Times. God hath a Book of Re∣membrance, of them that speak often one to each o∣ther to trust in his Name. Mal. 3.13. to the end. When men do ask, VVhat news? we should Qestion with them; VVhat shall we do to escape Gods Judgements? To stay his VVrath? Shall we pray? and humble our selves? shall we fast? Shall we become new men? And binde our selves to God, with an ever∣lasting Covenant? 9. Meditate Terrours. Conceive the worst before hand.
To be fore-warned is to be fore-armed. Get Hope: get Submission: get Pati∣ence. Let us prepare, and set our selves in a readinesse; think often, a judgment is coming. All the faithfull Ministers give warning: Many of them are taken a∣way, we may fear, from the Evil to come. The sword is one our neighbour Nations. Our Stay and Strength is taken away. We give too much way to the divorcing sinne of Idolatry. Our Parlia∣ments have been often dis∣solved. The Power of Reli∣gion
is in many places op∣posed. Meditate, as if the Ene∣my had landed, or there were civil Combustion and Uprore. The thing I feared (saith Job) is come upon me. 10. Spare not one sin unmor∣tified; keep no beloved Dali∣lab. The love of one Sinne will work us more Woe then all our Enemies, and will raise inward Fears and Doubtings: when o∣thers shall have joy, peace and consolation of Spirit. Jonas 1. Till our Jonas be thrown over-boord, the
winds and waves will not make a League with us. 11. We should cast a∣way all confidence in our selves, and in our own strength. Peter trusted to him∣self and fell. In his own might shall no man prevail. 1 Sam. 2. Let us be strong in the Lord and in the Power of His might. Eph. 6.10. 12. We should redeem the time because the days are evill. Especially from idle talking, and speaking of those things which do not concerne us, and for speak∣ing whereof may endanger us.
The Prudent should keep silence in an evil time: Am. 5.13. The Adversary may entrap us in our Words: therefore take heed before whom, and what, and how you speak. 13. Let our Souls mourn in secret for the sinnes of the Time and Place we live in. Ezek. 9.4, 5, 6. God has a Pen and Ink-horn to mark the Mourners, as well as a Slaughter-weapon to destroy the sinners. 'Tis better mourning here for sin, then hereafter for Mi∣sery. We shall do well to re∣deem
our Time from ad∣ding to the sinnes of others, and bestow it in bewailing Theirs and our own Pro∣vocations. Then shal we be marked among the Mour∣ners, and hidden in the day of the LORDS wrath. 14. Let us be often con∣versant with God by Hea∣venly Ejaculations. Isai. 26.20. We should enter into our chamber, shut the door, hide our selves, till the indignation passe over. Let the stream of our thoughts be for Heaven. Let us get under our Fa∣thers wings, and say to him, Thou art my hiding
place: Thou shalt encom∣passe me about with Songs of deliverance, Ps. 32.7, 8. &c. 15. We should exercise our selves in works of mercy. Visit the Sick: Give a pertion to Seven and to Eight: for thou knowest not what evil the Lord will bring on the Earth. Eccles. 11.2. The mercifull have the promise to find mercy: Mat. 5. Let us set before our eyes the Joys of Heaven and the Examples of the suffering Saints. Examples shew us, 'tis no noveltie, nor impossibi∣lity to suffer for Christ
and the Gospel. Paul overlooks the light Afflictions, and sees the weighty Glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. Moses had an eye to the Recompence of Reward. Heb. 11.35. Read the whole Chapter, see how Faith breaks through all Troubles. Look to Jesus Christ the Auther and Finisher of Faith, who for the Joy set before Him, endured the Crosse, despised the Shame, &c. Heb. 12.1, 2. Let us Remember and Consider that our momenta∣nie troubles shall be recom∣penced with everlasting Re∣freshments.
These will not stand in Times of Trou∣ble. 1. THose which doe slight God and Religion in their Peace and Prospetity, will never for God and Re∣ligin suffer Adversitie. 2. Those which stand not against Error and False Doctrine, pleading with their Mouthes; will hardly for the truth part with their Bloud.
3. Those which serve God now, being moved only by the praise of Men, will leave the service of God, when men disgrace them. 4. Those which can∣not endure the smaller Try∣als, will much lesse stand in the greater. Jer. 12.5. If thou hast run with Foot-men and they have wearied thee, how then wilt thou be able to contend with Horse-men? 5. Those which can∣not suffer the power of the Word, to come into their Hearts, will not for the Truth of the Word lay down their Lives. FINIS.
