C7053 E304_12 R200306 99861113 158778
A COPPIE OF Lieut. Gen. Cromwels Letter; Concerning the taking of WINCHESTER Castle: With a List of the particulars. Where was taken; 7. Peeces of Ordnance. 17. Barrels of powder. Musket bullets 2000. weight. Match 800. weight. Beef & Pork, 38. hogsheads. 15000. weight of Cheese. 800. pound of Butter. Wheat & meal, 140. quarters. Bisket, 7000. weight. Strongbeere, 112. hogsheads. French Wine, 3. hogsheads. Salt, 10. quarters. Oatmeal, 20. bushels. Candle, 70. dozen. Wood, 30. load. Charcoal, 40. quarters. Seacole, 30. bushels, for the Smith. Sheep, 14. Fresh Beief, 4. quarters. Together, with Mr. Peters report made to the House of Commons, from Lieutenant Gen. Cromwell. Commanded to be printed, and is published, according to Order. Octob. 9. London, printed by Iane Goe. 1645.
Mr. PETERS his report, made to the House of Commons. MR. Peters, Minister to the Army, being sent from Lieue∣nant Generall Cromwell from Winchester, came to the House of Commons, with the Lieutenant Generals man attending him to the House; with a Letter from his Ma∣ster to the Speaker, concerning the taking of Winchester Castle; and the House gave Mr. Spavin, the Lieutenant Generals Secretary, 50. l. And forthwith called Mr. Peters into the House, who went in attended with the Sergeant at Arms with the Mace before him; where the Speaker giving him thankes for his unwearied labours in the preservation of this Kingdome, and assuring him that the House took care for him, who had so often brought them good tidings▪ and hazarded himself so much; and told him, that he had liberty to speak freely, what he had in commands from the Lieutenant Generall. Mr. Peters spake in the House, the summe of whose discourse, was as followeth. Mr. Speaker, I Came from Winchester the last night late, but I had come sooner, had not my L. Ogle, and his company been so unwilling to part with their sack and strong beer, of which they drank so liberally at their farwel, that few of them (as it is their manner) could get up their horses without help, for the agreement was for their marching out at 3. a Clock but it proved lae, through their debaughchery. My Commands (from the Lieutenant Generall) are to give this ho∣nourable house a further narative of the Castle of Winchester, being up∣on te place and a spectator of Gods good hand in the whole work, as al∣so to present his humble request to the house in some perticulars; and be∣fore I speak to either of them, if gratitude it selfe were not sometimes un∣seasonable, I would (in my own name and the name of many thousands) ume this honourable house most humble thankes for our Lieutenant
Generall, in that you suffer (with patience) the vacansie of his place in this House. My wish is, that his spirit and that publike English spirit of Hamden Pim, and Stru, may be doubled upon your new elected members. For our Lieutenant Generall, this I must say: that Iudgement and af∣fections in him are striving for the mastery, I have rarely seen such heights, and depths consent in one man, that when I looke upon the 2. Cheefes of our Army: I remember Gustavus Adolphus and Oxenstern, and I wish our hopes in these nay not be so short lived as the Germans hopes in them, were. More I might say, concerning him that sent me, who is so farre a∣bove the world, and lives so little upon the states pay, and mindes him∣selfe so little; but that he hath enjoyned silence to all his friends, in any thing thar might turne to his onw prayse. For the Castle of Winchester: we begun our batteries upon Saturday morning, which wrought so ffctually; that a breach (wherein 30. men might go a breast) was made: The enemy sallyed out, and beat us off from our gunnes which were soon recovered againe, we plaid then with our Granadoes from our Morter peeces, with the best effect that I have seene, which broake down the Masion house in many places, cutt off a Com∣missary of theirs by the thighs, the most austere, and wretched instrument in that Country; and at last blew up their flagg of defiance into the ayre, and toarre the pinacle in peeces upon which it stood. Summons being sent as we entred upon this work, was refused by the L. Ogle their Governor; and another summons God sent them in the mid∣dle of our batterie; his Lady (to whom our Lievtenant Generall had gi∣ven leave to come forth, and had gone some miles out of the town) dyed; by whom the Governour had during her life, one thousand pounds a yar with her, lost by her death. The chiefest street of the town the enemy playd upon: whereby divers passengers wer wounded, and some killed, in which street my quarters being; I have that cause to blesse God for my preservation. The Lords day we spent in preaahing and prayer, whilest our gunners were battering, and at 8. a clock at night we received a letter from the Governour for a treaty, which I have brought with me. Collonel Hmond, and Major Generall Harrison were sent into te Castle on our party, Sir Edward Ford, and a Major of theirs, were se to us. The whole night was spent about it, our men standing upon some spe∣ciall
termes with them, and very desirous were we to to accept Sir Edward Ford: and Bennit to be our prisoners, by 8. a clock on munday morning it was a greed they should depart out of the Castle at 5, a clock according to the Articles which the Lieutenant Generall hath sent by me. I was forthwith sent into the Castle to take a view of it before my de∣parture, where I found a peece of ground improved to the bst advan∣tage, for when we had entred by our batterie we had 6. distinct works, and a draw bridge to passe through; so that it was doubtlsse a very strong piece, very well victualled, as appears by this note, which I crave leave to reade. Then Mr. Peters read the said Note, of which here followeth the Copie. 7. Peeces of Ordnance. 17. Barrels of Powder. 2000. weight of Musket Bullets. 800. Weight of Ma ch. 38. Hogsheads of Bief and Pork. 15000. weight of Cheese. 800. pound of Butter. 140. quarters of Wheat, and Meal. 7000. weight of Biskets. 112. Hogsheads of strong Beere. 3. Hogsheads of French Wine. 10. Quarters of Salt. 20. Bushel of Oatmeal. 70. Dozen of Candles. 30. Load of Wood. 40. Quarters of Charcoal. 30. Bushels of Seacoal, for the Smith. 14. Sheep. 4. quarters of fresh Bief. Then Mr. Peters went on in his Speech, as followeth. Mr. Speaker, The Castle was manned with near 700. men, divers of them Reformadoes, the chief men I saw there were Viscount Ogle their Governour, Sir Iohn Paulet, an old souldier, Sir William Courtney, and Collonel Bennet, also Dr. Crle the Bishop of Winchester, who came forth to our quarters in the morning, with whom I spent an hour or two, who with teares and much importunity, desired the Lieutenant Generals favour, to excuse his not accepting of the offer that he made unto him at his first entring the Town; he desired of me a guard to his lodging, lest the souldiers should use violence to him and his Chaplain, who were in their long Gowns and Cassocks, and he was accordingly safely convoyed home. I do verily believe, that they will hardly bring to Woodstock 200. men: It did much affct us, to observe what an Enemy we had to deal with, who themselves being judges, could not chuse but say, that our God is not as their God. And this is the 19. Garison hath been taken this Summer, through Gods goodnesse. And he that will not take his
share in this common joy, is either stupid or envious. Our Brigade is marched to Langford house, by Salisbure, which I hope will not be long work, and then that Country will be clean, and our men ready to wait our Generals further Commands. (Doublesse) wre not the year so farre spent, and our foot thereby not able to lye abroad, we might soon look for the finishing of this Warre. The fruits of what is already done are great, amongst the rest, what I saw upon the way; all sorts travelling upon their occasions freely to their own homes, with Carriages and Wanes: many Innes filled with guests. The former face of things returning upon us in severall kindes; yea, now we may ride with safety, from Dover to the middle of Devonshire. The Commission I have to this Honourable House, from the Lieute∣nant Generall, which he delivered unto me with much vehemencie and sence, was this. 1. That you should be truly informed concerning the payment of the Army, it being generally reported, they are compleatly paid, and that Army constantly injoyned to pay their quarters, in which there hath been much care taken, and by which much hath been gained upon the Countries. It is most certain, that of twenty one Weeks, the Horse are twelve weeks behinde; and the foot have likewise their proportion of sorrow, through want of pay. I know threescore in one company lying sick, by eating of raw roots and green Apples, through want of money to buy better food. It is most humbly desired, that they may not suffr by the State, who are willing to do so much for it; the hands and feet of a naturall body, are not more apt move for an aking head, then this Army (in every part of it, are) for this afflicted Kingdome. I have often wished (if it might be thought good to your wise∣domes) that every County (according to the store of money sessed upon every County) might know their souldiers, and a Committee of their own reside in the Army to pay them, it being the way of the Low-Countries; whereby the Warre hath been so well upheld and con∣tinued: The frame whereof I have long since given in writing, to some Members of this Honourable House. 2. The second thing I have in command is, That you be truly infor∣med about your recruits of men; when we have been promised and ex∣pected 4000. we have received but 900. And upon Friday last, when we were promised 3000. and did not expect lesse, we received but fifteen hundred.
It may be easily conceived that such an active Army must needs be a great spender of men by sicknesse and otherwise, though blessed be God it appeares at every siege, the enemies sword cuts not off many: at this of Winchester I know not of above 2 or 3 souldiers lost. Your recruits are so chargeable in their bringing to the Army, that with halfe the mony our officers would recruite themselves. And were this Army recruited to your first intention of 21000. not only England, but I hope Ireland would soon reap the fruits of their labours. The last thing I take boldnesse to commend to this Honourable House is, that the Garrisons wee take in, may bee for God, this Honourable House, and the whole Kingdome, my meaning is, that forthwith some course may be taken, for the many ignorant and heathenish soules in and about the places aforesaid. This city is glut∣ted, the contry is famished; we are quarrelling here about the covering of the house, the foundations whereof are not yet laid in the countrey. In this I am the bolder, because of the cryes of the people to me in the places where I have been; and some of Winchester at my departure cry∣ing for help with them of Macedonia. All which I represent to the most serious thoughts of this Honourable House, and the blessing of peace be upon all your Councells, AMEN. Here followeth a Copy of divers severall papers brought to the Parli∣ament by Mr Peters from Lievtenant Generall Cromwell. The Copy of the severall Letters that came from Viscount Ogle the Govrnour of the Castle, during the time of the siege. SIR, I have received a sad summons, and dsire, you that this inclosed may be conveyed from WINTON Castle, 4. Oct. 1645. Your Servant, OGLE. SIR, Vpon the opening of your sad message by your Drum, there was a mistake between your men and mine, for there was a man making an escape from the castle, at whom your men and mine did shoot, not knowing in the dark who he was; and the man is killed. OGLE. SIR, I have received formerly a Letter from you, wherein you de∣sire to avoyd the effusion of christian blood, to which you received my Answer, that I was willing as your selfe. But having received no reply to actuate your desires, I have thought fit to desire a Treaty; whereby
we may pitch upon some meanes, both for the effecting of that, and the preservation of this place. And that I may receive your letter with all conveniency, I desire that neither Officer or Souldier of your prty may come off their Guards, and I shall take the like course with mine. Winten Castle, at eight at night, October 5. 1645. Sir, I am Your Humble Servant, OGLE. Castrum WINTON, Articles agreed upon the 5 of October, 1645. between the Right Honourable William Viscount Ogle, Governour of the Garrison of the Castle of Winton of the one part, and Colonell Robert Hm∣mond, and Major Thomas Harrison on the behalfe of Lievtenant Generall Oliver Cromwell of the other party; for the surrender of the said Castle. 1. That the Lord Ogle shall deliver up the Castle of Winchester, with all the Armes, Ordnance, Ammunition, Provision, and all Function of Warre whatsoever therein, without any imbeazelment wast or spoyle, unto that Officer or Officers as shall be thereunto appointed by the said Lievtenant Generall, to morrow being Monday the 6 of Octob. by 3 of the clock, after noon. 2. That the said Lord Ogle shall have his own colours, and one hun∣dred fixt Armes for his Guard, and one hundred men to carry them. 3. That the Lord Ogle and all the Officers in Commission, shall march out of the said Castle with their own horse and arms, and their own pro∣per goods, unto Woodstock, thither they shall be safely convoyed. 4. That there shall be allowed to the Lord Ogle and his Officers, six Carriages for transporting of their goods aforesaid. 5, That all Officers, Gentlemen, Clergy-men, and Inhabitants of the city of Winchester, and all Officers within the Guards (desiring it) may be at their own time free from all violence and injury of the Parliaments forces. 6. That the Lord Ogle shall give sufficient Hostages for the perfor∣mance of the Aricles here constituted on their part to be performed, also for the safe return of the Convoy.
A Copy of Lievtenant Genrall Cromwels Letter. SIR, J Came to Winchester on the Lords day being the 28 of September, with Colonell Pickering; commanding his own, Colonell Mountagues, and Sir Hrdres Walles Regiments; after some dispute with the Governour, we en∣tred the town, I summoned the castle, was denyed, whereupon we fell to pre∣pare our bteries, which we could not perfct (sme of our Guns being out of order) untll Friay following, our Battery was six Guns; which being fini∣shed, aftr one fierg of them round, I sent him a second Summons for a trea∣ty, which they refused, whereupon we went on with our worke, and made a breach in the wall near the blacke Tower; which after about 200 shott wee thought stormable, and purposed on Monday morning to attempt it. On Sun∣day night about ten of the clocke, The Governour beat a parley, desiring to treat, I agreed unto it, and sent Colnoell Hammond and Major Harrison in to him, who agreed upon these enclosed Articles. Sir, This is the addition of another mercy, you see God is not weary in doing you good. I confesse Sir, his favour to you is as visible, when he comes by his power upon the hearts of your enemies, making them quit places of strength to to you, as when he gives courage to your souldiers to attempt hard things, his goodnesse is in this much to be acknowledged, For the castle was well manned with 680 horse and foot, there being neare 200 Gentlemen, Officers, and their Servants; well victualled with 15000 waie of cheese, very great store of wheat and beer, near 20 barrels of powder, 7 peeces of Cannon, the workes were exceeding good, and strong. It is very likely it would have cost much blood to have gained it by storme, we have not lost twelve men: This is repea∣ted to you that God may have all the praise, for it is all his due. Sir I rest Your most humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell. Post-script. For other things that I am not willing to write, I have intru∣sted Mr. Peters to communicate to you, who was within the place, and an eye-witnesse to all our proceedings, and knowes the true state of our Army; whom I doe pray you to heare. FINIS.
