C7116 E460_6 R205108 99864546 116776
A LETTER Written by Lievt. Gen. Crumwell, TO The Honourable the Committe of Manchester. Being a full Relation of the total rou∣ting of the Scoth Army, neer Preston in Lan∣cashire, Aug. 18. 1648. Whereunto is annexed another Letter dated at Whaly in Lancashire Aug. 18. 1648. wherein is contained a List of the number slain, Prisoners, Armes, and Ammunition taken, viz. Foure thousand slain Six thousand taken Prisoners, whereof many of quality. All their Ammunition, and Train of Artillery. London printed by I. M. August 21. 1648.
A LETTER Written by Lievt. Gen. Cromwel TO The honorable the Committee of MANCHESTER. Gentlemen, IT hath pleased God this day to shew a great mercy to this Kigdome by making the Army successfull against the Common enemy, we lay last night at Master Sherborns of Stanhurst, 9. miles from Preston, which was within three Myies of the Scotch quarters: we advanced betime the next morning
towards Preston, with a desire to engage the enemy; and by that time our Forlorn Hope had ingaged the enemy; we were about 4 miles from Preston, and there∣upon we advanced with the whole Ar∣my, and the enemy being drawn out up∣on a moor betwixt us and the Town: the Armies on both sides ingaged, and after a sharp dispute continuing for 3 or 4 hours, it pleased God to inable us to give them a defeat which we hope we shall im∣prove by Gods Assistance to their utter ruine: And in this service your Coun∣trymen had not the least share; we can∣not be particular having not time to take account of the slain and prisoners, but we can assure you we have many prison∣ers, and those of quallity, and many slain, and the Army is so discipated, a princi∣pal part whereof with Duke Hamil∣ton is on the South side Ribble and
Darwent brldg, and we lying with the greatest part of the Army close to them, nothing hindering the ruine of that part of the enemies Army but the night; Jt will be our care that they shall not pass over beneath the bridg to go North∣ward, or to come betwixt us and Wha∣ley; we understand four of Col. Gen. Ashtons are at Whalley, and we have 7 Troops of Horse and Dragoons that we beleeve lye at or neer Clithero; This night J have sent Orders expresly to them to march to Whaley to joyn to those Companies, that you shall im∣prove to the ruin of this enemy: You per∣ceive by this Letter how things stand, that the enemy is broken, and most of their Horse being gone Northward, and we having sent a considerable Party at the very heel of them: and the enemy ha∣ving lost almost all his Ammunition,
and 4000 Arms, so that the greatst part of Foot are naked, and therefore in Order to the perfecting of this work, we desire you to raise your Country, and im∣prove your Forces to the total ruin of the Enemy which way soever they go; and that if you shall accordingly do your part doubt not of their total ruin: We thought fit to speed this to you, to the end you may not be troubled if they shal march to you. But improve your Interest as aforesaid, and that you may give glory to God for his unspeakable mercy: This is all for the present from Your Humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell.
Sir, IT hath pleased God to give a great blessing unto the Forces in these parts, under the Command of Lievtenant General CROM∣VVEL against the insulting Enemy Duke Ha∣milton, and that Rebellious Crew under him, insomuch that their whole Army is routed and dispersed into several parts of the Country some backward toward their own Kingdom, others toward Manchester; they having lost all their Ammunition and above four thousand Arms, their Foot being left naked, their Horse being scattered, are ruin'd: The Lievtenant General sent a Letter to our Com∣mittee sitting at Manchester, containing a brief Narrative of the whole business; It is wonderful in our eyes to consider the goodnes of God herein: I know it will greatly discou∣rage many amongst you that the Duke hath no better success; but did they but feel what
most in these parts have felt, I am confident they see great cause of rejoycing and esteem it a great deliverance; I know you desire to prize mercies and rejoyce in them: Sir, I leave you till the next opportunity; at which time ex∣pect a more perfect Relation from Your Friend, E. S. Whaly, August 18. 1648. Postscript. As I was closing my Letter I was informed more particularly that there is 4000 slain, 6000 taken Prisoners and all their Arms and Ammunition. FINIS.
