D783 e1043_4 99866958 119247
A DECLARATION OR Remonstrance, TO HIS MAJESTIES Loyal and Faithful Subjects; TOUCHING Brokers, Usurers, Scrivenors, And Solicitors: For, and in behalf of all Merchants, Citizens, Countrey-men, and other His Majesties good Subjects, within the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland, and Dominion of Wales. London, Printed for George-Horton, 1660. Sept 4
A DECLARATION TO All His Majesties loving Subjects, touching Brokers Usurers, Scrivenors, and Solicitors; For, and in behalf of all Shoo-makers, Wea∣vers Butchers, Victuallers, Chandlers, Dra∣pers, Clothworkers, Taylors, Wire-drawers, Gold Smiths, and Silver-Smiths. AMongst the rest of His Sacred Maje∣sties many Illustrious Titles, which like fair and beautiful Flowers, do adorn & bedeck His Royal Crown, there's one exceds and excels all the rest, aswell in Vertue as in Beau∣ty,
and that is His Title of Defender of the Faith, &c. And, indeed, as that Title is his Majesties Honour, so the Truth of it is His Subjects Happi∣nesse. For, neithr the highest Provc tions, nor the strongest Tempttions that ever Prince met withall, hath been able to slake his ictorious Faith, nor abate his holy Zeal: Witnesse his Gracious Majesties first Act, after his Return o the Exercise of his Regal Power, in his early and timely suppres∣sing Prophanenesse and discountenancing debaucht persons, who know not how to expresse their Thankfulnesse unto GOD for Mercies, but by a sin∣ful drinking them away; a practise his Majesties Soul ahors. These his eminent Vertues, and excellent Qualifi∣cations that God hath bestowed upon Him, to make him every way wothy and fit for Government, in∣vitd the Parliament, with joyful earts, to make their humble Addresses to his Majesty for his Roy∣all Assent to several Bills; Amongst whih, the Bill intituled, An Act to prevent the taking of excessive Usuy, was by his Majsty signed, to the great con∣tentment of all Loyal and Faithful Subjects. The restraining men of avaritious minds whose Consciences are as large as their Bags, will be a great ease to the People, and an inablement to
the Merchants the better to go on with their Trades. They are the laborious Bees that bring in Honey into his Majesties Hive; and Usurers are the lazie, idle Drons, hat rob this precious Hive of the honey. For preventing all such Abuses for the Future, It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this present Par∣liament Assembled, That no peron or persons whatsoever, from and after the 29th day of Septem∣ber, 1660. upon any Contract, shall from and after the said Day, take directly o indiectly for Loane of any Moies, Wares, Merchandise, or oher Com∣modities whatsoever, above the value o six pounds for the Forbearance of one hundred pounds for a year, and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser sum or for a longer or shorter time. And that all Bonds, Contracts, and Assrnc's whatsoever, made after the time aforeaid, for payment of any Principall or Money to be lent or covenaned to be person∣med upon or for any Usury.
Whereupon or whereby there shall be reserved or taken above the rate of six pounds in the hun∣dred as aforesad shall be utterly void. And all persons whatoever, who shall after the 29 day of September, are hereby desired to take no∣tice, That if any person or persons shall take, accept, and receive, by way or means of any corrupt Bargain, Loan, Exchange, Shift, or Interest of any Wares or Merchandise whatsoever, or by any deceitful way, or conveyance, for the forbearing or giving day of payment for one whole year, of and for their Mo∣ney, or other thing, above the sum of six pounds for the forbearing of one hundred pounds for a year, and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser sum, or for a longer and shorter Terme, shall forfeit & lose for every such Offence, the treble value of the Mo∣nies, Wares, Merchandise, and other things so lent, bargained, sold, exchanged, or shifted. And all Scri∣venors, Brokers, Solicitors, Drivers of Bargains for Contrats, who shall after the said 39. day of Sep∣tember, take or receive, directly or indirectly, any Sum or Sums of Money, or other Reward or Thing for Brokage, Soliciting, Driving, or procuring the Loan, or forbearing of any Sum or Sums of Money, over and above the Rate or value of five shillings for the Loane, or forbearing of one hundred pounds for
a year, and so rateably, or above twelve pence for making or renewing of the Bond or Bill for the Loane, or for forbearing thereof, or for any Coun∣terbond or Bill concerning the same, shalll Forfeit for every such Offence twenty pounds, and have im∣prisonment for half a year: The one moyety of all which Forfeitures to be to the King our Sove∣raign Lord, His Heirs and Successors; And the other moiety to the persons that shall sue for the same, in the same County where the several Offences are committed, and not elsewhere. FINIS.
