E2135B R231805 99897490 133267
THE PARLIAMENTS DESIRES TO THE EARL OF WARWICKE: Wherein is Declared their Resolutions concer∣ning his going in Person to Hull, with 6. or 8. ships. Together with the Earl of Warwicks Answer to the Parliaments Commands. Also a Letter from the Earl of Warwick to the High Court of Parliament, read in the House of Commons upon Monday, concerning his taking of two ships upon the Sea, there being in one 42. Pieces of Ordinance, and great store of Ammu∣nition for Warre. With the Parliaments Determination concer∣ning all those that shall take up Arms. Ordered that this be printed and published. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com. July 21. LONDON, Printed for Edward Iohnson.
THE Earle of Warwicks Resolution concerning Sir John Hotham. MAny and sundry times hath flying Reports arrived in this King∣dome, and hath so farre dived into the hearts of the Subjects of this Nation, that they have bin much perplexed in mind, fearing a forreign in∣vasion. But praised be God he hath prevented these Designs, and hath of his gracious af∣fection which he bears to this Iland, be∣stowed his blessings in abundance upon us, prospering us with such gracious gifts, that no Nations under the Sun ever en∣joyed the like. And hath also out of his Divine Provi∣dence
discovered many desperate Designs, which were plotted and intended against this Kingdom. And hath also discovered many more Hellish Conspiracies, plotted by great per∣sons that were in emminent places, who when he see a sit and convenient time, dis∣closed their wicked intentions, and revea∣led it to the hearts of this our Honoura∣ble Assembly, who out of their vigilant & judicious Care disanulled them of their places, and hath chosen many worthy, pi∣ous, and Religious men for the enjoying therof. But because I will not deviate too sarre from my intended purpose, I will now proceed to my following Relation. Both Houses having taken in conside∣ration the Affairs of Hull, sent a Message to the Earl of Warwick, concerning the same. And they also received Letters from the said Earl, which were read in the audience of both houses, informing them, how that he had taken one of the Kings ships cal∣led the Lyon, which was comming from
Holland with great store of Ammunition, and as he thought, and conjectured, bound for the North. In which ship were Prince Robert, and his Brother Prince Maurice shipped to come for England, but being taken sick at Sea, and troubled with an extreame vomi∣ting of Blood, they returned back, and lan∣ded again in another part of Holland. But the Captain of the ship having in∣telligence that the Ear of Warwick had de∣livered up the Navie to the King, and that it was now under the Command of Sir John Pennington, came very couragiously amongst the ships, and very boldly came aboord the Admirall, where he finding the Earl of Warwicke, and understanding hee had still the Charge of the Navie (which he would not beleeve untill he had seed his Com∣mission) was much amazed, and at the first refused to submit himself, but the Earle of Warwick took him Prisoner, and possessed himselfe of his ship and Ammunition, wherin was 42. pieces of Ordinance, with a great quantiry of other provisions.
Hee also informed by the said Letters, that hee had taken another ship loaden with Powder, and in it many other things belonging to warre, which was also bound for the North. And upon Tuesday both Houses Orde∣red, that there should a Message forthwith be sent with all speed to the Earl of War∣wicke, informing him the will and plea∣sure of both Houses, which was, that hee should take six or eight ships, and go him∣self down to HUL, and lye thereabouts to relieve Sir John Hotham. And also Ordered, That he should bring from HULL all such great Saddles as are there, or other Furuiture for Horse or Horsemen, and the four Prisoners that Sir John Hotham tooke in a ship going for Holland. The Earl of Warwick having received this Command from both Houses, Hee called a Councell of Warre, and after some Debate therof, he resolved to send an An∣swer to the said Message, informing that he had called a Counsell of Warre to con∣sult
of their last Commands concerning his going to Hull, but found that he could not conveniently go himself, partly be∣cause his ship was of so great Burthen, she could not safely ride in that shallow Wa∣ter to continue but he had sent two of his ships, and would take order to send o∣thers after them, who should carefully ob∣serve their Commands in all points, and fulfill it accordingly. And likewise certified them, that he had sent three other ships to HULL to re∣lieve Sir John Hotham, and desired them, that they would bee pleased to send him moneyes with all speed, for to pay certain Captains discharged by him, by reason that they refuse to obey his Command. Wherupon both Houses Ordered, That there should be fifteen hundred pounds forthwith sent. Where it was also Voted, and joyntly concluded of, that the said Earl should have Thanks returned unto him for that good service, which was according concluded of and a Messenger fortwith dispatched.
Both Houses resolved, That when soever the King maketh War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach of the Trust reposed in him by his peo∣ple, contrary to his Oath, and tending to the dis∣solution of this Government. And also Resolved. That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such Warres, are Tray∣tors, &c. Ordered that this be printed and published. John Brown Cler. Parl.
