F2292B R42502 36282150 150059
A Full and True ACCOUNT Of a Bloody And Barbarous Murther, Found to be Committed upon the Person of a WOMAN, In Kent-street, near St. George's Church, South∣wark; with the Circumstances that attended the Discovery, and other things accompanying so Amazing and Cruel proceedings. 8. Aprill .1690. Licensed according to Order. IT cannot but reflect strange and amazing Horror, upon the Minds of those that shed Humane Blood; Yet neither the Terror of Guilt, nor the fearful punishments are capable of deterring Cruel and Revengeful Minds from so great a Wickedness, as frequent Examples have made evident, and Recorded in Sanguin Characters, Mankind in this, is more Barbarous than the Ravenous Beasts, who prey not upon their proper Kind, but by a natural Instinct spare to shed the Blood of their Compeers; but amongst others of a Crimson-dye, we here undertake to give one of a fresh date, wherein no small Barbarity will appear. It so hapned, that the beginning of the last week, a Coffin being discovered by some of the Neighbours, to be carryed into one Stevens his House, at the Sign of the Trumpet, at the hither end of Kent-Street; and not having heard that any person had been Sick, made them begin to suspect more than ordi∣nary: Especially, considering a House that had none of the Best Reputation, and for some time, a whispering of suspition was spread abroad, and enquiry made to what end it was designed, but no Satisfactory Answer could be got∣ten; but in the end, Suspition growing greater, it was given out, that a strange person Lodging there, dyed: Whereupon the Searchers came, as is usu∣al, to make their Inspection of the Corps: But before their coming, it was Coffined up, and decently dressed as to its Burial or Interment, and by that means, whether they discovered not the Wounds, or were partial in concealing them, we do not undertake to Determine, but contrary to the true cause of the Death of this party, they gave it out, that she dyed of a Feavour, or some such Violent Distemper; but the people of the House thought it not however convenient to make a publick Burial, rather considering it most to their Ad∣vantage, to bury the Body privately, and made overturns of that kind to the Sexton, or those concerned in Burials: Which giving a greater Suspition, no∣thing could prevail to bring it to pass, before a further Search was made, and thereupon the Burial being suspended, the Coffin with the Body in it, was left at the Church Door in the Dark, and the next day the Corroner or Magistrate
having notice of these passages, the Body was taken out, and upon further In∣spection, a mortal Wound appeared on the right side the Arm, being likewise stobed, supposed to be given with a Sword, Bagonet, or broad Knife; and the Body was carryed int the Church Porch, and exposed to the view of the peo∣ple; who crouded fom all parts, to see the Sad and Deplorable Spectacle, making various Conjectures and Censures, and much inquiry was made, who the party shold be, and who were the Murtherers, but as to the Name and Qua∣lity of the person thus Murthered, we are yet to learn. Whilst things were at this pass, and peoples Judgments were various, the Corroners Jury was Summoned and Met, to make an Inquiry how the party came by her Death, and such Witnesses as could be got were Examined, be∣ing mostly the people of the House from whence she was brought Dead, whose Testmonies appeared very obscure, in the apprehension of most People; as Alledging, that she received those Wounds that were found upon the Body of the Deceased, in some Fray or accidental Rencounter, at or near Tower-Hill, and that after she was Wounded, she came only as a Lodger to their House, and that they Entertained her out of hopes she might Recover; and that Dying there, they had undertaken to procure her Burial, and were no ways concerned, or further knowing in Relation to her, or her Death: As to this purpose, however upon View of the Wounds, they appeared not to have been Dressed, and by many it was imagined, after receiving them, she was not capable of coming so far, but must of necessity have fainted by the way, for Anguish or loss of Blood, and thereupon the Jury considering the Cir∣cumstances, could find no other but that she dyed of those Wounds, and con∣sequently was Murthered, and those most suspected, as the Master, &c. Bound over to answer the Death of this Party; that a further and more satisfacto∣ry Account may be had how it happened, and after several days being expo∣sed to View, Orders were given for the Interment of the Corps, which was accordingly performed, in the Church-yard of St. Georges. This is all the Account we can at present give of this Deplorable Murther, till a further Light be had of the Matter, and Crimes of this Nature seldom escaping un∣punished. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. (1) A New Narrative of the Siege of London-derry, or the late memorable Transactions of that City faithfully represented, to rectifie the Mistakes, and supply the Omissions of Mr. walker's  Account. By John Mackenʒie, Chaplain to a Regiment there during the whole Siege. Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin. (2) There is now publish'd the Second Edition of that New Play, entituled, The Abdicated Prince, or the Adventures of Four Years, a Tragi-Comedy, as it was lately acted (with great Applause) at the Court at Alba Regalis, by several Persons of great Quantity. Printed for J. Carterson. (3) A Narrative of the Dissenters New-Plot, together with an Account of the Chief Conspirators Names, and principal Consults, Written by one who was deeply concern'd therein. Since the publication of this Narrative (which has made such a great noise in the World by being misunderstood) there is Prin∣ted an Account of the design of it. Written by the same Author. Both Licens'd according to Order, and sold by R. Janeway. (4) There is every Friday publish'd a very ingenious paper, entituled, The Weekly Pacquet of Advice from Ireland; to which is added the Irish Courant. Sold by R. Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Pater-Noster-Row. 1690.
