F2232A E130_11 99871299 156303
A Frivolous PAPER, In FORME of a PETITION: Framed and composed by a DISAFFECTED PARTY in this Citie of London, intended by them to be presented to the honourable House of COMMONS. WITH Certaine Considerations propounded by way of Advertisement and Caution unto those who through unadvisednesse, are apt to subscribe the same. By a wel-willer to PEACE and TRUTH. ENLARGED With new Additions, by way of Advertisement to all such who unadvisedly had subscribed; and three speciall Rules for their present Caution, and future Admonition. LONDON, Printed for STEPHEN BOWTELL, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes bead Alley. 1642.
A COPIE OF THE Frivolous PAPER, Before-mentioned. THat the present sense of our Misteries and Apprehensions of inevitable Ruine both of Church and Common-wealth maketh us to become humble Suiters to this Honourable Assembly (the likeliest meanes under God for our reliefe) to consider our distressed state and to provide a speedy remedy for our present and future evils. Earnestly desiring you to weigh the Care and Judgement of our Predecessors, who by a known Law settled and preserved our Pro∣testant Religion, our Liberties and Properties, with the right vnder∣standing betweene King and Subjects, which produced Plenty and Peace in our Streets. And to reflect with serious thoughts upon our present Distempers, violating Religion by Papists, and Sectaries, ingaging our Nation in a Civill, bloudy, and destructive Warre, in, invading our Lawes, and Liberties, indangering all our Lives, and ut∣ter disabling us to relieve our distressed Bretheren in Ireland. Wee beseech you likewise to consider the effect of a continued Warre, as the Destruction of Christians, the unnaturall effusion of blood, Father against Son, Brothers by Brothers, Friends by Friends slaine; then a Famine and sicknesse the followers of a Civill Warre, making way for a generall confusion and Invasion by a forreigne Na∣tion, while our Treasure is exhausted, our Trade lost, and the King∣dome dispeopled.
These things weighed and inlarged by your Wisedomes, we doubt not will be as strong motives in you to labour as in us to desire a spee∣dy Peace and happy Accomodation. Wherefore wee humbly crave that not lending an eare to any Fo∣menters of the present Warre under what pretence soever; nor re∣membring ought that may increase Jealousies or continuall Divisi∣ons, betweene his Majesty and his Houses of Parliament; you will speedily tender his Majesty (according to his Royall Intimations) such Propositions for Accomodation as hee may with Honour and safety to the whole Kingdome accept. For effecting whereof wee shall be ready to assist you with the best and utmost of our abilities; and whilst you endeavour Peace, wee shall send up our Prayers to Heaven for the blessing of Peace upon you, and all that desire it. CERTAINE CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE PREFIXED PETITION. AS God and his Church never wanted enemies, so the Di∣vell and Antichrist never wanted friends for the pro∣motion of prophanesse and Idolatry in all places, it is hard to say, whether are more the enemies of truth and peace with God, or friends of error and peace with the Divell: men whom the Apostle calls sensuall, fleshly, and Divel∣lish, lovers of pleasures more then Lovers of God, who can see no further then this life, fearing more the terrors of man then of the Almighty, chuse rather peace with man, and wrath with God, then the wrath of man and peace with God; the truth of all which doth appeare by a Petition now in agitation; concerning which I have gathered some plaine and undeniable observations, presenting them by way of caution unto others, from these particulars, viz. 1. The chiefe composers of this Petition. 2. The Malignant nature of this Petition. 3. The most probable Consequences, Reasons and Aimes of this Petition.
First consider whether the chiefe sticklers and fomenters thereof are not notoriously known to be Pattentees, Proctors, Delinquents, Ma∣lignants, who either have not at all, or any of them in any consider∣able measure according to their Estates assisted the common cause of the Kingdome against the common enemy hereof: whose pretences though they are for Religion, and Law, and the aid of poore bleeding Ire∣land, yet they are men Popish, Atheisticall, and prophane in point of Religion, some whereof (and they not of the lowest sort) have most propanely and blasphemously in the presence of those (who being desired, denied to subscribe to a Petition for peace without truth) cursed truth, saying, a pox on truth, give us peace truth will follow, and let us have peace and the Divell take truth, &c. and as for the Law consider, whether many of them have not gotten their Estates by Pattents, a lawlesse occupation; and as for bleeding Ireland let their Receipts shew what they have don for its recovery, which will amount to the same nothing as the summe which they have disbursed for distracted England, they are mutinous and tumultu∣ous professing in the presence of many, that if this Petition died, they will die with it, and if one suffer all will suffer, with such like mutinous expressions.—These are the parties. Secondly, consider the nature of this Petition, and see if yee finde it not intolerably saucy and peremptory against the Parliament in many particulars. First in taxing closely but cleerely this present Parliament with in∣consideration of the known Laws of the Land, as if either they were igno∣rant thereof, or impotent thereby, as not able to repeale or alter the same, being made by themselves in their predecessors having power to nul the same at their pleasure. Secondly, consider whether they do not covertly, but unavoidably tax this present Parliament, either with indiscretion in that they presume to be wiser then their predecessors, and therefore desire them to weigh the care and judgement of our predecessors, who by a known Law setled and preserved our Protestant Religion and Property, &c. or else closely implying, that this present Parliament accuseth former Parliaments of folly and unadvisednesse, in that they have confirmed those things that must now be reversed; either whereof is most un∣sufferable arrogancy and Nationall injury. Thirdly, consider whether they do not tax this present Parliament
with their tendring unto his Majesty such Propositions hitherto, which hee may not with his honour, and safety of the Kingdom ac∣cept, and therefore they desire that they would speedily tender unto his Majesty (according to his regall intimations) such Propositions for Accom∣modation, as He may with honour, and safety to the whole Kingdom accept: Whereas it is most evidently known, that many Propositions have bin tendred, and not one either to the dishonour of the King, whose greatest honour would be to governe his Kingdom by the advise of his great Councell, and faithfull Parliament, and not by the Malig∣nant Counsells of Papists, and Traytors, and out-law'd Delinquents: neither hath there bin one Proposition tendred which doth not most uberously carry along with it the safety and future prosperity of this Kingdom. Fourthly consider whether the Malignity of this Petition doth not appeare in many phrases and expressions scattered up and down therein, as if it were the birth of the same womb which hath lately bin very fruitfull in many printed and scandalous Pamphlets, in ca∣sting reproaches, and most unworthy scandalls, upon both Houses of Parliament, such as The known Law of the Land; ascribing the violation of our Religion to Papists and Sectaries: Under which latter word, hath ever bin implied, every man that in any thing hath differed from the Bishops Innovations, and superstitious Ceremonies, in the govern∣ment of the Church: Thus the malignity of this Petition appeares in the nature of it. Thirdly, consider the undoubtedly aimed at Consequences and Tendences thereof, which must be such as these, First, the raising of mutinies, divisions and discontents in the City (the unity whereof is the ruine of the common enemie) that the re∣port hereof in the Countries, whose eyes are upon the City, may discourage the well affected there, and so the common cause may meet with reluctancy throughout the whole Kingdom. Secondly, that the enemy now very weake and like to fall of them∣selves for want of Amunition and meanes (the vitall blood of an Ar∣my) may yet strengthen and encourage themselves, and make shift by plundering, robbing, and spoyling the Countrey, to spin out a lit∣tle time, knowing that our division here, if continued, will effectu∣ally advantage them in their bloody designes: and thus these hypo∣criticall Petitioners as Ehud to Eglon, cry Peace, Peace, to the Kingdom,
while they secretly and maliciously endeavour to thrust a Sword of destruction into the bowels thereof. Thirdly, a third aim'd at effect must be this, the stiring up of other their Brethren malignant wretches in other parts of the Kingdom, ad exemplum to do the like that so they may bring the whole King∣dom divided against i selfe to inevitable ruine, whereas by the mer∣cy of the Almighty the present care and endeavour of our Parlia∣ment, by our Forces abroad, and associations of the severall Coun∣ties against the common enemy, may put a very speedy and timely end unto these present troubles, with all advantages both to Church, and State, and desired assistance of our poore Brethren in Ireland. Fourthly, they now well perceive that they shall no longer be to∣lerated either in their detected malignity, or unworthy newtrality, but Nolentes Volertes shall be compel'd by just assesments and censures in their estates to helpe the present state of the Kingdom, and there∣fore will now adventure such courses as may bring all to confusion, rather then be helpefull, endeavouring like Iudas for a little moneys sake, under colour of a kisse of of peace, to betray the Kingdom into the hands of violent and bloody men, and although like reverend Plush-cloakes, and intelligent States-men they cry out against the Parliament, saying, did they not plead the Subjects propertie, loe where is property if they shall take what they please from us? yet they may know, that though we may plead property in respect of the Kings taxing without Law, yet wee can pleade no property from the Parliament in a time of imminent danger, into whose disposall we have committed our estates and all that we have, which we never did to the King; and surely were our Parliament as selvish as these Pe∣titioners are, we should all have known long before this time, what the power of a Parliament had bin, by our ruine and slavery, being not in the tenth measure so provoked by such ingratitude, and un∣naturall provocations, as they have bin. Fiftly, consider what a rock we may run upon, thus unthankfully to provoke the Parliament, may they not compremise differences to their own personall safey, and preferment, and our irrecoverable slavery? have they not us at such advantage, that they may undoe us every houre? can we alleadge any thing against them wherein they have bin unfaithfull in that trust we committed to their charge? is it not in the prosecution of our peace, wherein they meet with such
frownes and oppositions from above? have they not hazarded their estates and livelyhoods for us? did not many of them oppose with their blood in their personall adventures, the malignity of that un∣naturall and bloody Army that came against their mother Nation? did we not chuse them because we thought they would be faithfull? and shall we distast them for their faithfullnesse; hath not the peace and wel-fare of the Kingdom bin pretious in their eyes? let malice it selfe produce any instance to the contrary: what had become of us before this time had not their care and diligence in securing the Seas prevented those preparations made beyond the Seas by known Traytors to the Kingdom? hath God by them discovered so many plot? prevented so many apparant dangers? freed us from so many preslures, and taxations? procured so much freedom for us? and doe we thus requite them? had they not every day a fresh ointment from above with the Spirit of meeknesse and love unto the Kingdom, they would make our hearts ake for such daring provocations as this Pe∣tition imports. It is not to be doubted but many have put their hands hereunto, not discerning any such malignity either in the nature or consequences thereof, whose integrity and discretion can no way better be vindi∣cated but by their Recantation, which if I might be their Monito) should be as publiquely divulged as is their unadvisednesse, against these; the imputation implyed in what hath been said is not inten∣ded; but because honest men have beene more then once taken by this slight, I shall desire to propound two or three Rules of advise for their caution and prevention astainst another time. First take speciall notice of the prime and chiefe Actors and Pro∣moters in matters of this nature. It is hard to draw evill men to good actions, especially for Church and State; therefore will I sus∣pect that wherein they are more forwarder then honester men. Secondly, observe these men and their number; who seconds any thing of this kind once begun, evill men (though one age hath been delivered of two such births) may happily both centrive and bring forth a Designe intending both the purity of Religion and Peace of the Kingdome together, but seldome seconded by many such as themselves; and never deserted by a more conscientious party; if I cannot see who the Leaders are, I will take the more notice of the followers, and accordingly will I come up in the Reare, or decline them.
Thirdly, let not the goodnesse, or badnesse, quality, or number of men in any matter wherein your subscription is required, quit your owne personall examination thereof, if any thing bee propounded chiefly by suspitious men, lege, per lege, & relege; read it, and that throughly and over againe; for though such men are most apt to call men more uprigh then themselves, hypocrytes and dissemblers; yet you shall find a great dexterity in this iviish Art of dissembling in such mens expressures: plausible intimations of aiming at Religi∣on, and the good of the Kingdome, are commonly the greene leaves, under which they hatch their Cockatrice Fggs, as is their pretence in this Petition, though the chief Actors were never knowne to have the least dram of true love either to Religion or Kingdome. In fine, let us follow hard after Peace but harder after Truth, the best peace will follow truth, though truth will not follow every peace; let us pray for peace, but of Jerusalem, not of Babylon; if our peace be enmity to truth, truth will quickly devour our peace: let us admit of a pace upon any termes of personall disadvantage, so we engage not the God of peace against us; what ever we abate of that which is called ours, yet let us not leave a hoof behinde of all that is called Gods; better it is to purchase Truth for our posterity by our blood, then to betray them by a sinfull peace. God hath hi∣ther to bin with us, while we have bin with him, if we forsake him he will forsake us: though the Sons of Anak be great and tall, yet shall God drive them out before us as he hath don: If we honour God by believing he will honour us by succeeding our endeavours; 'tis true God bids us follow Peace, but never without Holynesse. FINIS.
