F443 E1025_5 99867611 119930
A Plain-dealing, and Plain-meaning SERMON, Preach't in the Parish Church of St. Nicholas, Bristol, April 6. 1660. Being the day appointed by the Parliament for publique Fasting and Humiliation for the sins of the NATION, &c. Together with a prefatory Epistle, and subsequent Vindication both of the Sermon, and Author. Wherein (besides an Apology for home and plain-preaching) you have something offered to allay the heat of their stomacks, and to temper the tongues of those, who (being ignorant in Scripture) reproach and revile Presbytery and PRESBYTERS. With some hints at SATANS subtlety, and the mis∣chief of those people, who brand Zeal for God and Truth (in free, home, and faithfull preaching) with the reproachful names of Anger, passion, and Railing. Ezek 33.30. Also thou son of Man, the children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls, and in the doors of their houses, &c. Psal. 35 11. False witnesses did rise up: They laid to my charge things that I knew not. Matth. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall sy all manner of evill against you falsely for my names sake. Rejoyce and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, and are to be sold by Thomas Wall by the Tolezey in Cornstreet in Bristol, 1660.
To the strenuous Assertor of his Countreys Rights, Will: Pryn Esquire, a chosen Mem∣ber of the High Court of Parliament. Sir, I Am now upon an Appeal to the World, but not to all the world; for all are not competent Judges. But in my judgment I take you for the fittest man in the world to de∣termine, whether I have spoken against the King, or his coming in, in this ensuing Sermon. You whom the late King honoured with the title of the Cato, (the impartial Cato) of this age: You whom nei∣ther fear nor flattery, nor persecution can by as from the truth: You who have militated more, and con∣quer'd more in the Kings behalf by your pen, then many Regiments of souldiers by their pikes & mus∣quets; To you I appeal in this matter: were it mat∣ter of Doctrine, I durst make you my Ʋmpire, for I know your ability that way; Witness that ex∣cellent Book of yours of the Perpetuity of a regene∣rate mans estate. But my appeal to you now is upon matter of fact & discretion, whether my discourse were scandalous or unseasonable. Sir, you are ac∣quainted with the Topicks and proper seats of ar∣gument
in all kinds, deliberative, demonstrative, per∣swasive. You can discern whether I have sinn'd a∣gainst the law of the Preacher. Had you been in the Country, this Sermon had waited upon you for your Deleatur, or Imprimatur, before it had gone unto the Press: But mine and the Book-sellers ap∣prehensions that your greater & manifold occasi∣ons (now that you are in London) would not offer us such a time of leisure wth you, as to peruse it be∣fore-hand, hath with held me from that attempt. Yet I could not with-draw from my resolutions to crave your just decision. If you find me guilty, strike out your name, and disown the dedication, which would be a sorer blow to me, then all the oppo∣sings of my Calumniators: But if you find me inno∣cent, then let my Sermon (with its Appendices) goe forth with your auspicious tutelage. I have one thing to beg of you, and that is, That the good old Cause may not be forgotten. And I shall beg of God (whose cause it is) a blessing upon you, and upon the great Councel, whereof you are a chosen Mem∣ber, that the Lord would make you repairers of our breaches, and restorers of our paths to dwell in. These are the desires and prayers of him who is Sir, Yours most ready to serve you in all Christian Offices R.A: FARMER. From my house in Bristol. April 30. 1660.
A Prefatory Epistle to the Reader. ITS not the least part of our work who are Ministers of the Word to suit our Texts and Subjects: And in both (in a good sense) to observe that direction in Rom. 12.11. (as the Vulgar Latine reads it) to serve the time; That is, to suit our discourses to the season, to the occasions, times, and persons wherein we live, and to whom we are to preach. Solomon the wisest Preacher that ever was (Jesus Christ, the wisdome of God himselfe excepted) tells us, that words spo∣ken in season (i. e. according to the time, occasion and condi∣tion of the persons spoken to) are like apples of gold in pi∣ctures of silver, very good, very pleasant.Prov. 25.11. And he also tells us that Preachers who are wise, and would teach their people true and saving knowledge, they must be heedful and carefull not to utter (as many pretended Enthusiasts do) quicquid in buccam venerit, but to seek out, compose, and to set in or∣der what they are to treat on:Eccles. 12.9,10. And to find out acceptable, delightful, taking, winning words and matter. In the Hebrew it is  verba voluntatis, i. e. such words and mat∣ter as might captivate and take the wills and affections of their Auditors: And (as the Apostle phrases it)2 Cor. 10.5. bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. And this I conceive (in great part) was that , that craft; subtlety, and cunning that the Apostle (in preaching) used to catch the Corinthians.2 Cor. 12.16. Being crafty, I caught you with guile. He carried himselfe so both in matter and man∣ner, that he drew them on, and brought them over to that he desired. In sum he did what he told them elsewhere, He became all to all men, that he might save some.1 Cor. 9.22. In the Greek the word [men] is not. In the Originall it runs thus; , I am made (or become) all to all. I ap∣ply
my selfe to all times, and all persons. I use all means to save some, in and by the exercise of my Ministery. And truly this hath alwayes been in my eye, and this way I have ever approv'd of; And to (my poor ability) followed in the course of my Ministery: having finished a Text and Subject, it hath sometimes put me to as carefull thoughts what to preach next, as how to preach: Especially upon speciall and extraordinary occasions. I have been sollicitous to take all advantages that might bring and win over those I preach to, to the truth to be proposed. And being invited to the observation of the last so∣lemn Fast, I accordingly made choise of the Text which was the subject of the Sermon following: How apt and pertinent, let wise men judge, I lookt with a sad eye upon our manifold breaches, and our more sins, (the cause of those breaches.) And yet considering the Lords gracious dispensations (in the wonderfull and unexpected turns of providence) I was under some hopefull expectations that the Lord would also heale our breaches, if our wilfull obstinacy and impenitence did not hinder and with-hold so great a mercy. And the people in ge∣nerall, and my selfe in particular, being in an apprehension and expectation of the Kings being brought unto the throne, I thence took occasion in my discourse to suggest such things as I conceiv'd might be profitable and conducent to what I in∣tended, which was to in vite them to repentance. But as he said of Bookes, Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli, According to the understanding of the Reader, so do books find entertainment: So may we say of Sermons; Accor∣ding to the understanding of our Auditors, so are our Sermons accepted or rejected. Nay not onely according to their under∣standing, but many times (and with most) according to their ignorance, humours, fancies, interests. It was always so, e∣ven with Christ, and his Apostles: Some believed their prea∣ching, and some mock'd and derided. Some reproacht, be∣lied and slandered both them and their Doctrine.
Thus it hath fared with me not onely at other times, but also at this time: And it is some comfort to me that I am not alone; But that my betters find no better entertainment from their Auditors, it makes me think it is not our fault, but theirs. And because it doth so much quadrare (so suite) with my condition, I will make so bold, as to lay the complaint of a most eminent, able, and godly learned Preacher, (in his own words) before you, not being able to do it in better lan∣guage. It is the Reverend Dr. Gauden, in his Sermon prea∣ched in St. Pauls Church London, before the Lord Mayor, Lord Generall, &c. Feb. 28. 1659. Being a day of Solemn Thanksgiving, &c. Wherein (intending to deale faithfully and plainly, Having proposed his Text, after a few words, he makes this entrance in page 2, 3, & 4. of that Sermon to this purpose. He seems very apprehensive of the danger and dif∣ficulty of free preaching in these times, wherein (as he ob∣serves) people are not onely impatient to be touched freely, and searched throughly, but are also prone to plead (as the Devills in the Gospel) who had possessed the poor man now a long time) against all health and recovery. Many men being like Cantors and Lazors (Canting beggars) in love with their wounds and ulcers: As getting their living more easily by keeping them open, raw, and running, then if they should quite heal them up. And he takes notice of the tender∣ness of many mens minds, who are onely for lenitives and oyles, for soft, smooth, & supple applications even to their most desperate hurts: But he professes, to chuse not to preach at all, then to preach timerously and precarious∣ly, as if he should ask men leave to be honest, or were afraid to speak the word of God to them. And he further sayes; When he is called to speak in Gods name, he must be Parrhesiastes as well as Ecclesiastes. I am (sayes he) to do it as a work-man that needs not to be ashamed, either for his ignorance, or cowardise, or indiscretion. And whether
men will hear, or forbear, the whole counsel of God must be delivered in its season, so as becomes the words of so∣berness and truth: For the Church and Pulpit must not be a sanctuary for insolency, nor a Burrow or retreat for rude∣ness. No, however men become our enemies for speaking the truth, yet it's better so, then to have God our enemie for smothering it, when it is just and seasonable: And such it is when necessary and soveraign to heale the hurt of a Church or State. Thus that reverent person. And then complains, It hath been his fate frequently to offend some men, when he hath been most intent to serve them, by Texts and Sermons, which he thought most apt, useful, and innocent; And then gives in three Texts which he preacht upon on 3. several great and special occasions. One before the King, another before the long Parliament, the third elsewhere. And of all three (says he) though wholsome and innocent Texts, and I hope ac¦cordingly handled; yet I heard some unpleasing eccho's and reflexions. The sore and itching eares of some men in all ages are such, that they will not endure  heal∣ing, or sound and wholsome doctrine, though the pain ari∣seth from the sores and inflammation in themselves, and not from the plaister and hand which honestly applyes it. Yet they are prone, as in fell boyls and acute tumours, when but touched (though but gently) to fly upon those that are next them, and cry aloud, O you hurt me, when the hurt is within, and from their selves, and their sound parts will endure free and rough handling; such as are un∣found do most want it. And therefore if we will be faith∣full to God, to our own souls, and our hearers, we must not flatter their sores to their ruine: but rather choose to heal them, though at present we be thought to hurt them. Nor (sayes he farther) shall our labour of love be in vain, ei∣ther in the Lord, or before good men, who at length will find by experience that the wounds of a friend (which let out
the putrified matter of painful tumors) are better then the kisses of an enemy, which do (infidis cicatricibus cuti∣culam obducere.) Skin over with unfaithful scars, the ill-searched, & ill-purged Ulcers of mens hearts and lives. I hope this worthy person will pardon me, that I have made so bold with him, as to borrow so much from him, I shall pay it him in those respects and honour I owe unto him for his no∣ble disposition and temper. And I rather chuse thus to do, as hoping his worth will add more weight, then if it had been delivered in my own words. And see, what is here delivered in the Sermon, was but as a prophesie what befell this good man and good Preacher af∣terwards: For in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Lord May∣or, Aldermen, and Court of Common-Councel (who gave him thanks for his Sermon, and intreated him to print it) he tells them, he heard some more offended at the plain-dealing he used, which possibly (sayes he) was from their over-rawness, and soreness, more then from my roughness. As I aym to do things faithfully, personally; so decently, and discreetly. Nor do I thinke I am to learn of those Cen∣sorious Cato's how to preach, any more then they will learn of me to buy and sell, or how to fight and war. And he says, No man may wonder, if he dare to reprove those sins which some dare to do; or to approve, but dare not hear of, or re∣pent. And that his parrhesia and freedome of speech, as a man, a Christian, and a Preacher, was such, as became his feeling of the publique miseries, the desire of the Publique tranquility, and the sense of that fidelity he did owe to God, his Countrey, them (to whom he preacht) and his owne soul. And the Lord knows my owne soul can, and doth attest the same, in my poor weak labours and indeavours also; Though infinitely short in worth of this most reverent person: To end with him, he tells us, These are not times to palliate and
speak smooth and soft things: Never age had fouler hu∣mours, or tumours, more felt and more painfull; more hard, and less mollified: And sayes; No, as he would not injure any man, or fester the times: so he abhorr'd to flatter them; which is the greatest injury a Preacher can do to Church and State. And now I must confess the subject of my discourse was not of so high a nature, nor had I to do with so high an Auditory. Nor am I fit for such an undertaking; nor have I quoted all this to any such purpose. But to let our petty world (here at home) know, that plain, free, home, and (as this worthy Doctor phrases it) personal preaching, is not such a sin as our Ignaro's would make it. And that though people be angry with us for such preaching, we must not cease to secure our conscience in the faithfull (though unpleasing) discharge of our duty: And good Read∣er, know, That as a necessity is laid upon those who are sent to preach; So a necessity is likewise laid upon them to deale punctually and particularly with the personall sinnes (I don't say naming the persons) of those they preach to; which if they do, they shall be sure to heare on't, If not with perse∣cution of the hand, yet with persecution of the tongue. And whereas some may say this, or that, in such or such a Sermon might have been forborn, Perhaps we may say so too. But if we (whom the Lord hath sent to do his work; And (in our Studies applying our selves unto it) having besought the Lord to teach us what to speak, and how to speak, as may be most for his glory, and the peoples good; And it be suggest∣ed to us, that such, or such expressions would be most taking; or best remembred: Our discourse thus and thus clothed in language, would be most effectual and conducent to the end intended. If we are thus perswaded in our Consciences, How shall we refuse it? Obj. It may be 'twill offend, displease some? They'l ca∣vill at it?
Ans. It may be so; We hope not; We know no reason for it. Wee'l pray they may not. But is it a necessary truth? Is it usefull, and seasonable? Is good like to be done by it? (which is our errand and businesse.) Must we forbear that which God in our Consciences (according to his Word) tells us will do some people good, because it will offend others? Tru∣ly friends we (Preachers) many times offend (yea hurt) o∣thers, when we know it not, nor ever meant or intended it. But is it our fault, or theirs? We meane the whole Congrega∣tion good. If any do not understand, or mis-understand, or mis-interpret, or pervert our words, or meaning, Is it our fault? I tell you Sirs, this great truth, and minde it; Much hurt (yea more hurt then good) is many times (nay most times) done by our Sermons. And we (Preachers) in that, not to be blamed, but are accepted of God therein, and shall be rewarded. It's a sad word (too true to many) that we further their damnation by our preaching. That one place (2 Cor. 2.14,15,16. ver.) fully proves all this. And whence all this? But because people do not heed (as they ought) what we say: Or they don't understand it, Or they won't practice it, Or (which is worst of all) they withstand, gainsay, per∣vert, or wrest it. And what? must we therefore forbear prea∣ching? Must we forbear the truth, because they abuse it? And (perhaps) us for it? I trow not. And let me put another Case. It may be God by his Spirit (for we hope we are not with∣out his imbreathings and suggestions) according to his word convinces and perswades me, that such or such a truth (as before) is very seasonable and usefull: And in steps selfe, and tells me, This truth is teo tart, and it may create me trou∣ble, I may heare ill, and beare ill for speaking it; What shall I do in this case? Why truly, Selfe is sometimes to be hearkned to: For we are not to create to our selves trouble unnecessarily. But (as before) it is a truth necessary and seasonable; May I (for fear) forbear it? Will you read
what one (no phanatick, or of a factious or turbulent spi∣rit) sayes, A man of great parts, learning, and judgement, Dr. Jackson;Dr. Jackson heretofore Pre∣sident of Corp: Christi Colledg in Oxford, In his Treatise of Justifying Faith, sect. 2. cap. 15. pag. 279 Ministers of the Gospel (sayes he) may deny Christ, or manifest their ashamedness of his Gospel as directly, by not laying his Law as closely to the great He∣rods of the world (as John Baptist did (supposing the case to be as notorious, and as well known unto them (he meanes the Ministers, as Herods was to John Baptist:) In this case they may as directly deny Christ, or be asham'd of his Gospel (in not dealing plainly and reproving) as if they had been afraid to confesse him, for feare of being put out of the Synagogue, &c. And he says, were John Baptists kind of preaching used in many Kingdoms, though by such as professe the same Religion with the Potentates, whom they should offend with their boldness, I think (sayes he) it would prove matter of Martyrdome in the end. And he farther sayes; In that any age since Christian Religion was first propagated, hath wanted store of Martyrs, 'tis more to be a tributed unto the negligence, ignorance, and hypocrisie, or want of courage in Christs Ambassadors, or appointed Pastors, then unto the sin∣cerity, mildnesse, or fidelity of the Flock, especially of the Bel-weathers, or chief Ring-leaders. And now friend! sare we (Ministers) thus in danger? what shall we do? Truly we have more need of your pitty, and your prayers, then your censures and reproaches. But jacta est alea, It's better obey God, and fear God then men, and please God then men, Or our selves either; for in so doing, we shall have peace with him, and in our own consciences, which is better then all the peace and comforts the world can afford us. And therefore we will bear it patiently, comfortably. But yet be∣cause Sathan makes no small advantage of those reproaches that are cast upon the Ministers of the Gospel (of which farther in the vindication) I shall once more appear in Print
(though much aginst my purpose) to stop the mouth either of prejudice, or wilfull calumny, or sottish and sleepy igno∣rance, or byast interest, which will pervert any thing, be it never so innocent and harmlesse. And this not without the advice and counsell of some worthy friends, and well-wishers who have been very sensible of those unworthy rumours that have bin raised & spread by occasion of this ensuing Sermon, which I shall now (good Reader) lay before thee, according to mine owne notes, and the best I could get of those who noted after me. Possibly this trouble might be brought upon me, that some may reap benefit by this Sermon (or appendant discour∣ses) printed, as I have some cause to hope some did, when it was preached. To which end I commend thee and it unto God, beseeching him to bestow upon thee and me the spirit of power, of love, and of a sound minde, 2 Tim. 1.7. For which thy prayers are desired at the Throne of Grace (if thou hast any interest there) by him, who is Thy faithful friend and wel-wisher, RA: FARMER. POSTSCRIPT. Reader, IF thou be one of the simple ones, let me advise thee: Shoot not thy bolt too suddenly, but receive information from those who are wiser. If thou be a person of judgement and discretion, make use of it, and do not read by snatches, and then censure, but read all. And where thou possibly mayst stumble or doubt (having read the former Epistle) favour me so far, as to read also my Vindication after. And I suppose we shall part friends, notwithstanding all evill surmisings. Farewel.
HOSEA 6.1. Come let us return unto the Lord, for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will binde us up. WEe have here a repenting people; and they the people of Israel, Gods people. Now repenting supposes sinning; for repentance is not but for sin. If there were no sinning, there were no need of repenting. Now, All sin, for there is no man living that sinneth not, as 1 Kings 8.46. Particular persons sin, and people and Nations in general sin. All sin, even Gods people, his pe∣culiar people sin. And if his people sinne as well as others, they shall suffer as well as others: Nay, Because they are his people, therefore, if they sin, they above all others shall suffer. Thus the Lord by the Prophet Amos, Chap. 3. vers. 2. You onely have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. Well, Gods people sin, and Gods people suffer for their sin: so these here. We may read of their sin both before, and after the Text. In the Chapter before the Text, there you may read of multiplyed, complicated sins, impudently, wilfully committed. Both Princes, the house of the King, and Priests, and all the people they had been nets and snares to betray one another into sinne, Vers. 1. of the foregoing Chapter. And in the 2d. Vers. Those revolters were profound to make slaughter; slaughter of men, and slaughter of sacrifices. They would kill, and commit murder, and yet pretend unto Religion. And in this they were profound notable hypocrites, deep dissemblers. For though they won't frame their courses to Gods minde, vers. 4. Yet they will go with their herds and their flocks to seeke the Lord, vers. 6. Oh! they'l be hugely religious, they'l not spare for cost, they brought their herds and their flocks to make sa∣crifices: But yet for all that, they shall not finde the Lord, ver. 6. God won't accept of such impostors, such pretenders, he hath with∣drawn himself from them. He will not countenance, protect, or secure
them, in the same verse. Nay, if they go on in their sin, and go fur∣ther from God, God will go yet farther from them; I will go and return to my place, ver. the last. God will not appear amongst them as he was wont by his wonted mercies, and gracious providences; Let the Assyrian, and King Jareb help them if they can. Those Phy∣sicians of no value, to whom they fled for refuge and for healing, when they were smitten and wounded. If they serve false gods, let them when they have need go to them whom they have served. This was the state and condition of the Princes of Israel at that time: But how was it with Ephraim? how was it with the people? (for so doth Ephraim sometimes signifie.) Why, like Princes, like people. Being broken in judgement, (a sottish, base, cowardly com∣pany) they willingly walked after the Commandement. An Idolatrons command went forth from cursed Jeroboam: And the people being oppressed and over-born by power, they willingly walked after the commandement, vers. 11. Oppression makes men base and cowardly; and like Issachars Asse to couch and lie down under every burthen. And thus by their joynt and generall sinning, they draw down a ge∣nerall judgement: And that is verified, Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi. And now God being gone, all their shifting cannot help them. In vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains, Jer. 3.23. Great men, men in high places, men in au∣thority, that are as mountains and hills, these cannot save Truly in the Lord God onely is the salvation of Israel, In the same vers. True, Salvation is in the Lord, but he is with-drawn and gone; he is returned to his place, and hides himselfe, he will not save, we cannot finde him. Oh! foolish people and unwife, thus to forsake God, and to cause him to forsake you, and to leave you naked to your oppressors, when there is none to helpe, none to deli∣ver. But is he clean gone? will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be fa∣vourable no more? hath God forgotten to be gracious? hath he in an∣ger shut up his tender mercies? Psal. 77.7. No, though Gods peo∣ple forget him, yet he will not forget them, Isa. 49.15. But if he will not forget them, why doth he with-draw? why doth he hide himselfe? why doth he not come in for his peoples rescue, their aid, their help and succour? And how long will he hide himselfe in this our affliction, distresse, and misery? Why? he is with-drawn, and returned to his place, he hides himselfe as it were in heaven, till we
acknowledge our offences, and by true repentance and unfained faith seek his face and favour; God doth with-draw to this purpose, that by his with-drawing he might draw us after him. He hides himselfe till we acknowledge our offences, and by a lively act of faith fervently seek his face. For surely (saith the Lord, if they be not altogether senceless) in their affliction they will seeke me early, dili∣gently, seriously, Chap. last, vers. last. Come therefore, and let us return unto the Lord, &c. Come let us, Ʋs that are here this day, Come let Ʋs: And oh! that all the Nation might hear this Call, and answer it: Come let us return unto the Lord, for he hath torne and he will heal us, he hath smitten, and he will binde us up. After two dayes he will revive us. In the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. We have in the words, First, an invitation to repentance. Secondly, an incouragement thereunto. The invitation, Come let us return unto the Lord. The incouragement, He hath torn, and he will heale us; he hath smitten, and he will binde us up. The Text may be taken as the Word of God, by the Prophet, put into the peoples mouths; Or as a direction and prescription from God to his people, shewing them what to do in a sad afflicted state and condition. And beloved, this is no strange notion, And it is a comforting and encouraging consideration: God, he is so willing of his peoples returnings, that they might enjoy his favourable coun∣tenance, as that, even when his afflicting hand is upon them, he not onely nvites them to it, but he even teaches them what to say, and in what words to address themselves unto him, that they might prevail with him; so gracious and tender a Father is he. This you have most sweetly and fully in this very Prophet, Hosea 14.1. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou hast faln by thine iniquity, take with you words; (what are they? why those that follow) say unto him, Take away our iniquities, and receive us graciously, and so will we render the calves of our lips. (And then it follows) Ashur shall not save us, &c. And when his people take this advice, and returne unto the Lord, then will the Lord heale their back-sliding, and love them freely, then will his anger be turned away from them, &c. Oh beloved! what precious mercies, and unexpressible kindnesses doth God offer to a repenting, a returning people: So tender a Fa∣ther is he, that he doth not only invite to repent, but teaches
them how to demean themselves, and puts words into their mouths, to come unto him withal. As a tender Mother, that desires to have her Child to go, stretches forth her hand to it, bids it come, gives words of encouragement to it that so it may come; Even so, God the Lord calls, invites, incourages his people to come unto him by unfeined repentance. Nay, not only so, but (as I said) he teaches them with what words to come unto him. So here; Come let us re∣turn unto the Lord, &c. Beloved, it is a great incouragement to poor, distressed, afflicted souls, that the Lord is so desirous of our re∣pentance, as that he not onely invites us to repent, but also tea∣ches us how to repent, and return to him. Come therefore let us re∣turn unto the Lord. Ʋs of this Land and Nation, Ʋs of the three Nations, Ʋs of this City, Ʋs of this Congregation, Let us return unto the Lord. Return unto the Lord! Why? have we departed from him? or can we depart from him? how can we depart from him? Is not God present every where? Pray sirs read what David tells you in Ps. 139.7. Whither shall I goe from thy spirit? or whither shall I flye from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utmost parts of the sea, even there shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand sustain me, How then can we go from God? and consequently return to him? To this I answer: It is one thing to depart from (and conse∣quently to return to) Gods essentiall and all-powerful presence; And it is another thing to depart from, and return to his gracious and most merciful presence. There is an essential presence (a presence of Gods power & might,) And there is a gracious presence; a presence of his mercy and protection. Now, Gods essential presence is never with-drawn from his Creatures; For in him they live, and move, and have their being. But then all who partake of his powerful presence, do not partake of his gracious presence. God is said to be near or far off a people, and they are said to be near or far from God, as they are in his grace and favour. When in mercy he extends his grace and favour to a people, then is he said to be neare: unto them. Now beloved, There is one thing makes a distance and separation between God and a soule, or between God and a people: and that is sin, Isa. 59.1. Behold the Lords hand is not shortned that he cannot save, neither his eare heavy that he cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you and your God: Your sins have hid his face
from you that he will not hear. By sin we go away from God, and then God goes away from us: not by his power, that he cannot do, for he is present so every where, But he goes away, in with-drawing his grace, his love and favour, his most mercifull provi∣dences, protections, and speciall preservations from a people; That's Gods going away. And we by further sin, go away further from God, and make the distance greater. And as by sin we go a∣way, so by repentance we return again to God, and so God returns again to us, and receives us into grace and favour. And now, sirs, Let me aske you; Have we not sinned, and gone away from God? Do not our iniquities testifie against us plainly, to our faces? And hath not God departed from us, and left us to run unto the Assyrian, and King Jareb? Interpreters do give vari∣ous Interpretations of that word what is meant by King Jareb; but yet all agree in this, that it signifies vaine helps. Friends, all helps and refuges are vaine, when God forsakes a people: And by the vanity and insufficiency of all our helps and helpers that have all failed us, is it not very manifest that God hath hitherto left us? And why is it? but because by sin we have left him, and departed from him. Will you give me leave to be plain, (and why should not I at such a time as this is?) Have not our Kings and Princes heretofore, and our princely Priests and Bishops been as snares upon Mizpah, and nets upon Tabor? (their high places and great offices) have they not tyrannized too much? Have they not revolted, and been profound to make slaughter, notwithstanding they have been reproved and admonished? I beseech you sirs, let not the appre∣hension of our present greater sufferings cause us altogether to for∣get our former iniquities. People are apt generally to complain of the present burthen, and murmur and forget what is past. And indeed, the greatnesse of our burthens may make us willing to be rid of them; But yet let us not be such sottish asses, as not to remem∣ber our former gal'd backs. In this day of our Humiliation, when we are seeking for establishment, let us not forget the cause and ground of our unsettlement. It was a sore Judgement that we were removed from our old foundations, but we must remember who it was that removed us. Friends let us consider who it was that broke us, was it not the Lord? Come let us return unto the Lord, for he hath smitten us, &c. Whatsoever be the hand that gives the stroke, or whosoever be the instruments, yet it is God that guides it. Amos 3.6. Shall there be evill in the City, and the Lord hath not done it?
Shall there be evill in a City, in a Nation, in the three Nations, and the Lord hath not done it? By evil, I understand the evil of pu∣nishment. Now I say, is the evill of punishment in the Nation, in the three Nations, or upon any particular person, without the evill of sin? will you say that the righteous Judge of heaven and earth hath not done right? When he hath brought the evill of punishment up∣on a Nation or person, will you say that the evill of sinne was not the preceding, and the procuring cause? I know well that God doth sometimes punish the sinne of Princes in and upon the People, and the sin of People in and upon the Princes: but then both of them have sinned. And though it may be the sin of the one hath been more provoking then the sinne of the other; yet when God comes with sweeping judgements upon all, surely all have had a great share in sinning. And whether the sins of our Princes, or the sins of the peo∣ple, have brought these heavy judgements upon us, God the Judge of all the earth best knows: I shall not take upon me to determine it; for what am I, that I should step into the Chair of the Almigh∣ty? but yet let it be considered, From that very time that those three eminent men stood in such a disgraceful and opprobrious man∣ner upon a pillory at Westminster like Rogues and Cutpurses, Let me tell you, since that time, neither the King, nor his party prospered; I mean those three worthy professors of the three noble Sciences, Divinity, Law, and Physicke. But yet surely the sins of this Land were ripe for judgement, or else the judgement would not have been so universal and generall. Hath not that dreadful judgement threatned and denounced of old, been most sadly fulfilled upon us? Isa. Ch. 3. begin. Behold, the Lord of hosts doth take away from Je∣rusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread and the whole stay of water: the mighty man and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, the Captain of fifties, and the honourable man, and the Counsellors, the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Oratour: And I will give children to be your princes, and babes shall rule over them: And the people shall be oppressed every one by another, the child shall be have himselfe proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honourable, &c. Hath not this been, and is it not this day sadly verified? Is not contempt of Magistracy and Ministry grown to an insupportable height? Hath not this I say, been sadly verified in these our dayes? And is it not because our sins have been universall? We will not  the fault upon one head, but take it upon all, for we have all
contributed to the common heaps of sin, and its infinite mercy that we have not been involved all in the common destruction: And have not we, we of this City, Magistrates and Ministers, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, have we not all had a hand in the provocation more or lesse? Can we forget that torpor, indiffe∣rency, lukewarmnesse and neutrality in our Magistracy, that hereto∣fore gave occasion to that flood of Heresie and Blasphemy to come in amongst us, and to make their seat here, to the poysoning of the Country round about us? And as for the people of this City, let me not be unfaithfull to∣wards them. Sirs, you complain that your Trade is decayed, and that you are ready to break, many of you, and I think you don't lie. Your Trade hath so forsaken you, that you are ready to forsake your Trades. And what is the reason? Surely God doth not leave a people but upon some occasion. Truly when God forsakes Trades∣men, no marvail if they forsake their Trades; without God none can prosper: Tradesmen may work hard, and fare hard, and go mean in habit, rise up early, go to bed late, and cark and care, and get nothing unlesse the Lord be with them. Ʋnlesse the Lord keep the City, the watchman watcheth in vain, &c. Psal. 127. Why now, a general forsaking of God, will cause the Lord to depart ge∣nerally from you. And beloved, that I may not dwell altogether on generals, not to mention that drunkennesse and prophanenesse, Sabboth-breaking, blasphemous Oaths, and bitter Execrations, Pride, contempt of Magistracy, and undervaluing of our Superiours, which upon this losse of government is now sadly returning again upon us, I say to let these alone (which yet do too evidently stare us in the face) and not to speak to them: Do not the people of this City in general, & have they not for a long time departed from God, and forsaken him in his Ministers and servants whom he calls and sends forth into his Vineyard? I will not now enter upon that com∣mon place of that comfortable and honourable incouragement that is due to the Ministers of the Gospel: It's so clear a truth, that in plain reason you cannot gainsay it. And yet how infamously famous is this City above all other Cities in this Nation in this particular? Beloved, let me not be counted your Enemie for telling you the truth, (as you know I do) and dealing thus plainly; Surely sirs, 'tis forsaking God, to forsake his servants, and he will not take it kind∣ly. I might mention other sins whereby we have gone away from God, and so caused him to go away and forsake us. And if God
forsake us, no marvail if we be in a broken and distracted condition. See this 2 Chron. 15.1,2,3. The spirit of the Lord came upon A∣zariah the son of Obed, and he went to meet Asa, and said unto him, heare me Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is with you whilst you be with him: If you seek him he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And see then their sad state after. Beloved, when God goes away with the honey of pity and mercy, he leaves such a sting of wrath and judgement behind him, that it shall vex and torment the very soules of a people: And then shall they finde that it is a sad and a bitter thing to forsake the Lord And now beloved, what remains, but that we having forsaken the Lord, we return again unto him. Come, let us return again unto the Lord, for he hath smitten, and he will heale, &c. Come let us return. Returning is nothing but repenting, and both of them do intend amendment. He that amends, repents, and he that repents returns; you shall find them oft put together in Scrip∣ture. So Ezek. 14.6. Thus saith the Lord, repent and turne your selves from your idols, and turne away your faces from all your abo∣minations. So in Chap. 18. of the same Prophesie, Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby you have transgressed, make you a new heart and a new spirit, for why will you dye O house of Israel? If you repent of the evill of sin, God will repent of the evill of pu∣nishment: And if you return from your evill wayes, God will re∣turn to you in mercy, and tender compassion. Come then let us re∣turn. Return, return, O England, Return O Bristoll, Return O thou my soule, and all you beloved that hear me this day, Return unto the LORD our God, for we are broken by our sinne, Chap. 14 1. Watchman what of the night? saith the Lord by the Prophet, Isa. 21.11,12. Watchman what of the night? He answered, the morn∣ing cometh and also the night, if ye will enquire, enquire; Return, Come. Sirs, there is a night and a morning, this I see. If you put this Querie to me, Watchman what seest thou? I say the morning cometh, and also the night. We have a night and a morning in our Text, and so also in our Nation if we neglect it not. We have had by Gods chastising hand upon us (and oh, that it may be a re∣forming hand) nights of tearing and smiting, the Lord hath torne us, and he hath smitten us. The hand of God upon us hath been a darke night of terrours and sorrows. Dark and black dispensations hath the Lord exercised us with: He hath smitten us, he hath broken
us, these are our nights. The morning now we hope also cometh: He will heale us, he will binde us up, that's the morning: And oh! Let that happy morning of Englands joy and deliverance make hast, and not tarry. It may be, beloved, as we have been under the curse, and judgement formerly mentioned, Isa. 3. So we may also see that happy morning of joy and reviving that is promised by the same Prophet Isay 1.25,26. I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy drosse, and take away all thy tinne. Do you expect a settlement? Truly then your sins must be purged away, and then I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counsellors as at the beginning; Afterwards thou shalt be called a City of righteousnesse, the faithfull City: Sion shall be redeemed with judgement, and her con∣verts with righteousnesse. Oh beloved! for such a happy day, when God the Lord shall delight in us, and in mercy shall bestow upon us that blessing here promised, of a righteous, just, and lawfull Government. And though God should not do it in such a way as we expect, yet he will do it in such a way as is best for us, if we please him, which let us leave to him and our Superiours. Let us then return unto the Lord, and leave it to him for our establishment and settlement. Let us I say, turn unto the Lord. Truly sirs (will you give me leave to open my heart unto you) my heart trembles to think of some mens turnings, and of some turnings which some men look for; not a turning to God, but a turning further from God. Many people expect a change, not that they might change their lives, or manners; No, beloved, they would have a turning, not to God, but to the Devill. Oh! how would some men turn to the Devil of drunkenness? how would some men turn to the Devil of swearing? to the Devil of Sabboth-breaking, and all man∣ner of prophanesse? That they might live and sin without controul. Friends is this the turning that God looks for? Surely sirs, these people (if they might have their wills) would bring in a night, a sad and darke night in stead of a light and gladsome morning, a sadder night then ever yet England saw; For if the Lord should establish us, and we make use of that establishment to establish our selves in sin, and so provoke the Lord to go further from us, and leave us, we have just grounds to fear that the Lord would then ne∣ver come again amongst us. Do these men turn unto the Lord? how many of them probably are in the Tavern at this time? how many in the Alehouse at this very time? At this time I say, wherein (as one would expect) we
should all as one man joyn together in our earnest prayers, to im∣plore a blessing from heaven upon the Counsel of the Parliament, shortly to be assembled, that the Lord would make them instru∣ments for our settlement and establishment now after all our break∣ings and shakings. But where are they? Do these men walk in Gods wayes? Do these men look for a change that may be for the better? Do these men look for establishment, and that the Nation should be setled upon their desires, and upon their endeavours? There is a place, that I hope in all things doth not run parallel, but in this is to our purpose. It is in 1 Sam. 12.19. All the people said unto Samuel, pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not, for we have added unto all our sins this evill to aske us a King. Now I say, I do not conceive that the Text runs parallel with our case in this particular; therefore mistake me not. But now marke, Samuel said unto the people, feare not, ye have done all this wickednesse; yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your hearts, and turn not aside, for then should you go after vaine things that cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain. It was not so great a sinne in them, but that desiring and having a King was consistent with serving the Lord: Nor had they thereby so sin'd as to forsake God. Turn not aside (sayes he) from following the Lord, but serve the Lord, &c. But then go on to the two last verses: Onely feare the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider how great things he hath done for you: But if you still do wickedly, you shall be consumed both you and your King People think, Oh I if they had a King, all shall be well, their state and condition shall then be prosperous, and they shall be all safe. But beloved, If men go after vaine things, if they do wick∣edly, it cannot be a King that can help them. The people of Israel they had a King according to their desires; But what, was that e∣nough to secure them? Surely if the Lord forsake them, it could not be their King that could help them: and therefore saith the Pro∣phet, vers. 22. The Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake, because it hath pleased the Lord to make you his people. If the Lord hath once assumed a people to be his, he will do much for them, and beare long with them ere he will forsake them. And therefore as the Prophet there, vers. 29. would pray for them, so also would he teach them the good and right way. Fear the Lord, saith he, and serve him in truth, with all your hearts, for consider how great things he hath done for you, vers. 24. And beloved, hath not
God done great things for us? What great hopes hath he given us of a settlement after all our feares and confusions? And we expect a King: But if ye still do wickedly, ye shall be destroyed both you and your King. Mark, That which the hearts of the people were set upon, was a King, nothing would please them but a King, yea you shall have a King; But yet do not go away from God, and follow after vain things, for if you do, you shall be consumed and destroyed, both you and your King together. Beloved, there's nothing that so surely brings ruine and destruction upon a King and Kingdome, as wilfull and reiterated sins and wickednesses: If you still do wickedly, you shall be destroyed both you and your King. You did wickedly before, and what became of your King? was it your wickednesse or his? Many of you will not say it was his. And if you still do wickedly, the next King (for ought I know) may fare as he did, therefore take heed of sin. Beloved, I propose this one thing to you, it was ei∣ther the sin of the King (the Father) that brought the evill upon him, or the sin of the People, or both together. If his own sinne, then the judgement was just upon him as to God, though not in them who did it; But if it was the sin of the people, let me ask you, will not that which ruin'd the Father ruine the Son? If you still do wickedly, you shall be destroyed both you and your King. Surely Kings, Princes, and chief Magistrates are least beholding to drunkards, to murderers, to prophane persons, to unclean lasci∣vious persons, to those that wallow in the stinking puddle and nasty dunghill of sin: Kings and Princes are least of all beholding unto them, for they draw down judgement upon the whole Nation. These persons, though they look for a morning of joy and gladness upon the Nation, yet will surely bring a dismal night of sorrow notwith∣standing their expectations. And therefore, Come let us return unto the Lord, that as he hath torn us for our sins, so he may binde us up; and as he hath broken us for our transgressions, so he may heale us upon our returning: Here's incouragement, which is the second part of the Text. Of which a little. Friends, none but he that smites us can beale us; none but he that tear's can binde us up. All other Physitians, all other Chyrurgions, they are but meer Quacks and Empericks. We may say of them as Job of his friends, Job 13.4. Ye are forgers of lies, ye are physitians of no value. And beloved, have we not found it so in our State-Mountebancks, who have set up their Stages, that they might pick
our Pockets, and made us bow down, that they might ride over us? Have we not found that of David verified? Men of high degree are a lie, and men of low degree are altogether vanity? Are they to be trusted in? Is there any more weight in them then in the dust of the ballance? O let us return therefore unto the Lord, for he hath broken us, and he will heale us, he hath smitten us, and he onely can binde us up: He hath here promised it, if we return (as before) unto him: And beloved, consider this, as God wounds and smites by his in∣struments, so he also heals and binds up by instruments. The enemies of Gods people, God makes use of as the rod in his hand to chastise and correct his Children for their sins: and he also raises up instru∣ments to deliver them from their sufferings. In Esay 58. there you have a promise made, that the just and righteous shall build the old waste places, shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and shall be called the repairer of the breach, the restorer of the paths to dwell in. Do you look for happy dayes in England? Would you have the Old waste places built, and the breaches repaired? Why, then see what the Lord requires of you: Read that place fore-quo∣ted, Isa. 58.6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? &c. This is a day wherein you fast and humble your selves to seek establishment. Well, will you see what Fast the Lord requires? Loose the bands of wickednesse, undo every heavy burthen, let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every heavy yoke; It is to deale thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house; When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine owne flesh: Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, &c. And vers. 12. They that be of thee shall build the old waste places, thou shalt raise up the foun∣dations of many generations, &c. Though our government hath layn in the dust these many yeares, and though we have had a dark and black night upon us, yet God can cause our light to break forth as the morning; he can raise us up some to build our waste places, to be repairers of our breaches, and restorers of paths to dwell in. But I say, the promise is to good and righteous men; These are the men, if any, that must lay the foundations: not prophane loose wretches, enemies to all righteousnesse, the Lord in mercy keep such out of that great Assembly of Parliament: And if any get in, the Lord in his wisdome find out a way to cast them out again. Beloved, nothing but justice, and truth, and righteousnesse, and mercy can heale a broken Nation, let us then this day, and every
day else beg of God, that he would graciously be pleased to be pre∣sent with, and to sit President in, and over that great Councel of the Land, that they may break off every yoke, and take off every heavy burthen, and keep off all unjust yokes and heavy burthens that any whatsoever would impose upon us. That so that great Assembly may be a repairer of our breaches, and a restorer of our paths to dwell in. Let us pray that both they, and all we may be more carefull to bring King Jesus into our hearts, then K. Charles into his Throne: Not as if I looked on these two as contradictory, opposite, or destructive the one unto the other; But thus, I tell you King Jesus is to be preferred before any mortall creature what∣soever: And if he that shall rule be carefull to rule according to Truth, and under King Jesus, If God and the great Council of the Nation shall think fit, Let him come and welcom. But sirs, let me tell you, King Charles cannot save your soules; but if King Jesus rule in your hearts, he can and will save you: What would it advantage you, if all of you had your hearts desire here? If things go even as you would wish? and yet when Death comes, you should be drag'd to Hell, to endlesse torments, what would it advantage you? Be not then so mad as to pursue world∣ly concernments, or worldly comforts with such eagernesse: But a∣bove all seek and pursue after things of everlasting concernment: And I tell you no mortall King can save your souls, and therefore let us most look that King Jesus his reign and government may be established over us. See his sweet and gracious government, Isa. 32. begin. Behold a King shall reign in righteousnesse, and Princes shall rule in judgement, and a man shall be as a hiding place from the winds, and a covert from the tempest as rivers of water in a dry land, & as the shadow of a great rocke in a weary land, &c. Ther's a description given of a blessed and good King: He shall be a shelter, a cover∣ing, he shall be all in all to a distressed people. Jer. 23.5. there it is said, Behold the dayes come saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shal reign and prosper, and shall execute judgement and justicein the earth; in those days Judah shall be safe, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. This is spoken of the Lord Jesus Christ, he that is the King of Kings, he shall rule in Righteousness. And he or they that Rule under him, must rule in Righteousnesse; Let us not then look so much (as most do) after wordly peace and freedome, and temporal deliverance from present
burdens, as after spiritual peace, and freedome from everlasting torments; not so much to enjoy perishing comforts, as to have the comforts of everlasting enjoyments: And then may we expect the performance of what is promised in the close of our Text. After two dayes will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight; We shall live not onely temporally, com∣fortably and happy, but a life heavenly and everlasting, we shall be happy to all eternity. Then (as it follows) shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, more of Gods minde, and of his mer∣cies, and he shall come unto us as the raine, as the early and latter rain upon the earth, which being parched with drought, re∣ceiveth it in readily, fructifieth, and bringeth forth abundantly. Come then, let us all return unto the Lord, for as he hath torne, so will he heale, and as he hath smitten, so will he bind us up. FINIS. HEre's my Sermon, now where's my sin? What's my Charge with which I have been so (I cannot say whether more) igno∣rantly or maliciously traduced: why its three-fold; I have preacht against the King, and the coming in of the King: So some, My whole Sermon drives at this; The coming in of the King would bring in prophanenesse; so others. A third sort say, I am angry. Now to answer to these distinctly. And first, I have preacht against the King, and his coming in, I ask wherein? how doth that appear? I will come as close and as speedily as I can to my Charge, I mean to that part of my Sermon from whence they might suppose me crimi∣nous. I shall therefore passe over almost one halfe of it, for that was but by way of Explication: And it concern'd others, Israel. That troubles not, no preaching at a distance, and speaking of o∣ther mens faults, and reproving them, that bites not, as much as you will of that: But this home-preaching, and treading too close upon our heels, This gauls, this vexes this troubles us. Why, what's the matter? what's the matter? Did not you say. That because by our sins we had left God, therefore God had left us? And did you not say, That our Kings and our Princes heretofore, and our
Princely Priests and Bishops had been as snares upon Mizpah, and as nots upon Tabor (their high places and great offices). And how have they not rag'd and tyranniz'd, &c. And did you not beseech us, that we should not let the apprehensions of our present greater sufferings, cause us altogether to forget our former iniquities? And did you not advise us, that upon that day of our solemn Humilia∣tion, wherein we sought to God for settlement, that we should not forget the cause and ground of our unsettlement? Here's enough to answer at once and together, and I think this is my greatest charge. And now what of all this? Let me ask you by your cavilling a∣gainst this, Don't you discover your ignorance? Is it not plain you are not acquainted with the Scripture? Or that you take no notice, or understand not what you read, or hear? That you are meer stran∣gers to the nature and manner of a true Fast? Is not a fasting day (especially publique, generall, and such solemn Fast dayes) a day wherein to humble our soules before the Lord by a hearty, sincere, and impartiall confession and acknowledgement of all our sinnes? And being a generall day of Humiliation through the whole Land, to confesse and be humbled for the sins of the whole Land in general. And in such a day are not the sins both of Princes and People both past and present to be remembred and acknowledged? And that not onely in generall termes (which is mostly slight and overly) but punctually and particularly, of those sins they were guilty of, and lay under. This is (if you know not, as it seems you do not) for your better information and (as I desire) Reformation; Do but read the instances of the Solemn Fasts recorded in Scripture, and you will be wiser hereafter. I reser you for this more particularly to those three most Solemn Fasts which are there recorded, Ezra 9. Nehem. 9. and Dan. 9. And see and observe the manner of the ce∣lebration, and whether their particular sins were not enumerated, confessed and bewailed. And had we of this Land and Nation no sins to be remembred? to be confessed? Are you so forgetfull? or were you ignorant of them? Are we not unsetled? Are not our foundations of government overturned? Do not the pillars of the Nation tremble? Is it not a Judgement? Do I not say so much? And what were there no sins that are the causes of it? Do such great, and heavy, and generall judgements befall a Nation (both King, Princes, Priests and People) without sin procuring them? you dare not say so? And were there no sins in England but the sins of the people? What was the Popish Match? and the building of Houses
and Chappels thereupon for Idolatrous and superstitious worship? What was the countenancing and exercise of that false worship, e∣ven in the Kings own dwelling? And were not our Communion-Tables turn'd into Altars, with superstitious cringings and bow∣ings towards them? and in some places wax Tapers set upon those Altars? and second Service (which the people could not ) there performed? How was the zealous profession of Religion (un∣der the nickname of Puritanisme) discountenanced and disgraced? How did the Court-Bishops (especially the Bishop of Canterbury, Dr. Laud) vex, perplex, and ruine men in their High Commis∣sion Court, and Star-Chamber? How would drunken and prophane Ministers (if but zealous for Ceremonies) give the checke to (and up∣on the least occasion) trouble and sue the best Knights and Gentle∣men in the Country even for trifles, and be therein upheld and coun∣tenanced by those Court-Bishops; Insomuch, that when the Knights and Gentlemen were assembled in Parliament, and had op∣portunity to be revenged upon them, they ding'd them quite down without mercy or consideration. I need not tell you what courses were taken that the King might be maintained without Parliaments, and so with out the love of his Subjects, and rednesse of their grievances, I could name much, more; you that liv'd in those times, and were able make obser∣vation know it. If you don't, others do. And are not these grounds of unsettlement? And upon a special solemn Fast (such a one as this especially) wherein we sought to God for establishment and settle∣ment) would it not be proper, that these things and such the like might and should have been remembred and mentioned, the more to consternate our spirits, and promote our humiliation: But you see I did not, I lightly past it over in Generals. Oh! But you said, since those three eminent persons, professors of those three most noble Professions, Divinity, Law, and Phy∣sicke suffered upon the Pillory like Rogues and Cutpurses in such an opprobrious and disgraceful manner. That the K. and his party never prospered, did I say so? and did I not say true? Did not their Cause go every day backward? I say, their Cause, the King and Bishops, for they I meant, I put them both together. There is a saying, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum: And every man that was acquainted with the Transactions of those Times, cannot but acknowledge, that that was the source of all our miseries: So dangerous a thing is it for Clergy-men to leave their Calling, and
turn Courtiers. Men whose riches lie in their heads, will be al∣wayes tampering. 'Tis good therefore they be kept to their proper businesse. For say, was it not a pretence of conformity and uniformity in Religion that began all our quarrell? Not that I think an Ʋnifor∣mity an evil (what ever others say) but rather a good, and by all good wayes to be endeavoured, and I suppose till then we shall not be well setled: And sure the quarrell began there, I could wish the settlement began there; For upon true judgement I speak it, though it be a shame and a matter of sadnesse: Most of the troubles and combustions in Civil States have been either begun or fomented by men of our profession, I mean of the Clergy, and was it not so with us? Our first War intended, was it not against the Scots? and wherefore was it? who began it? Was it not called generally Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops War, I put the King and Bishops together, with respect to this: The Bishop could not begin a War (I mean arm the people) without a King. And the Bishop having so great a power and influence upon the King, prevail'd with him to raise Armes against them (the Scots.) And the immediate Prodromus and forerunner of this War, was it not the most horrid and reproachful standing of these eminent persons upon the Pillory? I do professe (the persons, and every thing considered) it was the saddest sight (next to the Kings beheading) that ever (especially for many gene∣rations) was seen in England. I saw not the latter, but I did the for∣mer. And I well remember Mr. Burtons words when upon the Pil∣lory; Marke it (says he) little do we know what this dry tree (point∣ing to the Pillory) may bring forth. And speedily after, the next news from Scotland was; If the Englishman loose his lugg, the Scot would lose his cragg, meaning against the rage and tyranny of the Bishop: For having dealt thus barbarously with these three so emi∣nent persons, he then thought the terrour thereof would have daun∣ted and cowed the Scottish Nation, when as this did but heighten their indignation, and raise greater opposition against him. Yea, but were not the Scots too blame in this matter? It may be so, but I know it not, for I am not acquainted with the Laws, Rights, and Constitutions of their Kingdom, and therfore I say no more to it. But I ask this question; Was their not entertaining Episcopal Go∣vernment, and the Service-book a sufficient ground to embroil two Nations, two Christian Nations in War, to shed the blood one of another? And if (for conformities sake with England) Scotland
must have a Service-Book, why could not our own English Service-Book serve the turn? but there must be divers alterations, more conform to Romes language, then in our own Liturgie; of which Mr. Prins Book to that purpose can give you information. But the Scots abhorrid it as Swines flesh, and it would not down with them. And no doubt, could they have been beaten into it, to have dined on it, we should have been forced to have supt on it with them. But hereupon, on goes the War against them. And how well this Holy War was like to succeed, you may guess by the beginning; for even those rude and ignorant Souldiers, who were led against the Scots, to kill them into conformity, in our own Countrey (as they past along towards Scotland (in despight of their Commanders) broke into divers Churches, pull'd down and burnt the rails about the Communion Table, and tore the Surplices, and the Common-Prayer Books: These things were notorious, & not done in a corner. It would be too much beyond my de sign to men∣tion all that followed: Plain it was, nothing prospered after. And is this now such a hainous offence to say so? Or was it not rather a matter to be acknowledged as a sin, to be confest, and for which deeply to be humbled, and to repent of? I might have mentioned the cruel usage of Dr. Layfield, who at the instigation of the Bi∣shop, after a long imprisonment in the Fleet, was whipt from thence to Westminister, where raw (as he was) he stood upon the Pillory, his nostrils slit, and burnt in the cheeks or forehead. But did I charge this evil, or any other, upon the King, as the cause either of his or our suffering? Nay, did I not disclaim that bold presum∣ption, in the words even immediately foregoing, saying, Whe∣ther's sins were greater (ours, or our Princes) God the Judge best knows: For what am I, that I should step into his chair. This I concluded on, and I think none can deny it, If our sins had not been universal, the judgement would not have been so general? And I do profess, I dare not judge the Kings sins to be greater then the peoples, because he drank deeper in the judgement: But if I had charged the sin of the King upon himself, or his Father, why should these men pretend to be so angry? it would not have been to reproach him, or triumph over him, but to have been humbled with him, and for him (as well as for our selves) for our pardon, re∣formation and amendment: So that I hope this is not to speak against the King, or his coming in. And I suppose, they will not shew themselves (my Reproachers,
I mean) so ignorant or sottish as to say, That I spake against the King (or his coming in) by telling them, that their Wickedness might be a means to destroy both him and them: For which I quoted that place, 1 Sam. 12.19. and so on: Much less, did I speak against the King, in advising them to be more careful to bring King Jesus into their hearts, then King Charls to the Throne; and telling them, That they may be undone with him, yea, and by him, both temporally and eternally: But that King Jesus will assuredly save them, if he rule over them. I hope you will not say this is a crime? if you do, the Lord make you wiser. And this I think is all you have to charge me with in this matter; and how wisely, justly, cha∣ritably, Christianly, let all wise men judge. Confident I am, what I delivered, might have been spoken even in the Kings presence, and he would not have been offended: What would these captious hearers have said, had I used such plain language as was spo∣ken unto him at his Coronation, in the Coronation Sermon?Coronation Sermō preacht at Scoon, Ian. 1651. by Mr. Rob. Douglas. Printed at A∣berdeen, 1660. That his Father set himself in a hostile way, to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties; and in page 27. of the same Sermon, they charge his Grandfather King James with foul defecti∣on; and that he peresecuted faithful Ministers, and that he laid the foundation whereupon his Son (our late King (says he) did build much mischief to Religion, all the days of his life. And he tells him, that the guiltiness of the transgression lies upon the Throne and Family; and that is one of the sins for which he had professed humiliation very lately, and advises him to take warning. And in his Exhortation to the King, page 32. he tells him, There is too much iniquity upon the Throne by his Predecessors, who framed mischief by a Law: such Laws as have been destructive to Re∣ligion, grievous to Gods people. and page 36. he may say it freely, That chief cause of the judgement upon the Kings House, hath been his Grandfathers breach of Covenant with God; and his Fathers following his steps, in opposing the work of God, and his Kirk, within these Kingdoms. He says, They have broken the Covenant with God, and men have broken Covenant with them. Most cruelly and perfi∣diously (says he) they have invaded the Royal Family, and trod∣den upon all Princely Dignity: And therefore charges him in Christs name, not to break Covenant; if he do, he assures him, The Controversie is not ended between God and his Family, but it will be carried on to further weakning if not to the utter overthrow of it. Here's plain dealing, now what would our men have said to this
matter? Surely never a villain in England would have preached such a Sermon: and yet such foolish sots have we in England, to say so of a Sermon that hath none of all this (nor any thing like) in it. But now Sirs, to convince you of your perverseness, and to let you see, how like you are to those noxious creatures (the Flies) that flie-blow wholsome meat, so are you. It is usuall with them, if there be any bruised place, they are sure to light upon that first, and there to sucke and feed themselves: But if there be none, they flie-blow so long, till they have made it fit for their purpose: So do you flie-blow discourses. For whereas you charge me to be a∣gainst the King, and his coming in, did I not say, It was a judge∣ment that we were removed from our ancient foundations? And what could I mean, or did I mean? But the changing our government. And did I not quote that place, Isay 3. to the end of vers. 8. as a dreadfull judgement most sadly fallen upon us? And did I not af∣terwards say; That as we had been under that curse and judgement, so we might see that blessed morning promised to Gods people, in the same Prophet, Chap. 1. ver. 25, 26, 27. Do but read the pla∣ces, and let any man say what could be thence intended? And did I not pray for the hastning of that happy morning? And when I quoted that place in 1 Sam. 12.19. to the end, did I not in express words say, That that place in all things did not run parallel with our condition? But that in something it was pertinent to my pur∣pose; which was in the later part onely, in that the peoples wicked∣ness would destroy themselves, the King, and Kingdome? And did I not in plain words say, That that portion of Scripture held not pa∣rallell in that very particular, in that it was said they sin'd in desi∣ring a King? with more to that purpose, as you may see in the Sermon. And did I not say, That if it were the late Kings own sins, (which I did not, nor dare I determine) that brought that judgment upon him, it was not just in them who did it. And when I advised you to be more careful to bring King Jesus into your hearts; then King Charles into the Throne, did I not expresly, and in these sig∣nificant words say; That the one was not opposite, contradictory, or destructive to the other? But onely that King Jesus was to be pre∣fer'd before him? And that if he (King Charles) be minded to rule for him, and under him; did I not say, If God and the great Council see it fit, let him come and welcome? Well, the Lord forgive you, and make you wiser, and more discreet and bonest. And I cannot
passe by, but must reprove you for one most abominable lie of some of you; That I should pray in my Prayer, That as the Lord had de∣livered us from one Devill, so he would deliver us from another; and that hereby I did mean the King. Good Lord! what a lying malicious Devill hath possest these people. No, these and such like prophane and ungodly wretches in an humane shape are the Devils I prayed against. I prayd, That as the Lord had graciously in a good measure delivered us from the devil of Hersie and blasphemie, so that he would also keep us and deliver us from the Devil of prophanenesse: And the God to whom I prayed knows, that these ungodly wretches are all the Devils I prayed against, and no other; not having any thought, apprehension, or imagination of the King in this particular. And so much to my first charge. 2 Now for my second, in which I shall be brief. My Sermon, say some, drove all at this, The bringing in of the King would bring in all prophanesse; But did I any where say so? Truly I needed not, Prophanesse is in already in the Nation; nor did I thinke the King would bring it in, and I hope he never will. But this I think, all the ungodly and prophane people in the Nation have a very great and strong desire of the Kings coming in, as hoping to have as much liberty to be prophane, and to exercise it, as they had before. Oh! how hath the Parliament Acts and Ordinances hampered and chained, and fettered these beasts; They cannot swear, or be drunk but they must pay for't. Taverns, Innes, and Ale-house must be shut on the Lords day, all day long, that they cannot tipple, & be drunk. They must not walke in the streets nor in the fields on that day under a penalty, and many of them have been sued and indicted for it, and the like. And oh! How like wilde Buls in a net, have they fretted, and vext, and raved at it? Oh! that blessed book (think they) that most excellent book for sports on the Sabboth; That was a good, a blessed, a merry time with us. These people are like those, Jer. 44.16,17,18. As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and our princes in the Cities of Iudah, and streets of Ierusalem: For then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evill. But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, &c. we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by the famine.
Well sirs, think as you will; For my part I thinke that accursed book was none of the least provocations that drew down the judge∣ments of God upon the Nation. And yet how glad would many be of this licentious liberty re-introduced: And oh! for some good Court Bishops to help us in this particular against the Round-heads, and these puritanical Presbyterians. Beloved Reader, I charge this upon the Court Bishops onely; For confident I am, there were many good and godly Bishops in the Nation who abhorred that execrable thing, and yet this is the thing these miserable wretches look for. And here let me not be mistaken, or mis-reported, as if I thought that none but prophane and god∣lesse persons look and long for the Kings coming. No, far be it from my soul; For I am assured there are many godly and honest hearts, sober and discreet persons who earnestly desire it, and would be glad to see it, But as for prophane and ungodly persons, (drunkards swearers, whoremongers, Sabboth-breakers, despisers of Religion and godlinesse in the power of it) upon what good account can they de∣sire him, I leave it to any reasonable man to judge. Do they desire it either for the Kings good, or their own good, certainly no? But they are sure, if one party (whom they how hate) should pre∣vail, they shall still walke in their chains and fetters; but from an∣other they hope (at least) for freedome. And should they be ham∣pered and restrained by that other, they would hate both alike. For 'tis not this person or that person, this party or that, which is the quarrel or offence. But the old enmity of opposition and hatred between the two seeds of godly and ungodly. And if the King be, as by some he is reported, (which God grant) godly, and shall shew it by his curbing their wickednesse, they will not like him long, but would be weary of him. And clearly the observati∣on and information of their prophanesse the last Fast day, is to me (yea, and to any considering person) a sufficient argument of their ungodlinesse: and these onely are the men I spoke of, and desired to consider the vanity of their expectations. That (if it had been the will of God) I might have been instrumental to undeceive but some one of them, and see how they requite me for my labour! But I shall not lose it. And truly, although these be the persons I chiefly aym at (as most worthy of reprehension: Yet since I am now discharging my conscience in this way (of writing) which I think not to do again. I would beg leave to advise some of our more civill and moderate op∣ponents
in one particular. 'Tis too easie and familiar with many of you (upon the least provocation, sometimes without it) to return upon us, with the word Presbyterian by way of reproach as a Nick∣name, and to inveigh against Presbytery: But Sirs, do you under∣stand what you do? It's true, the Bishops have a long time kept the name (and thing) in a kind of silence under hatches. But will you (without passion and partiality, and as in the presence of God (for so I desire to deale with you) be informed in the truth? Then I must tell you this one thing, the Scripture speaks more of, and for Presbyters then Bishops Not that I bring this as an argument to prove Presbytery to be more sacred then Episcopacy; For I thinke them both so alike, and I intend not to handle that controversie. My designe is, to let you know (if the Scripture may rule you) you may as well speak scornfully of Bishops as Presbyters; and of Epis∣copacy, as of Presbytery; For I tell you again, the Scripture makes oftner mention of Presbyters then Bishops. Now for your informa∣tion, and to clear this to you, you must know, that the word pres∣byter (though we by use make it English) is a Greek word, which we in our English Bibles have always translated by the word Elder. It comes from , Senex, one that's old. And , is Se∣nior, one that's Elder. And this word is used in Scripture sometimes in a naturall sense, to signifie one elder in age: and sometimes in an ecclesiastical sense, for an Officer in the Church of Christ. Now it was my purpose to have examined all the places in the Greek Testament where the word Presbyter is used, and to have observed how ma∣ny times it was used in an ecclesiastical sence, signifying a Church-Officer: But the day before the writing hereof, there came very happily to my hand a Book lately published by one, whose other workes praise him in the gate, and this not a little, scil. Mr. George Lawson, Politica Sacra, which saves me some labour, which I am willing to embrace at this time for hast-sake, especially from such an Author. And he tells me page 139. of that Book, that he finds the word Presbyter in an ecclesiastical sence and notion about six∣teen times in the New Testament. And now as for the word , which is sometimes translated an Overseer (as Acts 20.28.) and sometimes a Bishop, I could quickly number them, for 'tis but five times used: and one of them is spoken not of an ordinary Church-officer, but of our Lord Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.25. So that I say the Scripture makes more use, and more often men∣tion of the word Presbyter then Bishop, and therefore not so to be
slighted and reproached, or to be used as a terme of disgrace to any man, unlesse you have a mind to disgrace the Scripture which thus honours Presbyters and Presbyterians above Bishoips. Yea, but Bi∣shops are above them; How know you that? They were so, and so have a long time; that's true. But did the Scripture put them there? Good sirs let no man be angry with me, if I express my mind freely. I mean not to make a quarrel of it, nor contend with any man about it, for I have better work to do; then nodum in scirpo quaerere. But where doth the Scripture put a Bishop above a Presbyter? Let any man in the world shew me the place, Shall I ask you one thing? According to the usuall apprehension, and among us in England, what was the office and businesse of a Bishop? And what is the office and business of a Presbyter? You'l say, the office of a Bishop was to rule and govern, for so they did. And the office of a Presbyter or El∣der is to teach and feed the Flock. But now, doth the Scripture thus distinguish and put a difference? No, but if there be any to be found there, 'tis on the other side the leaf, That puts the honour of ruling upon the Presbyters (the Elders) and the businesse of tea∣ching and feeding upon the Overseers, the Bishops. 1 Tim. 5.17. The Elders (, the Presbyters) that rule well are worthy of double honour. And the Apostle in Acts 20. puts the businesse of feeding (one part whereof is teaching) upon Bishops. For vers. 28. Take heed (sayes he) unto your selves, and to all the flocke over which the holy Ghost hath made you () Bishops (so in the Greek) to feed the Church of God. See here, you are made Bishops to feed. El∣ders to rule, and Bishops to feed. So that by this it seems in the Apo∣stles times the Bishop was not the better man. But beloved, are you willing to know the truth? and wil you not kick against it, when 'tis laid plainly before you? Why then know, that then (in the A∣postles time) Presbyter and Bishop were all one. And that (as the before-commended Mr. Lawson hath it) whatsoever some of late have said to the contrary, Presbyter and Bishop were onely two different words, signifying the same Officer. And for evidence undenyable, do but read the 17. verse of that Chapter (Acts 20.) and there you shall finde who those persons are whom he calls Bishops or Over∣seers, even the Presbyters (the Elders) of the Church of Ephesus, put both together, and it runs clearly thus. St. Paul said to the pres∣byters (or Elders) of the Church of Ephesus, Feed the flocke of God, over which the holy Ghost hath made you Bishops. I wonder why our last Translators of the Bible did not render it (Bishop) here, but
[Overseer] which they have not done in any other place where this word is used. But I know the mysterie, and I could give you some account, as I have been credibly informed. But to be short, compare 1 Tim. 3.1,2,3, &c. with Titus 1.5,6,7, &c. and you shall finde the qualifications of a Bishop, and of an Elder (or Presbyter) to be the same. And in that place to Titus, if you compare in 5. verse and the 7th. you shall finde the Apostle using Elder and Bishop as synonimous, signifying the same. This is plain, the Apostles themselves were not the onely Bishops even in the Apostles times. And to close all in this particular, let that place 1 Pet. 5. begin∣ning be considered, where St. Peter writing to the severall Chur∣ches (as appears Chap. 1.1.) in that 5th. Chap. he exhorts the Pres∣byters (or Eldrs) to a faithfull discharge of their duty (which is a diligent feeding their Flock, without lording it over them) much lesse over their fellow Elders, vers. 2, 3. of which he professes him∣selfe to be one in vers. 1. The Elders (or Presbyters, ) which are among you, I exhort, who am ( also a Pres∣byter (or Elder) a fellow-Presbyter, or a Presbyter together with you Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, so we read it; but in the Greek it is , playing the Bishops, or doing the work or businesse of Bishops. So that then, Bishop and Presbyter, both name and thing, Title and employment was all one, without any domination according to the rule and Canon of their Lord and Master, Mar. 10.42. where a request having been made in the behalf of some of his Disciples for domination, he calls them to him, and sayes, Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over Gentiles (or Heathens) exercise Lordship over them, and their great ones exercise authority upon them: But so it shall not be among you, &c. Much more might be said, and is said by others in this matter. And if any desire further information & satisfaction herein, let them (without prejudice) read Mr. Baxters five Disputations of Church-government and worship, and there they shall finde these things plain∣ly and truly stated and discussed. What then (will some say) you would have all leveld and equal. And you would have every Minister (every Presbyter) a Pope, to domineer and Lord it in his own Parish? Friends, be not too hasty, I do not say so, nor would I have it so. I would not have all equall, all are not fit for every thing. I am not of their opinion who say, all
things requisite to government and discipline in the Church are fully contained (I mean punctually and particularly) in Scripture. Nor do those who say so, make it good in their practice, nor can they. And I say further; That opinion hath been the mother and nurse of much schisme and faction, I grant that much here must be left to prudence, and that not of single or particular Pastors, Presbyters, or Bishops; but to the consideration and determination of the most godly, learned, grave, and able in the Nation, to which I would have all to conform. If any like it not, they are at their liberty. Ʋnity and order is more precious, then to be destroyed for the satis∣faction of such as will never be satisfied, as not well knowing their owne mindes. And as for Lordly dominion, and Poping it in our Parishes, I do professe I do abhor it under every form. I as much adhominate a lording Presbyter, as a lording Bishop; no name, ti∣tle, or pretext whatsoever gives us any such authority: And I would begge (as I do desire) that we might be kept to that which shall appear to be our proper businesse; which if those of our pro∣fession had been, England had not been in so sad a condition as it is this day. I like not the Scotch Stool of Repentance, nor would I have excommunicate persons driven into the Church again by the secular power: As by Writs de excommunicato capiendo, or the like. It may force men to an hypocritical acknowledgment of some kinde of penitence, but it cannot produce true repentance. I would have Church-censures, reach no further, nor cut any deep∣er then their spiritual sword will penetrate. I approve not rigid compulsions by the arme of flesh, in such things which are the onely work of the spirit; as is true and unfeigned repentance. Of which, if people by constraint make a feigned profession, it doth but harden them in their sin, and make them impudent; which (as I have been credibly informed) is too manifest in some places of the world, not∣withstanding the strictnesse of their discipline. I would have Church affairs (in this respect) so managed, as if the Civil Magistrate were no friend to Religion, farther then that those who professe it, and live peaceably, may be protected by him from outward violence. No, let the beauty, excellency, benefit and necessity of the com∣munion of the Church, with the priviledges thereof be clearly layd open to the people. Let the hazard, danger, and mischief of just excommunication be declared and urged upon them. And let all Christians with draw all countenance and unnecessary lessowship and society from them, according to the Scriptures. And if the
sense, shame, and grief thereof (with other such considerations, (set on by the spirit of God) will not humble them: Let them alone till the Lord cometh. But then, I would not have those who are by just excommuni∣cation cast out of one Church or Congregation, received in into another, for this were the way to make Conventicles of Hereticks, Schismaticks, blasphemers, and all manner of prophane and ungod∣ly ones: And in this I conceive the Civill Magistrate is much con∣cern'd (especially being a Christian) For 'tis found too true by sad experience, that factions in the Church beget fractions in the State. And therefore my soul longs for such a happy day, wherein by the favourable aspect of Christian Magistrates, all wayes of faction, se∣paration and division may be fore-cluded: And if men be otherwise minded, let them sit still and be quiet. Or if they will be doing, it were good if they would go and gather Churches among the hea∣then, and not intrude themselves into other mens labours. This which I have now declared, was and is onely to allay the heat of those mens stomacks, who (being altogether ignorant of what the Scripture hath and saith in the behalf of Presbyters and Presbyteri∣ans) do so slight and vilifie them, as to make the name and thing a reproach unto them. You may as well call a man prick-eard Chri∣stian, as prick-ear'd Presbyterian: And I have done this to give you timely warning, and to prevent your prophanesse. If you will not leave it, know, however you scorn them, the Scripture honours them; and take heed of kicking against the pricks: Your prophanesse is that I complain of, and if you will go on, Dominus venit. And now I have one thing more to speak to, and then manum de tabula; and it is to fore-warn (or rather after-warn you (for it hath been too long practised) of another evill: and that is, reproaching zealous, home and plain, down-right preaching, with the odious names of passion, anger, and railing. And let me tell you, this is no other then Sathans subtlety to render our preaching unto you unpro∣fitable, and ineffectual. We confess we are men subject to passion (yea and sinfull passion) as others are.Iam. 5.17. Instances might be given from Scripture of the Lords most precious Saints and servants in this sad particular. But what then? Is plain and home, and down-right preaching passion and railing? Take heed of that. Nay, is it not lawful sometimes to be angry and in passion? Eph. 4.26. Be angry and sin not. A man may be angry, and not sin. Nay, 'tis a sin not to be angry sometimes. Is not the Lord himselfe said sometimes to be
angry? And can he sin? It's true, St. Paul would not have a Bishop (or Presbyter) soon angry;Tit. 1.7. not suddenly, lightly, hastily. But doth that infer he should not be angry at all? Nay rather, doth it not infer the contrary? He may, he must be sometimes angry? Would you be drunke, and swear, and curse, and prophane Gods Sabboths, and hate and scorn strict profession of Religion, and openly declare your enmity, and shall not (must not) we be angry? Must we not re∣prove you sharply, cuttingly? So the word properly signifies () I'le tell you sirs, That which you call anger, and passion, and railing, is in Scripture call'd zeale.Tit. 1.13. I could be large in this particular: but there is so much in this kind done to my hand already by a worthy and reverend brother, and that in print, in a little book, called Elias Abatement, or Corruption in the Saints; Being a Sermon preached by Mr. Thomas Case at the Funerals of a godly Minister, (one Mr. Gualter Roswel) I say this be∣ing so excellently and fully done to my hand, I shall forbear the fur∣ther prosecution from my own thoughts. Onely because every one hath not that Book; and some may meet with this, who possibly may never meet with that: And for that prejudice against Ministers upon this account, is so great a mischief to them, especially to their people (being as I said) a device of Sathan to hinder the entertain∣ment of their Doctrine) I shall take so much pains as to lay before you some of that which that Reverend Author hath to this purpose, and which he did in vindication of that deceased brother, who it seems was changed to be a man passionate and cholerick. In the first place he confesses; he was a man in whom the black a∣dust humour of choler had predominance in his natural constitution, (and who can help that?) And he sayes, that many times gave a tin∣cture to his discourse and actions; which standers by, more censori∣ous then candid, interpreted to his unjust prejudice. Then he gives him a high commendation for his eminent gifts, parts, and abilities, comparing him (in his measure) to Elias, and John the Baptist, in many things. Amongst others he says his Ministery was a thundring Ministery: and I would to God (sayes he) we had more of them, there is need of them. And because tis so good and pertinent, take more. Thunder (says he) purgeth the air: And if so, we have need of more such sons of Thunder amongst us, and not such as will sing Placentia unto people: Sow pillows under their elbows, and sing men to Hell with sweet Lullabies of peace, peace, when there is no peace. Our air is pestilentiously infectious in the sense of our spiri∣tuall
Physitians, and our Climate is mortally infected with the pests of heresies and blasphemies, and with the putrid stench of all manner of poysonous lusts, which is the fatall source of all our plagues both in Church and State: and this our precious brother (saith he) was deeply sensible of: And hence it was that his spirit was warmed with∣in him to a more then ordinary degree of zeal in his Ministery. And he says his courage was rival with his zeal, he feared not the face of any man, but would boldly reprove (as Elias) even the high∣est. In all the Changes that went over his head, in all the Contro∣versies of the times, wherein he exercised his Ministry, he was a most strenuous assertor of the Truth, and a most couragious opposer of errour and innoviation: and that even, while some higher then others by head and shoulders (in their own eyes) did basely and unworthily betray their cause, he feared not the face of man, in the cause of Je∣sus Christ: He durst tell the greatest person he had to do with of their faults, upon just occasion in the worst of Times. He was a hammer to beat down error and blasphemy, where-ever it met him. He could not bear with them that preacht down Paedobaptisme, the Christian Sabboth, Universities, Schools of Learning, Ordination, and other ordinances and institutions of Jesus Christ;2 Tim. 4.3. as it was pro∣phesied, that some would not endure sound Doctrine, so he would not endure unsound Doctrine. He sayes, he could not bear with se∣ducers, nor they with him, so that by this means he became a man of contention. And yet he commends him for a man of a tender spirit, mortified to the world, free and liberall, much in fasting and prayer. And yet he sayes, he had his share in the persecution of the Times wherein he lived, from his very first entrance upon his Ministery, according to the prophesie of our Saviour, Mat. 5.11,12. And tru∣ly says he, It had been a wonder if he should have escap't it. For (as our Lord subjoyns the reason to his prediction of the Apostles suf∣ferings, ver. 13.) his Ministry was salt. He was salt in his life, and salt in his doctrine: Not onely savoury, but quicke and corroding, smart and searching, which corrupt times, and ulcer'd consciences could not bear, 2 Tim. 4.3. And this says he inrag'd & inflam'd the spirits of unsound men, and raised much trouble and persecution against him, wheresoever he came, which occasioned him often to flit from one place to another, to avoid the fury of unreasonable men. And he sayes, other of Gods saithful Ministers have had their share with him in this kind of perse∣cution,
Matth. 10.23. The world cannot bear the plain-dealing of Gospel-Ministers. None so hated as the reprover in the gate, Amos 5.10. They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly. And now, as to the thing it self (which some call anger and passi∣on, but indeed is zeal and faithfulness) I cannot leave till I give you in, what this Reverend man hath to that purpose, and it's hugely con∣siderable and advantagious. He asserts, That the affection of anger rightely qualified, and managed, is of singular use and advantage in the life and worke of a Christian, especially of a Minister of the Gospel; which ought in no wise to be branded with the usual scandal of cho∣ler and passion. They are his words all. I make no question (sayes he) the false prophets, and their sedu∣ced proselytes, stuck not to blast the holy Prophet (he means Elias) in my Text, with the same reproach, a furious man, a man of an in∣temperate and unbridled spirit, that valued not mens lives, but in his anger would not stick to call downe fire from heaven to destroy an hundred men at a time, &c. But saith he, let me mind you of this in the general. The passion of anger, with other affections in nature, at what time the person in whom they are is regenerate, they do change their nature, & become regenerate too. And being baptized with the blood and spirit of Je∣sus Christ, they receive divine impressions, and so passe into the cata∣logue of gracious affections and dispositions, and become instruments of exceeding honour and service in the hand of Jesus Christ, who is pleased to make use of them in his own work. And then instances in divers; and among the rest, Passion (saith he) born again of water and the spirit, becometh the grace of zeale, and holy jealousie for God, and for the interest of Jesus Christ. Anger sanctified is that to the affections, which edge is to the in∣strument, which varnish is to colours, which winde is to the sails of a Ship. Judgement is the ballast, but zeal is the full gale. It is as met∣tle to the horse. It is the activity of every grace, every affection red hot for Jesus Christ, which much water cannot quench, neither can the floods drown it.Cant. 8.7. In a word, Passion refined and spiritualiz'd, is every faculty of the soul, acting to its height for the glory of God.Psal. 69.9. The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up. To be short; Sanctified anger in the Saints of God, is not that which the world takes it to be, a short madness, but a grace of the spirit of God. Yea, it is a compound and
temperament of all graces, acting in summo gradu, in the height of intention for the promoting of the concernments of Christs King∣dome. I told you before, that Elias was a useful man, though he was sub∣ject to passion. I shall tell you more now: He was therefore so usefull, BECAUSE he was subject to passion. His anger and passion being san∣ctified, made him so abundantly active for God, and the reformation of the publique worship, doctrine, and Ordinances in his generation. Had he wanted his passion, he had wanted some of his zeal for God. And so was it (says he) with our worthy brother deceased; That which an idle, wanton, loose, luke-warm generation of Professors, as well as prophane persons (for the palliating of their own hypocrisie, and Gallio-like indifferency in matters of Religion) called passion and choler in him, was indeed and in truth nothing but his zeal and courage, and activity for Jesus Christ, which truly did even consume him. Alas! In this apostate generation, all things have lost their proper names. The Devil appears in Samuels mantle, Satan in the form of an Angel of light: And sin puts on the habit of vertue, that it may deceive the more safely. Thus lukewarmness and cursed neutrality in Religion passeth a∣broad for meekness and sweetness of spirit. Carnal policy for Christi∣an prudence. Cursed compliance with the lusts of men, for moderati∣on, and command of a mans spirit, &c. While zeal and fidelity to the Truth, ordinances and government of Jesus Christ, hear ill in the world, and suffer all the odium and scandal that a reviling world, and the venemous wit of malice can heap upon it. Truly the earth is not able to bear their words. Thus this reverend and worthy man, for whose pains herein I thank him, and thank God for him, and for his providence that brought this piece to my hand, at a time so seasonable; as I do also for the work of that worthy and ingenuous Dr. to whom I owe so much for my Preface. In matters of this nature, which are of proper concernment, it is better to deal by others words, then our own. For by this it will appear we are not alone in our judgement and manner of procedure, in discharge of our duty, nor in suffering for it. There is one exception more which some make against my dis∣course, which is, It was unseasonable. And to this I briefly answer: It's plain, these persons who urge this, are not acquainted with the Topicks, and proper seats of arguments, deliberative, or perswasive.
I did, and do conceive that if I might be so free as to make use of the respects of the people to the King at any time, and from thence to dehort them from sin, and to perswade them to turn to the Lord, that so both King and people may be (by Gods blessing) setled and esta∣blished upon sure foundations; That now was the onely time I will not say, but surely in all good reason it was a very seasonable time: When people are high, and full, & earnest, and that generally, and it being almost the onely talk of bringing in the King; was it not seaso∣nable upon a solemn Fasting day, to minde people of being more carefull of bringing King Jesus into their hearts, then any mortal King unto the Throne? And inasmuch as sin (the sins of the people, (for that way I carried it) had destroyd our former King, that therefore they should beware, lest by their sinnes they destroy the latter. Had I said any thing by way of opposition, or had I not very frequent∣ly upon all occasions (and that not in corners onely, but openly) de∣clar'd my judgement for the coming in of the King, it had been something: But surely these men have some prejudice against my person: But whether they have or no, thus much I tell them (in the fore quoted words of the reverend Dr. in the Preface, and where this exception is in part answered) I will no more learn of them how to preach, then they will learn of me to buy and sell. And so I leave them. And now upon the whole matter, I will draw towards a close with this request to those who may be Auditors hereafter, that they would not, by ignorant or wilfull mistakes, or if reports, make the re∣proach of Ministers a means to repair their decayd and broken for∣tunes, in taking up, or carrying on, and telling lies to those whom they have a mind to ingratiate themselves withal, and may (as they hope) lift them up out of their low condition. I must tell you sirs in few words (for I have gone beyond what I intended already) in thus doing (belying and reproaching the Mini∣sters of the Gospel) you do but the Devils business. Satans greatest design is to hinder the progress of the Gospel: And he well knows, contempt of the Minister brings neglict of his Doctrine It is a truth so clear in your own experiences, that I need not say more to it: And consider you are hereby injurious not onely unto us (weakning our hands that we cannot reap the desired fruit of our labours) But you injure both your selves and others of our people, who by your evill practice and example in this kind are drawn into the prejudice, sin and mischief with you. I shut up all with this: If it be an honour,
which brings a great reward with it, to be instrumentall in the work of mens salvation; what can they expect who in any kind hinder it? Consider it betimes, and be wise for the future. TO fill up the void place of my paper, I thought good to add a testimony or two conducent to my purpose in the preceding Vindication, and that from a witnesse not to be suspected of partia∣lity in this matter; And that is Dr. Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, taken out of his own Diary or Day book of every days observations under his own hand, and found with him by Mr. Pryn, when he sear∣ched him and his Lodgings in the Tower. And this I have in a Book published by Mr. Pryn, intituled, A breviate of the Life of William Laud, &c. where page 21. you have this passage recorded. June 14. This day John Bastwick, Dr of Physicke, Henry Burton Batchellor of Divinity, and Will: Pryn Barrester at Law, were censu∣red for Libels against the Hierarchy of the Church. June 26. The speech I then spake in the Star-Chamber, was com∣manded by the King to be Printed, and it came out June 25. I suppose the first June 26. should have been June 16. And this now manifestly evidences, their sufferings were not for a∣ny offence against the Civill State: And what power that Bishop then had to tyrannize, and how they did rage for things of their proper concernment. And what was the cause of the tumults in Scotland (which we all know led in the tumults in England) the same Bishop (who best knew it) will tell you. In the same page, thus. April 29 1638. The tumults in Scotland about the Service-Book, offered to be brought in, began July 23. 1637. And continued increa∣sing by fits, and hath now brought that Kingdom in danger; No que∣stion there is a great concurrence between them, and the Puritan party in England, a great aym there to destroy me in the Kings opinion, &c. Mark here. These 3. men suffered in June 37. and the Tumults began the next moneth following, and so went onwards: And did they prosper? And he here acknowledges these tumults began about the Service-Book: Which what a one it was, and how differing from ours, you may read in another Book of Mr. Pryns, entituled, Hidden works of darkness brought to light, discovering the practices used to usher Po∣pery into our Realms.
I'le add one testimony more out of the former Book, page 22. Thursday, Decemb. 5. The KING declared his resolution for a Parliament, in case of the Scottish Rebellion: The first movers to it were my Lord Deputy of Ireland, my Lord Marquess Hamilton, and my selfe: And a Resolution voted at the Board to assist the King in extraordinary wayes, if the Parliament should prove peevish, and re∣fuse, &c.By the Board, he means the Councel-Ta∣ble. Observe here now, who, and why, and whence came all our Troubles. And how per fas, aut nefas, it must be carried on (as it was) to his, the Kings, and the Kingdoms undoing: And see, if the Parliament answer not their ends, in this good Bishops language, they are peevish. THE END.
