H1287 E206_14 99873457 157718
THE HEADS OF REASONS, FOR VVHICH A Generall Councell of PROTESTANTS ought to be called together in England. Published by Authoritie. LONDON, Printed by E.P. for Nicolas Bourne and are to be sold at his shop at the South entrance of the Royall Exchange. 1641.
THE HEADS OF REASONS, for which a generall Councell of Protestants ought to be called together in England. IT may be made good first, That a generall Councell of Prote∣stants will be not onely most usefull unto the whole Church of God, but even very necessary both to the same and to all Protestants States, and most of all to the Church and State of England at this present time. Secondly, That the wavof calling it together in Great Brittaine will be easie. Thirdly, And that the man∣ner of proceeding therein towards the re∣dressing of publicke evils, will be safe and sure, without all apparent difficulties. Therefore it must be concluded, that the purpose of calling such a meeting at this time, ought to be taken to heart by the Church and State of Great Brittaine. And to
make the former propositions good, that the latter may be inferred, let us consider the particulars thereof. Of the first. First, the great usefulnesse of such a Coun∣cell will be, that on the one side the Gospell of Iesus Christ considered in it selfe, then the Churches of God professing that Gos∣pell, and with these all the publicke States, wherein these Churches dwell, will receive thereby incredible advantages, and on the other side the superstitions and errors of Po∣pery, the heresies of other Sects, which more secretly undermine the truth, and the open scandals and disputes, which disturbe the peace of many mens consciences, which trouble and divide the Churches, and breed in end all these confusions, and disorders which shake publike States, will be aboli∣shed and taken out of the way. And to make this more plaine, it may in due time by Gods grace be made apparent to the full, that, The Gospell of Christ in it selfe conside∣red,
will by such a meeting receive these ad∣vantages. 1. Matters of chiefe doubt necessary to be decided (lest Atheisme and Libertinisme in∣crease more and more still, as they begin in many parts) may be cleared. 2. Fundamentals of Christian truth and faith, may be fully and invincibly setled by common consent. 3. The publicke profession of Divine worship may be brought to some Religious uniformity, so farre as is expedient for the amiable correspondency of severall Chur∣ches one with another, and is sit for the edi∣fication of all Christians. 4. The meanes of propagating the Gospell and Kingdome of Christ towards those that are yet in darknesse, and destitute of true and sufficient helpes to attaine assuredly to salvation may be agreed upon, and set a foot for the advancement of Gods glory. The Churches making profession of the Gospell, may by this meanes receive these advantages. 1. All the evill intelligences which now
are betweene the Churches by reason of mistakings and superfluous disputes will be taken away, when parties shall come to understand one anothers meaning right∣ly. 2. The brotherly affections of mutuall love and care for one anothers edification, & preservation in the feare of God (which is the true badge of Christs Disciples) will be taken up & begotten in the hearts of upright Divines who now are at a dolefull distance: by reason of misunderstandings, and evill surmises risen amongst them. 3. The Churches will increase in number, and all the members thereof being taught by their Leaders, to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace and love, after this mee∣ting will grow in knowledge, and in godly zeale to all vertue. 4 A spirituall correspondency for mutuall communion of Holy things, belonging to the publike good of Religion, may be by this meanes setled betwixt the Churches and afterward entertained, from whence incre∣dible comforts will arise to every one in par∣ticular,
and to all an generall which truely professe Religion. The States wherein the united Churches doe dwell may receive from hence these ad∣vantages. 1. Within themselves they will be more setled in quietnesse then heretofore they have beene, and in all likelihood attaine to a full and constant peace one towards ano∣ther. 2. Together with inward peace all the bles∣sings attending the same in plenty and pros∣perity will follow. 3. In respect of those that are without, they will be in safety from the practices of evill instruments which have beene sent amongst us, and set a worke, or have set themselves for their owne ends politickly a worke; to worke the division of Protestants, and by their division their overthrow. 4. If they be assaulted, as now they have beene a long while agoe, more for their Re∣ligion then for any other cause, they will re∣ceive strength and assistance one from ano∣ther, and not be so farre divided in Councels
as hitherto they have beene to their owne overthrow. These are the advantages on the right hand, which by this Councell will clearely redound unto the Gospell, to the Churches, and to the States Protestants. The advantages on the left hand are no lesse if not farre more apparent; for by this meanes, The superstitious fooleries and errors of Popish Religion, together with the tyran∣nicall practises, usurpations and pretentions of Papists against Protestans will be brought to nought, and loose clearely all the advan∣tages which hitherto they have had against the Churches, and so the greatest blow that ever was yet given unto Popery, will by this meanes be given to it. Which is a thing so cleare that no rationall man can doubt of it, if he but a little consider that although the meeting should not yet (as it needeth not) be called to condemne Popery, yet if it but sheweth forth the truth of God, in that wherein it is fundamentally professed by Protestants, and setteth their
Churches in some kind of union amongst themselves, and bringeth their intentions to some good and easie correspondency, for the future manifestation and advance∣ment of the Gospell towards those that are kept in ignorance and spirituall slavery by the Pope: it will make him fall from his usurped Throne to the ground, and his whole imaginary Religion with him into contempt, even as Satan fell from heaven like lightning, when Christ sent forth his se∣venty disciples, which preached the Gospel. As for the Heresies of other Sects which secretly undermine the fundamentals of saving truth, and sound government; these doe as much harme in corrupting the minds of simple ones in the darke, as the Papists doe openly by violence and other practices upon the affections of men that are wise af∣ter this world. Therefore to cut these short of the advantages which they now take from our distractions, this meeting may greatly serve. For if the truth of fundamen∣tals once be evidently cleared, then a course may besettled, to deal both by authority with
those that are impudently blasphemous, scandalous and refractory, against the clearely fundamentall truth of Gods word, and likewise by treaties in all lenity and long-suffering with carefull instruction and Councell, to give satisfaction to the scru∣pulous consciences of the weaker sort; by which meanes the force of their seduction will come to an end. For now they pre∣vaile onely, because no such course is taken by common consent: And no such course can be taken by common consent, except it be done with common advice; and this cannot be done, except a Generall Coun∣cell of Protestants be called to consult upon the matter. The last advantage of the left hand re∣doundeth to the Gospell, to the Churches, to the States, and to every particular person therein all at once. For the removing, first of needlesse disputes; which upon this mee∣ting will infallibly (if it be well ordered) follow, will prevent contentiousnesse, and strife of parties. And if this be prevented, pu∣blicke scandals will of themselves cease, so
farre as they proceed from that licencious∣nesse, and inordinate course which men take to offend one another in the way of partiality and contradiction. Which way being once stopped, the wel-spring of a thousand publicke evils will be dryed up; and if there were none other motive to in∣duce his Majestie, and the Church and State of England, to call such a meeting of Pro∣testant Divines but this alone: namely that the fountaine of such bitter waters of strife may be dryed up, it would be sufficient to draw them to this resolution, whether they looke in particular to themselves at this time, or in generall to the whole States of Protestants, wherein their safety is invol∣ved. And from hence ariseth, if not an abso∣lute, yet a very urgent necessity of making use of this councell at this time; because if now it be either absolutely, or at least very urgently necessary, not onely by reason of Gods expresse and generall Commande∣ment to this effect, but also by reason of pu∣blicke and private calamities, distractions
and scandalously pernitious disorders more frequent now, then at others times, to aime at the seeking of peace in the profes∣sion of his Gospell. And if this peace can∣not truely be sought for, or any wayes ob∣tayned or hoped for, without such a mee∣ting of Protestants; then it followeth that such a meeting is at this time, if not abso∣lutely, yet very urgently necessary. But this may easily be made manifest, that without such a meeting, a true and set∣tled peace of Protestant Divines and Chur∣ches, cannot be obtained, according to Gods Commandement, for the advantage of the Gospell, and the safety of their pu∣blicke States: therefore it must also be con∣cluded, that the aime of calling such a mee∣ting, is not onely most usefull, but also ei∣ther absolutely, or at least very urgently ne∣cessary. Much could be said of this, either abso∣lute or at least very urgent necessity of pro∣curing peace and unity, as well amongst Protestants in generall, as in particular amongst the Churches of Great Brittaine,
and of the peculiar advantages, which those of Great Brittaine should gaine more then others, by calling a meeting of Pro∣testants to that effect, but now I will sur∣cease from this subject, and leave the mat∣ter to the more serious consideration of the judicious and pious Reader, who can dis∣cerne what the true causes and remedies of publicke evils are, and how the safety of the Church and State of England at this time cannot be procured without some especiall relation, which it must have towards other Protestant Churches and States. Of the second. To shew that in England such a meeting may easily be called together, I must in the first place presuppose that the State will be free from troubles and dangers of warre, and that there is a willingnesse in the King and Clergy to have it called, and then in the second place it must be made apparent, 1. That the minds and dispositions, of the chiefe of all Protestant parties, are now
sufficiently prepared to embrace and enter∣taine with gladnesse such a motion, if it should be proposed unto them in a conve∣nient way by any one of eminent Authori∣ty, which is able to be at some extraordi∣nary charges to that effect. 2. That the most judicious Protestant Divines and Statesmen in every party doe judge such a meeting to be not only usefull, but necessary to make an end of our divi∣sions. 3. That not onely the most judicious, but even almost all such as are of any note, have given already their consent and advice towards such a meeting; and amongst these all the truely peaceable and godly wish earnestly for the calling of it toge∣ther, ever since the Evangelicall States of Germany have made a Decree in the yeare 1634 that at some time convenient, when the affaires of the Empire should settle a little, such a meeting should be cal∣led. Now seeing that time is not yet come in Germany, nor like to come in hast,
and neverthelesse on all sides the necessities of such a remedy, to cure publicke evills grow daily greater and greater. Therefore the Church and state of England, is to be en∣treated for its owne safety and peace, and for the love of Gods glory, to helpe the publicke good in this behalfe. 4. That the further preparatives, namely to call, 1. Those that are to be called. 2. To deal particularly with them, that they may be preinformed of the scope & manner of trea∣ting intended. And 3. To order and precon∣ceive the whole way of proceeding to∣wards a full and happy conclusion of the treaty; such as may be without exception on all sides, will not require above a years space, after the resolution is once taken to call the Counsell together. All which may be made palpably and particularly, manifest in a very short space, if it once ap∣peare, that this motion is not slighted. And if it be slighted, I doe hereby declare that I have washed mine hands in innocency, and cleared my conscience from that guilt,
which will lye heavie upon those, who are incendiaries of strife, or accessory thereun∣to, or being able, will not helpe to redresse and to heale the breaches of Sion, which strife and ambition have made and aug∣ment daily. Of the third, To shew that the manner of proceeding in such a meeting of Protestanes may be such as will certainly without all apparent difficultie reach the ends, wherefore it ought to be called: Wee must conceive what the properanddirect scope of the com∣ming together of this Counsell should be: How the Divines should be brought toge∣ther? how, when they are come together he that calleth them should deal with them, to oblige them to the scope for which they meet? What they should treat off? how they should severally conceive, and joyntly conferre their thoughts? how the gene∣rall conclusion, and consent of all their re∣solutions is to be taken up and ratified? and lastly Low the same is to be introduced into all the Churches; for their mutuall
union, peace, and edification? Of these heads to speake but a word, conceive thus of each. 1. First, the scope for which the Coun∣cell should be called, should not be dire∣ctly to decide matters of particular con∣troversie, or to make determinations and Decrees, whereunto the consciences of all men, as by absolute command of that Assembly should be obliged implicitly to submit their beleefe, and blindly to give obedience, but rather to declare their meanings, onely concerning the union of Protestants in fundamentall truthes and formes of Doctrines most necessary for edification, and to give their advi∣ces concerning the way of uniting Pro∣testants in the publicke profession of those truthes, and in the meanes of peace∣able government for mutuall edifica∣tion in time to come, and for taking away of scandals, and preventing of the causes of future breaches. 2. The way of bringing them together
must be by intreaty made to the Supe∣riours of all parties, requiring that they would send, some able judicious and godly men sit to give counsell in such ca∣ses. And to make this intreaty effectuall, some sit Messenger, or Messengers must be used to insinuate the purpose of their calling together unto the State whence they are called, lest jealousies rise and hinder the proceeding of the worke. 3. When they are come together, they are to be obliged unto the scope of their meeting by a solemne forme of Oath, binding them first to sincerity in repect of their meanings, which are to be declared in the presence of God, and then to certaine other conditions not to be refused by any; whereby the dan∣ger of rash contradictions, needlesse di∣sputes, and frivolous tergiversations in profitable matters may be prevented, and the true manner of their treaty limited within due bounds. 4. The subjects whereof they should
treate are the particulars, contained un∣der the ends heretofore named, whereof a list must be made, with a cleare demon∣stration of the coherence of every Sub∣ject with another; and of the impor∣tance of every one for the attaining of the chiefe end to which it must be referred in the consideration which is to be taken of it. 5. The manner of conceiving several∣ly and conferring joyntly their thoughts, must be done in write. Therefore to conceive their determi∣nations and counsels, the subjects of me∣ditation are to be given to every Colledge apart in write, by way of question propo∣sed: whereunto the manner of answearing is to be prelimited, in respect of the grounds whence the answear is to be ta∣ken; of the forme, how it should be set down, and of the end to which it is more distinctly to be referred. And to conferre their determinations and counsels joynt∣ly,
it may be done by a Committee of some few, which hee who calleth them together, may appoint. And this Committee should contract the varie∣tie of all the answeres, to so few heads as may be, without omitting any thing which may be thought ma∣teriall. 6. The generall consent of all their resolutions is to be gathered from their owne declarations into one summe, yet by distinct heads of matters set downe. And it should be given to eve∣ry one severally to be perused, before it be ratified, as an Act of the Coun∣cell. And when all are willing to ac∣knowledge it as their owne Act, then it should be subscribed. 7. The manner of introducing the Acts of such a Councell in all parti∣cular Churches, should be determi∣ned in the Councell it selfe, shew∣ing what course should be taken every
where to acquaint the Ministers there∣with in all Churches, so as they may receive full satisfaction in case of any doubt, and have no cause to com∣plaine, that a yoake of humane con∣stitutions is put upon them, by the au∣thority of some few, or that they are too much limitted in that liberty, which Christ giveth to his Servants in the Gospell, to prophecie and pra∣ctice things tending to private or pu∣blike edification. All this may be done without the formalitie and trouble of many Sessions, and publicke meetings which might perhaps breed some in∣conveniences here needlesse to be men∣tioned. Lastly, the charges will not be a great burthen to England, although it should beare the same all alone, and although the meeting should last a yeare or two: but it may be made good,
that in one yeare space and sooner also, the worke may be done. And that most of the Protestant States will be wil∣ling to send their owne Divines, at their owne charges. And no doubt a free contribution will easily be obtained of all good Prote∣stants, to bring such a happy worke to passe. FINIS.
