H3871 E625_16 99864533 116763
A true Copy of Sir Henry Hides SPEECH ON THE SCAFFOLD, Immediately before his Execution before the EXCHANGE, on the 4th of March, 1650. Taken in Short-hand from his mouth, BY JOHN HINDE. LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil by the Exchange. MDCL.
REader, Take notice, This Speech following is published in those very words that the Gentleman delivered them; and though there be some abrupt breakings off, and other ex∣pressions not so smooth as might have been, yet I could not with honesty alter a word; and therefore have tyed my self to his own Expressions, that I may neither abuse the World, or the dying man, or my self. THe Gentleman came in a Coach to the Scaffold, at∣tended by the Lieutenant of the Tower, and the Sheriffs of London; and also in his company one of his Servants and Doctor Hide. Sir Henry Hide. I Am now come to put in practice the Chri∣stian Profession; and as I owe a Death to Nature and Sin, now I pay it upon the score of Grace. Dr. Hide. Blessed be God that hath enabled you to it: God hath and will enable you. Sir H. Hide. Looking round on the People, he said, A popu∣lous City, God bless it, and grant they may live to his Grace. Then turning to his Man, he said, John, I pray now though I have not been a good Master to you, be you a good Servant, and ac∣company me with your Prayers, and help me both in Body and Minde. John, Have you my things about you, John? Then staying for his Servants, they being not on the Scaffold, he said I had rather have my Servants then Strangers. Then the Lieutenant of the Tower coming to him, he said, Pray Sir rejoyce with me: I thank Almighty God I am brought hither to suffer for him. Lieut. of the Tower. I am glad you are so comforted: Gods will be fulfilled in all things. Sir H. Hide. If God call me to him, and I glorifie him, it is well: I seek onely the company of your Christian Prayers. L. of the Tower. I shall not be wanting in that, God willing.
Then the Chyrurgion coming (but not his Kinsman, who was called for) he said, My Kinsman is of no use, you may be useful about my Body. I hope Mr. Sheriff that you'll give order I may have a little more room here. Sheriff. Yes, yes, Sir. Sir H. Hide. And likewise for liberty of speech; and that it shall please you (for I am not acquainted with the Forms here of England) that I may speak my one sense (I am now going into the presence of Almighty God) a very little, without any disturbance. Sheriff. Why Sir, you shall. Sir H. Hide. John, where is my Coffin? John. It is here, Sir. Sheriff. Sir, it seems these men cannot be found. Sir H. Hide. But if Mr. Barret could be found. After some stay, Mr. Barret being not found, the Sheriff spake to him, saying, Sheriff. You have your liberty, you know your time. Sir H. Hide. Where is the place of standing, that way or this way? (pointing towards the Exchange and the Poultrey.) Sheriff. Which way you please: you may stand which way you will, but that way you must lie (pointing towards the Ex∣change.) Sir H. Hide. I am indifferent: It is not the way to Heaven where a man stands. One brought word to him that there was no help to be had. Sir H. Hide. That is no hindrance to my felicity. Dr. Hide. God enable you, that you may finde that joy and comfort which is due to the glory of his Holy Name; he will not forsake you that have put your trust in him. Sir H. Hide. I will open my heart and my mouth with thanks∣giving (if this Gentleman please to give way.) Then turning towards the Poultrey, he put of his Hat, and said, Glory be to God on High, on Earth Peace, Good-will to men.
CHristian People, I come hither to die, I am brought hither to die; and that I may die Chri∣stian-like, I humbly beseech the assistance of your Christian Prayers, that by the benefit of them my passage may be the more easie; yet because men in that condition, which it hath pleased God to reduce me, carry more credit to their Speeches: In the discharge of my Duty towards God, I shall use a few words, and so dispatch. I pray all of you joyn with me to praise this Al∣mighty God, to whom I desire to render all hearty thanks; as for all his Mercies, so in particular for this, That he hath brought me hither: That whereas I owe a duty to Sin and to Nature, that now I can pay the account: A debt to Nature, I can pay it upon the ac∣count of Grace. And because it is fit to render an ac∣count of that Hope that is in me, I shall tell you, to the praise of Almighty God, That I have been born and bred up in the Doctrine of the Church of England, I have no Negative Religion, beleeving to be saved by the onely Merits of my Saviour Jesus Christ (put∣ting off his Hat) and whatsoever else is profest in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, authorized by Law; humbly beseeching Almighty God to restore unto this Church her Peace, Prosperi∣ty and Patrimony, whereof I have been an Obedient and a Loving (however an unworthy) Son: And now both my Hope being confident, and my Faith perfect∣ed, there remains onely Christian Charity; Charity we carry into Heaven, Charity on Earth, and that I leave, beseeching all whomsoever I have offended (whether I have or no) to forgive me, as I from the
bottom of my Heart do them whomsoever; blessing Almighty God for the happy Advantage he takes to bring me nearer to Heaven; blessing Almighty God that he hath given me this Advantage, as he hath been merciful to me before the Foundation of the World, in my Saviour, so that now he hath in Mer∣cy honored me, with a suffering for his Name, in obe∣dience to his Commandment. On this day seven-night I was summoned before that Justice, which condemned me on Friday last, praised be Almighty God, that by this way he hath brought me the nearer to Himself (putting off his Hat) My Charge I presume is publike, as my Punishment is visible: if there have been any thing in the Manage∣ment of my part, being unskilful, having discontinued my own Countrey many years, I shall beseech the Christian Charity of all you my beloved Countrey∣men, to impute it unto the right part, The ignorance that is in this skilful way of managing: It was ob∣jected unto me there, That I had a vanity of delight∣ing to speak in strange Tongues. I was best skill'd in the Italian (but free from that vanity I thank Al∣mighty God) and therefore I would in defence of my life (if it had been the Custom here, or the Judges favor) have used that Language. It was objected, That I did not so freely as a through-paced Cavalier, own my Master: I was told since I came into England (for other skill I have not in your Laws) that a legal Denial in Law might be to∣lerable; I hope I did not exceed the Bounds of that in anything, for God forbid that I should be ashamed of serving so good, so pious, so just a Master (putting off his hat) for that therein I rejoyce, and I humbly be∣seech
Almighty God, to fill my heart and my tongue, and all that hear me this day, with thankfulness for it. As to the Business, that another Construction had been made and believed here, then what was there, the Righteous God knoweth it; if any weakness is in the management, those were mine: I was sent to serve and protect, not to injure any, and as God acquits me of the intention in matter of Fact, as having done any maner of evil that way, however here understood, bles∣sed be his holy Name, (putting off his hat) so those Gentlemen of the Turky Company, if they would but seriously consider, for they know it very well, the im∣possibility of my doing them any maner of harm. Whereas that of the Embassie objected against me, that my Master never honored me withal, I was never wor∣thy of it, I was his Messenger an Internuncio, for the Conservation onely of his good Subjects, of all the Merchants, untill such time as he could confirm that Gentleman now Resident, or to send any other; and they themselves know that there was impossibility in me (as I bless God there was an innocency in me) unto any such intention to do them any harm; for my Masters Commands were point-blank the contrary; I was onely sent for their good, as I never owned the Title, so the very Letters themselves speaking no other: I never did so much as think of any maner of Address unto the Grand Seignior, but gave him the Letter from my Master; the rest of the English Na∣tion that were there present, may, when they please, assert so much. This I would insert, that those Gen∣tlemen, as they have been losers by the miscarriages of others, may now have no breach of their Charity with me; but if it be, as it seems it is now in this Coun∣trey,
a Sin to be Loyal, I hope my God hath forgiven that, when it is upon harmless Imployment, not inva∣ding any, according to his just Masters Order; for in∣deed I have been always bred up in that Religion, my Allegiance hath been incorporated into my Religion, and I have thought it a great part of the service due from me to Almighty God, to serve the King (putting off his hat.) I need not make any Apology for any thing in relation to the present things in England, for were I (as I spake before my Judges) were I as evil as my Sentence hath here made me black, it were impos∣sible for me to have prejudiced any body in England, or to England belonging, in that imployment; but I bless God for his infinite Mercy in Jesus Christ (put∣ting off his hat) who hath brought me home to him here in this way, it was the best Physick for the curing of my Soul, and those that have done it, have no more power then that of my body. I leave nothing behinde me, but that I am willing to part withal; all that I am going to, is desireable: And that you may all know that Almighty God hath totally wrought in me a to∣tal Denial of my self, and that there is that perfect Reformation of me within, and of my own corruptions by the blessed Assistance of his holy Spirit, I desire Al∣mighty God in the abundance of the bowels of his Mercy in Jesus Christ, not onely to forgive every Ene∣my, (if any such be in the world, here or wheresoever) but to bring him into his bosom so much good and particular comfort, as he may at any time, whether the Cause were just or unjust, have wished me any maner of evil, for I take him to be the happy Instrument of bringing me to Heaven. It is tedious, but I have an inward comfort, I bless Almighty God: (pray Gen∣tlemen
give leave, speaking to some that prest upon him) I should never do it but to give satisfaction to all cha∣ritable Hearts. I have been troublesom. Sheriff. You have your liberty to speak more, if you please. Sir H. Hide. But as to that part, Mr. Sheriff, that did concern the Denial (as it was affirmed by Master Attorney General) of my Masters imployment, Truly landing at Whitehall I told that Councel, there was just Commissions to an old Officer by the blessing of God, I have by me, and I have other good things that God hath blessed me withal, more then all the good Chri∣stians in the world, that are not the Grand Seignior's Slaves; and we that are Merchants abroad, we allow our selves any sufferance that may induce to our own safety, inlargement of Trade, or preservation of what is ours. Why I had by the grace of my gracious Ma∣ster a confirmation of my old Commission of Consul∣age in Greece; but as to the Embassie, no more then my Credential Letters did speak, nor no more then that I attempted, an Internuncio they call it in those places, which is a Messenger between the one and the other King. They both unhappily dyed of several deaths, and both violent too; and it is a custom not unknown to you, Master Sheriff, and other Gentle∣men that practice in the world, that Princes of course, for the continuation of Amity, do send Messengers where there is peace, that the Transaction of those publike Expressions of recipocrol Affections may be performed; but for Embassie, God forbid I should own it, I never had it, however they have used it as the happy means to bring me to God this day. I be∣seech God in the bowels of my Saviour, to forgive
those people that have done it, as I owe them no harm, so God pay them home with all the good of this, and an everlasting Life. As for Power, I have been long absent here in England, I meddle with none: Sufficient for me is Gods Grace to the Salvation of my Soul. I have been always fearful of offending Almighty God, according to the Grace he hath given me: But to learn a New-Religion, and New-Ways (that I must say Master Sheriff to you, and all others that hear me) I cannot dispence with my Conscience to give offence to Almighty God. I am now (if it may be with your Commission, Master Sheriff) to pour out my Soul to Almighty God in two or three words (the place is straitned.) If I knew wherein to give any satisfaction to any thing whatsoever, wherein I have offended or no, I am here in the fear of God to do it. I forgive with all my Soul, and my forgiveness is clear, as I am now going to receive Happiness at the hand of my Saviour: But if I thought it were satis∣faction to Sir Thomas Bendish, and all the Company, or any who may think they have offended me, I am come Master Sheriff to pay that Obedience willingly; that Debt I owe to Nature, to pay it upon the score of a Subject; because Conscience within me, tells-me not, that for the intentions of serving my Prince, that I could deserve such a Death, though Ten thou∣sand times more other ways. Doctor Hide. There was some suspition that you might impart the way you were upon to some of those Servants that were with you. Sir Henry Hide. I humbly thank you for remem∣bring me of it, and if any be here of the Turky Com∣pany
this day, or any Friend of theirs, I shall desire them from a dying Man, to take this truth, That nei∣ther my Brother, my innocent Brother that is with me, nor other Gentlemen with me in my company, have contributed any thing to their disturbance; it was my own business, whatsoever hath been done, that hath been to evil, or loss, though I deny both of them in my Intentions: I come not here to accuse any man, nor to excuse my self, but to praise God for all his deliverances; yet I know I shall do God a great deal of Service, and them a great deal of Justice, in not involving any of my company in any thing of mischief. I cannot answer Objections; I finde a man may be in Turky, or any place, all the World over, where they will give that Language which they hold fitting; but this is beneath me. Blessed be Almighty God, that hath called me to the Knowledge of him, and this ready Obedience which I pay, and merciful accepting of my Saviour, and patient Death: And I beseech you all, whatever you are, That you will ac∣company me with your Prayers, whereby my Soul may be assisted within me, in that passage to my Savi∣our whither I am going. I am weak of Body; I have discontinued long from the Kingdom; I am unac∣quainted with new Forms; I have desired to serve God according to his Commandments after the Old way: I have begged mercy of God for all my offences to him; and I have had my pardon sealed from Heaven by the Blood of my Saviour: I beg pardon of all whosoever, whether I have offended them, or no: I truly forgive them, and have besought Almighty God to pour his blessings upon them. I accuse no man, I finde fault, nor quarrel with no man; neither
with the persons that were the occasions, they were but the Instruments; neither at the persons condemn∣ing. I accept thankfully the Sentence of Death upon my self; and I beseech Almighty God, that I may be the last that may suffer upon this score, or upon any other. Master Sheriff, If there be any thing wherein I can give any other satisfaction to any Christian whatso∣ever, in any kinde, as I spake in general, I bless Al∣mighty God from my own Heart, now so assisted, by the especial Operation, and Motions, and Dictates of the Holy Ghost: if I can know any thing, wherein, or how to be now in my dying (not having served God so well in my life) serviceable to the Church of God, of Christ, and the full satisfaction of any what∣soever, I am here ready: I am unacqainted, but in my extasies to Heaven, there is that Glory I am go∣ing to. I beseech Almighty God, that he will give me Grace to bless his holy Name; as for all, as for Jesus Christ, and in him all things, so particularly for this, That he hath thought me worthy to bring me hither for my Faithfulness to my Master, for do∣ing what I was commanded by my Master, that is the most Pious, and most Just Prince in all the World. My Master hath suffered bitterly in England; and if there be any failing in his Service, the fault is onely mine. God knows I have done nothing in the busi∣ness, but by the instance of the Merchants; I deliver∣ed my Letters, and there they lie: To other things I am a Stranger. I hope that God will give me the Grace of Perseverance in that Christian Religion; in that Loyalty to my Prince; in that Love to all the World, that now (being to give up my Account to
him, that) I may with comfort be received in the Arms of his Mercy. If there be any thing, Master Sheriff, that I may give satisfaction in, I am ready to do it according to the poor Talent I have. I will receive my punishment in the way God hath prepared for me; and many ways I have been taken up. Truly I am bound to all that see me, and many thousands more since I came into England, not an uncivil look (we had strange reports abroad) not an uncivil look from any: God repay them all, and return them from the Throne of his Grace into their own bosoms. And God in particular bless that Honorable Lady, who was the occasion of the coming of my Lords Grace of Ar∣magh, with the Confirmation of those glorious and eternal Messages of Comfort which now I am going to enjoy: being thankful to all those that know me, and know me not; for since I am come hither, whereas I might have received prejudice in respect to my Loyalty (which is not the way, now) I have from them all received courtesie, the Lord repay them. I thank God I am otherwise bred, and my Al∣legiance hath been incorporated, imbodied into my Religion; and besides the great desires of other Gen∣tlemen, that I might not go out of the world, but that the world might see that the grace of God hath had a perfect Reformation in me, and a willing and thankful Submission to his Will, therefore I repent me not of it; but I beseech Almighty God to bless and prosper all people whatsoever that to this Kingdom belong. As my Speech is imperfect, so is my Health. I have forced my self in this Discourse to give that satisfacti∣on which I could. And I beseech you, Mr. Sheriff,
if you can hear of any Gentlemen that are wronged, what I offer here, I am to answer it; and I beseech you joyn with me in your Christian Prayers, that I may have a passage whither I am now going to give an ac∣count, not onely of every deed, but of every word. Then turning to his Man, he said, Sir H. Hide. John, which is the Executioner? The Executioner being brought to him, he said, Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I have no quarrel with you, you are the welcom Instrument, do your work; onely let me see the place, that I may fit my self, for I have an infirm body. Sheriff. You shall when you have prayed; if you please to pray first. Sir H. Hide. I desire to see the Block, I can pray afterwards. Here Mr. Executioner is that Money that is left; here is Four pounds for you. Then being shewed the Block, he kissed it, saying, Sir H. Hide. It is unworthy for me to put my Head where my Masters was. Blessed be God, Blessed be his Holy Name (putting off his Hat) I have an infirmity in my Body, but God hath enabled me inwardly. Pray Mr. Sheriff let me have a little more room. Sheriff. Go to Prayer, and we will clear the room. Sir H. Hide. I have (I thank Almighty God) done those Christian Offices belonging to me, at home; I am come hither onely to dye. Then kneeling down, he said the Lords-Prayer. Then having prayed a short space, he stood up, and turning to the Executioner, said, Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I pray give me direction what I am to do, and do your Office: You will cure all Diseases presently; pray direct me. Then the Executioner going to spred the Scarf over the Block, he said. Sir H. Hide. Put it not on now, but by and by. Dr. Hide. God Almighty strengthen you.
Sir H. Hide. God reward you all. Then the Executioner going to put up his Hair under his Sattin Cap, he thought he had been taking of it off: Where∣upon he said, Sir H. Hide. Must I have my black Cap off? It is very cold: all these Diseases will be cured, the Lord be thanked. Then going to lie down, his Man not helping him, he said, Sir H. Hide. John, help me a little I pray: Did not I tell you I could neither rise nor fall; lay me down, and lift me up again, John. Then rising again upon his knees, he spake to the Executioner, having the Ax in his hand, Sir H. Hide. Pray Sir give me the Ax. And then taking the Ax in his hand, he kissed it, and re∣turned it to the Executioner again, saying, Sir H. Hide. I will onely say, Lord Jesus receive my Soul; and when I lift up my Right-hand, do your work. And then lying down again, after a little space he lift up his Right-hand, and the Executioner at one stroke severed his Head from his Body. FINIS.
