H666 E51_12 99871949 155183
A happy DEFEAT Given to the Kings Forces, neere Tipton Green, in Staffordshire. Where were routed The Kings Generall Lord Wilmote, Lord Wentworth, Lord Cleveland, Colonell Sands, and other Incendiaries 4000 horse, and many foote, 100 slaine upon the place, besides many wounded, Taken prisoners, 1 Captain, 2 Cornets, and other Officers. And the number and names of those that were slain and wounded on our side. Also other Prisoners taken by the Earle of Denbie, as they were going to joyne with Prince Rupert. LONDON: Printed by Andrew Goe, according to Order, MDCXLIV.
¶ A happy defeat given to a party of the Kings Forces neere Typton green, by the Earle of Denbigh. SIR, BY reason of the steepenesse of the hill that wee cut our passage for our Ordnance for a battery, and the rockinesse of the ground; we have a toilesome time, yet my Lord of Denbie, plies the service hard, and is mightily with them in the workes, toe encou∣rage them till breake of day, exposing himselfe to all ha∣zards, truly he is a galant man, and (beyond all ever was imagined) carries on all conquering with love as wel as Armes, even overcoming his enemies, the King Prince, and Duke of Yorke, were on Monday Iune 6 at Eversham, and that is 16 miles from us, we have taken some prisoners supposed to goe towards Prince Rupert: we last night Iune 6, received Letters from Stafford on Aven, from Coven∣try Forces to my Lord. That the King was marched towards Worcester, and that the Parliaments foote were quartered in their Reare 8 miles distant, and their horse were appearing on kills three miles from Easome, and that the horse march with speede after them. Subscribed Purfrey, Colmer, Willowby,
I hope you shall heare we have dispatched here ere long; and are marched into Cheshire with Sir Thomas Middleton now with us, and Colonell Mitton to recover those parts. Worthy Sir, From the Leaguer before Dudley June the 10 ON Saturday last we received a Letter from Sir Wil. Waller, wherein he writes to my Lord of Denbigh to joine with him to pursue his Ma∣jesty in the Reare, who is in a retreating posture, his Maiesty was at Easome then: Yesterday wee had intelligence he was at Bewdly, and Kitter∣minster his soote 8 miles from us, we quartered all our horse, my Lords and Sir Thomas his horse at Sturbridge, Hales-owen, Rowly, and as neere them as conveniently may be, for they make good Beudly bridge with free Quarter there; this morning wee have intelligence, Sir Wiliam Waller is about Holt Castle in Worcestershire, the King moves on the other side Severne: Last night we called after sermon a Councell of war, to confult what was best to do: whether to con∣tinue our siege; or to remove to be gone to goe to Wem, because wee heare the King is going to Shrewsbury, (for us to relieve Wem.) And it was resolved by the most votes, in regard sir Thomas Middleton was ingaged to Cheshire forces, and must draw off his forces, that it is not safe for my Lord to continue the siege, but to march to∣ward
Wem; and joyne in a body to follow the King, or fall in the Reare of Prince Rupert: The castle last night pretended a parley with us, and let down a letter with a piece of lead, which was thus. You are immediatly to depart you Tray∣tours and Rebels, or to morrow you shall be forced to leave your Artillery behind you, and you shall have no quarter: for wee are resolved to chastise you for your insolencies. From his Majesties Castle of Dudley. I. BEAUMONT. The said Beaumont commands in chief. They called yea Dogs, give us an answer, At which we fired three peeces of Ordnance on them. We remove not this day to experience their brava, does, but I think we shall march away suddenly. My Lord writ to sir Will. Waller to join with him. Another Letter dated Iune 12. 1644. Worthy Friend. IT is the Lords renewed mercie to me I am now alive, to write to you of this daies occurrences for we have been in as hot service, as ever I saw this day, and through Gods mercie came off with admired honour, from the mouths of our enemies, I can truly say I know not who in his place was defective in his duty and . We had the first Alarme about two a clock in the morning, but it was eight ere all our horse could be got
from their Quartrrs into the field about nine of the clock they faced us, and we them, and in the meane time hea∣ring that they were 4000 horse besides foote, we drew out our Ordnance which were neere engaged with much toil and our foote; we drew our Ordnance to Tipton Greene with much difficulty, the way almost with this raine made impaffible, where being drawne up my Lord desi∣sired Sir Tho Middleton with Cup Keme his troop & Cap. Tmson to lead the Van, and Col: Ridgly the Reare. Col. Mitten and Captain Keme two gallant Commanders of valient Spirits, commanded two forlorne hopes in the van of the Carrages, each of them one. We had not marched hafe a mile but the enemie had ambusheadoed the hedges, and then their body of horse appeared in the lane, so that we were called to draw up, but before we came that were of that forlorne hope: Colonell Bartons Troope, Captain Keme, and Captain Noaks, Captain Tompsons, charged them so fiercely, that passing with some little losse, our ambush routed their horse, killed three score in the lane, their horse retreating, their ambusheadors fled, the foote seeing that, pursued them desperately, and fired gal∣lantly, My Lord Denbigh deported himselfe with much gallantrie, leading the foote himselfe, he said he had rather lose 10 lives, had he them to lose, then one piece of his Artillerie and although our carriages broke twice, yet we made them good, beate them from them, and have brought off all blessed be God, Captaine Kenae had one man lost, and another shot through, who fought bravely, and Cap∣tain Kemes own horse shot in the head, Captain Thompson of ours is shot in the cheeke, Captain Lieutenant Farrer, Sir Thomas his Captain Lievtenant of horse, in the nec Captaine Clever slaine, who fought valiantly after the w,
wounded in the arme; yet charged again and was shot in the belly. Captaine Turtows Lievtenant is shott through. In all wee have lost eight men, about 20 wounded, the fight lasted from two of the clock till five, as fierce si∣rings as you ever heard, we kild about 100 of them in all and it is credibly reported, wounded many more, their word was Worcester, ours God, King, and Parliament. They curst their men for cowards, and said Denbighs bastards fight like devils, they were two for our own, wee jointly desire God may have the glory of all, Captain Bray was shot in the mouth of our party, there was Generall Wilmot, Wentworth, Lord Cleveland, with them Colonell Sands, &c. They all came to relieve the Papists with might and main, but we sent them back with powder. We are now, blessed be God, at Walfall, where we are in expectation of another touch this night, God pre∣pare us for it. Never could any Generall behave himselfe better then my Lord did, and all Officers and Souldiers did stirre e∣qually to share in honour, my Lord and Sir Thomas came up and gave all thanks: The fight ended, Captaine Keme commanded the Van, and blessed be God hath lodged all the Artillery safe in the Town, nor would my Lord come off the Rear till all was safe up, wee wisht Sir William Wal∣ler in their Rear, and Captain Keme dispatched his man to that purpose, last night: June 11, with a Letter from my Lord, but I fear he is taken, they came so quickly on, wee took many Prisoners, two Cornets or horse Colours, one is a red Bull in a white field roaring, one Captain Keight a
Clocestershire Gentleman (of horse) his father is high She∣riffe: I believe there have few sieges been) raised in a more gallant way. From Walfall, June 12, at ten a clock at night. Sir, Captain Keme tooke prisoner a Spy with a Warrant from Lievtenant Colonel Beaamont, I have sent you the copie, it was on the Lords day to summon Fidlers to make them merry, as you may see by this inclosed. To the chief Musician in Dudley Castle. THese are to will and require you to bring all your in∣struments of Musicke, especially your loud Musick and repair to his Majesties Castle at Dudley. If any of you shall fail, I will not fail to fire his or their houses for their disrepects. Fom his Majesties Castle at Dudley. J. Beamont. Published according to Order. Tuesday, Iune, 18. 1644.
