H980 E979_10 99866752 119037
THE COMPLEAT Husband-man: OR, A discourse of the whole Art OF HUSBANDRY; BOTH Forraign and Domestick. Wherein many rare and most hidden se∣crets, and experiments are laid open to the view of all, for the enriching of these NATIONS. Unto which is added A Particular discourse of the Naturall History and Hubandry of IRELAND. By SAMUEL HARTLIB, Esq LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Edward Brewster at the Crane in Paul's Church-yard. 1659.
TO THE READER. Courteaus Reader. THe Discourse which I did formerly pub∣lish concerning the Brabant-Husbandry, was somwhat imperfect, nor was the Author thereof then known unto me; but since I have learned who the Author was, I have also lighted upon a more perfect Copie, which I intend to offer to the Publique in a Second Edition, that such as have entertained that first offer with liking and acceptance, may finde the benefit of a clearer and fuller satisfaction in that which shall further be imparted unto them. And to the end that In∣genuity and Industry may want no encouragement, in the mean time accept of these Enlargements upon the same Subject; wherein you wil finde diverse other wayes, and no lesse (if not more) profitable, then that which was left by Sir RICHARD WESTON (the Author of the Brabant-Husbandry) as a Legacie to his Sons, whose In∣troduction to that Discourse, I have here premised to this, to bespeak thee in his words to his Sons, and to gain thy
affections more fully to these ways of advantaging both thy selfe, and the Publique. And I could wish, that God would put it in the heart of those Worthies that manage the Publique Trust; that by their Influence and Authority, these and such like Meanes of Industry, may not be left wholly to the uncertain, disorderly & lazy undertakings of private men, so as not to have an eye over them, and over that which in their proceedings doth so mainly ap∣peare to be a Publique Concernment. Therefore let us all joine to intreat and petition them, that in order to the Publique and Generall Welfare of this Common-wealth, these two things at least may bee thought upon and setled. 1 In respect of the known untowardnes of the major part of the people, who being wonderfully wedded to old customes, are not easily wonne to any new course, though never so much to their own profit, that two or more fit persons of approved skill and integrity may be made Publique Stewards or Surveyors; one of the Hus∣bandry, the othet of the Woods of this Common-wealth, and impowered to oversee and take care of the preser∣vation of what is, and by all good improvement to pro∣cure and provide for what is wanting to the present age: and (except some such Expedients be used) it is more then likely will be wanting to succeeding ages. 2 That according to the usual custome of Flaunders, a Law may be made of letting and hiring Leases upon improvement; where the manner is, That the Farmer covenanteth on his part, to improve the land to such or such a greater Rent, by an orderly and excellent manage∣ment of Husbandry, as well as building. The Landlord on the other side covenanteth on his part, at the expiration
of the said Lease, to give so many years purchase of the Improvement (according to the agreement) which is 3 or 4 years, or somtimes more, or to give out of it such a parcell or moity of Ground. As if land formerly going for 6. s an Acre, be upon improvement worth 10. s or 13. s 4. d an Acre. The Landlord is to give 4. or 5. s upon every Acre, more or lesse, according to the agree∣ment. If it please God to blesse these Motions, and that accordingly the Nationall Husbandry of this Common-wealth be improved; we may hope through Gods bles∣sing to see better dayes, and to be able to beare necessary and Publique burdens with more ease to our selves, and benefit to Humane Society then hitherto we could attain unto. Which more and more to advance, in reference to a Publique and Universal Interest, as subordinate to High∣er things; and which, though lesse visible and sensible, are more permanent, and to truly Rationall and Spirituall Husbandmen as perceptible, shall be the uncessant prayers and endeavours of Thy faithfull Servant Samuel Hartlib.
Sir RICHARD WESTON late of Sutton, in the County of Surrey, his Legacie to his Sons, &c. Anno Dom. 1645. My Sonnes, I Have left this short ensuing Treatise to you as a Legacy; if I shall not live my self, to shew you (what therein is written) by examples, which I know instruct far more then precepts; yet precepts from a dying Father, instruct∣ing of his Children what he hath seen and known, and re∣ceived information of from witnesses free from all excepti∣ons, should make such an impression on them, as at least to be∣lieve their Father writ what he thought was true; And ther∣fore suppose those things worthy to be put in practise by them, which he himselfe would have done, if it had pleased God to have granted him life and liberty; especially seeing the mat∣ter it self, which is required by him to be done, is in shew so profitable, and so easie to be effected, & with so little charge, considering the great gain that is proposed by it, that not any thing can restrain a rational man from triall thereof, but not giving credit to the Relator. The whole Discourse shews you, how to improve barren & heathy land, & how to raise more then ordinary profit there∣of, by such wayes and means as are not practised in England, but as commonly in some parts of Brabant & Flaunders, as the Husbandry of Wheat & Rie is here. By that means you may nobly augment your estates, and will receive so much the more profit & praise, by how with more industry & diligence you govern your affairs: and wil not only be imitated, but al∣so honoured by your Neighbours, when they shal see your la∣bours prosper so far, as to convert barren & heathy ground left un-husbanded for many ages, into as commodious a∣rable land, with Pastures and Meadows, as any be in this Kingdome. And certainly, that man is worthy of praise and honour, who being possessed of a large & barren Demeasne, constrains it by his labour and industry to produce extraordi∣nary fruits; which redounds not only to his own particular
profit, but also to the Publique benefit. Cato saith, It is a great shame to a man, not to leave his Inheritance greater to his Suc∣cessors then he received it from his Predecessors, and that he de∣spiseth the liberality of God, who by slothfulnesse loseth that which his land may bring forth, as not seeming willing to reap the fruits which God hath offered him. Nay, he threatens the crime of high treason; to those that do not augment their Patri∣mony so much as the Increase surmounts the Principall. It is a thing much celebrated by Antiquity, & thought the noblest way to gather Wealth, for to employ ones Wit & Money upon his Land, and by that means to augment his estate. If you observe the cōmon course of things, you will find that Husbandry is the End, which Men of all estates in the world do point at. For to what purpose do Souldiers, Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, and men of all Occu∣pations and Trades, toyl and labour with great affection, but to get Money? and with that money, when they have gotten it, but to purchase Land? and to what end doe they buy that land, but to re∣ceive the fruits of it to live? and how shall one receive the fruits of it, but by his own Husbandry or a Farmers? so that it appears by degrees; that what course soever a man taketh in this world, at last he commeth to Husbandry, which is the most common Occu∣pation amongst men, the most naturall and Holy, being comman∣ded by the mouth of God to our First Fathers. There is care & di∣ligence requisite in Husbandry, as there is in all the Actions of the World; and therefore as a Captain hath a Lieutenant to com∣mand his Souldiers in his absence, or for his ease: So must you provide some able honest man to whom you will commit the exe∣cution of such things, as you your selves cannot do without too much labour: whereof you must often take an account, and confer with him (as occasion shall require) about your businesse, that no∣thing may be left undone for want of providence. To such a man you must give good wages, with intent to advance your own gain, and take the more ease, by reason of his honesty and knowledge. You will finde this Husbandry (after you have once had expe∣rience of it) to be very pleasing to you, and so exceeding profitable,
that it will make you diligent: For no man of any Art or Science (except an Alchymist) ever pretēded so much gain any other way, as you shall see demonstrated in this ensuing Treatise. The Usurer doubles but his principall, with Interest upon Interest in 7 years; but by this little Treatise, you shall learn now to doe more then treble your principle in one years compass And you shall see how an Industrious man in Brabant & Flaunders would bring 500 acres of barren & heathy land, that was not worth at the most above 5. l a year, to be worth 700. l a year in lesse time then 7 years. I know no reason why the like may not be done in England, for we are under as good a Climate as they are; Our heathy Land, that is neither Sand nor Loam, is as good a soile as their barren ground is. We have not only Dung to enrich our Land, but also Lime and Marle, of which they know not the use, where they sowe their gainfullest Commodities mentioned in this ensuing Treatise, nor of any other Manure but only Dung. In fine, I am certain there is none of their Commodities but grow in England, as they doe in Brabant and Flaunders, but ours are not of the same kinde, as theirs, nor put to the same use. What cannot be vented at home, may as well be vented from hence into Holland, as the like commodities are from Flaunders thither. I will say no more of this Subject in the Pre∣face: only it remains to tell you, that you must not expect either Eloquence or Method in this ensuing Treatise; but a true Story plainly set forth in the Last Will & Testament of your Father; which he would have you execute: but before all things, to be sure you lay the Foundation of your Husbandry upon the Blessing of Almighty God, continually imploring his divine aid & assistance in all your labours: for it is God that gives the increase: and belie∣ving this as the Quintessence and soul of Husbandry, Primum quaerite Regnum Dei; & postea haec omnia adjicientur vobis. These things being briefly promised, I will leave the rest to this short ensuing Treatise, and commit you all with a Fathers Bles∣sing to the Protection and Providence of Almighty God. Thus far Sir RICHARD VVESTONS Introduction to the discouse of BRABANT HUSBANDRY; which is shortly to be published in a S∣cond Edition corrected and enlarged.
A large Letter concerning the De∣fects and Remedies of English Husbandry, written to Mr. Samuel Hartlib. SIR, ACcording to your desires, I have sent you what I have observed in France, about the sowing of a seed called commonly, Saint-Foine, which in English is as much to say as Holy-Hay, by rea∣son, as I suppose of the excellency of it. It's cal∣led by Parkinson in his Herball, where you may see a perfect description of it, Onobrychis Vulgaris, or Cocks head; because of it's flower, or Medick Fetchling: By some it is called Poly∣gala; because it causeth cattel to give abundance of milke. The plant most like unto it, and commonly known; being fre∣quently sowne in gardens, is that which is called French Honey-suckle, and is a kind of it, though not the same. France al∣though it be supposed, to want the fewest things of any Pro∣vince in Europe; yet it hath no small want of Hay, especially about Paris; which hath necessitated them to sowe their dry and barren lands with this seed. Their manner of sowing it, is done most commonly thus: When they intend to let their Corn-lands ly, because they be out of heart, and not situate in a place convenient for manuring, then they sowe that land with Oats, and these seeds together about equall parts; the first year they onely mowe off their Oates, leaving the Saint Foine to take root and strength that year; Yet they may if they please, when the year is seasonable, mowe it the same year it is sowne; but it's not the best way to do so: the year following they mowe it, and so do seven years together; the ordinary burthen is about a load, or a load & a halfe in good years, upon an Arpent, (which is an 100 square Poles or Rods,
every Pole or Rod being 20 foot) which quantity of ground being nigh a 4th. part lesse than an English Acre; within a league of Paris, is usually Rented at 6 or 7 s After the land hath rested 7 years; then they usually break it up, and sowe it with corn till it be out of heart, and then sowe it with Saint Foine as formerly: for it doth not impoverish land, as Annu∣al Plants do; but after seven years, the roots of this plant be∣ing great and sweet, as the roots of Licorish, do rot, being turn∣ed up by the Plough, and enrich the land. I have seen it sown in divers places here in England; especially in Cobham-Park in Kent, about 4 miles from Gravesend; where it hath thriven extraordinary well upon dry Chalky banks, where nothing else would grow: and indeed such dry barren land is most pro∣per for it (as moist rich land for the great Trefoile) or great Glo∣ver-Grasse (although it will grow indifferently well on all lands) and when the other grasses and plants are destroyed by the parching heat of the Sun; because their roots are small and shallow; this flourisheth very much, having very great root and deep in the ground, and therefore not easily to be exsiccated; As we have observed Ononis or Rest-Harrow com∣monly to do, on dry lands; but if you sowe this on wet land, the water soon corrupts the root of it. This plant without question would much improve many of our barren lands, so that they might be mowen every year once, at least seven years together, and yield excellent fodder for cattel, if so be that it be rightly managed; otherwise it cometh to nothing, as I have seen by experience. I therefore councel those who sowe this, or the great Trefoile or Clover-Grasse, or any other sort of grasses, that they observe these Rules. 1 That they do make there ground fine, and kill all sorts of other grasses and plants; otherwise they being native English will by no meanes give way to the French ones; especially in this moist climate; and therefore they are to be blamed; who with one ploughing sowe this or other seeds; for the grasse pre∣sently groweth up and choaketh them, and so by their negli∣gence, and ill Husbandry, discourageth themselves and others. 2 Let them not be too sparing of their seeds; for the more they sowe, the closer and thicker they will grow, and presently
fully stock the ground, that nothing else can grow. And further the seeds which come from beyond the Seas, are oftentimes old and much decayed, and therefore the more seed is re∣quired. 3 Not to expect above 7. years profit by it; for in that time it will decay, and the naturall grasse will prevaile over it; for every plant hath his period; some in one yeare; some in 2. o∣thers in 3. as the common Thistle; and therefore after 7. years let them either plough the land up, and sowe it with that same seed again, or with other Graine as they do in France. 4 Let not sheepe or other cattel bite them the first year, that they may be well rooted; for these grasses are farre swee∣ter then the ordinary grasses; and cattel will eat them down, leaving the other; and consequently discourage their growth. 5 The best way, if men will be at the charge, is to make their ground very fine, as they do when they are to sowe Barly, and harow it even; and then to howe these seeds in alone without any other grain, as the Gardiners do Pease; yet not at so great a distance; but let them make the ranges about a foots breadth one from another, and they shall see their gras∣ses flourish, as if they were green Pease; especially if they draw the howe through them once or twice that summer to destroy all the weeds and grasses: And if they do thus, the great Clover and other seeds may be mowen even twice the first year, as I have experimented in divers small plots of ground. There is at Paris likewise another sort of fodder, which they call La Lucern, which is not inferior, but rather preferred be∣fore this Saint Foine, for dry & barren grounds; which hath bin lately brought thither, and is managed as the former; and truly every day produceth some new things, not onely in other Countreys, but also in our owne. And though I cannot but ve∣ry much commend these plants unto my Countrymen, knowing that they may be beneficial to this Nation; yet I especially re∣commend unto them a famous kind of grasse growing in Wilt∣shire, 19 miles from Salisbury, at Maddington, which may better be called one of the wonders of this land, then the Hawthorne-tree at Glassenbury, which superstition made so famous: for di∣vers of the same kind are found elswhere. You may find this,
grasse briefly described in a Book called Phytologia Britannica, (which lately came forth, and set down even all the plants which have been found naturally growing in England, Gramen Caninum Supinum Longissimum, which groweth 9 miles from Salisbury, Mr, Tuckers at Madington: where with they fat hogs; and which is 24 foot long, a thing almost incredible; yet com∣monly known to all that shire. Now without question, if the seed of this grasse, be sown in other rich Meadowes, it will yeeld extraordinarily; though perchance not so much, as in its proper place. I wonder that those that live thereabouts, have not tryed to fertilize their other Meadowes vvith it: for it is a peculiar species of grasse; and though some ingenious men have found about 90 species of grasses in this Island: yet there is none like to this, that can by any meanes be brought to such an height, and svveetnesse. And truly I suppose, that the through examination of this grasse, is a thing of very great importance, for the improvement of Meadows and Pastures; and it may ex∣cel the great Trefoile, Saint Foine, La-Lucern, or any exotick plant vvhatsoever. And though I am very unvvilling to exceed the bounds of an Epistle; yet I cannot but certifie you, where∣in the Husbandry of this Nation in other particulars (as I sup∣pose) is greatly deficient, which I will do as briefly as may be; and likewise, how ingenious men may finde Remedies for these deficiencies. 1 Deficiency concerning Ploughs and Carriages.First, he would do the honest and painful Husbandman a ve∣ry great pleasure, and bring great profit to this Nation, who could facilitate the going of the plough and lighten our ordi∣nary Carriages. I wonder, that so many excellent Mechanicks, who have beaten their brains about the perpetual Motion and other curiosities, that they might finde the best ways to ease all Motions, should never so much as to honour the Plough (which is the most necessary Instrument in the world) by their labour and studies. I suppose all know, that it would be an extraordinary benefit to this Countrey, if that 1 or 2 horses could plough and draw as much as 4 or 6, and further also, that there is no small difference in ploughs, and waggons, when there is scarce any se rule for the making them; and every Countrey, yea almost every County, differs not onely
in the ploughs; but even in every part Some with wheels, o∣thers without; some turning the Rest (as they call it) as in Kent, Picardy and Normandy, others not; some having Coul∣ters of one fashion, others of another; others as the Dutch, having an Iron wheele or circle for that purpose; some having their sheares broad at point; some not; some being round, as in Kent, others flat; some tying their horses by the taile, as in Ireland. So, likewise Waggons and Carts differ: some using 4 wheeles, others 2 onely; some carrying timber on a wheels in a Cart, others with 4 wheels, & a long pole onely between, which is the best way; some plough with 2 horses onely, as in Norfolke, and beyond seas in France, Italy, where I never saw above 3 horses in a plough, and one onely to hold and drive: But in Kent I have seen 4, 6, yea 12 horses and oxen; which variety sheweth, that the Husband-man, who is ordina∣rily ignorant in Mechanicks, is even at his wits end in this In∣strument, which he must necessarily use continually. Surely he should deserve very well of this Nation, and be much ho∣nored by all, that would set down exact Rules for the making of this most necessary, yet contemned Instrument, and for e∣very part thereof: for without question there are as exact Rules to be laid down for this, as for Shipping and other things. And yet in Shipping, how have vve vvithin these 6 yeers out-stripped our selves, and gone beyond all Nations? for vvhich Art some deserve eternal honour. And vvhy may vve not in this? I knovv a Gentleman, vvho novv is beyond seas, vvhere he excels even the Hollanders, in their ovvn businesse of draining; vvho promiseth much in this kinde, and I think he is able to performe it; I could vvish, he vvere called on to make good his promise. In China, it is ordinary to have vvag∣gons to passe up and dovvn vvithout horses or oxen, vvith sails as ships do: and lately in Holland a vvaggon vvas fra∣med, vvhich vvith ordinary sails carryed 30 people 60 English miles in 4 houres. I knovv some excellent Scholars, vvho promise much by the means of Horizontall sails (viz.) to have 3 or 4 Ploughs to go together; vvhich shal likevvise both sovve and harrovv.
I dare not being ignorant in these high speculations, engage my self to do much thereby; but wish these gentlemen, whom I know to be extreamly ingenious, would attempt something, both for the satisfying of themselves and others. There is an ingenious Yeoman of Kent who hath 2 ploughs fastened to∣gether very finely, by the which he plougheth 2 furrowes at once, one under another; and so stirreth up the land 12 or 14 inches deep, which in deep land is good. Neer Greenwich there liveth an Honourable Gentleman, who hath excellent Corn on barren land, and yet plougheth his land with one horse, when as usually through Kent they use 4 and 6. These things shevv that much may be done in this kinde; and I hope some in these active times, vvil undertake and accomplish this vvork of so great importance. 2 Deficien∣cie, about digging of land, Set∣ting and Howing in of Corn.There is a Book long since Printed, made by Sir Hugh Plattes, (the most curious man of his time) called Adams Art revived, vvherein is shevved the great benefit vvhich vvould accrue to this Nation, if all land vvhich vvere fit to be digg'd, vvere so ordered, and their corn set. Mr. Gab. Plattes likevvise hath vvritten much of this kinde, and promiseth that men shal reap 100 for one; all charges born vvhich are very great. That this may be true, he bringeth some probable Reasons, sup∣posing that lesse then a peck of Wheat, vvil set an Acre, I dare not promise so much as these Gentlemen do, neither can I commend Mr. Gab. Plattes setting Instrument: For I knovv their are many difficulties in it, vvhich he himselfe could ne∣ver vvade through; but concerning digging and setting, and hovving in of Corne, these things I dare maintain. 1 That it is a deficiency in Husbandry, that it is used no more. 2 That one good digging, because it goeth deeper than the Plough, and buryeth all vveeds, killeth the grasses; is as good as three Ploughings, and if the Land be mellovv, not much more chargeable. 3 That it vvould imploy many 1000 of people, that a third part of the seed might be saved. As I have found by ex∣perience, that all the vveeds and grasses, might be more easi∣ly destroyed thereby, and the ground better accommodated
for other crops; and to conclude, the crop considerably grea∣ter. Yet thus much I must further say, concerning setting of Graine, That great Beans are even of necessity to be set, and that small Beans in Surrey and other places, are likewise set with profit, for the reasons above mentioned; that to set Pease (unlesse Hastevers) Oates, Barley, is a thing even ridi∣culous: that Wheat although in divers grounds it may be set with profit; yet to howe it in (as the Gardiners speak) as they do Pease, though not at the same distance, but about a foot the ranges one from another, is better then setting, for these Reasons. 1 Because to set Corn is an infinite trouble and charge; and if it be not very exactly done, which children neither can nor wil do, and these must be the chief setters; wil be ve∣ry prejudicious. 2 If worms, frost, ill weather, or fowles, destroy any part of your seed, which they wil do; your crop is much im∣pared. 3 The ground cannot be so well weeded, and the mould raised about the roots by the howe. Which 3 inconveniencies are remedied by the other way. Further, I dare affirme, that after the ground is digged or ploughed and harrowed; even it's better to howe Wheat in, then to sowe it after the common way; because that the weeds may be easily destroyed by running the howe through it in the Spring, and the mould raised about the roots of the Corne, as the Gardiners do with Pease, it would save much Corne in dear years, and for other Reasons before mentioned. Yea, it is not more chargeable; for a Gardiner wil howe in an Acre for 5 s and after in the spring for lesse money runne it over with a howe, and cut up all the weeds, and raise the mould: vvhich charges are not great, and you shal save above a bush∣el of seed, vvhich in dear years is more vvorth then all your charges. Further 1 s 6 d an Acre for the sovving and harrowing of an Acre in Kent is accounted a reasonable price; but if any fear charges let him use a Drill-Plough. I therefore cannot but commend the howing in of wheat, as an excellent piece of
good Husbandry, whether the ground be digged or plough∣ed; not onely because it saveth much Corne, imployeth much people, and it is not chargeable; but it also destroy∣eth all weeds, fitteth grounds for after-crops and causeth a greater increase, and in my apprehension is a good Remedy against Smut and Mildew. There is an Ingenious Italian, who wondereth how it cometh to passe, that if one setteth a Grain of Corne, as Wheat, Barley, &c. it usually produceth 300 or 400, as I have tryed: yet if you sowe Wheat after the ordinary way, 6. or 8. for one is accounted a good crop; what beccometh of all the Corne, that is sown, when as the 50th. part, if it do grow, would be sufficient? For answer to this. 1 I say, much Corne is sown, which nature hath destina∣ted for the Hens and Chickens, being without any considera∣ble vegetative faculty. 2 Womes, Frosts, Floods, Crowes and Larkes, (which e∣very one doth not consider) to devour not a little. 3 Weeds, as Poppie, May-weed, and the grasses growing with the Corne, do destroy much. Lastly, when Corne is so sowne after the ordinary manner, much is buried in the furrowes; especially if the ground be grazy: much is thrown on heaps in holes, and consequently starve and choak one another. Most of these Inconvenien∣cies, are to be remedyed by this vvay of setting and hovving in of Corn. 3 Deficien∣cie, concer∣ning Gar∣dening.Gardening, though it be a vvonderfull improver of lands, as it plainly appears by this, that they give extraordinary rates for land; (viz.) from 40 s per Acre to 9 pound, and dig and hovve and dung their land vvhich costeth very much; Yet I knovv divers, vvhich by 2 or 3 Acres of land maintain themselves and family, and imploy other about their ground; and therefore their ground must yield a vvonderfull increase, or else it could not pay charges; yet I suppose there are ma∣ny Deficiencies in this calling. 1 Because it is but of fevv years standing in England, and therefore not deeply rooted. About 50 years ago, about vvhich time Ingenuities first began to flourish in England; This
Art of Gardening, began to creep into England, into Sand∣wich, and Surrey, Fulham, and other places. Some old men in Surrey, where it flourisheth very much at present; report, That they knew the first Gardiners that came into those parts, to plant Cabages, Colleflowers, and to sowe Turneps, Carrets, and Parsnips, to sowe Raith (or early ripe) Rape, Pease, all which at that time were great rarities, we having few, or none in England, but what came from Holland and Flaunders. These Gardiners with much ado procured a plot of good ground, and gave no lesse then 8 pound per Acre; yet the Gentleman was not content, fearing they would spoil his ground; because they did use to dig it. So ignorant were we of Gardening in those dayes. 2 Many parts of England are as yet ignorant.Gravesend. Within these 20 years, a famous Town within lesse then 20 miles of London, had not so much as a messe of Pease but what came▪ from London, where at present Gardening flourisheth much I could instance divers others places, both in the North and West of England, where the name of Gardening, and Howing is scarcely known, in which places a few Gardiners might have saved the lives of many poor people, who have starved these dear years. 3 We have not Gardening-ware in that plenty and cheap∣nesse (unlesse perhaps about London) as in Holland and other places, where they not onely feed themselves with Gardiners ware, but also fat their Hogs and Cows. 4 We have as yet divers things from beyond Seas, which the Gardiners may easily raise at home, though nothing nigh so much as formerly; for in Queen Elizabeths time, we had not onely our Gardiners ware from Holland, but also Cherries from Flaunders; Apples from France; Saffron, Licorish from Spain; Hopps from the Low-Countreys: And the Frenchman who writes the Treasure Politick saith, that it's one of the great Deficiencies of England, that Hopps wil not grow, where∣as now it is known, that Licorish, Saffron, Cherries, Apples, Peares, Hopps, Cabbages of England are the best in the world. Notwithstanding we as yet want many things, as for example:
We want Onnions, very many coming to England from Flaun∣ders, Spain; Madder for dying cometh from Zurick-Sea by Zealand; we have Red Roses from France; Anice-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Cumine, Caraway, Rice from Italy, which without que∣stion would grow very well in divers moist lands in England; yea Sweet Marjorame, Barley, and Gromwell seed, & Virga Aureae, though they grow in our hedges in England. Lastly, Gardening is deficient in this particular: that we have not Nurceries sufficient in this land, of Apples, Pears, Cherries, Vines, Chestnuts, Almonds; but Gentlemen are ne∣cessitated, to send to London many hundred miles for them. Briefly, for the advancement of this ingenuous calling, I onely desire, that Industrious Gentlemen would be pleased to encourage some expert workmen into the places where they live, and to let them land at a reasonable rate, and if they be poor and honest, to lend a little stock; they will soon see the benefit that will redound, not onely to themselves, but also to all their neighbours, especially the poor, who are not a little sustained by the Gardiners labours and Ingenuities. 4 Deficien∣cy in Smut & Mildew.4 Our Husbandry is deficient in this, that we know not how to remedy the infirmities of our growing Corne; especially Smut and Mildew, to instance in these two onely, which oftentimes bring great calamities to these Nations: Smut in wet years, Mildews in dry. These distempers in Corne, are not onely in our Countrey;Helmont. but also in other places. A learned Au∣thour saith, that Smuttynesse of corne, which maketh it smell like a Red Herring, was not known in France, till about 1530, at which time the great foul disease began to break forth, which he conceiveth from hence to have some originall; as also the camp-disease. Mildews are very great in the King∣dome of Naples, which oft stick to the sithes of those that mowe grasse & Corn: and (God be thanked) we are not trou∣bled with Locusts, which is a great flying Grasse-hopper, nor Palmer-worms, which is a kind of great black Cater-piller, nor with great hail in summer, nor with great drought, which sti∣fleth the eare in the stalk; which Calamities in hot Countreys, do very oft totally destroy the honest and patient Husband∣man's
labours: neither are we troubled with extream colds, which in New-England and other cold Countreys, do oft de∣stroy the Corne. But to return to our purpose. And first briefly to shew you my opinion concerning the Causes of Smuttynesse I desire not to fetch Causes afarre off, and to tell you of the sad Conjunctions of Mars and Saturn (for I think Quae suprae nos, belong not to us) when as we have enough at home: This is certain, that there are many evident causes of this corruption of Corn. 1 A moist season about Kerning-time: which moisture either corrupteth the roots of the Plant, or the nourishment of it, or the seed in its Embrio: or perhaps in some measure all these. 2 Low; moist, foggy ground, for the reasons above men∣tioned. 3 Dung'd land. In Vineyards it's observed, that dung cau∣seth more increase in quantity, but lesse in goodnesse, so that the ill-tast of the dung may easily be discerned; because wine hath an high taste, vvithout question the same happen∣eth to other Plants, although it be not so easily discerned; for the ferment or ill odour of the dung, cannot be over-maste∣red by the Plants, as vve see also in Animals, that corrupt diet causeth unsavory tasts in the flesh: so hogs in New-found∣land, where they are nourished by fish, may by their tasts be called rather Sea-porpusses then Land-swine. 4 The sovving of Smutty Corne oft produceth Smuttynesse; the son like unto the father; I account Smutty Corn an imper∣fect or sick Graine, and suppose that by a Microscope the im∣perfection may be discerned. Lastly, the sovving of the same seed oft on the same field, causeth Smuttynesse; because that nitrous jewce, vvhich is con∣venient for the nourishment of the Grain, hath been exhast∣ed in the precedent years; and therefore it is excellent Hus∣bandry every year to change the species of Grain, and also to buy your Seed-Corn, from places farre distant. I am infor∣med of a Gentleman, vvho did sovve some Wheat which came from Spain, vvhere the Grain is usually very hard and flinty,
and as it vvere transparent, and farre vveightier than ours (as it appeareth by a measure at Amsterdam vvhich holdeth about 3 bushels, and if our Wheat in the Northern parts vveigheth 160. the Southern Corn weigheth sometimes 180, 200, 220:) and had a crop beyond expectation. The usuall Cures of Smuttynesse, besides those mentioned before, are these. 1 To lime your ground, which warmeth and dryeth the land. 2 To lime your Corne, which is done thus. First, slack your lime, add then moisten your Corne or lime, and stir them together, till your Graine be as big as a small Pease. This liming preserveth Corn likewise from birds and worms, and is found a very good Remedy against this disease: others make a strong ly vvith common salt, and steep their Corn in it all night, and then draw away their ly for further use; which seldome faileth of its desired effect. Whether this strong ly doth by its corrosivenesse, mortifie the weak and imperfect Corne, so that it will not grow; Or whether it be a Remedy, to cure the imperfections thereof, is worth the enquiry? I suppose this ly doth exsiccate the superfluous humidity, which is the cause of this corruption. If Corne be brought into the barn very Smutty, in Kent they usually thrash it on dry floors planked with boards; by which means, the Smuttynesse is beaten away, and sticketh not to the Grain, onely a little blacknesse appeareth about the eye, but if it be thrashed on a moist floor, the blacknesse sticketh to the grain, which there∣fore appeareth dark, and is sold at a lower rate to the Bakers. Mildew is without question an unctuous dew, which descen∣deth from above about Midsommer; it aboundeth in dry years, as Smuttynesse in moist. I cannot think that there is or∣dinarily any Malignity in this dew, but it produceth its effect by manifest causes, viz. from an oily viscuous quality which stoppeth the pores of the husk wherein the Wheat lieth, and depriveth it from the Ayre, and consequently from nourish∣ment: for the Ayre is the life of all things. I have heard, and do believe, that if you streak any eare of Wheat with oyl,
it wil produce the same effect. I am sorry that I never tryed, that I might better understand the nature of this sad calamity which often undoeth the Industrious Husbandman; and cau∣seth great scarcity in this Isle. It is to be observed further, that Wheat onely suffereth considerable damage by Mildew; because it lyeth in a chaffy husk, which other Grains do not. The Grounds most subject to Mildew are these. 1 Those that are inclosed vvith trees and high hedges. And truly this is the onely great Inconveniency I find by enclo∣sures. 2 Low Valleys. I have seen very oft in the same field, the banks fine, bright Corn; and all the lower parts, though greater in straw; yet little vvorth by reason of the Mildew. 3 Dung made of straw, I have observed to dispose much to Mildew, and Sheeps-dung to be a kind of Antidote against it: as also Pigeons-dung; because, as I conceive, these, 2 last sorts a∣bound much in Niter, vvhich produceth a firme, hard, bright Corne, not easily to be putrefied; but the other being more oily and Sulphureous causeth a dark Spungy Corn, soon corru∣ptible. And 2 because straw is a part in the same kind corrupt∣ed, vvhich is alvvays in some measure hurtfull to the same species, both in Animals and all Vegetables, and therefore rotten sticks or the earth proceeding from them, is found hurt∣full to the roots of trees; and trees vvill hardly grovv, vvhere Roots of other trees have formerly been corrupted. The Remedies for this Accident, briefly are these. (Not to speak of Bees, vvho questionlesse make most of their Honey, from these Honeys or Mildews: for they gather very little, in comparison of that vvhich falleth.) 1 The best way is to cut dovvn the trees about your ground, and your hedges lovv, that the vvind may ventilate your Corn. 2 To sovve early; that your Corn may be full Kerned,Sir Cheney Culp. be∣fore these Mildews fall. I am informed, that an Ingenious Knight in Kent, did for curiosity sovve Wheat in all moneths of the year, and that the Corn sovvn in July, did produce such an increase, that it is almost incredible; and truly I think it a
great fault in many places that they sow late, for many rea∣sons: I am sure in France, they usually sowe before Michael∣mas. 3 Some use (and with good profit) to draw a line over their Corn, and to strike off the Mildew, before it be inspissa∣ted by the Sun; This ought especially to be done before sun-rising: two men in an hour will easily run over an Acre; the Mildews usually fall like a thick fog, or a Mysty raine; if you go to your Bees, you will soon perceive it by their extraordi∣nary labour, very early in the morning. 4 The use of a kind of bearded Wheat, is an excellent Re∣medy: for the beard shoveth off the dew, that it doth not so easily insinuate it selfe into the eare, and likewise causeth the eare to shake by the least wind. There is a kind of Wheat in Buckingham-shire called Red-straw-Wheat, which is much com∣mended: it's a strong-stalked Wheat, and doth not soon lodge, and therefore excellent for Rank land where Corne is apt to lodge, and consequently to Mildew; but I question whether it hath any property against Mildew. This I am ve∣ry confident of, that if this Wheat, or any other, were with∣out the Chaffy huskes exposed bare to the Air; as Barly and Rie are, Wheat would not be afflicted with Mildew. Perhaps such Grain may be found by diligent enquiry. I have casually picked out of a Wheat-field some stalkes, which had 2 ears on them: and though Barly usually hath been 2 ranges; yet I have seen some sorts wit 4, 6, and there are many great varieties in graines not yet discovered. Tru∣ly, if any one knoweth better wayes then these, how to cure this Malady of Mildew, he is much to blame, if he do not publish it for the good of his Countreymen. 5 Deficien∣cy concern∣ing the plan¦ting of Ap∣ples, Pears, Cherries & Plums.I will not here set down the divers manners of Graftings and Inoculations, which neverthelesse is an art absolutely ne∣cessary in Planting; for every book of Husbandry doth shew it, and every Gardiner can teach it those who are desirous to learn it; Neither will I set down all the sorts of Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plums, &c. for it would be too tedious a discourse; and Mr. Parkinson hath already very excellently done it, in
his Book called Paradisus Terrestris, where at leasure you may read it. I will onely point briefly at the Deficiencies, which I finde in this part of Husbandry, and the best wayes to Remedy them. 1 I say, that it is a great Deficiency in England, that we have not more Orchards planted. It's true, that in Kent and about Lon∣don, and also in Glocestershire, Hereford, and Worcester, there are many gallant Orchards, but in other Countrys, they are very rare and thinne▪ but if there were as many more, even in any Countrey, they would be very profitable. I know in Kent, that some advance their ground even from 5 s per Acre to 5 pound by this means, and if I should relate, what I have heard by divers concerning the profit of a Cherry-Orchard, about Sittenburne in Kent, you would hardly believe me; yet I have heard it by so many, that I believe it to be true: Name∣ly; that an Orchard of 30 Acres of Cherries, produced in one year above a 1000 pound, but now the trees are almost all dead; it was one of the first Orchards planted in Kent. Mr. Cambden reporteth, that the Earl of Leicester's Gardiner in Queen Elizabeths time, first began to plant Flemish Cher∣ries in those parts; which in his time did spread into 16 o∣ther Parishes, and vvere at that time sold at greater rates then novv; yet I knovv that 10 or 15 pound an Acre hath been given for Cherries, more for Pears, and Apples. 2 There is a great Deficiency in the ordering of Orchards, in that they are not vvell pruned, but full of Mosse, Misletoe, and Suckers, and oftentimes the ground is packed too thick of trees; for they should stand at least 20 foot asunder; nei∣ther vvill ill husbands bestovv dunging, digging, or any other cost on Orchards, vvhich if they did, might pay half their rents in some places. One told me for a secret, a Compositi∣on for to make Trees bear much and excellent fruit, vvhich vvas this: First, in an old tree, to split his root; then to ap∣ply a Compost made of Pigeons-dung, lees of vvine, or stale U∣rine, and a little Brimstone, (to destroy the vvormes,) it hath some probability of truth: for by experience I knovv that a bushell of Pigeons-dung hath caused a tree to grovv and bear,
vvhich for divers years before stood at a stand; but concer∣ning the splitting the roots, I know not what to say. Some old Authours affirm this ought to be done; because that the roots may as well be hide-bound, as other parts of the tree, and not able to attract his nourishment, and when the Root is split, it will speedily send forth divers small fibrous roots; which are the principall Attractors. It were good that some vvould give us an account exact of this Experiment, But some wil object against Orchards, that they spoil much ground, and therefore ought to be planted onely in hedges. To this I answer. 1 That Plumtrees and Damsins may very well be planted in hedges, being ordinarily thorny plants; this is used very much in Surrey and Kent, where the Plums usually pay no small part of their Rent; yet I never saw in these Southern parts of England, any Apples or Pears thrive in an Hedge, un∣lesse a Crab or a Wilden, or some Sweeting of little worth. How they thrive in Hereford-shire and those places, I knovv not. 2 The Inconveniencies of Orchards planted at 20 or 30 foot distance, is not worth speaking of: for this is the usuall course in Kent, when they plant any ground, they exactly place them in rank and file, and then plough their lands many years, and sowe them with Corn, till the Orchard beginneth to bear fruit; then they lay them down for pasture, which pasture is not considerably soure; but hath this advantage a∣bove other Pastures. 1 That it is sooner grown by 14 dayes in the spring than the Medows, and therefore very serviceable. 2 In Parching Summers here is plenty, when other places have scarcity. 3 They are great shelters for Cattle, especially sheep, who will in those places, in great snowes scrape up meat, which in other places they cannot do: and if the pasture were soure, yet the losse is not great; for it will be a convenient place for the Hogs to run in, who must have a place for that purpose, where there are no Commons.
4 I say, that the Benefits are so many by Orchards, that you ought like an ungrateful man to thrust them up to the hedge: for they afford curious walks for pleasure, food for Cattle, both in the Spring early, and also in the parching Summer, and nipping snowy Winter: They afford fuel for the fire, and also shades from the heat, physick for the sick, refreshment for the sound, plenty of food for man, and that not of the worst, and drink also even of the best, and all this without much labour, care or cost, who therefore can justly open his mouth against them? 3 Deficiency is, that we do not improve many excellent Fruits, which grow amongst us very well, and that we have as yet many fruits from beyond Seas, which will grow very well with us. I passe by the generall and great Ignorance, that is amongst us, of the variety of Apples, of which there are many sorts which have some good and peculiar uses; most men contenting themselves with the knowledg of half a score of the best, thinking the vertues of all the rest are compre∣hended in them: as also of the variety of Pears, which are incredibly many. A Friend of mine near Gravesend, hath lately collected about 200 species. I know another in Essex, (Mr. Ward) who hath nigh the same number. I hear of ano∣ther in Worcester-shire, not inferiour to these. In Northamton-shire. I know one, who hath likewise collected very many. So that I dare boldly say, there are no lesse in this Island then 500 species; some commended for their early ripenesse; some for excellent tastes; some for beauty; others for greatnesse; some for great bearers; others for good Bakers; some for long lasters, others for to make Perry, &c. But to our purpose: I say many rare fruits are neglected; to Instance. 1 In the Small-nut or Filbird, which is not much inferiour to the best and sweetest Almonds. 2 The great Damsin or Pruin-plum, which groweth well and beareth full in England. 3 Almonds, which groweth well and beareth good fruit, as I have seen divers bushels on one tree in my Brothers Or∣chard.
4 Walnuts, which is not a fruit to be despised. 5 Vines and Mulberries, but of these presently in another place. I might likewise adde Currants, Raspeses, of which ex∣cellent drinks may be made. 6 Quinces, of the which I cannot but tel you that a Gentle∣man at Prichenel in Essex, who had a tree from beyond Sea, hath the best in England, and hath made above 30 pound of a small piece of ground planted with them, as I have heard from his own wifes mouth. And therefore it is by reason of our ill Husbandry, that we have Quinces from Flaunders, Small-nuts from Spain, Pruins from France, and also Walnuts and Almonds from Italy, and Chestnuts (which I had almost forgot) from Portugall. And now I cannot but digresse a lit∣tle, to tell you a strange and true story, with my opinion of it. In divers places of Kent, as at and about Gravesend, in the Countrey and elsewhere, very many of the prime Timbers of their old barnes and houses are of Chestnut-wood, and yet there is scarce a Chestnut-tree within 20 miles of that place, and the people altogether ignorant of such trees. This shew∣eth that in former times those places did abound with such timber; for people were not so foolish surely in former times to runne up and down the world, to procure such huge mas∣sey timbers for barnes and such buildings when as there was plenty of Oakes and Elmes, at their doors: And further, it sheweth, that these Trees will grow again with us to a great bignesse. This putteth into my mind the story of the moore-logs, which are found in divers places of the North of England in moores many foot deep; which logs are long and black, and appear to be a kinde of Firre or Pine; and yet in those places, people are altogether ignorant of these Trees, the Countrey not producing any of these species. The first story of Kent, which I know to be true, causeth me to wonder the lesse at the latter: for I see that a species of wood, may be de∣stroyed, even totally in a place. And 2 I know, that in Virginia and New-England, that Pines, and Firres and Cedars do grow wonderfully thick in such Moors or Swamps, and being light wood, and easily wrought,
they are continually used, while they last, for buildings. Fur∣ther, I suppose these Moors are Commons, to the which the poor have used to resort for firing, & how soon great woods will be consumed by them, every one making what havock he pleaseth, all men know. As concerning their being so deep in the ground, the blacknesse; I suppose that when wood was abundant in those places, every one did cut what they pleas'd, and left what was not for their turnes, which being in moist places, was soon glutted with moisture, and made ponderous; by which means it soon buried it self, as ships do, on quicksand, or perhaps the turf (which hath a peculiar facul∣ty vegetative, for where it is exhausted, it soon groweth again) in time hath grown over them; the people permitting it, be∣cause that wood, once sobb'd in wet, is of little use, as we see by Piles on the marshes-side, scarce any man vouchsafing to carry them home. The blacknesse of this wood proceedeth, as I suppose, from the sooty fume, or evaporation of the black turffe, (which endeavoureth, as all earths do, to reduce all things into its own nature; which though it be not able ful∣ly to accomplish; yet it introduced divers dispositions, and qualities, as blacknesse in the wood. Some suppose, that these moore-logs have laine there ever since the flood, with whom I will not contend; seeing that any wood, if it be kept from the Aire continually moist or dry, will endure even thousands of years without putrefaction. 6 Deficiency,The 6 defi∣ciency con∣cerning not improving our Fruits. is the Not-improving of our Fruits for the best ends and purposes. Normandy, which produceth but lit∣tle wine, maketh abundance of Cider, Perry, which they esti∣mate equally to wine, if it be made of good fruit. The ordi∣nary Perry is made of Choaky Pears, very juicy, which grow along by the high-way-sides, which are not to be eaten raw. In Biscay in Spain, where wine is scarce, they make Cider of a certain sweet Apple, which hath a little bitternesse in it, and is like to our snouting, and the Cider is very good. And truly here in England, if we would make Cider and Perry of the best sorts of Fruits, which is rarely done, (for we think any fruit good enough for that purpose) we might make drinks,
no wayes inferiour to the French wines, which are usually spoi∣led before they come over the seas to you, their spirits soon evaporating. There are two wayes of making Cider and Per∣ry: one, by bruising and beating them, and then presently to put them into a vessel to ferment or work (as it is usually called) of themselves: The other way is to boil the juice with some good spices, by which the rawnesse is taken away, and then to ferment it with some yest, if it work not of it self, this is the best way: and I have tasted Cider thus made of an excellent delicate taste. Neither let any complaine of the vvindinesse; for it is onely vvant of use: When I had for 2 or 3 years continually drunk wine beyond Sea, the strongest beer for 2 or 3 vveeks vvas as vvindy to me, as Cider vvill be to any; and aftervvards vvhen I vvent to Paris, the wine of that place vvas as troublesome as English beer for a little time: hovv much vvine might be saved, and also malt if English-men did take these good courses, vvhich other Nations do, and consequently how much advantage vvould this Island reap thereby? If I were an house-keeper in the Country, I would make excellent Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Metheglin, Wine, of our own grapes, and if my Friends vvould not drink these, they should drink water, or go away a thirst: I vvould scorn to honour France so much as men do usually; and the Spani∣ard and Italian should not laugh at us, and say that vve can as vvell be vvithout bread, as their wines, Currants, &c. Thus may many other excellent drinks be made out of our Fruits: not to speak of those which are made of our Grain, as Barly, Wheat, &c. yet I must tell you, that I knovv an Ingenious man, vvho can vvithout malting Barly, make a drink not inferiour to wine, and a greater quantity of Aqua-vitae out of them, and vvith lesse cost, then by the ordinary vvay, by a peculiar fermentation of his ovvn; vvhich time vvill discover. There is another Ingenious man, vvho out of Damsins and other fat and svveet plums, can make a drink not inferiour to the best wines, and abundance of Aqua-vitae. Many Ladies knovv hovv to make Cherry, Raspes-vvines; and Sir Hugh Plattes in his Closet for Ladies, discloseth many secrets of this kind;
as also for Conserves, Marmalades, which are things both de∣lightfull and profitable. I have a kinsman, who can even out of black-berries, make a very pleasant drinke, which curiosity he is unwilling to publish. Glauber an excellent Chymist hath divers secrets of this kind, even to the advancing of Hawes, Hips, Canker-berries, Slowes, to excellent Aqua-vitae's, drinks, vinegers, which he himself first invented. In Russia in the spring-time, it's an usuall custome to pierce the barke of the Birch-trees, which at that time will weep much liquor,Helmont. and yet like children be little the worse; this the poor ordinari∣ly drink for necessity, it's a pleasant healthfull drink; and al∣so the rich men, because it's an excellent preservative against the stone. The meanes to advance this profitable and pleasant work are these. 1 To advance Nurceries of all sorts of Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, which Gentlemen may do for a smal matter, and then plant out these trees, when they are grown great enough. The best and cheapest wayes to raise all Nurcery wares, is done thus. Plums may be raised either of stones, which when you have eaten the plums, may be presently pricked into the ground, or by Slips, which you wil finde about the old trees. Apples may be raised for Kernels (Crab-Kernels are the best) vvhich ought to be preserved in dry sand, til the spring, least they grovv mouldy: or Crab-stalke may be fetched out of the vvoods, and grafted. Some Trees as Sweetings, Codlings, Quinces, vvil grovv very vvel of slips. Cherries are very vvel raised by stones, (the Black-Cherries are the best, vvhich so soon as you have eaten them, are to be hovven into Beds made very fine, the ranges a foot distant; bevvare least you let them heate, and take heed of the mouse. I have seen Cher∣ry-stones and Apple-kernels grovv 2 foot and a half in one year; and consequently in fevv years they vvould be fit to be transplanted. The Art of Grafting, Inoculating a Gentle∣man vvil learn in tvvo hours. 2 Eor the advancing of Ingenuities in this kind, as that ma∣king of Vinous-Drinks out of Apples, Plums, &c. I counsel
all Ingenious Gentlemen to try divers experiments in these kinds; with these Cautions. 1 That he attempt not great quantities at first, which per∣chance will be chargeable and troublesome; for by a gal∣lon he may have as much certainly, as by a hogshead. 2 Not to be discouraged, if they suceeed not wel at first dash: for certainly there are many Ingenuities in these fruits which time wil discover. 3 Proceed by fermentation: for every liquour which will ferment, hath a vinous spirit in it, and without fermentation even the best fruits wil have none. Lastly, fermentation is done either in liquido, or humido; and herein consists some Mystery. I have forgot to speake of Apri∣cocks, Peaches, Melicotores, which are fine pleasant fruits, yet very dangerous; and therefore called by the Italians, Mazzo-francese, that is, Kill-Frenchman; and wish Ladies, and others to take heed of surfeiting by these and some other dangerous plums. The 7 defi∣ciency con∣cerning Vines.I cannot without much tediousnesse, relate the diverse sorts of Vines, which are even Infinite; Rome having in it usually, 40 or 50 sorts of Vines; and all very good: Other places of Italy Spain and France, have also great varieties; I therefore passe them by, as also the manner of managing them, because it is described in the Countrey-Farme, and also by Bonovil a Frenchman, who at the command of King James, wrote a short treatise of Vines and Silkworms, for the instruction of the plantations of Virginia. I shall onely according to my me∣thod shew you the Deficiencies amongst us in this particular plant, and the best Remedies for it. And first, although I think that the wine is the great bles∣sing of God, which Hot Countreys especially enjoy, as tempe∣rate Countreys do Milk, Butter, Cheese in abundance, and the coldest and Barrennest Fowl, and Fish in an incredible number; God of his goodnesse distributing some peculiar blessings to every Countrey; Notwithstanding I dare say, it's probable, that Vineyards have formerly flourished in En∣gland, and that we are to blame, that so little is attempted
to revive them again. There are many places in Kent called by the names of Vineyards, and the grounds of such a Nature, that it seemeth probable, they have been such. I hear fur∣ther by divers people of credit, that by records it appeareth, that the tithes of wine in Glocestershire was in divers Parishes considerably great; but at length Gascony coming into the hands of the English, from whence cometh the most of the strong French Wine, call'd high-Countrey wine, and customes being small, wine was imported into England from thence, better and cheaper then we could make it, and it was thought convenient to discourage Vineyards here, that the greater trade might be driven with Gascoine, and many ships might finde imployment thereby. Some fond Astrologers have conceited, that the earth be∣ing grown older, and therefore colder hath caused the sun to descend many degrees lower to warm and cherrish it, and one argument which they bring for this opinion is, that Vines and Silkworms are found in those Countreys, wherein former times they were unknown: But if these fond men had con∣sidered the good Husbandry in these times, with the blessing of God on it, they had not run into such foolish imaginati∣ons. This is true indeed, that the Roman souldiers, who had Alsatia given them to live in, which is one of the best and most Southern places of Germany, mutined, because they thought it so cold, that Vines should not grow there, and that therefore they should be deprived of that delectable liquor; whereas we find at this present day Vines flourishing many hundred miles more towards the North, both in France, Lo∣raine and Germany; and that they are crept down even to the latitude of England, for the Rhenish-wines grew within a de∣gree of the West-Southern places of this Isle, and Paris is not two degrees South of us, yet Vines grow threescore miles on this side Paris, as Beaumont; yea the Vines of these places are the most delicate; for what wine is preferred before the neat Rhenish for Ladies, and at table; and truly in my opinion, though I have travelled twice through France; yet no wine pleased me like Vin D'ache and of Paris especially about
Rueill, which is a very fine brisk wine, and not fuming up to the head, and Inebriating as other wines: I say therefore that it is very probable, that if Vines have stept out of Italy into Alsatia, from them to these places, which are even as farre North as England, and yet the wines there are the most deli∣cate, that they are not limited and bounded there. For a 100 miles more or lesse causeth little alteration in heat or cold, and some advantages which we have wil supply that defect. But not to insist too long on probabilities, I say, that here in England some Ingenious Gentlemen usually make wine very good, long lasting, without extraordinary labour and costs. To instance in one, who in great Chart, in the Wilde of Kent, a place very moist and cold,Sir Peter Ricard. yearly maketh 6 or 8 hogs-heads, which is very much commended by divers who have tasted it, and he hath kept some of it two years, as he himself told me, and it hath been very good; Others likewise in Kent do the same: and lately in Surrey a Gentle-woman told me, that they having many grapes, which they could not well tell how to dispose of, she, to play the good House-wife, stampt them to make verjuice; but two moneths after drawing it forth, they found it very fine brisk wine, cleer like Rock-water, and in many other places such experiments have been made. I therefore desire Ingenious men to endeavour the raising of so necessary and pleasant a commodity; especially when French Wine is so dear here, and I suppose is likely to be dea∣rer; I question not, but they shall finde good profit and pleasure in so doing, and that the State will give all encou∣ragements to them: and if the French Wine pay excize and customes, and the Wines here be toll-free, they will be able to affoord them far cheaper, than the French can theirs, and supply the whole Isle, if they proceed according to these Rules. 1 To choose the best sorts of grapes, which are most pro∣per for this Isle, and though there are many sorts of grapes a∣mongst Gardiners, yet I commend four sorts especially to them; and I desire that they be very carefull in this particular: for it is the foundation of the work; if you fail in this, you
fail in all; for I know that Burdeaux-Vines bear very great grapes, make verjuice onely at Paris, and that the tender Or∣leans-Vine doth not thrive there. The first sort is the Parsely Vine or Canada-grape; because it first came from those parts, vvhere if grovves naturally; and though the Countrey be intolerably cold; yet even in the vvoods vvithout manuring, it so farre ripeneth his fruits, that the Jesuits make wine of it for their masse; and Racineè (vvhich is the Juice of the grape nevvly exprest, and boiled to a Syrupe, and is very svveet and pleasant) for their Lent-provision, as you may read in their Relations: and this Vine seemeth to be made for these Northern Countreys, because it hath it's leaves very small and juicy, as if it vvere on pur∣pose to let in the sun, and it ripeneth sooner than other grapes, as I have observed in Oxford-Graden, 2 Sort of Vine is the Rhenish-grape; for it grovveth in a temperate Countrey, not much hotter in summer then En∣gland; and the wine is excellent as all knovv. 3 Sort is the Paris-grape; vvhich is much like the temper of England, onely a little hotter in summer: this grape bea∣reth a small bunch close set together, very hardy to endure frosts and other inconveniencies, and is soon ripe; so that the vintage of Paris, is sooner ended then that of Orleans or Bur∣deaux; and though it be not so delicate to the taste, as some other grapes; yet it maketh an excellent brisk wine. 4 Sort is the small Muskadell; vvhich is a very fine plea∣sant grape, both to eat and to make wine. In Italy it usually grovveth against their houses vvalls, and of this they make a small pleasant wine, a moneth or tvvo before the ordinary Vintage. It is a tender plant in respect of the other Vines in the fields: these Vines I knovv are the most convenient for this Isle; because they bear small bunches, and grapes soon ripen, and are hardy to endure frosts and ill vvea∣ther. 2 To choose convenient places. For this end, I counsell them, First, to plant Vines on the South-side of their dwelling houses, Barnes, Stables, and Out-houses. The Gentleman of
Kent, whom I mentioned before, useth this course: and to keep the Vines from hurting his tiles, and that the winde may not wrong his Vines, he hath a frame made of poles, or any kinde of wood, about a foot from the tiles, to the which he tyeth the Vines; by this meanes his Vines having the reflecti∣on of the yard, sides of the houses, and tiles do ripen very well, and bear much; so that one old Vine, hath produced nigh a hogs-head of wine in one year: and I wish all to take this course; which is neither chargeable, nor troublesome, but very pleasant; and if all in this Island would do thus, it's incredible, what abundance of wine might be made, even by this petty way. 2 If that any Gentleman will be at the charge of ma∣king a Vineyard, let him choose a fine sandy warm hill, open to the South-east, rather than to the South-west: for though the South-west seemeth to be hotter; yet the South-East ripeneth better, as I have seen in Oxford Garden; because the South-east is sooner warm'd by the sun in the morning; and the South-west winds, are the winds which blow most frequently, and bring raine, which refrigerate the plants; and such a place is very requisite; for in other places Vines do not thrive, even in France: for if you travel betwixt Paris and Orleans, which is above 30 leagues, yet you shall scarcely see a Vineyard, because it is a plain Champian-Coun∣trey. So likewise betwixt Fontarabia to Burdeaux, in the Sou∣thern parts of France, for an 100 miles together; because the land is generally a barren sandy plaine, where onely Heath abounds and Pine-trees, out of which they make Tur∣pentine & Rozen, by wounding of them; and Tarre & Pitch, by the burning of them: and if any finde such a fine warm hill, and do dung and fence it well, he hath a greater advantage of most of the Vineyards of France by this conveniency, than they have of our Isle, by being a hundred miles more South; for most of their Vineyards are in large fields not enclosed, on land that is stony, and but indifferently vvarme. But some wil say, that the wet weather destroyes us. It's true, that the wet will destroy all things; Sheep, Corn, &c. yet no man will say, that therefore England will not produce and nourish these Crea∣tures;
and if extraordinary wet years come, they spoil even the Vines in France: but take ordinary years and our moi∣sture is not so great, (though some abuse us, and call England matula Coeli but the Vines, especially those I have mentioned before, will come to such perfection as to make good wine: and if extraordinary raines fall; yet we may help the imma∣turity by Ingenuity, as I shall tell you anon: or at worst make vineger or verjuice, which will pay costs. Further these advantages we have of France. 1 This Isle is not subject to nipping frosts in May, as France is; because we are in an Isle, where the Air is more grosse than in the Continent; and therefore not so piercing and sharpe, as it plainly appeareth by our winters, which are not so sharp as in Padua in Italy: neither are we subject to such stormes of hail in summer, which are very frequent in hot Countreys, and for many miles together do spoil their Vines, so that they cannot make wine of the grapes: for those grapes vvhich are touched by the hail, have a Sulphureous and a very unpleasant taste, and onely fit to make Aqua-vitae. Further, sometimes in France, caske for their wines is so dear, that a tun of wine may be had for a tun of caske: and the custome and excize which is laid on wines here, is as much again as the poor Vigneron in France expects for his wine. Not to speak of the ill managing of their Vines, especially about Paris, vvhere poor men usually hire an Acre or 2 of Vines, vvhich they ma∣nage at their spare houres, and most commonly pack in so many plants on their ground, for to have the greater increase, that the ground and Vines are so shaded by one another, that I have wondered, that the Sun could dart in his beames to mature them; and therefore I cannot but affirm again, that we may make abundance of wine here with profit, the char∣ges of an Acre of Vineyard not being so great as of Hops: an hundred sets well rooted, at Paris cost usually but 4 or 6 sous or pence, where I have bought many: 000 will plant an Acre very well, 50 s a year is the ordinary rate for the three diggings with their crooked Instrument called ventage, and the increase usually four tuns for an Acre, which will be pro∣fit
enough: and though I referre all to Bonovil and others, who have written of the managing of Vines; yet I counsell to get a Vigneron from France, where there are plenty, and at cheaper rates than ordinary servants here, and who will be serviceable also for Gardening. 2 I will briefly tell what I have seen. In Italy through all Lombardy, which is for the most part plain and Champian, their Ʋines grow in their hedges on Walnut-trees, for the most part: in which fields, they speak of three harvests year∣ly, viz. 1 Winter-Corn, which is reaped in June, &c. 2 Ʋines and Walnuts, which are gathered in Septem∣ber. 3 Their summer-graines, as Millet, Panicle, Chiches, Ʋetches, &c. Buck-wheat, Frumentone, or that which we call Ʋirginia-Wheat, Turneps, which they sowe in July when their Winter-corne is cut and reaped, they reape in October. In France, their Ʋines grow the manner of wayes; in Provence they cut the Ʋine about two foot high, and make it strong and stubbed, like as we do our Osiers,; which stock beareth up the bran∣ches without a prop. 2 About Orleans, and where they are more curious, they make frames for them to run along. 3 About Paris they tye them to short poles, as we do hops. In France they usually make trenches, or small ditches, about three or four foot from one another, and therein plant their Vines, about one and a half deep, which is a good way, and very much to be commended; but if we here in England, plant Vines as we do Hops, it will do very well, but let them not be packt together too thick, as they do in France in ma∣ny places, least they too much shade the ground, and one a∣nother. In Italy when they tread their grapes with their feet in a cart, they poure the juice into a great vessel or Fat, and put to it all their husks and stones which they call graspe, and let them ferment, or (as vve say) worke together 12 or 14 dayes, and usually they put one third of water to it, this ma∣keth a wine lesse furious, Garbo or rough, and therefore a good
stomack-wine; but it spoileth the colour, and taketh avvay the pleasant brisk taste. In France so soon as they have pres∣sed out their liquor vvith their feet, they put it in hogsheads, and after in their presse squeese out vvhat they can, out of the graspe; which serveth to fill up their hogsheads while they worke, which is usually three or four dayes, and then stop them close: this is also the way used in Germany, and is the best, for it maketh a fine gentile wine with a curious co∣lour. In Germany, when their grapes are green, they make fire in their sellars in Stoves, by the which means, their wines worke extraordinarily and do digest themselves the better: This course we must also take here in England some years; for it helpeth the rawnesse of all liquours very much. There is an Ingenious Dutchman, who hath a secret, which as yet he wil not reveal, how to help maturation by a compost applyed to the roots: The compost which I have spoken of before, made of brimstone: Pigeons-dung, is very excellent for that purpose,Gluber. as also lees of wine, bloud, lime used with moderation. He also knovveth how to make soure grapes produce good wine; I sup∣pose his vvay to be this, all juice of grapes nevvly expressed is svveet, and vvhich may by it selfe alone be made into a sweet syrupe, vvhich the French call Racineè: further in the Evapo∣ration of liquors, vvhich have not fermented or vvrought, the watery part goeth away first. 3 Fermentation giveth a vinous taste, and maketh a liquor full of spirits. You may then easily guesse at the way, and perhaps he may adde also some sugar and spices, as the Vintners do when they make Hippocras. I know a Gentleman, who hath made excellent wine of raisins well boil'd in water, and afterward fermented by it selfe, or with barme, its called usually Medea. I likewise know, that all sweet and fatty Juices will make fine vinous Liquors, as Damsins, if they be wrought or fer∣mented ingeniously: but whosoever goeth about such ex∣periments, let him not think that any thing is good enough for these purposes; but let him use the best he can get: for of naughty corrupt things, who can expect that which is ex∣cellent and delicate.
The 8 Defi∣ciency con∣cerning Hemp and Flax.The Deficiency of us in this kind is so obvious, that all the world takes notice of it, and it is (next the neglect of fishing) the greatest shame to this Narion; for all know that we have as good land for these seeds, as any can be found in Europe; and that the sowing of them requireth neither more labour, cost or skill than other seeds. And further that the materials made from these are extreamly necessary: for how miserable should wee be without Linnen, Canvases, Cordage, Nets? how can we put our Ships to Sea, which are the bulwarks of this Isle? And yet we are necessitated to have these Commo∣dities from those who would destroy (I will not say the Na∣tion, but I may boldly say) our Shipping, and Trade. I hope that this wil more seriously be considered by those at the Helme of our State. I will freely and plainly relate, how this Deficiency may easily be Remedied according to my judg∣ment. 1 To compel by a law, that all Farmers, who plough and sowe 50 or 100 Acres of land, should sowe halfe an Acre, or an Acre of Hempe or Flax, or to pay 5 s or 10 s to the poor of the Parish where they live, or some law to this purpose; for there is no man but hath land fit for one of these, Hempe desiring a stiffe land, Flax that which is light. For there is so much irrationality in some professions that they must be forced even like bruts to understand their own good. In King Edward the 6 days somthing was enacted to this purpose, as I am informed. In Henry the eighth days, there was a law enacted that every man should sow his lands, and that no man should enclose his lands, least he should turne it to Pasture; for we have had great dearth in England through the neglect of Tillage; which lawes even as yet stand in force; yet there is, nor needeth there be any force to com∣pel men to til and sowe their lands; for they have at length found the sweetnesse, and willingly go about it for their own profits sake, and now we suppose (and not vvithout cause) that Enclosing is an Improvement: and so concerning Hempe and Flax, I say, if they vvere once accustomed to sovve them, they vvould never leave it, as I see Farmers do in East-Kent;
scarce a man but he will have a considerable plot of ground for Hempe, and about London farre greater quantities of Flax is sown then formerly. 2 It were convenient, that every Parish through the Nation should have a stock to set their poor to work, that the young children and women might not run up and down idle, and beg∣ging or stealing (as they do in the Countrey) of Apples, Pease, Wood, Hedges, and so by little and little, are trained up for the Gallowes. 3 That a severe law should be enacted against those who run up and down and will not worke: for if all know, that they may have work at home, and earne more within doores ho∣nestly, then by running rogueing up and down, why should they not compell them to it? and though some may think the Parishes will lose much by this way; because that the stock wrought will not be put off, but with losse, as perhaps 10 l will be brought to 8 l yet let them consider how much they shall save at their doors, how many inconveniencies they are freed from; their hedges in the Countrey shall not be pulled, their fruits stolne, nor their Corne purloined; and further, that the poor will be trained up to worke, and therefore fit for any ser∣vice: yea and in their youth, learn a calling by the which they may get an honest livelyhood; and I dare say, their Assesse∣ments for the poor, would not be so frequent, nor the poor so numerous: and the benefit which redounds to the Nation, would be very great. 4 The charitable deeds of our forefathers, ought to be enquired after, that they be not misplaced, as usually they are, but be really bestowed for the good of the poor, that are laborious (as in London is begun) and if there be any that will not work, take Saint Pauls rule, who best knew what was best for them. I dare not advise to take in part of Commons, Fens, &c. and to improve them for this use, least I should too much pro∣voke the rude mercilesse multitude. But to return to my dis∣course. I say, that sowing Hempe and Flax, will be very be∣neficiall. 1 To the Owners of land: for men usually give in divers
places 3 l per Acre, to sowe Hempe and Flax (as I have seen at Maidstone in Kent, which is the onely place, I knovv in England where thread is made: and though nigh a thousand hands are imployed about it; yet they make not enough for this Nation,) and yet get good profit. How advantageous will this be to those who have drained the Fens, where questionlesse Hempe will flourish, and exsiccate the ground. (for Hempe desireth stiffe moist land, as Flax light and dry,) and likewise to those in the North of England, where land is very cheape? I hope in a little time Ireland will furnish us with these commodities, if we be idle; for there land is very cheap, and those seeds need no inclosure; for cattle will not touch them, neither doth it fear the plunderer, either in the field or barn. 2 It's profitable to the sower. I know that they usually va∣lue an Acre at 10 or 12 l which costeth them usually but half the money. Whether there be Flax, that will yield 30 or 40 l per Acre as some report, I know not. 3 To the place where it is sown; because it sets many poor to work. I wish it were encouraged more in the North than it is; because there is many poor, who could willingly take pains, and though spinning of linnen be but a poor work; yet it is light, and may be called Womens recreation, (and in France and Spain, the best Citizens wives think it no disgrace to go about spinning with their Rocks) and though in some part the poor think it nothing to earn 4 or 6 d er day, and will as soon stand with their hands in their pockets, as worke cheap; yet in the North they account it well to earne 3d or 4d by spinning, which they may do. Lastly, it would be very beneficiall to this Nation, and save many thousand pounds, I may say 100 thousands, which are ex∣ported, either in cash or good Commodities; and we should not be beholding to Holland for fine linnen and Cordage, nor to France for Poldavices, Locrams, Canvases, nets, nor to Flaun∣ders for thread; but might be supplyed abundantly with these necessary commodities even at our own doors. There is no small Deficiency in dunging and manuring lands, both because that all manner of manuring and amending lands,
is not known to every one,9 Deficci∣ency, con∣cerning Duning & Manuring Lands. and also that they do not imploy all they know to the best use. I will therefore set down most of the wayes I have seen here in England and beyond Seas, by which land is improved, and the best wayes to use the same. 1 To begin with Chalke, which is as old a way as Julius Caesars time, as he himself reporteth in his Commentaries. Chalke is of 2 sorts. 1 A hard, strong dry Chalke, with which in Kent they make walls, burn lime, &c. 2 Kind is a small unctuous Chalke: this is the Chalke for land, the other helpeth little; onely it maketh the Plough go easier in stiffe lands: broomy land is accounted the best land for Chalke and Lime, but it helpeth other lands al∣so; especially, if you Chalke your ground, and let it lye a year or two, which is the way used in Kent; that it may be matured and shattered by the sunne and raine, otherwise if it be turned in presently, it is apt to lye in great clods, as I have seene it twenty years after. Chalke also sweet∣neth pasture, but doth not much increase it, and killeth rushes and broom. 2 Lime, which is made of divers sorts of stones, is an ex∣cellent thing for most Lands, and produceth a most pure grain: 160 bushels is usually laid on an Acre, but I suppose that if men did lay but half the dung on the ground, as they usually do, as also lime and Chalk, and dung and lime it oftener, it would be better Husbandry: for much dung causeth much weeds, and causeth Corn to lodge; and too much Chalke doth too much force the land, so that after some good crops, it ly∣eth barren many years. It's good Husbandry likewise to lay down lands before they be too much out of heart; for they will soon recover; otherwise not. 3 Ordinary Dung, which every one knoweth; but let it not be exposed to the Sun too much, nor let it lye in an high place; for the rain wil waste away it's fatnesse. It's observable, that earth the more it is exposed to the Sun, it's the better; as we see that land is much bettered by oft ploughings: for the Sun
and dew engender a nitrous fatnesse, which is the cause of fer∣tility; but dung is exhausted by the Sun, as it appeareth by the folding of Sheep, which profit little, if it be not presently turned in; therefore a Shepherd, if his time would permit, should turne up the ground with an howe for to sowe Tur∣neps, as Gardiners do. I have seen Ordinary Dung on dry lands in dry years to do hurt, and it oft causeth vveeds and trumpery to grovv. 4 Marle. It's of divers kinds: some stony, some soft, some vvhite, some yellovvish, but most commonly blew. It's in most places in England, but not known by all: the best markes to know it, is to expose it to the Aire, and to see if the Sun or Rain cause it to shatter, and if it be unctuous, or rather to take a load or two, and lay it on the midst of your fields, and to try how it mendeth your lands. It's excellent for Corne, and Pasture; especially on dry lands. In Essex the scourings of their ditches they call Marle▪ because it look∣eth blew like it, it helpeth their lands vvel. 5 Snaggreet: vvhich is a kind of earth taken out of the Rivers, ful of small shels. It helpeth the barren lands in di∣vers parts of Surrey. I beleeve it's found in all Rivers; It vvere vvell, if in other parts of England, they did take no∣tice of it. 6 Owse out of marsh ditches, hath been found very good for vvhite Chalky land: as also Sea-mud and Sea-Owse is used in divers parts of Kent and Sussex. 7 Sea-weeds. 8 Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall relateth, that they use a fat Sea-sand, vvhich they carry up many miles in sacks, and by this they have very much improved their barren lands. It vvere vvorth the vvhile to try all manner of Sea-sands: for I suppose, that in other places they have a like fertilizing fat∣nesse. 9 Folding of Sheep, especially after the Flaunders manner, (viz.) under a covert, in vvhich earth is strevved about 6 in∣ches thick, on vvhich they set divers nights: then more earth must be brought and strevved 6 inches thick, and the Sheep
folded on it, and thus they do continually Winter and Summer. I suppose a shepheard, vvith one horse, vvil do it at his spare houres, and indeed sooner then remove his fold; and this fol∣ding is to be continued, especially in Winter, and doth the Sheep good; because they lye vvarme and dry: and truly if I am not mistaken, by this means vve may make our Sheep to enrich all the barren dry lands of England. 10 Ashes of any kind, Seacoale-ashes vvith horsedung the Gardiners of London much commend for divers uses. It's great pitty, that so many thousand loads are throvvn into vvast pla∣ces, and do no good. 11 Soote is also very good, being sprinkled on ground, but it's too dear, if it be of wood; for it's vvorth 16 d or 2 s a bushel. 12 Pigeons or Hens-dung is incomparable: one load is vvorth 10 loads of other dung, and therefore it's usually sovvne on Wheate, that lyeth afarre off, and not easie to be helped: it's extraordinary likevvise on a Hop-gar∣den. 13 Male-dust is exceedingly good in Corn-land: blood for trees; also shavings of hornes. 14 Some commend very much the sweeping of a ship of salt, or drossey salt and brine: it's very probable; because it killeth the vvormes, and all fertility proceedeth from salt. 15 I have seen in France, poore men cut up Heath, and the Turffe of the ground, and lay them on an heape, to make mould for their barren lands. Brakes laid in a moist place, and rotted, are used much for Hop-grounds, and generally all things that vvill rot, if they vvere stones, vvould make dung. 16 In New-England they fish their ground, vvhich is done thus: In the spring about April, there cometh up a fish to the fresh Rivers, called an Alewife; because of it's great belly: and is a kind of shade, full of bones; these are caught in vviers, and sold very cheap to the planters, vvho usually put one or tvvo cut in pieces into the hill vvhere their Corne
is planted, called Virginia-Wheate, for they plant it in hils, 5 graines in an hill, almost as we plant Hops (in May, or June; for it wil not endure frosts) and at that distance; it causeth fertility extraordinary for two years, especially the first: for they have had 50 or 60 bushels on an Acre, and yet plough not their land, and in the same hils do plant the same Corne for many years together, and have good crops: besides abundance of Pompions, and French or Kidney beanes. In the North parts of New England, where the fisher-men live, they usually fish their ground with Cods-heads; which if they were in England would be better imployed. I suppose that when sprats be cheap, men might mend their Hop-grounds with them, and it would quit cost: but the dogs will be apt to scrape them up, as they do in New-England, unlesse one of their legs be tyed up. 17 Ʋrine. In Holland they as carefully preserve the Cowes urine, as the dung to enrich their land: old urine is excellent for the Roots of trees. Columella in his book of Husbandry, saith, that he is an ill husband that doth not make 10 loads of dung for every great beast in his yard, and as much for eve∣ry one in the house, and one load for small beasts as hogs. This is strange husbandry to us: and I believe there are ma∣ny ill husbands by this account. I know a vvoman who liveth 5 miles South of Canterbury, who saveth in a pail, all the droppings of the houses, I meane the urine, and when the pail is full, sprinkleth it on her Meadow, which causeth the grasse at first to look yellovv, but after a little time it grovves vvonderfully, that many of her neighbours vvondered at it, and vvere like to accuse her of vvitch-craft. 18 Woollen raggs, vvhich Hartford-shire-men use much, and Oxford-shire, and many other places: they do very vvell in thinne Chalky land in Kent for tvvo or three years. It's a fault in many places, that they neglect these, as also Linnen raggs, or Ropes-ends, of the vvhich vvhite and brovvn paper is made; for it's strange that vve have not Linnen-raggs enough for pa∣per, as other Nations have; but must have it from Italy, France, and Holland.
19 Denshyring (so called in Kent,Mr. Camb∣den. where I onely have seen it used, though by the vvord it should come from Denbigh-shire,) is the cutting up of all the turffe of a Meadow, vvith an instrument sharpe on both sides, vvhich a man vvith vio∣lence thrusts before him, and then lay the turffe on heapes, and vvhen it is dry they burn it, and spread it on the ground. The charge is usually four Nobles, vvhich the goodnesse of a crop or tvvo repayeth. 20 Mixture of lands. Columella an old vvriter saith, that his Grandfather used to carry sand on clay, and on the con∣trary to bring clay on sandy grounds, and vvith good suc∣cesse, the Lord Bacon thinking much good may be done there∣by; for if Chalke be good for loamy land,Naturall History. vvhy should not loame be good for Chalky banks? 21 I may adde Enclosure as an Improvement of land: not onely because that men, vvhen their grounds are enclosed, may imploy them as they please; but because it giveth vvarmth and consequently fertiliey. There is one in London, vvho promised to mend lands much by vvarmth onely, and vve see that if some fevv stickes lye together, and give a place vvarmth, hovv speedily that grasse vvil grovv. 22 Steeping of Graines. The Ancients used to steep Beanes in salt-water: and in Kent it's usual to steep Barly, when they sow late, that it may grovv the faster; and also to take away the soile: for vvild Oates, Cockle, and all save Drake vvil svvimme; as also much of the light Corne, vvhich to take avvay is very good. If you put Pigeons-dung into the vvater, and let it steep all night, it may be as it vvere halfe a dunging: take heed of steeping Pease too long; for I have seen them sprout in three or four houres. 23 Is the sowing of Course and cheap Graine, and vvhen they are grovvne to plough them in. For this purpose the Auncients did use LUPINES, a plant vvel knovvne to our Gardiners: and in Kent sometimes Tares are sovven, vvhich vvhen the Cattel have eaten a little of the tops, they turn them in, vvith very good Improvement for their ground.
10 Deficci∣ency, con∣cerning the not Im∣provement of our Meadows.I wil not deny, but that we have good Husbands, who dung and Marle their Meadowes, and Pasture-land, and throw down all Mole and Ant-hils, and with the their spud-staffe, cut up all thistles and weeds, and that they likewise straw ashes on their grounds to kil the Mosse; and salt for the wormes, and they do very well, but yet there are many who are negligent in these particulars, for the which they are blame-worthy, but the Deficiencies, of which I intend to speak of, are these following. Cato, one of the wisest of the Ro∣mans, saith, that Pratum est, quasi paratum; alwayes ready, and prepared; and preferreth Meadowes before the Olive-Gardens, (although the Spaniards bequeath Olive-trees to their children, as vve do cottages) or Vines or Corn; because Meadows bring in a certain profit, without labour and paines▪ but the other requireth much cost and paines, and are subject to Frosts, Mildew, Haile, Locusts: to the which for the ho∣nour of Meadowes, I may adde that the stock of Meadows, is of greater value, and the Commodities which arise from them, are divers, and of greater value, than Corne, as Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides, Beef, Wool; and therefore I may con∣clude, that England abounding in Pastures more than other Countreys is therefore richer; and I know (what others think I care not) that in France Acre for Acre is not comparable to it, Fortescue Chancelor of England, saith, that we get more in England by standing still than the French by working: but to speak of the Deficiencies amongst us. 1 We are to blame, that we have neglected the great Clo∣ver-grasse, Saint Foine, Lucerne. 2 That we do not float our lands, as they do in Lumbardy, where they mowe their lands three or four times yearly, which consist of the great Clover-grasse. Here are the excel∣lent Parmisane Cheeses made, and indeed these Pastures farre exceed any other places in Italie, yea in Europe. We here in England have great opportunities by brooks and Rivers in all places to do so, but we are negligent; yet we might hereby double if not treble our profits, kill all rushes, &c. But he that desireth to know the manner how to do this, and that
profit, that wil arise thereby, let him read Mr. Blithes Book of Husbandry, lately printed. 3 That when we lay down land for Meadow or Pasture, we doe not sowe them with the seeds of fine sweet grasse, Trefoiles, and other excellent herbes. Concerning this you may read a large Treatise of the Countrey-Farmer; for if the land be rich, it will put forth weeds and trumpery, and perhaps a kind of soure grasse little worth, if it be poor, ye shal have thistles, May-weed and little or no grasse, for a year or two. I know a Gentleman, who at my entreaty, sowed with his Oates the bottome of his Hay-mowe, and though his land were worne out of heart, and naturally poor; yet he had that year not onely a crop of Oates; but he might if it had pleased him, have mowen his grasse also, but he spared it, which was wel done, til the next year, that it might make a turffe, and grow stronger. By this Husbandry lands might be wel improved, especially if men did consider the diversi∣ty of grasses, which are 90 sorts, and 23 of Trefoile: I know a place in Kent, which is a white Chalky downe which ground is sometimes sowen with Corn a year or two, and then it rest∣eth as long or longer: when it is laid down, it maintaineth many great Sheep and very lusty, so that they are even fit for the Butcher; and yet there doth scarce appear any thing that they can eate, which hath caused divers to wonder, as if they had lived on Chalke-stones: but I more seriously considering the matter, throughly viewed the ground, and perceived that the ground naturally produceth a small Trefoile which it see∣meth is very sweet and pleasant, it's commonly called Trifo∣lium luteum, or Lupilinum, that is, yellow or Hop-Trefoile: and I am perswaded, if that the seed of this Trefoile were preser∣ved, and sowen with dates, when they intend to lay it down, it would very much advance the Pasture of that place; there∣fore I desire all Ingenious men, seriously to consider the na∣ture of the Trefoiles, which are the sweetest of grasses, and to observe on vvhat grounds they naturally grovv: and aso the nature of other grasses, which (as I have said before) are no lesse than 90 sorts, naturally growing in this Isle; some on
watry places, some on dry, some on clay, others on sand, chalk, &c some on fruitful places, others in barren; by the which meanes, I suppose a solid foundation might be laid, for the advancing the Paesture-lands of all sorts, through this Island? for I know some plants, as the Orchis call'd Bee-flower, &c. which wil thrive better on the Chalky barren banks, than in any garden, though the mould be never so rich and deli∣cate, and the Gardiner very diligent in cherishing of it: and why may not the same propriety be in grasses? for we see diverse benty grasses to thrive, especially on barren places, where scarce any thing else wil grow. I must againe and againe desire all men to take notice of the wonderful grasse which groweth near Salisbury, and desire them to try it on their Rich Meadowes, 11 Deficien∣cy concern∣ing waste Lands.It's a common saying, that there are more waste lands in England, in these particulars, than in all Europe besides, con∣sidering the quantity of land. I dare not say this is true; but hope if it be so, that it it will be mended. For of late much hath been done for the advancement of these kinds of land; yet there are as yet great Deficiencies. In the times of Papi∣stry, all in this Island were either Souldiers or Scholars; Scho∣lars by reason of the great honours, privileges, and profits, (the third part of the Kingdome belonging to them) and Soul∣diers, because of the many and great warres with France, Scotland, Ireland, Wales. And in those times Gentlemen thought it an honour to be carelesse, and to have houses, furniture, diet, exercises, apparell, &c. yea all things at home and a∣broad, Souldier-like: Musick, Pictures, Perfumes, Sawces, (unlesse good stomacks) were counted, perhaps unjustly, too effeminate. In Queen Elizabeth's dayes Ingenuities, Curiosi∣ties and Good Husbandry began to take place, and then Salt Marshes began to be fenced from the Seas; and yet many were neglected, even to our dayes, as Hollhaven in Essex, Axtel-holme Isle in York-shire: many 1000 of Acres have lately been gained from the Sea in Lincolne-shire, and as yet more are to be taken in there, and in other places. Rumsey-marsh
in Kent consisting of 45000 Acres and upwards, (as Cambden relateth) is of some antiquity where the land is usu∣ally let for 30 s per Acre, and yet 1 d per week constantly is pay'd, through the whole levil, for the maintenance of the wall, and now and then 2 d whereas ordinary salts are ac∣counted dear at 5 s or 6 s per Acre; so that the improve∣ment is very considerable: the same I may say of Fens, espe∣cially that great Fen of Lincoln-shire, Cambridge, Huntingdon consisisting as I am informed of 380000 Acres, which is now almost recovered; and a friend of mine told me very lately, that he had profered a marke per Acre; for 900 A∣cres together, to sowe Rape on, which formerly was scarcely valued at 12 d per Acre; very great therefore is the improve∣ment af draining of lands, and our negligence very great, that they have been wast so long, and as yet so continue in di∣vers places: for the improving of a Kingdome is better than the conquering of a new one. 2 I see likewise no small faults in this land, by having so many Chases and Forrests, where brambles, brakes; furzes do grow, when as these trumperies might be cut up, and pot-ashes made of them; and the ground imployed profitably for Corne, or Pasture. I know a Forrest by Brill in Bucking∣ham-shire taken in, and the land is usually let being now wel enclosed, for 4 or 5 Nobles per Acre. 3 Sort of waste-land, is dry heathy Commons. I know that poor people wil cry out against me, because I call these waste lands; but it's no matter: I desire Ingenious Gentlemen seri∣ously to consider, whether or no these lands might not be im∣proved very much by the Husbandry of Flaunders, (viz.) by sowing Flax, Turneps, great Clover-Grasse, if that Manure be made by folding Sheep after the Flaunders way, to keep it in heart? 2 Whether the Rottennesse and Scabbinesse of Sheepe, Murrein of Cattel, Diseases of Horses, and in general all diseases of Cattel do not especially proceed from Com∣mons?
3 If the rich men, who are able to keep great stocks, are not great gainers by them? 4 Whether Commons do not rather make poore, by cau∣sing idlenesse, than maintain them; and such poor, who are trained up rather for the Gallowes or beggery, than for the Common-wealths service? 5 How it cometh to passe, that there are fewest poor, where there are fewest Commons, as in Kent, where there is scarce six Commons in the County of a considerable great∣nesse? 6 How many do they see enriched by the Commons; and if their Cattel be not usually swept away by the Rot, or starved in some hard winters? 7 If that poor men might not imploy 2 Acres enclosed to more advantage; than twice as much in a Common? And Lastly, if that all Commons were enclosed, and part gi∣ven to the Inhabitants, and part rented out, for a stock to set all the poor on work in every County; I determine no∣thing in this kind: but leave the determination for wiser heads. 4 Parkes. Although I cannot but reckon Parks amongst lands, which are not improved to the full; but perceive considerable waste by them, by brakes, bushes, brambles, &c. growing in divers places, and therefore wish there were few∣er in this Island; yet I am not so great an enemy to them, as most are: for there are very great Uses of them, as. 1 For the bringing up of young cattel. 2 For the maintaining of Timber, so that if any have occasion to use a good piece of Timber either for a Mil-post, or a Keel of a Ship, or other special uses, whither can they go but to a Parke? 3 The skins of the Deere are very useful, and their flesh excellent Food. Not to speak of the Medicinall Uses, nor of Acorns for hogs, &c. But some wil object, that the plough never goeth there. To the which I answer, It's no matter: for I cannot but say as Fortescue Chancellor to Henry 6 doth,
That God hath given us, such a fruitful land,Preemi∣nence of English Laws. that without labour we have plenty: whereas France must digge and delve for vvhat they have. And I suppose, that I could maintaine two things vvhich are thought great Paradoxes, (viz.) that it were no losse to this Island, if that we should not plough at all, if so be that we could certainly have Corne at a reasonable rate, and likewise vent for all our Manufactures of Wool. 1 Because that the Commodities from Cattel are farre more stable than Corne: for Cloth, Stuffes, Stockins, But∣ter, Cheese, Hides, Shoes, Tallow, are certain even every where: Corne scarcely in any place, constantly in none. 2 Pasture imployeth more hands, which is the second Pa∣radox; and therefore Pasture doth not depopulate, as it is com∣monly said: for Normandy and Picardy in France, where there are Pastures in a good measure, are a populous as any part of France; and I am certain, that Holland, Friezeland, Zealand, Flaunders, and Lombardy, which rely altogether on Pastures are the most populous places in Europe. But some wil object and say, that a shepheard and a dog formerly hath destroyed divers villages. To this I answer, that we wel knovv vvhat a shepheard and a dog can do, (viz.) look to tvvo or three hundred sheep at the most, and that tvvo or three hun∣dred Acres vvil maintain them, or the land is extreamly bar∣ren; and that these tvvo or three hundred Acres being bar∣ren, wil scarcely maintaine a Plough, (vvhich is but one man and tvvo boys,) vvith the horses: and that the mowing, reaping, and threshing of this Corne, and other vvorke about, vvil scarcely maintaine three more vvith work through the vvhole yeare. But hovv many people may be employed, by the Wool of tvvo or three hundred Sheepe, in Picking, Sorting, Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Dying, Fulling, Knitting, I leave to others to calculate. And further if the Pastures be rich Meadowes, and go on dairing, I suppose all know, that 100 Acres of such land imployeth more hands than 100 A∣cres of the best Corne-Land in England, and produceth like∣wise
better exportable Commodities. And further, if I should grant, that formerly the shepherd and his dog did depopulate; yet I wil deny, that it doth so now: for former∣ly we were so unwise, as to send over our Wool to Antwerpe, and other places, where they were Manufactured; by which meanes one pound oft brought 10 unwrought to them; but we set now our own poor to work; and so save the depopula∣tion. Yet I say, it's convenient to encourage the plough; because that we cannot have a certainty of Corne and car∣riage is dear, both by sea and land, especially into the Inland-Countreys; and our Commodities by Wool do cloy the Mer∣chants. 5 Rushy-lands. Blith telleth us, good Remedies for these Inconveniencies, (viz.) making deep trenches, oft mowings, Chalk∣ing, Liming, Dunging and Ploughing. I know where hun∣gry guests Horses soone make an end of them. 6 Furze, broom, heath, these can hardly be so destroyed, but at length they wil up againe; for God hath given a pe∣culiar propriety to every kinde of earth, to produce some peculiar kinds of Plants, which it wil observe even to the worlds end, unlesse by Dung, Marle, Chalke, you alter even the very nature of the earth. In Gallitia in Spaine, where such barren lands do very much abound, they do thus: first, they grub them up as clean as they can; of the greater Roots and branches they make fire-wood; the smaller sticks are either imployed in fencing, or else are burnt on the ground; afterwards the land being ploughed twice at least, they sowe Wheate, and usually the crop is great, which the Landlord and Tenant divide according to a compact; then the ground resteth, and in 3 or 4 yeares the Furze or broom wil recover their former growth, which the painful Hus∣band-man grubbeth, and doeth with it as formerly. I set this down that you may see how laborious the Spa∣niard is in some places, the poverty of the countrey compel∣ling him to it. 7 There are other Inconveniencies in land, besides weeds
and trumpery (viz.) Ill tenures, as coppy-hold, Knight-service, &c. so that the Possessor cannot cut any Timber downe, with∣out consent of the Lord; and when he dyes must pay one or two yeares rent. But these are not in the power of the poor Husbandman to remedy; I therefore passe them by: yet hope that in little time we shal see these Inconveniencies remedied; because they much discourage Improvements and are (as I suppose) badges of our Norman slavery. To conclude, it seemeth to me very reasonable, and it wil be a great encouragement to laborious men, to improve their barren lands, if that they should have recompence for what they have done, according as indifferent men should judge, when they leave it, as is the custome in Flaunders. I have likewise observed some Deficiencies in Woods,12 Defici∣ency▪ in Woods. which I shall briefly declare, with the best way to Remedy the same. 1 It's a great, fault that generally through the Island the Woods are destroyed; so that we are in many places very much necessitated both for fuel, & also for timber for building and other uses; so that if we had not Coales from New-castle, and Boards from Norwey, Plough-staves and Pipe-staves from Prussia, we should be brought to great extremity: and ma∣ny Mechanickes would be necessitated to leave their cal∣lings. 2 Deficiency, is that our Woods are not ordered as they should be; but though Woods are especially preserved for timber, for building and Shipping; yet at this time it's very rare to see a good Timber-tree in a Wood. 3 That many of our Woods, are very thinne, and not re∣plenished with such sorts of Wood, as are convenient for the place. 4 That we sell continually, and never plant or take care for posterity. These Deficiencies may be thus Remedyed. 1 To put in execution the Statutes against grubbing of Woods, which are sufficiently severe. Its well known, we have good
lawes; but it's better knowne, they are not executed. In the Wilde of Kent, and Sussex, which lies far from the Rivers and Sea, and formerly have been nothing but Woods, liberty is granted for men to grub what they please; for they cannot want firing for themselves, and they are so seated, that nei∣ther firewood, nor timber can be transported elsewhere. I know a Gentleman who proffered their good Oak-timber at 6 s 8 d per tun, and the land in those parts in general is very good. About Tunbridge there is land which formerly was Wood, is now let for 30 s per Are; so that to keep such lands for Wood, would be both losse to the owner, and to the Island: But in other parts of the Island it is othervvise, and men are much to be blamed for destroying both timber and fuel. I have seen at Shooters-hill near London, some Woods stub∣bed up vvhich vvere good ground for. Wood, but novv are nothing but furze, vvhich is a great losse, both to the owner and to the Countrey. For the land is made vvorse then it vvas formerly. I conceive there are Lands, vvhich are as na∣turally ordained for Woods, viz. Mountainous, Craggy, une∣ven land, as small hils for the Vines and Olives; plain lands for Corne; and low moist lands for Pasture: vvhich lands if they be stubbed, do much prejudice the Common-wealth. 2 That all Woods should have such a Number of Timber-trees per Acre, according to the Statute. There is a good lavv for that purpose, but men delude both themselves and the lavv, that they every felling cut dovvn the standers vvhich they left the folling before, least perchance they should grovv to be Timber, and leave 12 small standers, that they might seem to fulfil in some measure the Statute; but it's a meer fal∣lacie, and causeth the Statute to fail of it's principal end, vvhich is to preserve Timber. 3 The best Remedy against thinnesse of woods, is to plash them and spread them abroad, and cover them partly in the ground, as every Countreyman can direct; by this meanes the wood vvil soone grovv rough and thick. It's good Husbandry likevvise to fil your woods vvith swift growers, as
Ashes, Sallow, Willow, Aspe, which are also good for Hop∣poles, Hoopes. Sycamore is also a swift grower. In Flaunders, they have a kinde of Salix, called by them Abell-tree, which speedliy groweth to be timber. 4 That some law be made, that they which fel, should al∣so plant or sowe. In Biscay there is a law, if that any cut down a Timber-tree, he must plant three for it, which law is put in∣to execution with severity: otherwise they would soon be undone; for the Countrey is very mountainous and barren, and dependeth wholly on Iron Mines, and on Shipping: their Woods are not copsed there, but onely Pollards, which they lop when occasion serveth. I know one, who was bound by his Land-Lord to plant so many trees yearly, which according he did, but alwayes in such places that they might not grow. In France, near to the borders of Spaine, they sowe Ashkey, which when they grow to such a greatnesse, that they may be slit into four quarters, and big enough to make Pikes, then they cut them down; and I have seen divers Acres together thus planted: hence come the excellent Pikss, called Spanish-Pikes. Some Gentlemen have sowen Acornes, and it's a good way to encrease Woods. Though the time is long, I doubt not but every one knoweth, that it's excellent to plant Wil∣lowes along the waters side, and Ashes nigh their houses for firing: for they are good pieces of Husbandry; and it's pitty that it's not more put in practise. There is a Gentleman in Essex who hath planted so many Willowes, that he may lop 2000 every year: if others were as Ingenious, we should not want fire-wood; Osiers planted in low morish grounds do advance land from 5 s per Acre to 40 s 50 s 3 l and up∣ward; it's much used Westward of London: these Osiers are of great use to Basket-makers. There is a sort of small Osier or Willow at Saint Omars in Flaunders, which groweth on Islands which floate up and downe; it's farre lesse than that which the Westerne men call, Eights, with this they make their curious fine Baskets: this plant is worth the procuring, being so nigh: John Tredescat hath some plants of it. There
is a plant likewise in England called the sweet Willowes; it's not onely good for shade and firing; but as I am inform'd, the leaves do not soure the grasse, but that the cattel wil eat them sooner than Hay: if this be so, it may be of singular use for Meadowes. 5 That those things which mightily destroy Woods, may be restrained, as Iron-workes are; therefore the State hath very wel done to pul downe divers Iron-workes in the Forrest of Deane, that the timber might be preserved for Shipping, which is accounted the toughest in England: and when it is dry as hard as Iron, the Common-people did use to say, that in Queen Elizabeths dayes the Spaniard sent an Ambassador purposely to get this Wood destroyed: how true this is I know not; but without question it's admirable Wood for Shipping, and generally our English Oake is the best in the world for Shipping; because it's of a great graine, and therefore strong: but the Oakes of other Countreys have a finer graine, and more fit for Wainscot; and in this kinde our Forefathers have been very provident; for we have an Act of long stan∣ding, prohibiting Iron-workes within 20 miles of London, and within 3 miles of the River of Thames: though you may finde Iron-stone in divers places, as in the great gravel-pit at Woolwhich. There are some Ingenious men, who lately have got a Patent for making Iron with Sea-coale: I hope they wil accomplish their desires; for it would wonderfully advance this Island, and save Wood. There are two faults in Sea-coale, in respect of melting Iron-oare. 1 That it is apt to bake together, or cake. 2 It hath a sulphureous fume in it, which is an enemy to Metal, and consumeth it as we see by our Iron-Bars in Win∣dowes at London; so that the Metalline nature of the Iron-stone is much wasted by it, and that which remaineth is very brittle, and wil be Could-shire. I know that by the mixture of Coale beaten with loame and throughly dryed, one (if not both of these Inconveniencies) may be taken away. In the Duke of Cleveland's Countrey, they use have Turffe, half
Charcoale. There is a way by making a kinde of Barter with Loame, Urine, &c. vvhich vvil cause Charcoale to last very long, as I am informed: but these discourses belong to ano∣ther place. It's a great Deficiency here in England vvithout question,13 Defici∣ency, of Bees. that vve have no more Bees, considering that they are neither chargeable, requiring onely a fevv stravves for an house, nor troublesome: and this Island may maintaine ten times as ma∣ny: for though a place may be over-stocked vvith these Animals, as vvith the greater; yet I knovv no part of this land, that is so: and I know divers places which vvould maintain many hundred hives, yet scarce one to be seen. 2 Our Honey is the best in the vvorld, and Wax a staple Commodity. Further we know, that that cold Countreys, not comparable to ours as Moscovia have farre greater quantity than vve have; so that it's incredible vvhat quantity is found in the Woods, if the story of the man be true, vvho fel up even to the eares in Honey, and had there perished, had not a Bear, on vvhich he caught hold, pulled him out. Novv I have en∣quired, hovv it commeth to passe that there is so great store of Honey in Moscovia, considering the Winters are extreame cold, and also very long: and I am credibly informed that first, the spring vvhen it beginneth, cometh extraordinary fast, that the dayes are very long, and the Summers farre dry∣er than ours here in England, so that the Bees are not hinde∣red by continual showers; as they are some yeares here in this Isle: and lastly, that the Countrey aboundeth much vvith Firs, and Pine-trees, vvhich the Inhabitants usually cut, that the Gumme, Rosinous, or Turpentine substance may sweat forth, to which places the Bees do come, and presently fil themselves, and returne laden: and perhaps for these very reasons, Bees thrive very much in New-England. 2 We are Deficient in the ordering of them. Not to speak of the negligence of particular men, which is very fre∣quent: nor to write a general story of the ordering of them; because it requireth much paper: and Mr. Leveret and But∣ler;
especially the latter, hath written so exactly, and upon his own experience that little can be added to it: onely in a point or two I differ from him; of the which I wil speake briefly. 1 That we must take and destroy all the Bees for their Honey, and not drive them, as they do in Italy once or twice yearly. 2 That if a swarme be poor with little Honey, that that swarme ought to be taken; because it is poore; so that the rich stockes are destroyed, because they be rich, and the poor swarmes, because they be poor: so that be they rich or be they poore, they must be destroyed. An Italian reporteth, that in the City of Askaly, there was a law made, that none should destroy a swarme of Bees, unlesse he had a just cause; accounting it a part of extream injustice and cruelty, to take away without cause, both the goods and lives of such good and faithful servants. I am credibly informed, that an English Gentleman beyond the Seas, getteth many 100l yearly, by keeping Bees after a new and Ingenious Manner, which is thus. He hath a roome made very vvarm and close; yet vvith glasse-vvindovves, vvhich he can open at his pleasure, to let the Bees fly abroad vvhen he pleaseth, vvhere he keep∣eth his Bees and feedeth them all vvinter; vvith a sweet Compo∣sition made of Molossoes, Flowers, sweet Wine, Milke, Raisins, &c. (for vvith such things as these, they usually feed the Bees in Italy) and oftentimes in summer, vvhen the vveather is rainy, vvindy, or so disposed, that the Bees cannot conve∣niently go abroad, he feedeth them at home, vvith divers svveet things, and gathereth divers flovvers, and layeth them amongst them, and sticketh up many fresh boughes in divers places of his Roomes, that in swarming-time, they may settle on them; by these meanes he preserveth all his svvarmes, and gathereth an incredible quantity of Honey and wax; and truly this vvay seemeth to me very probable: for 1 We knovv the Bees, (even as vve say of the Aunts) vvil vvorke continually, even night and day, vvinter and summer,
if that they were not hindered by darkenesse, cold, and moisture. 2 That Bees do not onely make Honey, (for I suppose, that they have a peculiar propriety of making Honey, as the Silk-wormes Silk) out of Mildewes or Honey, but also out of all sweet things, as Sugar, Molossoes, &c. 3 That many sweet things may be had, far cheaper than Honey; which (I suppose) the Bees wil transmute into perfect Honey. This way, I conceive, would be very advantageous to us in England, for the preserving of late swarmes, and also for the enriching of old stocks, so that we need not destroy them, but might drive them from hive to hive, and set them to work again; and truly I think there is no place in the world so convenient for this purpose as England; because that though our Winters be long, yet they are not very cold; but Bees would be stirring in them: and further our Summers are so subject to windes and raines, that many times there is scarce a fine day in a whole week: and Further Molossoes, Refuse Sugar, Sweet Woort, Milke, &c. may be had at reasonable rates. I hope ere long to give an exact account of this experi∣ment, and desire those who have any Ingenuities in this kind, freely to communicate them. I have not observed many things more of importance concerning Bees, in my travels; onely in Italy they make their hives of thin boards, square in 2 or 3 partitions, standing either above one another, or very close side to side, by the which meanes, they can the better borrow part of their honey when they please. In Germany their hives are made of straw, to the which they have a sum∣mer-doore, as they call it, which is nigh the top of the Hive, that the Bees when they are laden, may the more easily enter and discharge themselves of their burthens. 3 We are to blame, that we do not imploy our Honeys in making Metheglin: It's true, that in Hereford-shire and Wales, there is some quantity of this liquor made; but for want of good cookery it's of little worth; but usually of a browne
colour, of an unpleasant taste: and as I suppose commonly made of the refuse honey, wax, dead Bees, and such stuffe, as they ordinarily make it elsewhere▪ for the good house-wife thinkes any thing good enough for this purpose; and that it is pitty to spoyle good Honey by making Meade: but I know that if one take pure neat honey, and ingeniously clarifie and scum and boil it, a liquour may be made not inferiour to the best Sack, Muskadine, &c. in colour like to rock-water, with∣out ill odour or favour; so that some curious Pallates have called it Vin Greco, rich and racy Canary, not knowing what name to give it for its excellency: This would bring very great Profit, not onely to the Publique, by saving many 1000l disbursed for Wines through all the world; but would be ve∣ry advantageous to private families, who use to entertaine their friends very nobly, Wines being at present intolerably dear and naught; Thope therefore ere long to see it put in execution. An excellent drinke not much unlike this may be made of Sugar, Molossoes, Raisins, &c. of the which I have already spoken, yet thinke it fit to put you in minde of it a∣gaine. 14 Defici∣ency, con∣cerning Silk-wormsIt's a great Deficiency here in England, that we do not keep Silk-wormes (which in Italy are called Cavalieri,) for to make Silke. I know that is a great Paradox to many, but I hope by this short discourse to make this truth to appear plainly▪ The first original of Silke-wormes by what I reade in Histories is from Persia, where in infinite numbers they are still maintained; and the greatest profits of that great Monarch do arise from hence: China also aboundeth very much with Silke. In Virginia also the Silke-wormes are found wilde a∣mongst the Mulberry-woods, and perhaps might be managed with great profit in those plantations if Land were not so so scarce and deare. I suppose this Silke-worme of Virginia is produced by the corruption of the Mulberry-tree, as Cochin∣neale, from ficus Indica, or Indian figtree: for some ingenious & curious men who have strictly observed the generation of In∣sects, do finde that every plant hath an Insect which groweth
out of its corruption, (as divers sorts of lice from Animals) and that these Insects do usually feed on that plant, out of which they were made, as Lice on the same animals frō whence they were engendred. I know a Gentleman here in London, who hath 3 or 400 Insects,M. Marshal. and can give a very good account of their original feedings. And also Mr. Moreney in Paris, hath a large book of the same subject. But to returne to our pur∣pose: I say that we had Silke-wormes first from Persia. In Justinian's time about 1000 or 1100 years ago, some Monkes presented a few to him at Constantinople; where in his time they began to plant Mulberries: from thence it came to Ita∣ly, about 3 or 400 yeares since: for the Auncient Writers of Husbandry, as Cato, Pallad, Golumell, do not so much as men∣tion these creatures: and at length these have passed over the Mountains into France within an 100 years; where they flourish so much, that if we will believe their own Authours, they bring greater profit than the Wine and Corne of that large Countrey. I know that France hath Silke enough to maintaine their excesse of apparell, and to export Plushes, Velvets, &c. Now then if that these wormes can thrive, not onely in the parched Persia; but also in Greece, Italy, yea in France; which differeth not much from the temper of En∣gland; why should we thinke, that they are confined to that place, and must move no farther Northward? for they have come many 100 miles toward the North, why not one 100 or two more? and further we see that Mulberries, which is their food, thrive here as well as in any place. But some will object, that our Aire is too cold and moist. To which I an∣swer. 1 That those who write of Silk-wormes, say, that you must take heed, that you make not the place too hot: for too much heate may destroy; and therefore that you must set the windowes open to let in the cold Aire. 2 We know, that moistnesse of aire rather encreaseth such Insects, and nourisheth them. Indeed if moisture hurt∣eth, it's because that it too much corrupteth their food, and
causeth a flux amongst them: but this easily is prevented, as I shall shew you anon. But to be short, it is not onely my opinion that Silke-wormes will thrive here, but the solide judg∣ment of King James and his Council confirmeth the same: as you may see by his letter to the Deputy-Lievetenants of e∣very County; wherein also many weighty reasons are contein'd to convince men of the same, which letter followeth a∣non. Lastly, we finde by experience, that Silke-wormes wil thrive here, and therefore the matter is out of question: for divers Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, Citizens, &c. have nursed up divers wormes to perfection, though they have had little skil in the managing of them; and likewise not such accommo∣dations as are necessary for them; and more would they have done, if they could have had Mulberry-leaves. I am informed that one near Charing-Crosse maketh a good living by them: as also another by Ratliffe-Crosse; and therefore if we can bring up an 100, why not a 1000, yea, 100000, if we had food for them? Truly, I know no reason to the contra∣ry, neither could I ever finde one that could speak any thing to the purpose against the businesse. And further I must tell you, that the ordering of this worme is very easie, none need to be bound prentize to the trade; the speciall businesse is to be carefull in feeding them, and keeping them sweet; which things children use to do. He that would learne this Art ex∣actly, let him read Boneil, or an Authour W.S. Printed 1609, about Mulberries, and sold in Paul's Church-yard, by Eleaz. Edgar; but because that the books are out of print, I will give you a few Rules. First, endeavour to get store of Mulberry-trees, which are of 2 sorts, the white and the black. The white groweth great∣est, and hath a fine leafe, and sweetest, and therefore fittest for the young wormes. This is easily propagated by Slips, as Quinces, Codlings. The Black Mulberry is difficultly pro∣pagated by Slips; but must be raised from seeds, sovven either at Michaelmas, when the Mulberries are eaten: or kept in
dry sand till the spring; and then sowe or howe them in, as other seeds and stones, and must be diligently weeded. This groweth not to be so great a tree as the former: the leaves are rougher and harsher, and fittest for the wormes. When they are strong and ready to spin, when your trees are grown to a good bignesse, you may plant them forth, as is usually done for walkes or Orchards, or in waste places, as they do in Italy, (for the Fruit is little worth, onely the Leaves are use∣full,) where I have seen the trees as bare of leaves at Mid-summer as at Mid-winter. There are 2 sorts of Silke-wormes, the Spanish and Calabrian. The Spanish is the smaller and more tender, and maketh a finer silke. The Calabrian is great∣er and more hardy, and maketh more Silke, but courser. This sort seemeth to be the best for this Countrey. When the Mul∣berry-trees begin to bud, take the egs of your Silke-wormes, and lay them on a piece of stuffe or say, (some use to Bathe them first in warme Malmsy, and say that it maketh them stronger,) and carry them about you in the day in a Box, in the night lay them under your Bed, or in a warme Oven, till the wormes begin to come forth, then lay a piece of paper of the widenesse of the box, cut full of holes on them, and on the paper lay Mulberry-leaves, and as fast as they hatch they will crawle forth, and stick to the Mulberry-leaves; which remove into other boxes, till all be hatched: then when they have past their second sicknesse, feed them on shelves 2 foot broad and 18 inches one from another: the Roome where you keepe your Wormes, must neither be a low place, nor nigh the tiles; but a middle Roome, warme and dry, yet sometimes a little cold air is good. Take heed of Rats and Mice, as also of Hens, Robinred∣breasts, Sparrows, and other birds; for they will eat them. They have 4 Sicknesses, the first 12 dayes after they are hatched; and from that time at the end of every 8 dayes: their sicknesse lasteth 2 or 3 dayes, and then they are to be fed but very little. The whole time that the wormes do feed, is about nine
vveekes: feed them twice daily at least: at the first vvhen they are small, give them a fevv leaves; and as they grovv greater, more, and feed them oftner. Let your leaves be dry and vvell aired upon a Table or cloth before you give them; and gather not your leaves, till the devv be off; and in dry seasons if you can possibly, you may keep your leaves gathered 3 or 4 dayes or longer. Keepe your shelves and boxes very clean: but take heed you touch not your vvormes vvith your hands, vvhen you remove them; but move them not vvhen they are sick. In cold moist vveather, set a Pan of coales in the Roome, and burn a little Benjamin, Juniper, &c. especially vvhen they are young, (viz) the first 5 vveekes; but aftervvards, unlesse it be extraordinary cold, give them Aire, and keep them not too hot, and let the Roome be wel sented vvith Herbs. Let not your Wormes be too thick on the shelves: if any dye or be sick, speedily remove them, least they infect the rest. As soone as by the cleare Ambour-colour of your wormes, you perceive that they would spin; make Arches betwixt your shelves, with heath made clean, branches of Rosemary, Laven∣der, &c. where the wormes will fasten themselves, and make their bottomes in 2 or 3 dayes, and about 12 or 14 days after, will come forth: before which time, you must take away the bottome, which you will use for Silke, and kill the vvorme vvithin, by laying the bottomes in the sun 2 or 3 dayes, or in an hot Oven. The bottome vvhich you vvill keep for seed, lay in a vvarme place, till the wormes come forth: which put on some pieces of old Say, Grogran, Velvet, made fast to some wall: there they will engender, and the Male having spent himself falleth down and dyeth; so the Female, when she hath laid her egs, which egs when they are gray, you may gently take them off vvith a knife, and keepe them in a piece of Say in a dry place, till hatching time come. The vvinding of the Silke off the bottome requireth a pecu∣liar vvheel, vvhich an Artificer must make: 1 l and 2 ounces of the bottome yieldeth from 1 ounce to 3 of Silke.
An ounce of Spanish seed yeeldeth ordinarily 6.8. or 10. li. of Silk. and the worms will eat 250. li. of leaves: the Calabrian-worms being greater, do eat nigh 300. weight, and yeeld 11. or 12. pound of Silk. To conclude, I desire all men seriously to consider, what advan∣tage this businesse will bring to this Island, if it be brought to per∣fection. Truly I know nothing doth hinder but want of Mulber∣ry-trees, which will in little space come to a considrable greatnesse. And though I commend those who endeavour to advance this work in Plantations, and prefer it before Tobacco; yet I know that it cannot be for want of hands; whereas in England we have plenty of women, children, old folks, lame, decrepite. &c. who are fit to be overseers of this work. And I wonder Gentlemen do not go about a thing so pleasant and profitable, (for 3, 4, or 5. at most will attend as many worms as will make 40. or 50, li. worth of Silk, in 2, or 3. moneths) and the worms eat onely leaves, which are of no value: neither is there any considerable trouble about the worms unlesse it be the 12. or 15. last days. I hope, if that particular men will not endeavour to advance this work for their private profit, yet the State will for the Publick Good, it being the best way I know to set all the poor Children, Widdows, old and lame people on work, and likewise will save this Nation many 100 thousand pounds per annum. And further, the way to accomplish this work may be done without grievance to the Subject, (viz.) to comand every one to plant or sow so many Mulberry seeds which may easily be procured from beyond Seas, &c. But I leave States matters to States men, I am none. A Copy of King James's Letter to the Lords Lieutenants of the several Shires of England, for the increasing of Mulberry-Trees, and the breeding of Silk-Worms, for the making of Silk in England. JAMES REX. Right Trusty and Wel-beloved, we greet you well. IT is a principal part of that Christian care, which appertaineth to Soveraignity, to endeavour by all means possible, as well to be∣get,
as to encrease among their people the knowledge and practise of all Arts and Trades, whereby they may be both weaned from idlenesse and the enormities thereof, which are infinite, and exerci∣sed in such industries and labours as are accompanied with evident hopes, not onely of preserving people from the shame and grief of penury; but also raising and increasing them in wealth and abun∣dance, the Scope which every free-born spirit aime that, not in re∣gard of himself onely, and the ease which a plentifull estate bring∣eth to every one in his particular, but also in regard of the honour of their Native Countrey, whose commendations is no way more set forth then in the peoples Activenesse and Industry. The consideration whereof, having of late occupied our minde, who alwayes esteeme our peoples good, our necessary con∣templations: We have conceived as well by the discourse of our own reason, as by information gathered from others, that the making of Silk might as well be effected here, as it is in the King∣dome of France, where the same hath of late years been put in pra∣ctice. For neither is the climate of this Isle so far distinct or differ∣ent in condition from that Countrey; especially from the hither parts thereto▪ but that it is to be hoped, that those things which by industry prosper there, may by like industry used here, have like successe, and many private persons who for their pleasure have bred of those worms, have found no experience to the contrary, but that they may be nourished and maintained here, if provision were made for planting of Mulberry-trees, whose leaves are the food of the worms. And therefore we have thought good thereby to let you understand, that although in suffering this invention to take place, we do shew our selves somewhat an adversary to our profit, which is the matter of our customes for silk brought from beyond the seas, will receive some dimunition: Neverthelesse, when there is questi∣on of so great and publick utility to come to our Kingdome and Subjects in general; and whereby (besides multitudes of people of both sexes and all ages) such as in regard of impotency are un∣fit for other labour, may be set on work comforted and relieved; we are content that our private benefit shall give way to the pub∣lick; and therefore being perswaded that no well-affected subject will refuse to put his helping hand to such a work as can have no other private end in us, but the desire of the welfare of our people,
we have thought good in this form onely to require you (as a person of greatest authority in that County, and from whom the generality may receive notice of our pleasure) with more conveniency then otherwise) to take occasion either at the Quarter-Sessions, or at some other publick place of meeting, to perswade and require such as are of a ability, (without descending to trouble the poor, for whom we seek to provide) to buy and distribute in that County, the num∣ber of ten thousand Mul-berry plants, which shall be delivered un∣to them at our City of, &c. at the rate of two farthings the plant; or at 6 s the hundred, containing five score plants. And because the buying of the said plants at this rate may at the first seem chargeable to our said Subjects, (whom we would be loath to burthen) we have taken order that in March or April next, there shal be deliver∣ed at the said place a good quantity of Mulberry-seeds, there to be sold to such as will buy them; by means whereof the said plants will be delivered at a smaller rate then they can be afforded being carri∣ed from hence: having resolved also in the mean time, that there shal be published in print; a plain instruction and direction, both for the increasing of the said Mulberry-trees, the breeding of the Silk-worms, and all other things needfull to be understood, fur the per∣fecting of a work every way so commendable and profitable, as well to the planter, as to those that shall use the trade. Having now made known unto you the motives as they stand with the publick good wherein every man is interessed; because we know how much the example of our own Deputy Lievtenants and Justices will fur∣ther this cause; if you and other your neighbours will be content to take some good quantities hereof, to distribute upon your own lands we are content to acknowledge thus much more in this ditection of ours; that all things of this nature tending to Plantation, increase; of science, and works of industry, are things so naturally pleasing to our own disposition, as we shall take it for an argument of extra-ordinary affection towards our person; besides, the judgement we shall make of the good dispositions in all those that shall expresse in any kind their ready minds to further the same: and shall esteem that in furthering the same, they seek to further our honour and con∣tentment (having seen in few years space past, that our brother the French King, hath since his comming to that crown, both begun and brought to perfection the making of silks in his Country, where
he hath won to himself honour, and to his subjects a marvellous in∣crease of wealth) would account it no little happinesse to us, if the same work which begun among our people, with no lesse zeal to their good, (then any Prince can have to the good of theirs) might in our time produce the fruits which there it hath done: whereof we nothing doubt, if ours will be found as tractable and apt to fur∣ther their own good, now the way is shewed them by us their So∣veraign, as those of France have been to conform themselves to the directions of their King. Given under our Signet at our Pallace of Westminster, the sixteenth of November, in the sixth year of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the two and for∣tieth. 15 Defici∣ency, con∣cerning the Husband∣ry of other places.15. Deficiency is the ignorance of the Husbandry of other pla∣ces (viz.) what seeds, what fruits, what grasses they use, what Ploughs, Harrows, Gardening-tools they have; how still they ma∣nage and improve their lands; what cattel they have; how they feed and fatten them; and how they improve their commodities, &c. For there is no Countrey where they are such ill Husband-men, but in some particular or other they excel: as we see even in the se∣veral Counties of this Island, every County hath something or other wherein they out-strip their neighbours. And that much profit may arise from hence in this nation, is manifested by that excellent Treatise, which is published by you concerning the Husbandry of Flanders; wherein are briefly set down divers particulars very use∣full for us here in England, and formerly unknown. And without question, France, Spain, Italy, Holland; Poland, Germany. &c. have many excellent things both for Husbandry, Physick, Mecha∣nicks, worth the manifesting and very beneficial to us: so likewise there are divers things in our Plantations worth the taking notice of, in Husbandry. To passe by the Southern Plantations, as Bar∣badoes, Antego, Saint Croix Christopher, Mevis, Monferate, where the commodities are onely Cotten-wools, Sugars, Gingers, Indicoes, which our cold climate will not produce; and also To∣bacco which groweth also with us, about Norwich and elsewhere. We will onely sail upon our Northern Plantations, Verginia, New-England, and instance in a few things. Why may not the Silk-grasse of Verginia, the Salsaperilla, Sassarfas, Rattlssnake-weed (which is an excellent cordial) be beneficial to us, as also their
Cedars, Pines, Plum-trees, Cherries, great Strawberries, and their Lo∣custs (which is a prickly plant, a swift grower, and therefore excel∣lent for hedges) be usefull to us? So for New England, why should we think that the Indian corn, the Marsh-wheat, that excellent Rie. the Pease (which never are eaten with magots,) the French, or Kid∣ney Beans, the Pumpions, Squashes, Water mellons, Musk-mel∣lons, Hurtleberries, wild Hemp, Fir, &c. of those parts are alto∣gether uselesse for us? as also the Cramberries, (which are so cal∣led by the Indians, but by the English, Bear-berries, because it is thought the Bears eat them in Winter; or Barberries, by reason of their fine acid taste like Barberries,) which is a fruit as big and as red at a Cherry, ripe onely in the winter, and growing close to the ground in bogs, where nothing else will grow? They are account∣ed very good against the Scurvie, and very pleasant in Tarts. I know not a more excellent and healthfuller fruit. But some will object, that they will not grow here with us, for your fore-fathers never used them. To these I reply, and ask them how they know? have they tryed? Idlenesse never wts ∣cuse; and why might not our fore-fathers upon the , held their hands in their pockets, and have said, that Wheat and Barley would not have grown amongst us? and why should not they have been discouraged from planting Cherries, Hops, Liquorice, Potatoes, Apricocks, Peaches, Melicotones, and from sowing Rape-seeds, Colliflowers, great Clover, Canary-seeds, &c. and many more of this kind? and yet we know, that most of these have been brought to perfection, even in our days: for there is a viciffitude in all things, and as many things are lost which were knowne to our fore-fathers, as well the Purple colour, &c. as you may read in Pancirol: so many things are found out by us, altogether unknown to them, and some things will be left for our posterities. For exam∣ple, not to speak of Gun-powder and Printing, nor of the New-world and the wonders there, which notwithstanding are but of a few 100. years standing: I say twenty Ingenuities have been found even in our days, as Watches, Clocks, Way-wisers, Chains for Fleas, divers Mathematical Instruments, Short-writing, Micro∣scopes, by the which even the smallest things may be discrned, as the egs, eys, legs and hair of a Mite in a Cheese: Likewise the Seleno∣scope, which discovereth mountains in the Moon, divers Stars, and
new Planets, never seen till our days. But to return to our pur pur∣pose, I say that in Husbandry it is even so; for the Ancients used divers plants which we know not; as the Cytisus-tree, so much commended for Cattel; as also their Medick fodder, which Co∣lum. saith endureth 10. years, and may be mowen 4 years, 7. times in a year, and one Acre he esteemeth enough for 3 horses. This fod∣der likewise is accounted very sweet and healthfull, whereas the plants which are usually called Medicaes with us, are annual plants, and have no such rare proprieties. So we are ignorant what their Far or fine Bread Corn was, what their Lupine, Spury, and an hn∣dred of this kind, as you may read in Mathiol. or Dioscorides: so on the contrary, infinite are Plants which we have, and they knew not, as well appeareth by their small and our large Herbals; and dayly new Plants are discovered, usefull for Hushandry, Mecha∣nicks and Physick; and therefore let no man be discouraged from prosecuting new and laudable ingenuities. And I desire Ingenuous Gentlmen and Merchants, who travel beyond Sea, to take notice of the Husbandry of those parts (viz.) what grains they sow? at what time and seasons? on what lands? how they plough their their lands? how they dung and improve them? what Cattel they use? and the commodities thereby? also what books are written of Husbandry, and such like? and I intreat them earnestly, not to think these things too low for them, and out of their callings; nay, I desire them to count nothing trivial in this kind, which may be profitable to their Countrey, and advance knowledge. And truly, I should thank any Merchant that could inform me in some trivial and ordinary things done beyond Sea, (viz.) how they make Ca∣viare out of Sturgeons Rows? in Muscovia, how they boil and pickle their Sturgeon, (which we English in New-England can∣not as yet do handsomely?) how the Bolognia Sausages are made? how they ferment their Bread without Yest? of what materials di∣vers sorts of Baskets, Brooms, Frails are made? what seed Grout or Grutze is made of? and also how to make the Parmi∣sane Cheeses of Italy, which are usually sold here for 2. s. or 2. s. 6. d per pound; or the Angelots of France, which are accounted better Cheeses then any made in England; as also the Holland Cheeses, which are far better then our ordinary Cheeses, and yet these sorts of Cheeses are made not of Mares milk, as some think, but from the
Cows, and our Pastures are not inferiour to theirs, &c, 2. I desire ingenious men to send home whatsoever they have rare of all sorts; as first, Animals, the fine-woolled Sheep of Spain, Bar∣bary Horses, Spanish Jennets, &c. and so likewise all sorts of Ve∣getables not growing with us, as Pannick, Millet, Rice, which groweth in the Fenny places of Millan; and why may it not grow in our Fens, and the best sorts of Grains or Fruits in use amongst us? perhaps there is Wheat that is not subject to Smut or Mildew; per∣haps other seeds will give double increase, as Flax, Oats, Pease; and divers other things of importance there are beyond Sea, which may be usefull to us; as the Askeys, the Cork, Acorns, the Scarlet-Oak, sweet-Annise, which groweth abundantly in Millan, Fenel, &c. Tilia or Linder-tree for base Ropes, &c. Spruce Pines for Masts and Boards, seeing that they are swift growers, and many will stand in a small piece of ground: they have formerly grown here, and some few do flourish in our Gardens, and in Scotland. I suppose that this ought seriously to be considered: for altough we have plenty of Oaks, yet what will it profit for Shipping without Masts? and how difficult it is to get great Masts above 22. inches diameter, is very well known. Many things I might add of this kind, but for brevities sake I refer you to Master Iohn Tredescan, who hath taken great pains herein, and daily raiseth new and curious things. 3. Consider that these new Ingenuities may be profitable, not onely to the Publick, but also to Private men: as we see by those who first planted Cherries, Hops Liquorice, Saffron, and first sow∣ed Rape-seeds Colliflowers, Woad, Would, Early Pease Asspara∣gus, Melons, Tulips, Gilliflowers, &c. and why may we not find some things beneficial to us also? 16.16 Defici∣ency, of the igno∣rance ef things ta∣ken from the earth and wa∣ters of this Island. Deficiency is the ignorance of those things which are taken from the Earth and Waters of this Island. Although it may seem to many that these things do little con∣cern the Husbandman, who usually is not a Naturalist, but onely indeavoureth to know his own grounds and the seeds proper for it and seldome pierceth into the bowels of the earth: yet if we consi¦der that out of the earth he hath Marle, Lime, Stone Chalk, for the inriching his lands; and also Loam, and Sand for his buildings▪ of¦tentimes fuel for fire, &c. it will plainly appear, that it is necessary
for him to know all subterrany things, and to be a Petty-Phyloso∣pher, and that the knowledge of these things will be very beneficial for him. And here I cannot but take notice of a great deficiency amongst us, (viz.) that we have not the natural history of all the Sands, Earth, Stones, Mines, Minerals, Metals, &c. which are found in this Island: it would not onely advance Husbandry; but also ma∣ny other Mechanick Arts, and bring great profit to the publick. I hope some ingenious man will at length undertake this task; for the Lord hath blessed this Island, with as great variety as any place that is known, as shall in part appear anon; and it may be proved by that great variety which is found near the Spaw-waters in Knares∣borough, as Dr. Dean relateth in his Book called the English Spaw: Or the glory of Knaresbrough, springing from several famous foun∣tains there adjacent (called the Vitriol, sulphurous and dropping Wels) and also other Mineral waters, whose words are these: Here is found not onely white and yellow Marle, Plaister, Oker, Rudd, Rubrick, Freestone, an hard Greet-stone, a soft Reddish stone, Iron stone, Brimstone, Vitriol, Niter, Allum, Lead, and Cop∣per: (and without doubt divers mixtures of these) but also ma∣ny other Minerals might (perhaps) be found out by the diligent seach and industry of those who would take pains to labour a little herein. Printed at York by Tho: Broad, being to be sold in his shop at the lower end of stone-gate, near to Common-Hall-Gates, 1649. This Letter will not permit me to make a compleat Natural History of the things of this Isle; yet I shal relate divers things which may be as hints to set some others to work, which I have found in Mr. Cambden and others: and shall briefly instruct the Hus∣bandman what he ought to take notice of, for his own and others good. And first, if he live nigh the Sea, let him take notice of those things the Sea casteth up; for it hath even with us cast up Amber∣greece, which is worth so much Gold; with the which not long since a Fisherman of Plymouth greased his boots, not knowing what it was: sometimes it casteth up Jet and Amber, as at Whitbey oftentimes. In former times we had Oysters which had very fair great Pearls in them of good worth; and at this time some of them are
found in Denbigh-shire; Coperas-stone likewise is found along by the Sea-Coasts of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Hampshire, out of the which Copperas is made; a thing very useful for Ders, Curri∣ers, &c. further Sea-weeds are not to be sleighted; for in Iersey they have no other fuel amongst them; and here in England it is burnt to make Kelpe for Glassemen, and is also very good manure for divers Lands; also Sea-owse is not only good to lay on Land, but at Dover, and other places, the Inhabitants make Brick there∣of, called Flaunders-Bricks &c. Sea-sands in Cornwall do very much enrich their Lands; and in Cumber-land out of a certain kind of sand they extract Salt, &c. 2. Let him take notice of all sorts of Waters, which issue forth of the earth, differing from the ordinary, in Colour, Odour, Taste: for it is well known, how advantagious these waters are; often∣times, not only to particular men, but also to the Countrey about; yea to the whole Island, as appeareth by the waters of Tunbridge in Kent, and of Epsham in Surrey, Knaresborough, Spaw in York-shire, and by the Allum-waters in Newenham in Warwick-shire, like Milk in taste and colour, and are excellent for the Stone and wounds; and also it appeareth by the salt Fountains in Worcester-shire and Cheshire, which furnish all those parts, with an excellent fine white salt: by the hot Bath's in Summer-setshire, and the luke-warm waters by Bristol. &c. At Pitchford in Shropshire, is a fountain which casteth forth liquid Bitumen which the people use for Pitch, &c. 3. Let him not despise the sorts of Sands, which he findeth: for some Sands are for buildings, as the rough sorts; others for scow∣ring▪ others for casting fine metals, as Highgate sand; others for the Glasse mex, as a sand lately found in Sussex▪ In Scotland there is a sand, which containeth a considerable quantity of Gold: and in divers Countries fine Gold aboundeth very much in sands; and if we may believe an excellent Dutch Chymist, there is scarce any sand without it. 4. Let him take notice of the Earth, Loames, Clayes, &c. which have divers and necessary uses: as first the stiffest Clayes, as New-Castle and Nonsuch, are for the Glassemens Pots, for Crucibles, melting pots: the lesse stiffe for ordinary Earthen wares, Brewers, Tiles, Bricks▪ &c. white Clay is for Tobacco-pipes: Marle of divers colours and stiffness is excellent for Hus∣band-men:
Fuller's-Earth is found in Kent, Surrey, and lately in divers other places, for the great benefit of the Clothier: Rub and Rubrick in York-shire, as also divers other in Oxford and Glo∣cester-shire excellent for Painters, &c. Turffe for firing may be found in most parts of this Isle, if people were industrious: neces∣sity now and then compelleth them to be inquisitive, as it did late∣ly at Oxford and Kent, where it is found in good quantity. in Holland they have little fuel, save what is taken out of their ditches; and therefore it is truly said, that their firing is as it were fish'd out of the water, and its indifferent good fuel: Coales are found in ve∣ry many places, yet divers places are in great want of them. 5. Let him take notice of the several stones found in this Isle, as of Freestones for building; Cobbels and rough hard stones for pa∣ving, Tomb-stones; soft sandy stones commonly called fire-stones, because that they will endure strong fires, and therefore fit for Iron furnaces; and this propriety these soft stones have, that when they are white hot, a steel instrument will scarce touch them to hurt them. Alabaster is found at Burton on the Trent, and in Staffordshire, and a Titbury-Castle: excellent Marble at Snothil in Hereford-shire: a course Marble near Oxford; in Kent, also at Purbrick in Dorsetshire, Milstones in Anglesey, in Flintshire, Darbyshire, Lime-stones: Chalk in very many places, for divers uses: Allum-stone is found in Anglesey, but especially at Gisborrow in Yorkeshire, where the Allum works are, which serve this Island; Lapis Clamina∣ris is lately found in Somersetshire, by the which Copper is made brasse: Manganese for those that make white glasse, lately found in the North: the best Emery for pollishing Iron in Jersey: Plaister at Knaresborough: Black▪ lead in Cumberland, and no where else in Europe: There is a stone in Durham out of which they make salt; Diamonds are found about Bristol and Cornwall very large, but soft: There is a stone near Beaver Castle like a Star. In Yorkshire another like a Serpent petrefied: and also other stones round like bullets, which being broken have as it were a Serpent in them without an head, &c. 6. Of all Minerals and Metals, Iron-stone is found almost in e∣very County, and is profitable where Wood is plentiful: the best is found in Lancashire, one load and a half making a Tun of Iron: it hath been transported into Ireland, to mix with poor Mine. In Richard the 2. time a Copper-Mine was found in Wenlock in
Shrop-shire, but exhausted: in Queen Elizabeths dayes one was found at Keswick in Cumberland: and lately in Stafford shire, York-shire, and near Barstable in Devon-shire, on which some Gentlemen intend speedily to work: Lead is found in Durham-wall and Devonshire: Brimstone in Yorkshire and Wales, An∣tymony in Staffordshire: a silver Mine in Cardiganshire: a gold Mine was discovered in Scotland in King James his time: and many rich Mines, might be discovered in England, if that the Kings prerogative (which was to take all Royal Mines to himself, (viz.) Silver, Gold and Copper) were so certainly abolished, that they which should find these Metals in their own Lands, might safely digg them. But some will object and say, that many things are of little worth and profit. To these I answer, that God hath made nothing in vain, every thing hath his peculiar use, and though some things seem to be of little worth and contemptible, as Sand, Loame, Chalke; yet it hath pleased the wise Creator to make these things very necessary for mans comfortable subsistance, which they that want these things can testifie: As for example, in New-England, where there is no Chalk nor Lime-stone, they are com∣pelled to burn Oyster-shells, Cockles, to make Lime; or else they could hardly build any houses. The like I may say of Sand and Loam in divers places, where they are wanting. 2. I say that most of those things I have spoken of, are very pro∣fitable in one place or other. To instance in some of the meaner sort, at London Brick-men give 50 l per Acre, only for Loam to make Bricks, and pay 3 l per Acre, of yearly Rent, and are to leave the Land worth the same yearly Rent; likewise I know a Chalk cliffe in Kent not two Acres of ground, valued at many 100 l and that one Colum of Chalk which is 10. foot square, is valued at 40, or 50 l at 8 d per load. The Oker Mines of Oxford and Gloucestershire are of great value, and so would o∣thers of that kind, if they could be found; so is the Black-lead Mine. Also the pits of Clay, Marle, Coale, Turffe, &c. And therefore I desire all Countrey-men to endeavour to know all sorts of Stones, Clayes, Earths, Oares, and to teach their Children the use of them, that they may know that this sand is for building, this Loam for Bricks, this Clay for Pots, this Marle for Corn-land: and if that they shall find any Stones, Earths, which they know
not, that they would lay them up, till that they meet with some ingenious man, that can inform them. The richest Mines of the world, have been found out by these meanes, if we will believe Hi∣stories. And this I am sure of, that by this means, they may much advance their knowledge, and be more profitable to the publique, their Neighbours, and also to themselves. 17. Deficiency▪ is the ignorance of the Vegetables of this I∣sland,17. Defi∣ciency, of the Vege∣tables of this I∣sland, and their Ver∣tues and Vses. and their Vertues and Vses. And the first Deficiency that I take notice of, is the ignorance of the ordinary seeds which are commonly sowen amongst us: for usually the Countrey-man contenteth himself with one or two sorts, and knoweth no more, when as there are very great varieties; some of which agree with one sort of ground, some with another: as for example, there are very many sorts of Wheates, some called White Wheat, some Red Wheat, some Bearded, (which, as I have said before, is not so subject to Mildews, as others) others not: some sorts with 2. rowes, others with 4. and 6. some with one eare on a stalk, others with double eares, or 2. on the same stalk; red stalk Wheat of Buckinghamshire, Winter Wheat, Summer Wheat, which is sowen abundantly in New-England, in April and May, and reaped ordinarlly in 3. moneths; and many sorts more. Not to trouble my discourse with Spelt, Zea, Tiphine-Wheat, or Olew, Far, Siligo, Alica, which were used amongst the Auntients; but now unknown not only to the Countreyman, but even to the learnedest Botanicks: so I may say that the ordinary Yeoman is ignorant of the diversities of Barley's, for there is not only the ordinary Barly, but also big sprat-Barly, which hath late∣ly been sowen in Kent with good profit; also Winter-Barly sowen in Winter, Barly with 4.6. rowes, naked Barly, which require divers dispositions in Land: some delighting in finer, others in stiffer grounds. So there is also Winter and Summer-Rie, and 20. sorts of Pease, the ordinary Schew, the Raith or Early-ripe Pease, the Roncivals, Hastivers, Hotarses, Gray-Pease, Green-Pease, Pease without skins, Sugar Pease, whose shels are sweeter then the Pease it self, and have been within these 10. years plentifully sowen in Lincoln-shire with profit; also Fulham, Sandwich-Pease, &c. which require divers sorts of land and seasons: so also there are di∣vers sorts of Oats, white, black, naked, which in New England
serveth well for Oatmeal without grinding, being beaten as they come out of the barn; Scotch, Poland, &c. Also Buck-wheat, Len∣tiles; divers sorts of Tares, of Hemp and Flax, altogether unknown to most Countrey-men, but I hope that hereafter rhey wil be more inquisitive after them: for divers of them may be of good use on their lands. 2. Defficiency in this kind, is, that they are ignorant of the Plants and Grasses which naturally grow among us, and their Uses, which likewise were made for to be food for Cattel, and also for the service of man. This ignorance causeth them to admire, and to esteem even as miraculous, ordinary and trivial things; as for exam∣ple, how it cometh to passe, that in one Meddow an Horse thriveth very much and speedily, and yet a Bullock will not in that place; and contrariwise in a Medow close by the former, the Bullock will thrive, and the Horse not: so also how it commeth to passe that Conies and Sheep will thrive well, where there is scarcely any Pa∣sture, and yet come to nothing on Commons, where there is a grea∣ter quantity of Pasture; which proceedeth from this cause, that some kind of Plants are more agreeing and sweeter to one sort of Cattel then to another, and every Beast almost hath some Plant or other, which they love exceedingly. I suppose, that the observances of this kind, might be very usefull in Husbandry. These Deficiencies I will draw to three Heads. 1. I say that divers Plants (not to speak of Fruits, because we have already spoken of them) that grow naturally in our Island, may be very serviceable to the Husbandman, both for his Pastures and Corn-lands. To instance in some few: we see that divers sorts of wild Vetches, Chiches, Tares, &c. grow wild in divers places which though they bear not so great and large crops, as some others alrea∣dy used; yet who knoweth what they would do, if they were ma∣nured as other grains▪ and in land proper for them: for we see that the transplanting of Plants into gardens, doth very much meliorate or better them; and without doubt all those grains which are in use with us, were at first picked out of the fields and woods; and by ingenious men found useful for man or beast, and of late divers have been found not known to our forefathers, as Saint Foin Lucern; and why may not we find divers Grasses, Vetches, Medicaes, Wild Pease, &c. which as yet are scarce taken notice of.
2. There grow divers sorts of wild Pease, but to speak of two onely. 1. Sort which groweth on the stony beaches of the sea, where there is little or no earth, the roots are many foot deep in the ground. In Queen Maries days in a dearth, the poor people ga∣thered divers sacks full of them, and they were no small relief, to to them, who hath tried whether they would thrive better on bet∣ter land? 2. Sort groweth on dry barren land, and is commonly called the everlasting Pease; which continually groweth out of the same root. In Gardens I have seen it grow 10 years together, and larger at the 10 years end, then at the first. I have also seen it flourish on barren grounds, where Oats were burned away: who knoweth but these and other Plants may be serviceable, if not for man, at least for beasts or Pigeons; for in New-England the great flights of Pige∣ons are much maintained by these, I am sure it were good to make experiments of these and divers others. 2. Head, is the Ignorance of the MechanicaI uses of Herbs and Trees, for even for these uses most Plants have some peculiar propriety. To instance in a few. We know that Elm is for wheels; and tbe best wood to make Herrings red, Oak is for the Shipwright, Joyner, Tanner; Horn-beams, Beech, for the Milwright; Line-tree for bass-ropes; old Elder without pith is very tough and fit for Cogs of Wheels, Tooth-pickers; Pear-tree for Mathematical instruments and ingravers, &c. Osiers for baskets; Walnut for Gunstocks; Asp for Hoops; Box, Ash for a 100 uses; and much more might be spo∣ken of this kind, if time would permit. So likewise divers Plants are for Painters, as you may see in Battees experiments: some for the Dyers, but as yet we know but four, (viz. Woad, Would, Green-wood, and Madder) amongst 1200 Plants & upward; which grow wild with us. I could wish some ingenious man would take the pains to search out the Mechanical uses of Plants; surely it were a good way to advance Mechanicks, who in their callings usually go round; as horses in a mill, and endeavour very little to ad∣vance or know the causes of their operations, I know a Gentle∣man, who promiseth some things in this kind, and I hope will be as good as his word. 3. Head, is the ignorance of the very Physical uses of Plants: for
though many hundred Plants do grow amongst us; yet but few of them are used Physically: whereas there is scarce any one but may be usefull in this kind. And truly in my opinion it is a great fault that we so much admire those things, that are far fetched and dear bought; when as oft-times they are gathered in unseasonable times, and corrupted by long voyages by sea, counterfeited by Merchants; yea we have very oft quid pro quo, and rank poysons, and do neg∣lect those medicines which God hath given us here at home. I am credibly informed that in former times, Virga aurea was in great use with us. and usually sold for eight pence per ounce, and brought from France: but so soon as it was found growing plentifully in our hedges, it was cast forth of the Apothecaries shops, as of little vertue. And though some will object, that our Plants have little vertue. I say its false; for God hath tempered them for our com∣plexions: and we see very oft that one simple medicine doth more good then the great compositions of the ancients, which are rather ad pompam then for health, and seem to savour somewhat of the Mountebank; because Opium is alwayes an ingredient. And further we see, that where any Endemicall or National disease reigneth, their God hath also planted a specifique for it: As the Cochleare or Scurvy-grasse for the Scurvy, in the Baltick Sea, where it is very frequent, and also in Holland, England. So in the West-Indies, (from whence the great Pox first came, and where it reigneth very much, that not only man, but other Crea∣tures are infected with it, so that even Dogs die of that disease in our Northern Plantations, perhaps catching this infection, by mingling with Indian Dogs,) there grow the specifiques for this Disease, as Gujacum, Salsaperilla, Sassafras, and the Salvages do easily cure these distempers▪ Further we see, that even the irra∣tional Creatures, can find not only meat, but also Medicines for themselves; as the Dog, Couchgrass for a vomit: the Dove, Ver∣vein; the Weasel Kue; the Swallow, Celandine, the Toad Plantine; and where is our reason that we cannot? I therefore desire all Countrey▪people, to endeavour to know these Plants which grow at their doores: (for God hath not planted them there for no purpose; for he doth nothing in vain,) and to collect together the plain simple Medicaments of their Grandm; by this means they may save many a 40. pence: I
mean preserve themselves and Families, and Neighbours, in good health. Some small Treatises have of late been written, to shew the use of our Plants in Physick; and I hope ingenious men will dayly more and more communicate the secrets of this kind, which they have in their hands, for the publique good. 18. Defi∣ciency con∣cerning Animals.They that write of 4. footed beasts, do reckon about 120. spe∣cies of them: half of them are scarcely known amongst us. I do suppose therefore, that divers species are wanting, which may be useful. To instance in some: And 1. To begin with the Elephant, the greatest, wisest, and longest lived of all Beasts: which abound very much in the Eastern parts of the world; as China, India, and are accounted very servicea∣ble, both for the Warres, and for carriage (15. men usually ri∣ding on his back together) they are not chargeable to keep; why may they not be of use even here, when I am credibly informed, an Elephant lived divers years here in a Park? so that they can en∣dure the coldness of this Climate. 2. The Buffle, which is as big as an Ox, and serviceable both for the Plough, and for their Milk: their skins make the best buffe, they will fare very hard, and live in Fens and bogs, where nothing else can. In the Duke of Florences Countrey near Pisa, are many of them. 3. The honest and patient Asse, which was very much used in the old time for carriage, (as the Horse for the War, and the Oxe for the Plough,) and in many Countries at this time; they will eat Thistles, and live even with nothing. They may save poor men (who are not able to keep an Horse, because he is a great feeder,) much labour. 4. Mules, which is a very strong and proud beast, and will carry far more then an Horse, and are more sure footed. I sup∣pose, that they might be serviceable to the Carriers here, as they are beyond the Seas. 5. Black Foxes, may be profitable; whose skins have been sold from 20. l per skin to 90 l I might add divers more of this kind: as Muske-Cats Sables, Martines, Minkes, Musk Squash, Guiney-Pigs, and a sort of Con, which some few have in Hamp∣shire, whose Fur is worth 2 s. 6. d. or 3 s per skin, being little in∣ferior to Beaver, &c. but for brevities sake I passe them over: as
also divers sorts of Fowls, of good use; as a kind of Duck with a crooked bill, which layeth constantly as Hens do, as also Hawks of divers sorts of good value, which perhaps the Countrey-man loveth not; because they are enemies to his Poultry. 2. Deficiency is, that we do not endeavour to advance the best kinds of this Cattel, which are amongst us. And 1. To begin with horses. The French-man that writeth a book called the Treasure politick, saith, that in England in Queen Eli∣zabehs days, we had not above 3 or 4000 horse worth any thing for the war, and those onely in Noblemens stables, which thing perhaps did the more incourage the Spaniard to invade us; but at this time we are known to have very many thousand of horse not inferiour to the best in the world: yet I suppose, that we might much meliorate our breed by Spanish Jennets, Barbary, &c. And we are not so careful to increase good horses as we should be. 2. We are too negligent in our kine, that we advance not the best species: for some sorts give abundance of milk, and better then others: some sorts are larger, more hardy, and will sooner fat, &c. Lancashire and some few Northern Counties, are the onely places where they are a little careful in these particulars. 3. We are not curious in procuring the best sorts of sheep, for greatnesse, soundnesse, and fine wool. I wonder that some of our sheep-masters have not procured of those exceeding fine-woolled sheep of Spain; whose wool costeth the Mrchant nigh 10 s per pound, before it is exported: I suppose that it would for a time mend our wool, if not continue so for ever: for these sheep were first carried forth out of England, if we may beleeve stories, Spain not affording such sheep before. Dutch sheep, are reported to have two or three Lambs ordinarily. Dutch sheep are very great, with great tailes; but their wool is very course, not onely because of their course feeding; but also because in hot countries, they ordinarily mingle with Goats, and therefore in Venice ordinary Porters will scarce eat any Mutton. And here I cannot but relate, that all stran∣gers very much wonder at 2 things in our sheep, (not to speak of the finenesse of wool,) And 1. That our sheep if they be sound, seldome or never drink, even in Summer; though they go on the driest Chalky lands: as it plainly appeareth in Kent, where there is scarce water for the great
Cattel, which proceedeth from the moisture of our air, and abun∣dance of rains and dews. 2. That our sheep do not follow their shepheards as they do in all other Countries: for the Shepheard goeth before, and the sheep follow like to a pack of dogs, this disobedience of our sheep, doth not happen to us, as Papist Priests tell their simple flocks; because we have left their great shepheard the Pope; but because we let our sheep range night and day in our fields without a shepheard; which other Countries dare not for fear of Wolves and other rave∣nous beasts, but are compelled to guard them all day with great dogs, and to bring them home at night, or to watch them in their folds. 3. Deficiency in this kind, is the neglect of Fish-ponds, which are very profitable: for fish usually live by such worms and flies as are ingendred in the ponds, and require no charge. Concerning the ordering of them, and the profit of them, read Mr. Vaughans Golden Grove. And surely it would be a great benefit to this I∣sland, if we had fish at reasonable rates. I cannot therefore passe by two extream abuses, which exceedingly destroy fish, and are in no wise to be permitted. 1. That divers poor men keep many Swine, and in nets, or o∣therwise catch many vessels of the young fry of fish and feed their Swine with them. 2. That the Fishermen in the River have the meashes of their nets so streight, that they take many sorts of fish, when they are too small, and do destroy more fish then they take. I hope these abu∣ses wlll be reformed with all severity. To this head I may adde Decoys, which are very frequent in Holland, and profitable; but ve∣ry rare with us in England: yet it may be very profitable and de∣lightfull. 4. Deficiency, is the ignorance of the insects of this Island. And though it may seem ridiculous to many, to affirm that Magots, Butterflies, should be of any importance; yet I desire them to con∣sider, that we have our Honey, the sweetest of foods from Beas, which are Cattel of this kind: also all our Slks, Sattns, Plushes, and bravery from the poor Silk-worm, which may be called a Magot, Caterpillar, or Butter-flie, &c. the richest of our Colours from the Coheneile, which is one of this sort. Cum-la is made
by Aunts, some are used for food, as Locusts, &c. as you may read in Musset's Book de Infectis. Many of these likewise are used in Physick, as Cantharides, Wood-sowes, Lice, &c. Some think, that Medicines transcending even the Chymists, may be had out of these; for every Plant, which hath a Medicinal vertue, is also sub∣limed up into this living Quintessence: and therefore I commend divers ingenious men, as Mr. Marshal and others, who have col∣lected many hundred sorts of these; and I hope they will commu∣nicate ere long their experiments to the world. 19. Deficiency concerning divers things necessary for the good of Cattel.19. Defi∣ciency con∣cerning divers things ne∣cessary for the good of Cattel. 1. That we are ignorant of the divers Diseases of Cattel and their Cures. Not to runne over all the diseases of Cattell and their Cures, which would be too long, and you may read them in Mr. Markams works, the Countrey Farmer, and others. I will in∣stance only in two, which some years sweep away Cattel, as the Plague doth men, (viz.) the Murreine amongst great Cattel, and the Rot amongst Sheep. And though divers have wrote concern∣ing the Cures of these Diseases; yet we do not find that effect which we desire: and therefore I hope some will attempt to sup∣ply this Deficiency, and write a good Treatise about the Diseases of Cattel. Of these 2. Diseases, I shall briefly declare my mind: And. 1. Of the Murreine, which proceedeth from an inflamation of the blood, and causeth a swelling in the throat, which in little time suffocateth the Cattel. The especial Causes of this Disease, are an hot and dry season of the year; which dryeth up the waters, or at least doth so putrifie them, that they are unwholsome; and also the letting of Carrion lie unburied. This Disease is thought to be infectious; but perhaps it may proceed from one common cause, as the rottenness of Sheep. The best way to keep your Cattel from this Disease, is to let them stand in cool places in summer, & to have abundance of good water, and speedily to bury all Carri∣on: and if any of your Cattel be infected, speedily to let them blood, and to give them a good drench, &c. by these meanes divers have preserved their Cattel; when their Neighbours have perish∣ed. 2. Concerning the rot of Sheep, not to speak of the Pelt-rot, or
Sheep that are starved; but of the ordinary rot, called by some the white rot, and is a kind of dropsie, their bellies are full of wa∣ter, and their liver discoloured. I have seen out of the livers of sheep tending to rottennesse, living Creatures, leaping like small Flounders; which without question in little time will destroy the liver, and consequently produce an indisposition not unlike to the Rot. The common people say, that these worms are caused by the over-heatings of sheep, and that Rottennesse proceedeth from a plant called Cotyledon, or Marsh Penny-wort, which is of a very sharp taste, and therefore not likely that sheep will eat it; but it may be a signe of wet rotten Land, as broom is of sound and dry land. This is certain, that in wet moist years, sheep die very much of the Rot; and in dry years on the same ground, they hold sound: and yet I have heard that in Ireland, which is far moister then England, rottennesse of sheep is not known. It were therefore well worth the labour of an ingenious man, to inquire into the causes of these indispositions in sheep. The meanes, which have been found very effectual for the cu∣ring of these Diseases, are these: first, to drive your sheep up to dry Lands, or to keep them in the fold, till the dew be off the grasse, or to feed them some dayes with fine dry hay, especially of salt Meadow, or to put them into salt Marshes; for in those pla∣ces sheep never rot, or to drive them to some salt River, and there to wash them, and make them drink of the water, this will kill the skab, and also the ticks, and fasten the wooll; but if you have not the conveniencies before said, then rub their teeth with salt, or rather make a strong pickle with salt and water, and force them to drink thereof. Some dry Pitch in an Oven, and add to the pickle, and have found very good success: for these Medicines do exoficcate the superfluous humidities, open obstructions, and kill worms. Some commend the Antimonial Cup, as a catholick Medicine against all Diseases of cattel. 2. We are ignorant of divers ingenuities, concerning feeding and fatting of Cattel and other Creatures. To instance in some; And 1. Of the Horse who is a great feeder. In Kent and Hartford∣shire they usually cut all their Oats and Pease small, and give them with their Chaffe; by this means the Horses sooner fill them∣selves,
and eat all the straw up: some put his Horse-meat into a bag, and so order it that a little only lyeth in the Manger; which when that is eaten up, more falleth down, and not before; by this way Horses do not blow their meat, nor throw it out of the man∣ger with their Noses. A further good peece of Husbandry they use, which is this, when their Horses are well fed at night, they fill the Rack with Wheat or Barly-straw, and so leave them; the Horse perceiving that that which is in the rack is not very plea∣sant, lyeth down and taketh his rest, which is as good to him as his meat: if he rise in the night, and fall to the rack and manger, as he usually doth, and findeth nothing but straw, he sleepeth till the morning; but if it be Hay, Tares, or Pease, the Jade will pull it all down and spoil it, and likewise will be hindred from his rest; by the which double damage doth insue. Currying and dressing of horses ought not to be forgot, it is half as good as their meat. Brim∣stone and Elecompaine roots are the especial ingredients for this Physick. 2. Of the feeding & fatting of Cows. We usually feed Cattel with straw in racks in the yard, or turn them to the fields, and there let them feed as much and how they please; which hath many in∣conveniences: as first Cattel spoil as much with their heels as they eat, especially if the ground be moist, or if the Flie be very trou∣blesome, and they blow and stench and tumble much, and if the Flie be busie they run up and down, and over-heat themselves, and fat very little, so that oftentimes in Iune or Iuly they fatten as little as at Christmas, and most of their dung is lost by these means, &c. But in Holland they do thus: They keep their Cattel housed winter and summer; for the Winter-provision, they lay in not onely hay, but also grains,) which they buy in Sum∣mer, and bury in the ground:) and also Rape-seed Cakes, and sow Turneps, not onely for themselves, but their Cows also; with the which Turneps being sliced, and their tops, and Rape-seed Cakes, and grains, &c. they make meshes for their Cows, and give it them warm; which the Cows will slop up like Hogs, and by this means they give very much milk. In the Summer time they mow the great Clover-grasse, and give it them in racks; so that their Cattel are not troubled with the pinching frosts nor rains, nor with the parching Sun in Summer, neither with the Flie, nor do they over-heat themselves or spoil half so much meat; and are always as fat
as their Masters, or Bacon-hogs. The Dung and Urine they charily preserve, and thereby keep their meadows of Clover-grasse (which are constantly mowen twice or thrice yearly) in good heart: and in∣deed Cattel ought not to go amongst Clover-grasse, because it usu∣ally groweth with long Haum (as they call it) like Pease, which if it be broken will not thrive. In Bermudas they have a pecu∣liar way of fattening their Cattel, not used any where else that I know▪ which is with Green Fennel, that groweth in that Island plentifully. There is a plant in Essex called Myrchis or Cow-pursley, which groweth fast and early in the spring, which they give their Cattel at the beginning of the year, and they eat it well. It is an ill custome that is used almost every where, to let Hogs lie in their dirt and dung, when they are fattening; for all creatures generally do hate and abhor their own dung: and an hog is the eleanliest of all creatures, and will never dung nor stale in his stie, if he can get forth, which other creatures will: and though he tumble in the dirt in Summer; yet that is partly to cool himself, and part∣ly to kill his lice, for when the dirt is dry, he rubbeth it off, and de∣stroyeth the lice thereby. Sir Hugh Platts in his writings setteth down divers ingenious ways of fattening Poultry, &c. and more may be found out day∣ly. The Jews have a peculiar way of fattening Geese, with Milk, Figs, Raisins, and other sweet things, by which they make the li∣ver of an extraordinary greatnesse, and is a dish much valued by them. In Moor-fields there is one that keepeth many hundreds of Co∣neys with grains and bran: and some others who keep the great laying Ducks, with these things and bloud, to their great advan∣tage. I have seen a book translated out of French, which teacheth how to gain divers hundred pounds per annum, by fifty pound stock in hens. I suppose about London where Eggs are so dear, great profit might be made by them. Turkeys may be kept with good profit, where there are many Meadows as in Suffolk. In Bark-shire many keep tame Pheasants, and have gained well thereby. 3. We do not know how to improve the comodities proceeding
from Cattel to the highest: as for example our ordinary butter might be better scented and tasted: some Ladies have fine ingenui∣ties in this kind. We cannot make Cheese comparable to the Par∣misan, nor so good as the Angelots of France, our ordinary Cheese is not comparable to the Holland Cheeses, where also divers sorts of Cheeses are made of divers Colours: but I cannot much com∣mend their green Cheeses, which are made of that colour by Sheeps-dung, &c. but I hope in short time our good Hous-wifes wil scorn that any shall excel them. 20. Deficiency, Is the want of divers things,20. Defi∣ciency, Of the want of divers things which are necessary for the ac∣complish∣ment of Agricul∣ture. which are necessa∣ry for the accomplishment of Agriculture—As 1. That we have not a Systema or compleat book of all the parts of Agriculture. Till the latter end of Queen Elizabeths days, I suppose that there was scarce a book wrote of this subject; I never saw or heard of any. About that time: Tusser made his verses, and Scot wrote about a Hop-garden, Gouge translated some things. Lately divers small Treatises have been made by di∣vers, as Sir Hugh Platts, Gab. Platts, Markham, Blith, and Butler, who do well in divers things; but their books cannot be called compleat books, as you may perceive by divers particular things, not so much as mentioned by them. The Countrey Far∣mer translated out of French is enough; bt its no ways framed, or squared for us here in England: and I fear the first Authors went on probabilities and hear-says rather then experience, I hope some ingenious man will be incouraged, to undertake a work so necessary and commendable. 2. Deficiency is, that Gentlemen try so few experiments for the advance of this honest and labourious calling; when as many experiments might be made for a smaller matter; for half a Pole square, will give as certain a demonstration, as an Acre, and a pot∣tle as a Hogshead. I hope in time there will be erected a Colledge of experiments, not onely for this, but also all other Mechanicall Arts. 3. Deficiency is, That Gentlemen and Farmers do not meet and communicate secrets in this kind, but keep what they have ex∣perimented themselves, or known, from others; as Sybils leaves: I mean as rare secrets, not to be communicated. I hope that we shal see a more communicative spirit amongst us ere long. And Sir I can∣not
but desire you, if you have any things more in your hands of Gabriel Platts, or any mens else, that you would with speed pub∣lish them. 4. Deficiency is, That we want a place to the which men may resort for to find such ingenious men, as may be serviceable for their ends and purposes; and also know where to find such seeds and plants as they desire, as the great Clover-grasse, Saint Foin, La Lucern, &c. 5. Deficiency is, That men do usually covet gteat quantities of land; yet cannot manage a little well. There were amongst the an∣cient Romans some appointed to see that men did Til their lands as they should do, and if they did not. to punish them as enemies to the publick; perhaps such a law might not be amisse with us: for without question the publick suffereth much, by private mens negligences; I therefore wish men to take Columel's Councel; which is, Laudato ingentia Rura, Exiguum Colito. For melior est culta exiguitas, &c. as another saith, or as we say in English, A little Farm well tilled is to be preferred: for then we should not see so much wast land, but more industry, greater crops, and more peo∣ple imployed, then are at this present, to the great profit of the Com¦mon-wealth. 21 Defici∣ency, that because of our sins we have not the blessing of God upon our labors▪21. Deficiency is, That by reason of our sins we have not the blessing of the Lord upon our Labours. And this the reason, that although the Husbandman hath been laborious and diligent in his calling these last years; yet our Crops have been thin, his Cattel swept away, and scarcity and famine hath seized on all parts of this Land; and if we had not been supplyed from abroad, we had quire devoured all the Creatures of this I∣sland for our sustenance, and yet we could not be satisfied, but must have devoured one another. And therefore to conclude, though I desire the Husbandman to be diligent and laborious in his calling, yet I counsel him to break off his sins by Repentance, to have his eys towards him who is the Giver of every good thing, and to pray daily to him for his blessings, who giveth freely to them that ask, and upbraideth not. And although all callings ought to look up to him that is on high; yet rhe Countrey-man especially; for he hath a more immediate dependance on him then any other: for if the Lord with-hold his fat dew from Heaven, or the former
or later Rain, it is in vain that the Husbandman rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of earofulnesse: for we know, that it is the Lord that maketh barren places fruitfull, and he like∣wise that turneth fruitfull Lands into barrennesse, (as the Land of Canaan, which was very fruitfull even in the time of the Canaanites, but now a barren desart) and therefore, I again de∣sire the Countrey-man to walk as it becommeth a Christian, in all Sobriety, Righteousnesse and Godlinesse: not to trust to his con∣fidence in his own labours, and good Husbandry; but on the Lord that hath made all things: for though even Paul himself doth plant, and Apollo doth water; yet it is onely the Lord that gi∣veth increase and plenty, which he will not deny to those that fear him; for they shall want nothing that is good. And thus Sir, I have written to you very largely my thoughts concerning the Husbandry of this Island, and partly what I have seen in many travels. Good Sir, be not offended at my long and impertinent stories, my rude language, and unmethodical discourse. It was, if not to satisfie; yet somwhat to gratifie the universal good∣nesse of your spirit, and care of the publick, which God hath inrich∣ed you withall. And these are onely my first thoughts, which in haste I have hudled up together. I hope (if the Lord send life and health) my second thoughts shall be better: But whatsoever I have done, pray look on it, as comming from one who is desirous to serve you, and to advance the Publick good, according to the talent the Lord hath given him. Thus I commit you to the pro∣tection of the Almighty: And rest SIR, Your, Anno; 1651. Copies and Extracts of more letters written to Mr. Samuel Hart∣lib: They all tending very much to the great improvement not
onely of Agriculture, but of true and real Learning, and Natu∣rall Philosophy. SIR, The several things observed and set down during my stay in the Country, are these. 1. I Learned the whole way and art, of making and ordering of Woad, viz. the time when they sow it, when first they weed it, and cut it. I saw the manner of their gathering it, grinding, bal∣ling, drying it, and after sweating, and curing it. Informing my self of the whole charge and profit of it: have made divers Annota∣tions on it, and taken order for some seed to be sent to me, for other more compendious and profitable trials, answerable to the Nature and Philosophy of it, 2. This and some other things, gave me occasion to make the best inquiry I could of Housewives and of Fowlers, for all sorts of dying weeds, and herbs, used in the dying of wool; or of nets, which I have carefully collected to improve to a more then ordinary use; some being very remarkable. 3. Among other generall inquiries and adventures, I heard of one at Ware, that charr'd Sea-coal; procured an errand and com∣mendations thither; went, was civilly used, and satisfied in the truth and manner of the thing, and found the Gentleman who was the first Author of it to be one Airs, now dead an ingenious man, a great Malster, made much profit of it: it drying Malt as sweet as if the Sun it self did it; it is cheaper then either wood or straw; and may be many otherways applied. 4. I went into the Isle of Ely, to see one of the Holland-mills for dreyning; though set up there and kept by certain Frenchmen. The Invention seemed to me but mean and rude, and Mr. Wheelers way much more ingenious. 5. I saw at Wickleson the manner of your Holland Sluces. The ruines also of a Cochlea, for the emptying and dreining of water, of which Vbaldus hath writ a whole Treatise. Likewise a pretty kind of Pinnace with Ordnance, somewhat like a close Liter, but flat-bottommed; which rowed with wheels instead of Oars, im∣ployed it seems formerly with admirable successe, for the taking in
of Crowland, and which gave me a proof of what I for many years have thought possible, and of very great use and service, and still think it of unknown value, if it were skilfully indeed framed, and applyed as it might be. 6. The Lord F. W. assured me of a Gentleman in Norfolk, that made above 10000. l. sterl. of a piece of ground, not 40. yards square, and yet there was neither Mineral nor Mettal in it, He after told me, it was onely a sort of fine Clay, for the making a choise sort of earthen ware; which some that knew it seeing him dig up, discovered the value of it, and sending it into Holland, received so much money for it: it is a story not to be despised. 7. His Lordship told me the way of making of Spunk or Touch wood. 8. Mr. H. his Lordship's Bailiff, shewed me a small plat of ground, scarce an Acre and half, wherein he assured me, he had in one year 21. hundred of Hops; and falling out then to be scarce in other places, he made of that small parcel of ground 4. score. l. 9. At Milton I saw a Spring, that might have been made big enough to serve a large Town; which my friend Wheeler had new∣ly discovered, and broke up; every man opposing him in it, and deriding his confidence, till he made it appear, and shamed them. Hereupon he gave me several marks of knowing and finding out Springs under ground. 10. From Springs we converted our discourse to Pipes, for the carrying along of Water under ground to any House or Town; wherein he imparted some Secrets to me, both of the fittest Wood and Trees for Pipes, and preserving them whole Ages from corrup∣tion, by ways extreamly rational, and not hitherto observed or found out by any. 11. This drew on some discourse of woods, their differences and several applications: in which he told me many singular ob∣servations. 12. After this, I saw at Melton an excellent Model of a Garden, Orchard, and Walks; and being further curious, my friend related a Witty invention he once put in practise, to plant an Orchard in a Morish place, where never grew a Tree. 13. I casually met with one Boughton, a most singular rare man in carving or cutting out Figures in small or in great Stone;
and for that reason Servant in ordinary to the late King: who ac∣quainted mee of many excellent ingenious men, and promised to seek me at my lodging. 14. Being in Cambridge-shire, I examined more particularly the Husbandry, planting, ordering, and curing of Saffron. Some other things came in my way not without notice: but these are the chief. My own improvements and comments, upon all which, I shall more at large give you, when we meet together be∣ing always. SIR, Yours Queres sent into France; about the seed called La Lucern. WHen one N. N. was last in France, (being in discourse with Doctour D. concerning Saint Foin, he was then told by Doctour D. that for the improvement of barren grounds) there was in those parts of France about Paris) another seed that did far excel that of Saint Foin, and that the name of that more ex∣cellent seed was La Lucern. I am desired by a friend of mine to whom N. N. related this passage of Doctour D.) that by your kindnesse, he may be spoken to of this La Lucern, and his directions desired, where the said seed is to be had? for what price? how much is usually sowed upon an English Acre? what time of the year its sowen? whether it be sowen alone? or with any other ordinary Corn? and with what Corn? and with what kind of land it best a∣grees? and finally, what other particulars he can direct more then is hete set down.
The Answer to the Queres from Paris. I Have been with Doctour D. about Lucern, who tells me that it groweth best in wettish grounds, that the best time of sowing it in England will be in February, at the same time that Oats are sown with the which also it may be sowen, but best alone; that to the sowing of an Arpent, (which is much-what the same with an English-Acre) there will go 12 or 15 l of the seed, the which useth to be sold here at 8 or 9 sols the pound. More Quere's concerning Lucern. I Desire further to know, what kind of wet grounds are best for it? whether Moorish or Clay? whether poor or rich? whether it will continue over a year in the ground? and if more then a year, then how many years it will continue without being new sowen? whether it be only good for Meadowes or for Pa∣sture? and if for pasture then whether the sheep or Cattel be suffer∣ed to go upon it? or whether it be carried off green as the Clover-grasse is in Flanders? Lastly, for what Cattel it is most proper? Another Answer from Paris. I Thought to have sent you 9 l of the seed of Lucern for the sowing of three Acres, Doctor D. having told me, as hereto∣fore I told you, that 3 l would sowe an Arpent or Acre; But as I was going about it, I met with a Gentleman an acquaintance of mine, who some years since (but unknown to me hitherto) hath had some Acres of Meadow of Lucern upon his ground, to whom having casually spoke of my business, and told him all that Doctor D. had told me about the Lucern; he answered me, that Dr. D. was most grosly mistaken in the quantity of the seed required for the sowing of an Acre; and that it would not take up 3 l but two whole Sacks, each sack containing the full load of a strong Porter; after which rate the quantity of seed for the sowing of 3.
Acres would fill a great dry-fat, the sending whereof by Land would come to excessive great charges, and therefore necessarily to be sent by Sea in my opinion. You will be pleased to impart these things to your friend, and to let me know his final resoluti∣on upon them, the which shall be faithfully accomplished by me; and in the mean while, I will get him a perfect and full answer up∣on all his Quere's, not from Dr. D. (whom I dare trust no more in this business, having found him guilty of such grosse mistakes a∣bout it) but from that other Gentleman, who told me he could him∣self resolve most of those Questions; but that for to be the surer, he thought it best to confer first with his Farmer about it. You make Apologies for putting me upon these Inqueries; but I pray you to believe, that at any time I shall most readily and chearfully perform any service that shall lie in my power, for you or any of your friends, for your sake. And I were very unreasonable, to think troublesome any thing that you require of me, when as con∣tinually I put you to so much trouble my self. The last Answer concerning Lucern. THe information about the Lucern that I have got from my Friend, being a very particular one, and containing a very full answer to all the Questions propounded by your Friend; is such as followeth: It requireth a rich ground, but somewhat loose and light, so as a stiffe Clay, and such other tough grounds, are no-wayes fit for it; The ground must not be over-dry nor over-moist, but in a mean; yet somewhat more inclining to moisture, then to the contrary. It must be ploughed three times, the first time in October, and the second and third, towards the Spring. Natural∣ly it doth not love Dung, and cometh much better in a ground that is sufficiently rich of it self, then that which hath been inriched by dunging; and where Dung is made use of, it must be very stale and well rotten, and long before the sowing-time. It cannot en∣dure the cold, and therefore must not be sowen till rhe cold weather and all the danger of it be quite past, viz. about the beginning or midst of April. The Quantity of the seed, is the sixth part of Corn, that the same ground would require: so as only one Bushel of Lucern is to be sown on that space of ground, which would re∣quire
6. Bushels of Corn. It must be carefully weeded, especially in the beginning. And to the end, that it may take the more firm root, some Oats must be mixed with it, but in a very small propor∣tion. It is to be cut as soon as it beginneth to flower, which in the hot Countries (Provence, Languedock and Spain) it doth 5. or 6. times, and some years 7. or 8. times in a Summer; but in this Climate it useth to be cut twice a year, about the end of Iune, and about the end of Septemb. Being cut, it must be turned very oft, that it may dry the sooner, and be carried off the ground the soon∣est that may be; and it must be kept in close Barns, being too ten∣der for to be kept in Reeks, open to the Aire as other Hay, It is good for all kind of Cattel, as Kine, Sheep, Goats, and as well for the young ones (Calves, Lambs, Kids) as for the others; but a∣bove all it agreeth best with Horses. It is much more feeding then any other Hay: insomuch, as any lean beasts will soon grow fat with it; and to the Milch-beasts, it procureth abundance of milk: but it must never be given alone, especially to beasts that have not been long used to it: but must ever be mixed with straw, or with some other Hay; for otherwise it over-heateth them, and filleth them too much with blood; and that so suddenly, as it greatly in∣dangererh their health, and their life too; which it doth princi∣pally to Kine: to whom it is more dangerous, if too plentifully gi∣ven, then to any other Cattel. After the last cutting, you may let your Cattel graze on your Lucern-fields, and that all Winter long, until the beginning or middle of March. Of once sowing you will have your Meadow continue good for 10. or 12. years. and until 15. and afterwards too, it will still continue to bear; but the Hearb will then notably decay in goodness. Wherefore it is best to turn it then to some other use. Kine must never eat of this Hearb green; but only dryed, and that moderately too, as hath been said▪ But Horses eating their fill of it green in the Spring, are purged thereby, and grow fat by it in 8. or 10. dayes time: If one desire to have of the Grain, one may let such a proportion of the Mea∣dow as one will; grow up to seed, after the second cutting, any year except the first only: and when the seed is ripe, the tops of the Hearb, with the Codds wherein the seed is inclosed, must be cut in a dewie morning, and put into sheets, for fear of loosing the seed, and must be beat out with Flails upon the same, when that it is
well dryed: and afterwards the remaining part of the Hearb must be mowen close to the ground; after which it continueth to sprout out again after the usual manner. The Hay thereof wil keep good 2. or 3. years; and one Acre is sufficient to keep 3. Horses all the year long. A Post-script to the last Answer concerning the Lucern. SIR, THe Gentleman, who had given me the note about the Lucern, hath told me since two particulars more, which he had forgot to put into it: The one, that not onely to other Cattel, but even to Horses with whom that Hay agreeth best of all other beasts: it is not to be given but in winter; because that in the Summer it would too much heat their bloud: And the other, that this hay must be per∣fectly well dried, before it be carried off the ground; and to that end turned very often: because that being put up with any the least moi∣sture, it will quite spoil, much more then any other Hay. Now these and all the other particulars, which I have had from the Gentleman, have been confirmed to me by many others. And yet within these 2. or 3. dayes I met with a Physition of Rochel, who assuring me that the Lucerne was very common in his Coun∣trey, made me a relation of it agreeing with the former, onely in these 3. points, viz. That of once sowing it will continue 10. or 12▪ years; That it is cut twice a year, serving afterwards for Pasture all Winter; And that it wonderfully fatteneth all kind of Cattel; but very much different from it in all the others, and in some of them point blank contrary to it. For he saith, that it is to be sowen in the beginning of March; that it desireth a temperate ground, but rather dry then wet, and no wayes fat nor clayish, but stony and gravily; that it need not be mixed with any other Hay, but may be given alone, and all the year long; in Summer as well as Winter, not only to Horses, but to Cowes and other Cattel. He added, that the proportion of the seed, is the charge of a Porter for four Arpents or French Acres. Which particulars I thought good to impart unto you, that your friend comparing them with the o∣thers
might make his best profit of them; and this Rochellois; (or Rocheller) who hath lived three or four years in England, thinks that Lucern will come admirably well in that Country. NOTE. THe meaning of these words—The quantity of the Seed is the sixth part of Corn that the same ground would require —is this, That whatever quantity of Wheat or Barley an Acre of ground would require of the seed of Lucern; you must take but the sixth part of that quantity of the seed of Lucern; so as that ground which for its sowing requireth six bushels of Corn, doth require but one bushel of Lucern-seed. An Arpent deterre (which how much it is in English measure Cotgrave's Dictionary will perfectly tell you) requireth 10. l. of that seed, as several Grain-sellers (of whom I went to inquire for it) have unanimously told me: the seed being exceeding small, and to be sowen wonderfully thinl. As for Saint Foin or Holy Hay, I have seen it grow here about Paris in several places, in rich fat grounds, and those both high and dry, and others low and Marshy. It is cut but once a year, much what about the same time of other Hay, and a great deal of the seed of it is required for sowing the ground with it. But being once sowen, it lasteth 10 or 12 years, as well as Medi∣ca or Lucern, wherewith also it correspondeth altogether in its Ver∣tues and Uses. A Copy of a Letter, relating a Proof or Experiment of an Eng∣lish Husbandry. Honoured Sir. I Desire your acceptance of this small present, may be according to the real worth of the thing; not as at first sight it may ap∣pear to be (viz.) straw or stubble. This is I assure you no o∣ther then the true and real Experiment of what by the blessing of God, the native fertility of our English ground, rightly Husbanded will bring forth: nay I can upon most probable grounds affirm, that had I used all the Art and Care which I could and might have
done▪ (had I not been otherwise taken off) it could hardly have failed to have been double, treble, or quadruple to what it is. And it is also most true, that any good ground well managed, may yeeld one, ten, a hundred, &c. Acres, in which there shall be very many superior to the biggest root of these, and hardly one inferiour to the best but one; by which account it will easily appear, how much beyond the old way, this is the increase, there being between two and five quarters on the Acre; and the product of this way will be rarely under 10 quarters, not rarely 16 or 20 and the same for most grains; yet will this dull age as to goodnesse not believe it without some testimony, and perhaps scarce suffer themselves to be convinc'd by this so eminent an experiment; wherein it plain∣ly appears, That out of one single Barley-Corn is sprung about 80 Ears, of which near 60 had, some 36, 34, 32, 30. and hardly any lesse then 38. which in all is above 2000 for one: And truly the charges to be bestowed on an acre of this sort is no ways double to the common way. Accept it therefore, and reserve it as a real rari∣ty, and a jewel onely fit for a Publick and Pious spirit, as yours is: till I shall by Gods assistance be able next year to produce you more abundant examples of Gods wonderfull power and bounty that offers, and mans ingratitude that neglects, or refuses such ho∣nest means, of the truest and most justly gotten humane wealth, ho∣nour and happinesse. Your most faithful and ob∣liged friend and servant. September 26. 1650. An Extract of a Letter from Amsterdam dated the 28 of No∣vember, 1650. in answer to the former communication, with another experimennt of a French Husbandry.
SIR, I Am much obliged unto you for sending me the Discourse of the Braband Husbandry, which I have perused. Not long a∣go I was told of certain men which would fain have morga∣ged some thousand Acres of Heathy grounds, which lay here and there as Commons. But the late Prince of Orange by the advice of his Councel, durst not entertain any such Propositions, the lands belonging to the Commonalty. On the other hand the undertakers would not be contented with lesse for imparting of their Secret. It appears unto me by all circumstances, that it was the same design of Husbandry with yours, the parties if I remember well being Englishmen. From Paris I am advertized (for certain) of one, who did last year, 1649, ferment one grain of Wheat, which this year hath produced him 114 Ears, and within them 6000 Grains, which is more then 80 Ears, and 600 Grains of your English friends. This year, 1650. he hath a great many fermented and sowen. An Answer to the foregoing extract of a Letter from Amsterdam. SIR, I Have received from you a Relation of a very great and wonder∣ful production or increase, which your Friend at Amsterdam relates to be done in France. I am far from lessening the admira∣ble greatness of that person's skill and success. Only since I find my self taken notice of by the same party, and the experiment I made the last year of Barly, weighed in the scales with this, and found too light; I shall take leave to say, that (besides all diffe∣rence that is or may be conceived to be betwixt the soyles; that of France hath a manifest advantage in the elevation and powerful o∣peration of the Sun.) That it is probable he did use all possible means both to the ground and seed, to make them both fruitful, which I did not at all; but quite contrarily I chose the worst seed I could procure, and my ground was as barren as any whatsoever in the parts adjacent. I added nothing to either; all I did was
after the blade was sprung up. And whereas your friend menti∣ons 600. out of 80. eares, those eares contained one with the other at the least 30 single Corns, which is 2400. That besides that, Wheat is no whit inferior to Barly, but rather more inclined to its proper nature to branch and spread: it is also allowed as long time again to grow, and therefore may better spread to many eares then Barly. That my ears of Barly rated at 30. one with the other, (which they were at least, some having 38. a thing I suppose rarely (if ever) seen in England before) are full as high as his Wheat ears rated at 52. And the seeming great difference between 2400 and 6000. when looked into, will prove not to be in the number of eares, which differ no more then as 14. to 10. but in the nature of the Grains, there being universally as many more in an eare of wheat as in an eare of Barly. That if (as it is most like) he in France did only try conclusions, to what height nature might possibly be scrued by art, and that what is here related, was the effect of that trial; that holds not comparison with mine, which is generally practicable, without any considera∣ble expence of time or stock more then in the common-way. Last∣ly I affirm, in all possible humble reverence and submission to Gods good pleasure, power and providence; that when I shall make use of good feed rightly prepared, good Land in right condition, and all other helps which I know and can use; I shall not doubt for smaller numbers of the same grain (viz.) Wheat, to produce 200. or 300. eares, and in them 10000. 12000. or 15000. Corns, (and somewhat like that, for whole fields together, and that here in England,) howsoever let us alwayes remember to give all possi∣ble praise to God, whose blessing only makes rich. SIR, I am your faithful Friend and Servant
Another Letter from Paris, discovering the secret of the fore∣named French Husbandry. SIR, J Do with much impatience desire the Treatise or Discourse pub∣lished by you about the Braband-Husbandry, and do very much admire the industry of that English Gentleman your friend, who hath found out the wayes of making Corn multiply so prodi∣giously. The Parisian Experimenter of Corns multiplication I know not: but a friend of mine very well acquainted with him, assureth me to have had the following description of his secret from himself; and to have seen the experience of it very fully in the year 1649. not in any great quantity, but in a Garden, only for trials sake. Pour into quick or unslack't Lime, as much water as sufficeth to make it swim four inches above the water: And unto 0 l of the said water powred off, mix one pound of Aqua-vitae, and in that liquor steep or soak Wheat (or Corn) 24. hour: which be∣ing dryed in the Sun, or in the Aire, steep again in the said liquor 24. hours more, and do it likewise the third time; Afterward sowe them at great distances the one from the other, about the di∣stance of a foot between each grain. So one grain will produce 30.36.38.42.52. eares, and those very fruitful, with a tall stalk, e∣qualling the statute of a man in height. Another Extract of a Letter from the Lowe-Countries. SIR, THese are to give you special thanks for communication of the Parisian Experimentors Secret. Water (if he meanes cold water) poured into quick or unslackt Lime, cannot work much in one hour upon the Lime; but if it be boiled with it, and that the water be poured alwayes afresh upon the Lime, then it will come to be strong at last, that an Egg may swim in it, as I learn'd by
tradition from Dr. Hartmannus, but could never make any try∣al of it, for want of unslack't Lime in the place where I live. This perhaps may be yet better; but experience goes beyond reason in these cases. The often macerating or steeping, and drying of grains I like very well. I have only according to Mr. Gabr. Platt's directions steeped them 24. hours in turned or tainted Rain-water, and Cow-dung, and afterwards sowen them thus wet; which on Sandy grounds hath produced such goodly Corn, as if it had been very good Land. Some here use Salt-Peter, which also doth much good; but is found likewise in Sheeps-Dung, as may appear by its fertility. I have lost the Book of Husbandry of Mr. Plats, which was called, A Discovery of infinite Treasure hidden since the Worlds beginning; Whereunto all men of what degree soever, are friendly invited to be sharers with the Discoverer. For having lent the same to a friend, that it might be translated into High-Dutch, I could never see it again. I am told it is out of print. But if you could help me to another, you would do me a pleasure. I have no∣thing to add for the present, but that the Genius of this Age is ve∣ry much bent to advance Husbandry; and that in all Countries I hear there are found Gentlemen, that study professedly these im∣provements more then in former times. I rest alwayes SIR, Yours, Another Letter expressing the reasons why the Experimenter of the Barley-Corn, thinks it not fit or expedient to part with his secret as yet, for a more common use.
SIR, I Find dayly more and more, that it is too true, that most men love money, that they even worship it in their hearts, as the onely Sammum Bonum. I need not go far for proof, since they have brought one to my hand. That (having so fair and just offers made, in order to the Corn-businesse; as I have presented to them by your hands,) will by no means (though so very much to their own profit and the Publick Good) part with their monies; and yet stick not to demand (in effect) the discovery from me of that talent of knowledge, which God hath made mine by his free gift; as the reward of my industry, and faithfull love to my native Countrey; An estate (if I mistake not) better gotten then by any of the common means; by which men grow rich dayly. Surely the commodities cannot be lesse then equal. The most wise and vertuous men that ever lived, have preferred Art, Industry, and In∣genuity far before money· Money (especially the abuse of it) is become the very poyson of the world, against which Art and In∣dustry is an Antidote or Cordial. Money is counted and enjoyed by a thousand thousands, Art and Industry but by a few. And things of excellent use are accounted Jewels, especially when rare and scarce. The Professors of Art and Industry, besides their pri∣vate aim also at a Publick good: these prefer their private gain (too often) before the being and well being of the whole world; nay of their own souls. These are ever ready to part with invaluable trea∣sures upon easie conditions: Those will not upon any conditions whatsoever (but such as please themselves or are full of oppression) part with their monies, (no not to save a Brothers, or hardly a Fa∣thers, or a Childs life.) And finally if they judge it improvidence to part with a little of their estates, onely for a time, to return again to them shortly, like Noahs Dove with an Olive branch, a double branch of Peace and Prosperity: I desire to be excused, if I upon better grounds hold it prophane, to sell a better right then a birth-right for lesse then a messe of pottage; even for just nothing, and for ever. I can never forget the exceeding great ingenuity to the world, shewed and given by Mr. Gab. Platts, as will more fully appear, when you shall have printed those writings of his which he left to
your trust and custody, and the worlds base ingratitude that let such a man fall down dead in the street for want of food, without a shirt to hih back; none (but your self that want not an inlarged heart but a fuller hand to supply the worlds defects) being found with some few others, to administer any relief to a man of so great me∣rit. In a word, that God that hath forbid to muzzle the Ox that treads out the fodder, hath appointed every man to use his blessings (next to his glory for the providing for and preservation of his fa∣mily, which he that can do and doth not, is worse then an Infidel. I dare not give away this means of obtaining outward blessings to my self & family, till I have found away to make it instrumental to that end; and that end once effectually attained to, I dare not deny Gods mercy and bounty to me, nor longer restrain the Pub∣lick use of this universall good: I remain SIR, Yours, A Secret practised with very good success in England, concerning sowing of Wheat, to prevent it from being Smutty. FIrst take your Wheat, pour the same into a tub of water, and stir it about, take off all the Corn that swimmeth upon the water, and pour the rest upon a floor, letting the water run off. Then make a strong brine of Bay-salt, and pour some of the brine on the Corn upon the floor; and take to half a quarter of Corn, half a peck of Salt, and strow it on the Corn, and stir and mix it continually, as you pour thereon the brine, and strow the salt thereon, untill the Corn be all wet and overstrowed with Salt. Then take to a half quarter of Corn, half a bushel of unslack'd lime, and strow that likewise over the Corn, mingling it well to∣gether; which done you may sow the same the next day. The brine must he cold when you pour it on the Corn, and you must prepare no more Wheat, then you intend to sow next day.
Another Secret practised in Germany for the enriching of Meadowes▪ A Meadow yields 6 times more Hay, vvhen it is turned up vvith a plough, and sovven thick vvith ashes burn't out of the sub∣stance thereof, but the rain must fall first. Aftervvards sovve your Meadow vvith the seed of Trefoile, and plough and harrovv them in. The first grasse vvhich grovveth thereon, let it be very ripe, that the seed may fall off it selfe; then let some go over it, and vvith rakes stir it, that it fall out. Aftervvards let it be movven off, and carried to a certain place vvhere it may be dryed, so the Grasse vvill grovv presently againe, and may be movven again in three vveeks. How to make Rushy ground to beare Grasse. BReake the Rushy ground, and rake the roots and the rushes to∣gether, and burne them or carry them avvay, Then spread up∣on that ground, Turffe-ashes, or Pigeons-dung, Chalke or Lime, ac∣cording to your ground. Try of every one of these upon a little plot of your ground: you may use other Ashes, Marle or Dung for experiments: and that which you finde doth kill the Rushes and other Weeds best, use it: You are to make gutters or draines to carry avvay the vvater from the ground: you may destroy Rushes or Ferne, if you vvill; but cut or movve them dovvn in the beginning of June, and so use to do it 2 or 3 years together at that time. For planting or sowing Walnuts. IN the season vvhen they are full ripe on the trees, a fevv dayes before they vvould fall, as near as can be guessed, let them be gathered or beaten off; and in the green huske, or vvithout it, put them into good ordinary earth in a barrel or basket: So let them continue untill the beginning of March follovving: as soon as that moneth begins, get as much vvarme Milke from the Cowes as vvill steepe them 24 hours: after they are steeped, set them in ground vvell digged, and judged naturall for such fruit, vvith their little end, or their prickled sharpe end upvvards about 3 or 4 inches deepe in the earth, and not one of 28 vvill fail, as hath appeared by experience. This may make dry Walnuts also prove trees, the Nuts used as above said, as farre as may be, set them near one foot a-sunder, and in a right line to vveed them. The Walnut breeds good Timber, good shadow, good smell, good fruit. At four years growth transplant them.
Mr. Lanyon's Description of the usuall manner of planting and trans∣planting (according to that of Flaunders) of those Trees called A∣beales, imparted for Publique Good. THey are first planted from any even the least part of the Root of the same Tree: you must divide the root, by slipping each part from the other, and not by cutting it in sunder: you may take those parts from those trees whilest they grow, and without danger to them, rob them of all the small sprigs of the root, and leave only the Master-Roots; but the most usuall way is to mul∣tiply them, when they are transplanted; which time is at their growth of 5 yeares: their season is in March. They are first planted in the way of a Nursery, in loose earth, moist and sandy, or inclining to it: their distance is 10 inches one from another (the earth being first prepared as for a Garden:) you are to make holes with a stick, the depth of the length of the part you have to set, setting him so that you may onely see a part of it above ground, the earth being closed about them; they are to be kept weeded as any other plants. The second yeare in February you are to prune off all from the Master or Middle-shoote, and so to the 3 and 4 yeare: the 5 you may transplant them, so as they like the ground of their Nursery. Their usuall distance one from another is 10 foot: you may drive a stake with them when you transplant them, to secure them stiffe against the winde; for that they will grow very tall in those years, and so be much exposed to the winds. They may without much prejudice (to Corne) be planted in the furrowes where it growes; so as the ground be moist, and you keep them well pruned, and leave onely a bush at the top of the tree. No stiffe Clay grounds will admit them to thrive, they wil grow in moist Clay ground, but onely in height, and will not burnish for want of roome to extend their roots. This tree if he likes his ground; will be at ful growth in 20 years. He is valued in Flaunders after 7 years growth, worth every year 12 d untill his time be up. He growes very straight without boughes, onely a bush on the top, and so exceedingly well be∣comes a Walke. This Timber is uncomparable for all sorts of vvooden vessels, especially Traies; Butchers-traies cannot vvel be made vvithout it, it being so exceeding light and tough. Some years ago there vvere ten thousand at once sent over into England, and transplanted into many Counties. M. Walker at S. James can give the best account of them to all such as desire further to be direct∣ed in this particular. FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE LEGACIE OF HUSBANDRY: OR, A Seed-plot of Annotations upon the LEGACIE aforesaid. WITH AN INTERROGATORIE, Relating more particularly to the Husbandry, and Naturall History of IRELAND. ❧ Printed for Richard Wodenothe, MDCLII.
To his worthy and very much Honoured Friend, the Author of the large Letter of Husbandry. SIR, YOu may perceive by these Additionals to your large Letter, vvhich you vvrote to gratifie my desires, that the Publique hath been benefited by your Communications, vvhich vvas all that I intended, by setting you upon that worke: nor will you repent of the paines I hope which you have taken this way. For you see that your Open-hartedness in this kind hath provoked another Friend of mine of very pub∣lique desert in the Common-wealth of Learning, to impart un∣to me his Observations of the same nature. And although his Annotations now and then, are Animadversions rather then Enlargements, yet it is not unprofitable to the Publique, nor disadvantageous to us; that our errours and mistakes (for who can pretend to be without them:) be laid open and recti∣fied. I suppose you would be as loath as I, that any by your meanes or mine, should be led into a by-way, and instead of gaining become a loser, in making triall of what we offer for his advantage I could wish that my worthy Friend who hath imparted these his thoughts unto me in the following extempo∣rary Letters, had spared some expressions; & bin less censorious a∣gainst the Persons of some, of whom others have a high and ho∣norable opinion, as Helmont & Glauber: but he is to be born with all in this, as we would be borne with all by him and others; in the freedome which we might take of giving our opinions con∣cerning his failings. Also I am confident, that that learned Gentleman is not interessed by any prejudice of passion, or personall disaffection against any of them; but that as a man of a free spirit he doth give his judgement through his zeal and love to every truth as it lies in his apprehension; let every one have his freedome in things which are well meant for the Pub∣like; and the best way to rectifie one anothers mistakes, will be to strive to set each other a Copy, of better and more mo∣derate expressions in the like Cases, wherein there may be a mistake or failing: If we were skilfull to provoke one another, onely to the affections of love and of good workes; and by
our own usefull experiments discreetly dispensed towards the Publique, could draw forth the profitable (but buried) skill of others, unto common use to be imparted unto all; what could not be done for ease of the poor, and the relief of common cala∣mities? Truly, although neither God by his directions how to make use of all his gifts; nor Nature his handmaid by her supplies of things necessary and comfortable for our livelihood are wanting to us. Yet we by the untowardnesse of our spirits, and the shutting up of our bowels, and the enviousnesse of our dispositions, bring a scarcity upon our selves, and upon others, whil'st we are not faithfull and liberall stewards of our talents, for the benefit of those, for whose sake God hath be∣stowed them upon us: therefore I shall desire you, as you have begun, to continue in well doing, for you know the promise, that in due time you shall reap the fruit of all your labours, if you faint not. And least you should imagine, that you are at this distance forgotten by us, give me leave to present you with a∣nother taske proper for your thoughts in the place where now you are, that the advantages of Nature, which God hath be∣stowed upon Ireland, may not lie undiscovered, and without improvement, at this season vvherein the Replanting of the vvast and desolate places of that Countrey, is seriously laid to heart by many: I shall therefore desire you to look upon this Alphabet of Interrogatories, and consider vvhat Ansvvers your Observations vvill afford unto them; or vvhat you can learne from the Observations of others to clear them; and as you have opportunity, do, as my Friend from Paris hath done; fur∣nish me vvith vvhat Gods providence shall send unto your hands, that as I have begun, I may put it out to use: and requite you more plentifully, as I hope I shall be able to do, vvith the increase, vvhich it shall yield, by this vvay of Trading, vvhich I have taken up freely to bestovv my paines and cost upon others, that all may see the goodness of God in the vvorks of his hands, and have cause to be thankfull unto him for the same, and that so many eminent talents vvhich God hath put into your hands, may not (seeing he hath given you a heart to use them) lye idle for vvant of Objects, and fit Commodities vvherevvithall to be trading vvith him, vvho subscribes himself alvvays, SIR, Your very much obliged and assured friend to serve you, Samuel Harthb.
Annotations upon the Legacie of HVSBANDRY. Paris the 1 of July 1651. I Give you most hearty thankes for your vvorke of Husbandry, the vvhich having perused in∣stantly à capite ad calcem. I finde it a most ex∣cellent piece both for the improvement of Hus∣bandry, and of the other Commodities of the Countrey, as likevvise for the Naturall History of England, and have learned many particulars by it, vvhich before vvere unknovvn to me. But I remember to have heard of a Dutch Merchant in Dublin, that the Dutch used to fetch their Black-lead out of Wales; vvhereas you say it is found in Cumberland, and no vvhere else in Christendome. I pray you to let me understand, vvhether you have any particular knovv∣ledge of that Mine, of the nature and properties of that ma∣teriall, vvhether it serveth for any other uses, than to make pens off, and to neale earthen vessel vvithall, and hovv for this use Potters do prepare and apply it. Paris the 12/22 of July 1651. I Was hugely taken vvith the large Epistle in your Legacie up∣on the first reading of it, and am more novv upon the second, vvhich maketh me sorry, that the Author should give any ad∣vantage to carping wits; as he doth here and there in some of
the Parerga; upon which I shall freely give you my sense, that being communicated to him, he may mend them in the next Edition, if so he see it fitting: What he saith out of Helmont page 13. The smuttinesse of corne, and the foule disease to have be∣gun in France, together about 1530, and the latter to have had some originall from the former. To say nothing of the small credit of that Authour, even in things subject to his own knowledge and experience, (I being able to convince him of most palpable lies out of his own writings) a more credible Authour than he should not be alleaged, much lesse heeded; if opposite to so notorious a truth; as that of the foule disease, it's originall in France, as well as in Italie and Spain; full 36 yeares sooner than Helmont sayes (viz.) in the year 1494: and nothing could be advanced more absurd or ridiculous in the judgement of all sound Physitians, than to attribute the originall of that disease in any wise to smutty corne, as he doth. The imperfecti∣on of smutty corne, consisteth altogether in a similar distemper, and that of the more spirituous part, consequently not at all subject to the eyes, and so not to be found out by the Micro∣scope, to the contrary of what our Authour supposeth, page 15. The corne sowne in July, produced such an increase, page 18. I cannot imagine, how Corne sowne in Summer can come to good, or what humane wit or skill can hinder it from running up; and spending it selfe, before the coming in of winter. His Philoso∣phy of the blacknesse of the Moor-loghs, as communicated by the blacknesse of the earth or turffe, page 25. is no wayes receivable. I finde him too credulous, page 27. to Glauber and others, about those Mountebanke boastings of brewing without malt, and of drawing great store of Aqua-vitae out of the imaginary Beer; and o∣ther unfit materials. The opinion of the Suns descending lower, page 30. although justly (as I hold it rejected by Moestlinus, Longo∣montanus, Keplerus, Morinus, Bullialdus, quibus omnibus praeit Ptolomaeus, ought not to be spoke of so contemptuously, seeing that one of the greatest Astronomers that ever was, (viz.) Co∣pernicus did first advance it, and Reinholdus, another most fa∣mous Artist approve of it, and he having made the lowest des∣cent of the Sun but of 35 minutes, which is but a little more
than halfe a degree; I know not what makes our Authour speake of the Suns descending many degrees lower. It is true, that those 35 minutes amount to many thousands of miles, which expression therefore would be both more per∣tinent, and more sutable to the vulgar capacity of most Readers, than that of minutes or degrees; This is what I have observed till page 30: further than which I am not yet come: And forasmuch as I have never an English Dictio∣nary here, I would be glad of the exposition of some En∣glish words not so well understood by me, as howing (so oft spoke off) and the how; Wheats-lodging, page 18. Canker-berries, page 27. and the difference betwixt hawes and hips; page eadem, I having ever taken them to signifie the same thing. I do not know neither, what are the piles on Marshes sides, page 25. and am ignorant of the History of Glassenburies-Hauthorne mentioned page 4, about which I would willingly receive some light. Paris the 9/19 of August 1651. AN English Gentleman, who many yeares hath lived and been a House-keeper in Devon-shire, as he was yesterday reading your Legacie at my house, having lighted on that passage, page 26. about the making of Cy∣der, told me, that the second way there mentioned is not a making of Cyder, but a certain preparation of it already made, usuall also in wines and other liquors, especially those that are to be transferred a great way by Sea; and as for the first, that he never saw it practised in Devon-shire, vvhere Cyder is very common; and vvhere himselfe usually made 40 hogsheads every yeare; but that the vvay of making Cyder in that Countrey used by all men is this; Having re∣duced their Apples into Mash, by turning upon them a kind of a milstone set edge-vvaies in a vvooden trough, they pre∣sently carry them to a vvooden presse of that bignesse: as in one houre they vvill presse out tvvo hogsheads of Juice: the vvhich having let stand a day or tvvo, and taken off the black scum that ariseth in that time, they tunne it, and in
the barrels it continueth to worke some dayes longer, just as Beer useth to do. He told me divers other perticulars a∣bout Cyder, partly of his own, and partly of that Countrys common observations, the which I forbeare to relate, be∣cause I believe that Markham hath spoke of them. Paris the 6/16 of September, 1651. SEeing by your last, you desire the continuation of my Annotations upon your Legacie, I must tell you that I be∣lieve your friend hath not been well informed, page 23. a∣bout the Countreys there named by him; for the sending of Walnuts, Quinces, and Chestnuts into England, and that it will be found upon better enquiry, that these commodi∣ties do come into England, if not solely yet abundantly: the first from Holland, the second from Zealand, and the third from France; and as for small nuts, except he speak of some exquisite kind of them, I know not why one should runne so farre as Spaine for them seeing that Ireland aboundeth in them above all Countreys in the world; page 27. I know an ingenious man, who can without malting, &c. If you and your friend will be ruled by me, you shall not take this upon Glaubers bare word, nor any of those other magnificent pro∣mises; which he maketh in that boasting Catalogue, till he have made them good by the effect, least the similitude of the Prophet Esay 29.8. be verified in us, page 28. Graf∣ting, Inoculating, &c. a Gentleman will learne in two houres, to learne it to some purpose will require more than so many dayes, if not weeks expertus loquor: page 30. we finde Vines flourishing many hundred miles more towards the North [than Alsace] both in France, Loraine and Germany: If for many hundreds he had said one hundred miles, he might perhaps have made that good, and yet not that neither in all the three Countreys here named, I am sure not near it in in Lo∣raine, and very hardly in France: page 31. Vines grow 60 miles on this side Paris at Beaumont; Beaumont is but 8 leagues, or 16 English miles North from Paris and Beauvais (which and Beaumont is the most northern part of France, where
any Vines grow) is but twice as farre, being distant 16 leagues from Paris. Ibid. Those places which are even as far North as England, nothing near none of them; page 36. linea 3. pack in so many plants, &c. I have seen most of the Vineyards about Paris for many miles round, and never saw any such thing, very few having any thing in them but Vines, and where any thing else vvas, I savv onely a fevv Peach-trees here and there, too farre asunder to do any great harme to the Vines or ground; 37. To short poles, as we do hops, out of one Hop-pole you may make 3 Vine-poles. as for length; vvherefore they should not be so yoked to∣gether: ibid. In France, so soon as they have pressed out their liquor with their feet [pressing vvith feet is not used in all parts of France, and utterly unknovvn in these northern parts of it,] they put it into hogsheads not at all till it have vvrought first in Keeves: 39. from these who would destroy, &c. I could vvish that bitter and exasperating expression in the behalfe of my Countreymen might be spared. If I vvould make Observations upon those passages, vvhich have somthing of good & excellent in them, as vvel as upon them vvhere I conceive somthing is to be mended, I should never have done, the Book being ful of thē from one end to another; yet I cannot let passe vvith silence those words pag. 44. The Sun and Dew ingender a nitrous fatnesse, they pointing at the unfolding of one of the greatest Mysteries in Nature, un∣known to most of them if not to all; who professedly do deale in the inquiries of that noble science, but to speake of this to the full were not the work of a Scholion, but of a whole Treatise, concerning the Improvement of Land by Sea-land; of which page 45 you wil finde a confirmation of that in Irelands Naturall History, and it is very much u∣sed in Devonshire, with admirable successe, not onely equall to, but even beyond Lime it selfe, as I have been told by that Gentleman, whose Observations concerning Cyder I gave you formerly; page 46. All fertility proceedeth from salt, addendum. Made unctuous, or oily, and spirituous, id est uno verbo nitrous, nam sale mero nihil magis inimicum faecundi∣tati;
47. In Holland they as carefully preserve the Cowes u∣rine, as their Dung to enrich their land, they preserve it no o∣therwise than is done in all other Countreys; viz. mixed with the Dung and joyntly with it carried out to the Dung∣hill, ibid. we must have it, [paper] from Italie, France, and Holland; I believe Italie sendeth out little paper, either to England, or to any other Countrey, and as for Holland; it hath none to send, but what it selfe getteth from abroad, there being none at all made there, (viz.) In Holland pro∣perly so called, nor in any of the other Provinces that I know of, but onely some in the Velaw, a part of Gelderlant, and in England there is good store made, both towards Oxford, and in some other places, though not enough for to serve the Nation. Paris 18/2 October, 1651. HAving continued to read on in your Legacie from page 48. where I left with my last Annotations, I finde no∣thing that needeth any Animadversions but these few fol∣lowing things, page 60, a kind of Salix called by them Abel-tree, the Tree called a Abell in Dutch is no wayes a kind of Salix but is Populus alba; Ibidem; If we believe their own Au∣thours, &c. I know not who those Authours are, but I am sure that whoever hath said so, hath said most untrue; for the profit that ariseth to France by Silke, cannot in the least part come in competition with that of Corne and Wine Ibid. In France, which different not much from the tem∣per of England; Silke is a stranger to those parts of France that agree with Englands temper; 69. I could wish those words, linea 3 & 4. we know nourisheth them, to be left out, as devoid of all truth, if applyed to the Insect in question: pag. 70. linea 2. let him read Boneil, add Andream Libavium, qui peculiari Tractatu inserto parti secundae Singularium: fusè ac diligenter admodum omnia ad Bombyces spectantia pertractavit: similiterque Olivier de Serres libro 50. Theatri Agriculturae. Among the things which page 70. he thinketh might be
transplanted profitably into England, I could wish the o∣mission of the three first, (viz) Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, and Snake-weed, the which I greatly doubt would hardly be made to grow there at all with any industry, but sure I am, never to any purpose: and the same I believe about their Cedars and Pines. Medica veterum is with∣out all peradventure the plant now known under the name of Lucerna; wherefore it ought not to be ranked as it is, page 80. amongst the plants now unknown; Quid esset lupinus veterum, nemo unquam Herbariorum quod sciam dubi∣tavit quare omittenda ejus mentio inter herbas controversas page 80. Page 81. What seed, grout, or grutze is made of the same seed, and in the same manner, as that which in English is called Groats (viz.) of Oates and of Barley; of those three sorts of Cheeses which he reckons up, page 81. onely the se∣cond and third are made of Cowes milke, and therefore his expression is too general, and what he says there, which are farre better than our ordinary Cheeses is true indeed, but as true it is, that they are far better than their own ordinary chee¦ses: & as true likewise, that the best of those Cheeses are no better, nor so good by far as some English Cheeses. Verbi gra∣tia Chedder-Cheeses. He is much mistaken, if he believeth that all those things reckoned up page 82. wil grow in England at least to any purpose, especially Rice, Corke, Scarlet-Oake, and that Sentence of Virgil; Ʋt quid quaeque ferat regio, quid quaeque recuset. Justly tearmed an Oracle by Pliny, doth not depend wholly (as our Authour seemeth to take for granted) on the climate, and the latitude of Regions, for were it so Dictamnus, Laser, Cinamonum, Balsamum, Myr∣rha, Camphora, Stirax, Mastick, Benjovin, Caryopbylli, Nux-Muschata; and an infinite number of other Plants would not be, and from all time have been confined to such Terri∣tories as they are; all the Industry of man, and the power and wealth of greatest Princes never having been able to make them grow; at least not to make them fructifie out of their native soiles: I wonder also to finde Linder-trees
named in the Catalogue of Plants, which he would have denizon'd in England, seeing that great store of them and very goodly ones have been growing in several parts of the Land, many years since even in and about London, as at Ex∣eter-house, Wimbleton-house, &c. and there besides Shere∣wood-forrest in Nottingham-shire, aboundeth in them natu∣rally. Paris the 8/18 November, 1651. I Come now to your Legacie, whereon these words, page 84. it casteth up Jet and Amber, I must tell you that as it is most certaine, that of Jet, good store is found on some part of the shore of Yorke-shire, so I dare say that upon inquiry it wil appear, that never any Amber or Succinum was cast up there by the Sea; that being a commodity so peculiar to Spruce or Prussia, as the Sea was never known to render it in any other Countrey of the world whatsoever, page 85. at Dover they make brick of Sea-owse, a thing very incredible to me. In Cumberland, out of a certain kind of sand they ex∣tract salt; it were worth the while to tell in a few words at least, how they proceed in the doing thereof; Not onely notice should be taken by the Husbandman, or Countrey-Gentleman of the different colour, odour and tast of wa∣ters, as our Authour wisheth them to do, eadem pag. 85. but also and much more (as a thing of a much greater and more particular concernment to them) of the wonderfull and vast difference of waters (in which none of those three qualities is notably to be discerned) for the severall uses of ordinary house-keeping of Husbandry, and of severall Ma∣nufactures, page 86. if we may believe Glauber, there is scarce any sand without gold; I am very sure that whosoever be∣lieveth him herein, as in many other things, will finde him∣selfe very fouly deceived; Ibidem, save what is taken out of their Ditches. For the word Ditches no wayes proper here, should be substituted Bogs, Fens, or Moores; It is indif∣ferent good fuell, yea, many sorts of them are most excellent
fuel. An Englishman speaking of turffe, should not name Holland onely, but Scotland and Ireland in which two Countreys turffe is of very great and general use, page 87. There is a stone in Durham, out of which they make salt, I would we vvere told the manner hereof: Ibidem, Lead is found in Durham-vvall: I would faine know what Dur∣ham-wall is, whether a Town or Countrey, and in what part of England, and why Derby-shire, where those famous Lead Mines are, is not at all named here, page 94. Opium is alwayes an ingredient, this is too generally spoken, page 95. I am not well satisfied with what he sayes of transplanting Elephants into England, and making them of common use there, for many reasons; and I believe it would prove as hard a taske to people in England, with any considera∣ble store of Black Foxes, Muske-Cats, and some o∣thers of those Animals named, page 96. in these words. Paris the 2 of December, 1651. THe conceit I finde in your Legacy, page 99. Of the medicinall vertues of the plants being sublimed into the Insects bred out of them, is altogether destitute of truth, as very easily and practically may be demonstrated, page 101. That in Ireland rottennesse of sheep is not knowne; It is too wel known there, and even in my time, I have seene great mortalities of sheepe caused thereby. Page 103. In Holland they keepe their Cattle housed winter and summer: I never knew any Cattle housed in summer in my Countrey, but all about Paris that is very ordinary: Ibidem, they bury the graines in the ground; they keepe them indeed in the ground; but in that manner as cannot vvell be called burying; for they dig holes a mans length deep and square, cemented not onely in the bottome, but on all the four sides, vvith a vvooden shut at the top, and there they keepe their grains, not lying loosly; but rammed as close as may
be; Rapeseed-cakes, Ibidem, he should have added Linseed-cakes: Ibidem, Turnips; I never knew them given to Cowes in Holland, but at Roven, it is a usuall thing to feed Cowes therewith, and they do thrive wonderfully there∣with, as I am told by an English Lady of my acquaintance, an excellent Housewife, who hath lived a great while in that City, eadem pagina 103, which are constantly mowed twice or thrice yearly. I never in Holland saw or heard of any Medows mowen more than once a year: The Paradoxe held forth. Initio paginae 104. of the cleanlinesse of Hogs, and their not loving Dirt: I believe not at all to be consonant to truth; especially in the second particular. Ibidem (the Jewes have a peculiar way) after those words, I could wish to be inser∣ted; (which also anciently was most common among the Romans) For the Liver of the Goose augmented to an excessive bignesse by a peculiar kinde of cramming, was one of the greatest dainties of the Romans, as may be seen in Pliny, lib. 10. cap. 22. and the Authors there alleaged by the Scholiast. Paris 6/16 December, 1651. INstead of going on for to make an end of my Anno∣tations upon your Legacy, to the end whereof I am wel neer come; I shal at this time step back, for to tel you that one of Purchas his Pilgrims having given us most amply and distinctly the whole manner of making the Caveare, as may be seene in his second Tome, page 1420. your friend will do well to leave that out of the Catalogue of those things, which page 81. he desireth to be informed of, by the travels of any Merchant or Gentleman: as likewise give you at large a Relation made to mee within these few dayes by a brave English Lady, and an excellent House∣wife, greatly confirming and illustrating the practise of fee∣ding Cowes with Turnips; of which page 103. she telleth
me, that at Roven (where she hath lived a good while) and in all the Countrey round about it, they feed their Cattle usually in this maner. Of Turnips (not of the best, but refuse ones, such as being worm-eaten, or otherwise faulty, are not good for mans meat) they boil a great ma∣ny in a great Kettle, whole as they are, with their leaves on their tops; til they be tender, adding thereto good store of branne; (of Wheat onely, because that, that of Rye, is scowring, and so not proper for them) and afterwards of the cakes of Rapeseed, or Linseed; which cakes having a singular faculty of fatting Cattle, they put much lesse of them into the Mesh for Milch-Cowes, (for fear of spoiling their Milke) than for other kind: of this they give them twice a day, so as it maketh the greatest part of their feeding, much more than the hay, which they give them betwixt whiles: and thus they feed them onely in Winter-time, because that all the Summer long they keep them abroad at grasse: Whe∣ther this be used in Holland as your friend saith, I can∣not tell of my own knowledge: having never there seene it, nor heard of it: but in France it is of very old standing, as appeareth by these words of Columella lib. 2. cap. 10. Rapa non homines solum, verum etiam boves pas∣cunt, praecipuè in Gallia, ubi Hyberna cibaria praedictis pecu∣dibus, id olus praebet. De-serres doth also speak of it, but very shortly, and onely mentioning it in a word or two. lib. 4. cap. 9. Paris the 6 of January 1652. IN the 104th. page of your Legacie, where I left with my last Annotations, I finde these words: In Barke∣shire many keepe tame Pheasants, and have gained well there∣by: The which having communicated to a brave En∣glish Lady here, a great friend of mine, who hath been a great House-keeper in England, and is a most excellent
vvife; she tels me that at a Countrey-house of hers, not farre from Chelsey, she had alvvayes great store of them; insomuch as she hath hatched to the number of 200 in one spring: vvhereof though many dyed, yet farre and farre the greatest part vvould come to perfection. That of people of quality she never knevv any but her selfe vvho kept any; but that there is abundance in the parts neer London, vvho keep them, for to make profit of them and sell them to the Poulterers, that there is nothing more easie to bring up, and to keep, than Pheasants; vvhen they are once past the first Moneth: for til then, they must be kept onely vvith Aunts eggs, and feed on nothing else; of vvhich one vvould think it a hard matter to get so many, but there are fellovves in England vvho for a little money vvil get one as many as one can desire: the first moneth being past, they are kept after∣vvards vvith Oates onely, requiring nothing else: but as they love to be kept in grassie fields: so one must change them somevvhat oft to fresh grounds, because they taint the grasse and the ground in the same manner, as Geese do, and for to keep them in, my Lady used to have those parcels of ground, vvhere they vvere kept, inclosed vvith lats. Paris the 3/13 of January 1652. YOu shall have now the conclusion of my Annotations upon your Legacy according to your desire. In the bottome of page 104: your friends speak∣eth, as if the excellency of Butter and Cheese de∣pended wholly of the handling of it, and that Cheese like to Parmesan and Holland Cheese, might be made in England, if the same industry
were used there, as in those Countreys, which is nothing so: For though Art and Industry can do very much in this particular, as in most o∣thers, whereof I have seen most remarkable examples both in England and Ireland, yet there is some thing in the particular nature of different waters and different Soiles, and of the food for Cattle thereon growing: and con∣sequently in that Cattles milke, and in the But∣ter and Cheese made thereof, which no Art nor humane skill can supply or imitate, no more than the same kind of Beere can be brewed in all pla∣ces, or the same kind of Wine be made to grow on all grounds. And this is most manifest here∣by, that in Holland it-self there are made severall sorts of Cheeses hugely different among them∣selves; which difference is most remarkable in those two excellent sorts, (viz.) the Edam-cheese (being that kind which is so much trans∣ported into forreign Countreys, and every where known by the generall Name of Holland-cheese) and the Stolke-cheese. And if it should be thought, that that diversity proceedeth from the different makings of Cheese, used in the severall parts of that Countrey; I can assure you, that if you make Edam and Stolke boors exchange their habitations, and keep all their own fashions, each of them shall make Cheeses, not such as they were wont to make at home, but as used to be made in the places to which they are come. The like may be said of the green-Cheeses, made in Holland of Sheepsmilke, especially those
of Gravesand, Tessel, and Grind; all three most excellent ones; and yet extreamly differing a∣mong themselves. And not to go for examples of this, further than England it selfe; It were against all reason and experience, to thinke that, that notable difference betwixt Suffolk and Che∣shire-cheeses, cometh onely from the different way of making it. Another thing, which I find fault withall in the same Discourse, is, that the Author nameth the French Angelots among the excellent sorts of Cheese; whereas they are no∣thing so, neither in their qualities, nor in their price, they being sold for two Sols a piece, where∣as they use to weigh half a pound. I do likewise mislike, that he for to instance in the best kinds of Cheese; he fetcheth Parmesans, and Holland-cheese from abroad, without taking notice; that at home in severall parts of the Land, and parti∣cularly in Mongomery-shire, Cheese is made equall to the best of these kinds; and at Chedder in Wiltshire, that which in my judgement is farre to be preferred before them, and to any other cheese in the world. Page 105. I cannot brook, that he complaineth England hath not a Systema, or a Compleat Book of all the parts of Agriculture; and reckoneth Markham among them, who have writ onely divers small Treatises of it: whereas Markham hath comprehended in his works, what∣ever belongeth to any part of Husbandry and of Housewifery too; with very few and small omissi∣ons; such as in no wise can rob him of the name
of a generall writings; his workes also having that excellency, that they are altogether squared for England, and go on experience rather than on Probabilities, and hear-says; to the contrary of what our Authour seemed to taxe in him, aswell as in other writers of that kind; which maketh me suspect; that either he hath not at all been conversant in Markham's writings; or that in reading of him he hath been strangely fore-judg∣ed, he being in my opinion, one of the most excellent of his kind; and in many particulars to be preferred before the most excellent of them all. It is true what is said pag. 106. There were a∣mong the Ancient Romans some appointed, to see that men did till their Land as they should; but that which followes: and if they did not, to pu∣nish them as Enemies to the Publique; is too hy∣perbolically spoken, there being a vast difference betwixt punishing one as an enemy to the Pub∣lique, and a simple fining of him, which was all the punishment inflicted for that fault, as you may see in the twelvth Chapter of Aulus Gellius his fourth Book. In these words, pag. 107. he that turneth fruitfull Lands into barrennesse, as the land of Canaan, very fruitfull heretofore, but now a barren Desart. Our Author saies nothing, but what is common in the mouth and pens of almost every body, and yet the truth thereof is very questionable, as an observant Reader will easily finde by the exactest and latest writers of that Countrey, among whom Eug. Royer is to be
placed in the very first ranke. And thus I make an end, having nothing to say to any thing con∣teined in the following pages of your Legacy; the reprinting whereof with those alterations and amendments I have hinted to you, I doe most earnestly wish for, it being indeed a most excellent piece; and from the be∣ginning to the end fraught with most excellent observations and experiments. FINIS. Page 98. line 12. Mr. Vaughan's Golden Grove should not have been named at all, as containing onely certain Geor∣gica Animi, matters of Morality, and nothing at all concerning the ordering of Fish-ponds, and the profit of them; of which Dubravius de Piscinis, hath written on purpose in the Latine Tongue.
AN INTERROGATORY Relating more particularly to the HƲSBANDRY And Naturall History of IRELAND. Prov. 14. Verse 22. Doe they not erre that devise evill? but mercie and truth shall be to them that devise good? ❧Printed for Richard Wodenothe, MDCLII.
THE ALPHABET of Interrogatories. A. Apricocks. WHether any thing common in gar∣dens, in whose gar∣dens, how long since they were brought in first and by whom? Acorns. Whether any store be in the Woods of Ireland, as to feed any great Herds of Swine, and whe∣ther they ripen as kindly as in Eng∣land? Acres. Difference of Irish and English Acres, how many feet and perch∣es go to an Acre, how many inch¦es to a foot, and how many Acres to a Plow-land? Ale. What the best manner of brew∣ing it, and wherein it dffers from the English Ale? Alder. Whether any great store of them any where, to what uses the timber of it is put? Almonds. Whether any trees in Ireland, whether they bear any fruit at all, and whether it come to any Per∣fection? Allum. Whether any found in Ireland, where, what quantity, how re∣fined; Ambergreece. Upon what parts of the coast any hath been found, when, by whom, in what quantity, what sorts, wherein and how much differing from the best? Ants, Pismires. Whether in any such quanti∣ties, as to cause annoyance and waste of graines, what means u∣sed to destroy them? Apples. Whether any great plenty any where, what sorts? Artichoaks. How long known in Ireland, by whom brought in since when come to be plentiful? Ash tree. Where most plentiful, in how much time from the seed they will grow to perfect trees, to what uses their timber is put?
Ashes. Where used in stead of dung, in what quantity, what time of the year, what good it doth? Asses. By whom any were brought o∣ver at any time, what numbers, how they thrived, and whether they did procreate? B. Badgers. Where any are, what store, how they lodge themselves, what they feed upon, what hurt they do, how hunted, how they do to defend or save themselves, how many they whelp, what their skins are worth, and to what use put, whether any body do eat their flesh? Bacon. The whole ordering of it, and the best ways? Bay-trees. Whether any store any where, and of any great bignesse, whe∣ther at any time they bear ripe berries? Barley. In which parts of the land most sown, in what grounds, how manured, what proportion upon each Acre, what increase, what is the seed-time, whether common∣ly bread be made of it any where? Barnacles. Where any are, in what num∣bers, how sold, when they come in and go out, whether any such thing be, as Barnacles ingendred in shels out of rotten wood, up∣on what coasts any such thing hath been observed, when, by whom, where, in what manner: how long ere they come to any perfection, whether they ingen∣der at all, what colour they are of, what bignesse, what they feed on? Barred-harbours. Where any are, how spacious, how many foot of water upon the barre at full sea, how many at low water? Barrel. What different sorts of barrels usual in Ireland, how they differ, what inferiour measure they con∣taine, how many of them go to an hogshead, and a tun, what pro∣portion they bear to the London-measures? Barren-ground. What sorts of ground abso∣lutely barren, not at all, or hard∣ly to be made profitable, in what Counties and Baronies any be, and of what extent? Base. Where any taken, what store when in season? Bats. Whether and where any store of them, what hurt at any time done by them to man or beast, particulars of their breeding and feeding, how taken and de∣stroyed? Beans. In which parts most sowen, on
what grounds and how manured, with what increase, and for what uses, how much seed put to each Acre, when sowen? Beare. Wherein differing from bar∣ley, where most sowen, at what time a year, on what ground, and how manured, what proportion for each Acre, what increase, for what uses, whether any difference in goodnesse betwixt Beare and Beare, and what difference? Beefe. What quantities of beefe were wont yearly to be made by the Merchants in Dublin, and other Port-towns, what it would cost them the barrel, and what they would sell it beyond seas, and in what places? Beech-trees. Where any grow, what store, whether they bear nuts, and ripe ones, what uses made of the wood? Beere. How brewed in Ireland, what several ways, which the best, how to make it lasting? Bees. Where most kept, where any store of wilde ones, what grounds and herbs they most delight in, how looked to, what hives, when they begin to make honey, when they give over, how much honey and wax ordinarily in one hive, when they take out the honey, whether they take all, or leave some for them to feed on during winter, what vermine they are obnoxious to, and how preserved from them, when the young swarmes are taken, and how hi∣ved? Beetles. What particulars observed con∣cerning their nature, breeding, feeding? Birch-trees. Where any are, what store of them, how sowen, in what time they will grow to perfection, what use made of them? Birdlime. Where any made in Ireland, what quantity, in what manner? Birds. What sorts of birds every where, what plenty, what good∣nesse, when in season, how taken, their natures, breeding, feeding, what sorts of them are constant∣ly in Ireland at all times, and what sorts do come and go at scertain seasons? Birds of Prey. What sorts in any place, what store, what hurt they do, how taken and destroyed, how made tame? Blackbirds. Where any store, when in sea∣son, and how long, when their breeding-time, their feeding, ways of taking them, at what rates sold the dosen, whether any different sorts of them, and wherein they differ?
Bloomeries. The fashion of them, charges of making one, how many people necessary to attend them, what quantity of iron they can melt in a day, and with what quantity of charcoal, whether the iron melt∣ed in them differ in any thing from the iron melted in furnaces, and wherein, where any are, whose they are, when and by whom erected? Bogs. What several sorts of them, the nature and condition of each of them, what use is or can be made of any of them, where any very great ones are, and of what length and breadth? Bogs draining. What bogs apt to be drained, how it is done, what the char∣ges, what the profits, where, when, and by whom any great proportions have been drained, and what it hath advantaged them, whether any of them make good Arable, and how long it must be first? Box-tree. Whether in any parts of Ire∣land it groweth up to an height, and what store, in what grounds? Brawn. The whole manner of the ma∣king on't, differences of good∣nesse, and from whence ari∣sing? Breams. In what parts, what store, what bignesse and goodnesse, when in season, and how long? Bricks. The whole manner of ma∣king them, what manner of clay fittest for this use, what may be the charges, what errors usually committed in the making, and what the effects thereof, Since when begun to be used in Ire∣land? Bridges. How many good ones, in eve∣ry Countie and Baronie, of how many Arches, when built, and by whom? Brooks. What brooks have any thing remarkable in their rising, course, over-flowings, (water-mills) vi∣olence, fish, &c? Broom. What grounds they be, where it groweth plentifully, and ca∣pable of what improvements? Bulls. Of their size, strength, order∣ing, diet, time of covering the Cows, what particulars observed of their courage, &c? Bull-finch. Their nature, feeding, breeding, plenty, season, ways of taking them? Buntings, Their shape, colours, nature, dyet, breeding, seasons, num∣bers. Buzzards. Where any be, what store, na∣ture,
breeding, shape, bignesse, &c? Butchers-broom. In what places it groweth, what use made on't? Butter. The whole manner of making and ordering it, both for good∣nesse and lasting; what proportion of it out of a proportion of milk and cream, different sorts, (for colour, taste, goodnesse) and the causes? Butter-flies. Their several sorts, natures, feeding, breeding, seasons, chan∣ges. C. Cabbage. The several sorts of them? Calves. The manner of rearing them, Calving-time, whether at any time more then one calved at once? Cane-Apples. Where any grow, what store? Carp. Where, what store, their sea∣son, bignesse, goodnesse? Carrets. Caterpillars. Their sorts, when and where most cumbersom, what ways used to destroy them? Caves. Cats. Where any be, how deep, how large, the fashion of them, what within them? Champion. What Counties and Baronies, altogether or for the most part are champion land, and wha oile? Charcoale. Of what sorts of wood usually made, and the whole manner of making them? Cheese. The whole manner of making it, the different sorts for good∣nesse, with the causes thereof? Cherries. Where any great store, by whom planted, what sorts? Chesnuts. Where any grow, when and by whom planted, whether they bear any ripe fruit, or any at all? Cider. Whether any made in Ireland, where, when, by whom, what quantity, what goodnesse, how lasting? Climate. Clay. What several sorts of it, which good, which barren, how to be handled and mended, of what depth, which best for brick? Coales. Where any found, when, by whom, what sorts, of what good∣nesse, what charges the digging, how deep they dig for them, and in what manner, what soil above them? Cockles. Where any Plenty of them, when in season? Cock of the Wood. Where any be, what store, their size,
colour, nature, breeding, feed∣ing, season, what meat they be, manner of taking them? Colliflowers. In whose garden any, when brought in, by whom, what store? Cod. On what parts of the coast it most abounds, seasons of fishing them, what profit, the whole manner of salting, them, what quantity one Fisherman may take in twenty foure houres, in what depths, and how farre from the land, what weather and wind best for fishing, what worth the tun, and what the charges? Conger. Where any taken, what store, of what different bignesse and goodnesse, when in season? Cordage. Where any made, what store and size, what charges, what pro∣fit? Cormorants. Where any be, what numbers, their bignesse, colour, shape, na∣ture, their manner of fishing and feeding, where they breed, how taken alive, whether ever any bo∣dy made them tame, who, when, where, what they would per∣form? Corne. What sorts are most common∣ly sowen in each part of Ireland, vvhat ground, and how manured, best for each kind, how much of any sort commonly sovven upon one Acre, and how much that u∣seth to yield? Cornelians. Where any grovv, since vvhen, in vvhose Orchards? Cowes. The best vvays of ordering them for breeding and milk, vvhen they take the Bull, hovv long after they calve, vvhat quan∣tities of milk ordinarily an Eng∣lish Covv may give in the several times of the year, and vvhat an I∣rish, their diseases, the nature and the cure of them, hovv old they begin to calve, and hovv long they continue? Crabs. Where they are in any plenty, vvhat sorts, what seasons, hovv they are taken? Cranes. Where any be, vvhat store, their nature, breeding, feeding, season, vvhat meat they are? Crayfish. Where any is taken, vvhat store, in vvhat manner, vvhat seasons? Crickets. Their several sorts, nature, in∣gendrings, feedings, seasons? Crowes. What sorts of them in Ireland, vvhat hurt they do, hovv hindred or destroyed, vvhether any body eats them, and vvhat meat they are? Observations of their na∣ture and properties. Cuckows. Their nature, breeding, feed∣ing,
season, bignesse, shape, co∣lour, vvhat meat they are? Curlews. Where any store of them is, their shape, bignesse, colours, na∣ture, breeding, season, ways of ta∣king them? D. Darnik. Daws. See Iackdaws. Deare. What store in any place, what kinds, their fawning-time, how long they are with fawn, how many they use to fawn, what time a yeare they cast their hornes, how long it is before they begin to bud out again, and in what space they come to their perfect bignesse? Observations of their nature, long-livednesse: Wherein Chiefly layeth the difference be∣twixt red deare, and fallow deare? Dew. What time a yeare, and in what weather, most plentifull, what good or harme it doth at any time? Diamond. False diamonds, like Bristows, found some where, in what places, upon or under the ground? Diseases of men. What diseases peculiar and reigning in some parts of the countrey? the nature, causes, cures thereof. Diseases of beasts. What diseases amongst all sorts of tame beasts, Common in Ire∣land, the nature, causes, cures thereof. Ditching. Divers. Where any are, what store, their nature, shape bignesse, co∣lour, taste, season, feeding, breed∣ing? Dogfish. Where taken, what quantities, what season, their bignesse, shape, nature, taste? Dogs. The several kinds of dogs in Ireland, their several natures and properties? Dotterels. Whether any in Ireland, and where their shape, nature, colour, manner of taking them? Doves. See Pigeons. Draining of Bogs. See Bogs. Ducks. Ordering and profit of Ducks. Wilde Ducks, vvhere is any store, in vvhat seasons, hovv taken? Dung. Several sorts of dung usual in Ireland, for vvhat grounds, and grains each sort, hovv, vvhen, and in vvhat quantity to be laid on? E. Eagles. Where any are, vvhat sorts, observations of their nature and properties, their manner of hunt∣ing, &c. Earth. What several sorts of earth in Ireland, hovv differing for fruit∣fulnesse,
and in the several vvays of manuring, the defects of each sort hovv to be amended? Earthquakes. Whether any in Ireland at any time, when, hovv long continued, vvhat harme done by them? Earewigs. Ebbe and Flood. See Tides. Eeles. Where most abundant, biggest, best, vvhere and vvhen taken in great numbers, vvith vvhat nets, in vvhat vveather and season, the manner of salting them, vvhat the charges, and vvhat the profits of the Eelesishing, vvhen they come in season and hovv long they con∣tinue, vvhat hath been observed about their ingendring and breed∣ing? Elder. Elecampane. Where any grovveth of it self, any vvhere, vvhere, and vvhat store? Elmes. Where any grovv in the coun∣trey, vvhat store, by whom plant∣ed? F Fallow deere. See Deere. Fals, Salmon leaps. In what rivers any are, in what Counties, and Baronies, neere what Towns, how farre from the sea, how high, how broade. Faulcons. Where any breed, what store, where destroyed, how taken, how taught, how to be ordered, and dyeted; Observations of their nature, properties, engendring, manner of preying. Felfares. Where any are, what store, in what seasons, their shape, bignesse, Colour, taste, price, feeding? Ferrets. Where any are wilde, how ta∣ken, how made tame, how dyet∣ed? Fig-trees. Where any grow, in whose gardens, whether at any time they beare any fruit, or any at all? Filberts. Where any grow wilde? or in gardens? Finches. Where any store of them, what sorts, how differing in shape and Colour, when in season? Fir-trees. Where any grow, what store, what use made of them: where any found in bogs, how deep un∣der ground, whether the stems only, or with rootes and bran∣ches? Fish. What rivers and loghs most a∣bounding with fish, what kinds, what goodnesse; What strange fishes now and them are taken, or cast a shoare? Fishing. What weather in general most fit for fishing; dark, gloomy days and troubled waters, or Sunshine
and calmes. The several sorts of nets used in the sea; locks, rivers, with the fashion and bignesse of every one of them; and which nets most used, for which kinds of fishes, the several baites. What other ways used for the taking of fish, besides nets and angling. Flax. What store of flax sowed in each County and Barony, of what goodnesse, the whole or∣dering of flax, to make it fit for spinning? Flies. The several sorts of them, when they come in, when they go out? Fleas. Flood and Ebbe. See Tides. Floods. Land floods. Which parts most obnoxious to them, what harm they suffer therby, and how to be remedied? Flowers. What variety of rare and choice flowers in gardens, and in whose gardens? Flownders. The several sorts of them, where greatest store of them, when and how long in season? Foards. Description of all Foards in a∣ny County or Barony, that have any thing peculiar or remarkable in them? Foggs. In which parts most frequent, and when, what harm they are found to do to man or beast? Forelands. Description of all the remark∣able Forelands in each County upon the coast, how far they run into the sea, how high, what land, barren or fruitful, low or high, rockie or sandie, or earthy, with a strand or without? Fowle. What sorts of Fowle in every Province and County, what store, what seasons, how taken, what sorts are constant in the Nation, and what sorts do come and go at certain seasons? Fountains. What fountains in any parts that have any thing remarkable in them, for largenesse, fashion, properties of water, manner of rising, &c. Foxes. Where most abundant, what harm done by them, the several ways of taking and killing them: what particulars have been obser∣ved concerning their breeding, lodging, preying, cunning, what profit made of their skins, and how sold the dosen at first hand? Freestone. What sorts of it, differing in colour, hardnesse, smoothnesse, &c. what kinds grow better by wind and rain, and what sorts worse, where any very deep quar∣ries are, and how deep? French beanes. How long since, and by whom
brought into Ireland first? Fruits. What several sorts of good fruit in any gardens and or∣chards, and whose, how it useth to ripen? Furres. What several sorts of Furres the countrey affords, and at what rates, the manner of dressing them? Furze. Several sorts of Furze, what profit Furze affordeth, in what time it cometh to Perfection, what benefit bringeth to the ground? G. Galls. Whether any grow upon the Oaks in Ireland, and where? Gardens. Where any choice gardens (for rare plants, flowers, fruits) when and by whom made? Geese. Where any great flocks were kept, and what profits made of them? Wilde Geese, in what parts, what store, their seasons, whether they breed in the Coun∣trey or come from other Coun∣treys, and from whence? Glasse. Where any Glasse-houses, by whom made, what the profits of them yearly, all charges abated; where they have their materials, if in the land, in what parts, what sorts of glasse they make, and out of what proportions of land and ashes, the whole manner of melt∣ing the glasse? Glue. What sorts of Glue made in Ireland, in what places, of what materials, after what manner? Goats. Gnats. Where any flocks kept, what the profits that are made of them, what the yearly increase, what time a year they use to kid, how many at once, how long they are at once, whether any use made of their haire, and what? Godwins. Where any be, what store, their shape, bignesse, Colour, feeding, season, goodnesse: Goshawks. Wherein they differ from other hawks, their shape & big∣nesse, where they breed, how they are taken, how nurtured, at what games they are best, the manner of their flights? Goldfinches. Where any plenty of them, their shape Colours; how they are taken? Grafting. What kinds of grafting used in Ireland, what time a yeare best for them, what particulars to be observed about them? Gray-hounds. What kinds of them in Ireland, their nature and properties? Grains. See Corne.
Grapes. Whether any come to ripe∣nesse, where, what kinds, in whose gardens? Grashoppers. Whether any in Ireland, what kinds, what time a year? Grasse. The causes of soure rank grasse, where the sweetest grasse, where the deepest and thickest, what grasse fittest to be preser∣ved for winter-feeding, what grasse best for Sheep, Cowes, Oxen, Goats, Horses? Growses. Where any store of them, their shape, bignesse, colour, when in season, what kind of meat they are? Gudgeons. Where any be taken, what time of the year, their shape and bignesse? H. Haddock. Where taken in great quanti∣ties, how farre from the coast, what time a year, how salted, when best of all to be eaten? Haile. Hay. All the particulars to be ob∣served about hay-making. Hares. Havens. Descriptions of each haven, in what Countie, how far from the next havens, how large, hovv deep, hovv far they run into the land, hovv vvide at the mouth, vvhether barred or no, vvhat rocks and sands before or vvithin them, the shape of them. Hawks. What sorts of Havvks in Ireland, where they breed, vvhat store, hovv and vvherin they differ from each other, the manner of the slights of each of them, and at vvhat games each of them best, and hovv to be nurtured? Heads. Capes. Description of all the principal heads of the Coast, their height, spaciousnesse, vvhether of bare rock, heathie, grassie, vvhether steep, or vvith a strand before them, hovv far distant from the next places of note. Herbs. What gardens stored vvith rare and choice herbs, and vvith vvhat store? Heaths. Where any grear Heaths, vvhat extent, vvhether in Champion or Mountain, vvhether altogether barren, or some vvays improvable, vvho hath reduced Heaths into profitable lands, vvhat scopes, vvith vvhat helps, and to vvhat ad∣vantages? Heath-cocks. See Growses. Hedge-hogs. Where they breed in any great numbers, vvhat they feed on, vvhat harm they do, vvhat vvays used to take them, hovv they ingender, and hovv numerously, vvhether their flesh eaten by any, vvhat use made of their skins? Hedging.
Hempe. Where any great quantities sovvn, upon vvhat ground, and hovv manured, vvhat hurt or good it doth to the ground, the vvhole manner of ordering hempe? Hernshaws. Hens. Where any be, what store, when in season, what paticulars have, been observed about their nature breeding, feeding, &c. Herrings. On what places of the Coast taken, what time a year, what quantities, how sold the mease, the whole manner of salting and re-salting them, what are the signes of their being out of sea∣son, what windes and weather best for taking them. Hides. What quantities yearly used to be sent forth, at what rates. Hills. What Countreys all hillie? Hoary-frosts. What hurt done by them to fruit, corne, grasse, &c. Hobbies. What their peculiar quality, size, what store of the race left, and where? Hogs. Hollie. Where any great store groweth, and to a perfect bignesse, what use made of the wood & of the rind? Honey. What quantities made in such or such a Countie. what sorts, what goodnesse? Hops. Where any hop gardens, when and by whom planted, what year∣ly profit they yield. Of what goodnesse the Irish hops? Horses. What good races in Ireland, where and whose, where any great steeds kept, by whom, upon what grounds, how long Mares are with foale, vvhether ever they foale more then one at once, at vvhat years they use to give over. Diseases ordinarily incident to horses, the causes, prevention, and cures of them? Horseleeches. Hounds. I. Iackdaws. What store of them in Ireland, where most, vvhat harm they do, their nature and breeding? Ice. Islands. Description of the Islands up∣on the coast, and in the Loghs, their number, bignesse, vvhat kind of soile, and vvhat they bear, vvhat trees on them, vvhat hills, brooks, rocks in them? Iron. Iron-mines. Where any Iron-mines are, of vvhat sorts, (rock-mne, vvhite-mine or bog-mine,) hovv found out, and hovv digg'd, especially the bog-mine and rock-mine, vvhich mines the richest, and hovv much oare vvill yield a tun of iron, vvhat kind of iron each sort of Mine giveth.
Iron-works. Where any are, and vvhose, vvhen and by whom made, the charges of making one, and of maintaining one, vvhat yearly profit they yield, hovv much iron they melt in tvventy foure houres, what proportion of char∣choale is laid to the oare, in vvhat order they are put into the fur∣nace, hovv far the furnace is fil∣led vvhat store of men imployed about one work, and in what se∣veral offices. The manner of melt∣ing and hammering the iron, at the forges, and with how much waste? Juniper-trees. Whether any grow in Ireland, and where? K. Kine. See Cows. What the best grounds and grasse for Kine to feed on, what dseases incident to Kine, and the ways to prevent and cure them. Kites. What store in Ireland, what places they breed, what ways u∣sed to destroy them? Knives. Where any good ones made, where they have the steel, how they temper them, what waters best for to harden them &c. L. Lambs. The manner of rearing them? Lampreys. Where any be, what store, how taken, when in season, how they breed and ingender? Lands. Leeks. Larks. Observations concerning their nature and properties, when in season? Leather. Lettice. Leeches. See Horse-leeches. Licoris. Leeks. Where any groweth, what quantity, what goodnesse? Lice. Lime. Limestone. What several sorts of kilnes u∣sed for lime, and what sorts of fiering, the whole manner of burning lime, and the charges of it, whether any differences of limestone, in colour, brittlenesse, &c. where they use lime for the inriching of the ground, what quantity to an Acre, what time a yeare? Lightning. Lind-trees. Whether any grow in Ireland, where, and by whom planted? Ling. Where any taken, what quan∣tity, what time a year, the man∣ner of salting it, the shape of the fish? Lisards. Observations of their nature and properties Loghs. What Loghs in every Province and County, of what depth, length, breadth, compasse, what Islands in them, and what sorts of fish?
Lobsters. In what places they are plenti∣ful, when in season, what time of the year they cast their coat, and how long it is before they get a new one. M. Maccamboy. Whether there be such a thing at all, that this herb should purge the body meerly by external touch, or whether it be a fable, what particular observations have been taken for or against it, the shape of the herb, and in what place it groweth? Macarels. On what parts of the coasts they are taken in any great plen∣ty, when they come to be in sea∣son, and how long? Madder. Whether any be planted in Ireland, where, what quantities, how manured and ordered? Maggot apies. See Pies. Maggots. Maids, A kind of scate or thorn-back. In what parts to be had, what quantity, what time a year, their nature and properties? Mallards. See Ducks. Malt. Manuring. The several ways of manuring the ground, with all the particu∣lars of each kind, and where used? Marble. What sorts are found, in what places, in what ground, (champi∣on, mountain or hill) vvhat soile over head, how deep they dig for it, the charges of digging it? Marle. Where any is found, in what County and Baronie of each Pro∣vince, how long since it was found, and by whom, what ground o∣ver head, and how deep, the depth of the Marle it self, the na∣ture and colour on't, upon what grounds they use it, what time a year, how many loads to an Acre, and at what charges, what grains marled land wilt bear, and how many years together, how to be used afterwards, and whether it may be used more then once upon the same piece of ground, and with what effect? Marshmallows. Whether any grow of them∣selves, where, what store? Mastiffs. What store of them in Ireland, their several natures and proper∣ties? Match. Where any made in Ireland, of the whole manner of making it? Measures. What several measures usuall in Ireland, for the measuring of Land, Corne, Beere, Wine, Fish &c. Meaws, sea-meaws. Where any store, what use made of them; their nature and properties; whether there be any different kinds of them; and what?
Meadows. The time and manner of laying meadows, what grounds best for meadows; and in which meadows the sweetest grasse? Medlers. Where any grow, whether wilde, or in Gardens only? Merlin. Where any ayries of them; how and when to be taken; and to be used to the hand; their na∣ture and properties, the manner of their flights; and on what game they are best; how to be looked to, and dieted? Mice. Whether field-mice any where, what store, what harme they do; how destroyed? Milke Mines, See Iron-mines Silver-mines VVhat share the King had in mines that are found out, and what share the Lord of the Man∣nor? Minerals. VVhat several sorts of mine∣rals, found in any parts of Ire∣land? Mists, See Fogs. Moales. VVhether any be in Ireland, and where? Moore-hens. VVhere any found, what store, what time a yeare best for meat; their shape, bignesse, Colours; nature, properties? Mountaine. What proportion of moun∣tain in each Province and Coun∣ty, the length and breadth of it, how high, where at the highest, what soile, and what it beareth? Mud. Where used to inrich the grounds, in what manner and proportion? Mulberries. Where any grow, and in whose Gardens? Mullet. Where any taken, what store, when in season, their nature, pro∣perties? Muskemillions. Whether any grow in Ireland, and come to any perfection? Muskets. Whether any made in Ireland, where, and how? Mussels. Where in greatest plenty, what season? Muttons. General rules about the ma∣king and ordering of Muttons? N. Nightingailes. Whether any body ever brought any over, and how long they lived in Ireland. O. Oakes. What Oaks of any extraordi∣nary bignesse any where are, or-have been lately. Oase. Sea-Oase. What store in any plaee, what
kinds, what use made thereof? Oates. Where most sowen, on what grounds, how manured, their seed-time, their kinds? Oatmeale. Where any made, and the whole manner of making it? Oysters. Onions. Where any store, what sorts, when in season? Orchards. Where the most, where a∣ny choice ones, when and by whom planted, what good fruits in them? Osprays, Where any be, their shape, bignesse, colour, their manner of taking fish, whether any be made tame, and what sport they af∣ford? Otters. In what parts any be, what store, how they are taken, what use made of their flesh, their na∣ture and properties, manner of their building, at what rates their skins are sold at first hand? Owles. What sorts of them in Ireland, and where, their nature, proper∣ties, nests, diet, whether used for birding in any parts of Ire∣land? Oxen. P. Paper. Whether any be made in Ire∣land, where, the whole manner of it? Parkes. Where any were before these troubles, when and by whome made, what compasse, what vert, what sort and store of Deerein them? Parrets. Parsneps. Partridges. In what Counties and Baronies any be, where they most abound, when in season, observations con∣cerning their nature and proper∣ties? Patricks-Purgatory. Perfect description of the Logh, Island, Caves, and the whole proceedings there, during the Justiceship of the Earle of Corke, and the Lord Chancellour Loftus. Peaches. Where any good ones, and any store doth grow? Peacocks Whether any in Ireland, where, with whom? Peares. Where any store, and what sorts? Pearmains. Whether any grow in Ireland, and where, when planted, and by whom? Pearles. Where any found, what store, what goodnesse? Pease. Where most sowen, on what grounds, and how manured, their seed-time, what uses made of them?
Perches. Where any, what store, when in season? Perrie. Whether any made in Ireland, where, by whom? Perwinkles. Where taken, what store, when in season? Phesants. Where any be, what store, when in season, their nature and properties, manner of hunting and taking them? Pigeons. Where any great store of tame ones, and where of wilde ones; what ways used to take the wilde ones; their nature and proper∣ties? Pigeons-dung. Where used to dung the ground, in what manner, to what purpose? Pigs. Pikes. Where any, what store, what bignesse, when in season, what several wayes of taking them. Pilchards. Where any Pilchard-fishing, what time a yeare, what charges, what profit, how farre from the coast, the whole manner of or∣dering and salting them, whither they are transported? Pintails. Pintail is a bird in bignesse be∣tween a Duck and teale, of co∣lour like a wilde-duck; in the taile it hath a spring of feathers in fashion like a buls pisell, three or foure inches long, of dainty various colours, are no where in Ireland, but in Connaught, and there at no other time of the year, than in February; and then they are there in great abundance; so as ordinarily they are sold at four and six pence a couple; they are most dainty meat. Pipe-staves. Where any made, what store, what charges, what profit, whether transported? Pismires, See Ants. Pippins. Whether any grow in Ireland, where, by whom planted, and when, what store? Pistols. Where any made, what store, what goodnesse? Places. Where taken, what store, what bignesse, and goodnesse, what time a yeare? Plague. When any in Ireland, how farre it spread, what numbers it killed how long it lasted? Plants. Plovers Gray Plovers, and greene Plo∣vers, where, what store, when in season, what particulars ob∣served about their nature & pro∣perties? Plow-land. What it is, and of what ex∣tent? Plums. What sorts of Plums in Ireland, what store,
where, by whom brought into Ireland? Poisons. Particular observations of the Antipathy of the Irish earth and Aire, against all poisonous crea∣tures? Poplars. Where any grow, what store, what uses made of them? Pork. Goodnesse of Irish pork, and the whole manner of ordering it? Porpases. Where any be, what store, what time a yeare; their shape, bignesse, nature? Potatoes. Where any store sowen, when brought over first; and by whom; what uses made of them, what time to be taken up, and how to be preserved? Powder, Gunpowder. Where any made, what quan∣tity; from whence they have the Materials? Prawms, See Shrimps. Privet. Puits. Whether any in Ireland, where, what season; their shape, big∣nesse, Colour, nature? Pumpions. Whether they come to per∣fection in Ireland, where they grow; and what store? Pumiestone. Whether any found in Ireland, and where? Q. Quailes. Where any, what store, what season; their nature and proper∣ties? Quicksets. Where any very good ones, the whole manner of ordering them? Quinces. Where any grow, when and by whome planted? R Radish. Railes. Where any; what store, what season, their shape, bignesse, Co∣lours, what wayes they are taken? Rapeseed. Where sowen, on what ground, how manured, the profits thereof? Rasors. VVhere taken, what store, what bignesse, and goodnesse? Rasps. Whether any grow wilde in Ireland; where, what store; what kinds? Rats. Where the most abound, and since when; what wayes used to destroy them; what parts cleare from them? Ravens. What store in Ireland, and where most; what particular ob∣servations have been made con∣cerning their nature, proper∣ties, long life? Red Deeres.
Where any, what store, when in season, particulars observed concerning their nature, proper∣ties, long life; when they cast their hornes, when they grow a∣gaine, and when they come to their perfection. In what space of time Red Deere commeth to its full perfection; their fawning∣time, and how long they are with fawne? Red herrings. Whether any made in Ireland, where, what store? Reeds. What sorts of them in Ireland; and where; what use made of them? Rhubarb. Where it groweth, in what quantitie? Rie. In what parts of Ireland most sown, on what grounds, how much to an Acre, and what in∣crease? Ring-doves. Rivers. Rinnet. Particular description of all ri∣vers in each Province and Coun∣tie, where they rise, where they fall into the sea or other rivers, through what Locks they passe what sorts of fish is in them, what fishing, and at what times a year, how far they ebb and flow, Ships of what burden may come into them, and how far, how far they are portable at all: what towns of note, great hils, woods, great bogs they passe close by, how long, & how deep and broad, where at the broadest, and deepest, what time a year they use to swell most, what weres and falls are in them, and where-abouts? Roads. What roads of note upon any parts of the coasts; how neer to the shore ships may come to an Anchor there, in how much wa∣ter, and for what winds lay Landlockt? Robin-red-brests: Roches. Where any are, what store, when in season? Rooks. Where any are, what store; whether any eat them; of their nature and properties, wherein they differ from Crows? Rot of sheep. Roses: Rushes. The severall sorts of them, and to what uses they are put? Russetings. Whether any grow in Ireland, in whose gardens, when brought in? S Saffron. Whether any groweth in Ire∣land, where, what store? Salmons. Salmon-fishing. Where any are taken, what quantities, in what times of the year?
Salmon-salting. The Manner of them? what Salt best? Sallows. Salt. Whether any made or refined in any part of Ireland, and the whole manner of doing it? Salt-peter. Whether any made in Ireland, where, what store: the whole manner on't? Sampier. Where any groweth, and what store? Sand. Whether there be any sandy places in the land altogether bar∣ren, where, of what extent, and what kinde of sand? Savin. Whether any groweth in Ireland, where, what store, to what height? Sea aire. What hath been observed in the severall parts of the coasts: Concerning the sea-aire, what good or hurt it doth, to men, beasts, trees, Corne, and grounds? Sea-coales, See coales. Seales. Where any are, what store, how taken, of their nature and properties? Service-trees. Whether any grow in Ireland, and bear ripe fruit, and where? Shad. Whether any be taken upon the coasts of Ireland, what quanti∣ties, where and what season; their shape and nature? Sheepe. Sham-rocks. What grounds best for them, how to be ordered according to the several seasons of the yeare, how to be provided for in Win∣ter, during frost and snow; What diseases incident to them, and the ways to prevent and cure them; things to be observed in the rearing of flocks; Names of all the great Sheepe-matters, that were throughout the kingdome at the breaking out of the Rebellion; what flocks they had, and what profits they yielded them yeare∣ly? Sheldrakes Where any be, what numbers; when in season, their shape; big∣nesse, Colour, nature, dyet? Shel-fish. What several sorts of them the Irish sea affordeth, and in what parts in most abundance: When every sort in season, and where best? Shelves upon the coasts. Where any lay, and what obser∣vable things can be said about them? Shrimps. Where any are taken, what bignesse; what store, what sea∣sons? Silk-wormes. Where, and by whom any have been kept, what store, what quantities of silk they made?
Silver. Silver-mines Skirrets. Where any store, in whose Gar∣dens, since when, who brought them first into Ireland? Slate. Where any quarries of them are, how deep it lyeth, what kinde of slate it is, (for colour, brittlenesse, &c.) what charges? Black-slate. Where digged, what store, the vertues of it, how found out first, when, and by whom? Smelts. Whether any be taken in the Irish-sea, where, what store; what seasons? Snailes. Whether ever any such abun∣dance of them any where; as to do any great harme to gardens, or fields, and what wayes are u∣sed to destroy them? Snites. Where any be, what store; what seasons; their nature and properties? Snow. In which parts most snow useth to fall; which is the longest, that it continueth upon the Moun∣taines in any part of Ireland? Soales Where any taken, what store, when in season? Soape. Whether any made in Ireland; where, what quantitie; the whole manner of making it? Sows, See Swine: Soile. The different kinds of soiles in Ireland; what use every kinde is best for; the excellencies of every kinde; as also the defects, and how to be remedied? Black sows, (a kind of vermin.) Spaes. Where any in Ireland, of what nature and propertie, when, and by whom found out? Spanniels. What different kinds of them in Ireland, with the properties and excellencies of each kind? Sparagus. In whose Gardens any grow; what store, and since when? Sparrows. The different kinds of them in Ireland; with the peculiar pro∣perties of each kind? Sparrow-hawks. Where any breed, what store, how to be taken, and ordered; their nature and properties? Sponges: Whether any grow upon the coasts of Ireland; where, what store, of what goodnesse? Springs: Description of all springs in the severall parts of the Land that have any thing rare, or ob∣servable in them? Sprats: Whether any taken in Ire∣land; where, what store, what sea∣sons?
Squirrels. Where any be, what store; their nature, properties, diet, breeding, how a dozen of their skins useth to be sold at first hand? Stags: Starch. Whether any be made in Ire∣land; where, what store? Sares. Where any great numbers of them. Their nature, properties; dyet? Steele. Where any made, what store, in what manner? Storks. Whether ever any have been seen in Ireland; when and where? Stronds. The different kinds of them, where high; where flat, where rockie, where faire and sandy, where none at all; so as the sea is very deep close by the Land? Sturgeon. Whether ever any seen in the Irish-seas; when and where? Straw. The different uses made of straw; for dung, thatch, &c? Swallows. Strawberries. In what parts they grow of themselves in any plenty? Swans. Where any numbers of tame ones have been kept. Where any store of wild ones; their season, nature; and properties? Swine. The whole manner of order∣ing herds of swine, and what profits to be made of them. Dis∣eases incident to swine; the causes, preventions and cures of them? Swords. Where any made, and where the best? Sycomores. Whether any grow of them∣selves any where? T. Talbots. Where any are taken, of what bignesse and goodnesse, in what seasons? Tallow. What store every year useth to be made and transported at Du∣blin and other ports? Tanneries. Where any great ones, when, and by whom erected? Teales. Where any great store of them, when in season? Thunder. Thornbacks. Where any store taken, when in season; observations of their nature and properties? Thrushes. In what parts to be had in any store, when in season, their nature and properties? Thrushels. Where to be had, what store, when in season; their nature and properties? Tides. On what parts of the coasts
very high and very strong tides go; and where highest; how ma∣ny foot the water doth rise and fall? Tillage. What things observable in the tillage of Ireland; & what things chiefly to be regarded for the well ordering of it for all manner of graine: and wherein the chief difference between the tillage of England and Ireland? Timber. What sorts of timber in Ire∣land; of what goodnesse, and to what uses each kind is imploy'd? Tortoises. Whether any in Ireland, and where? Trane. Where any made, what quan∣tities; of what fishes, what charges, and what profit? Trees. What sorts of trees, both wilde and other; naturally grow in Ireland; and what sorts have been brought in of late, that grew not there before? Trowts. Wherein extraordinary plenty, or of extraordinary bigness, when in season and how long? Turbot. Where any taken, of what big∣nesse and goodnesse; and at what times of the yeare? Turfe. How many sorts of turfe, what sort the best; what is the deepest they dig for any turfe, how they do to keepe out the water out of the turfe-pits; whether the turf∣pits use to fill up again, and in what space of yeeres: In what turfe-bogs trees are found, what sorts of trees; and how deep un∣der ground? Turkeys. In what part greatest store is bred; how long it is since they had any in Ireland. What things chief∣ly to be observed in breeding of turkeys? Turneps. What their seed-time, when to be taken up; what ground fittest for them? Turtles. Whether any be in Ireland, and where? V Valleys. Venemous creatures. See Poysons. Veale. Things to be observed about the right ordering of veale? Verjuice. Whether any be made in Ire∣land, where, what store? Vermin. What sorts of vermin chiefly abound in Ireland, what harme they do; what means used to de∣stroy them? Vines, See Grapes. W Wagtailes. Where any, what store; their nature and properties?
Walnuts. Where any ripe ones grow, and what store? Wares. What wares Ireland sendeth forth; what quantities, to what Countreys; at what rates, what wares are imported, from whence, at what rates? Water. Notable differences of the se∣veral sorts of water, and for what peculiar uses each sort of water is fittest? Wax. What sort of wax made in any part of Ireland; and how they make it? Weres. Wells. Particular description of all Wells that have any thing rare, or observable in them, either for the nature of the water, depth, &c. Wesels. Where any great store of them, in what places they live abroad, and on what they feed; observa∣tions concerning their nature and properties? Whales. On what parts of the coast any VVhales have been cast up at any time within memory, what num∣bers; what bignesse, what time a yeere? Wheate. In what parts of Ireland it is most sowen, on what grounds; how manured; what proportion to an Acre; and what increase? Whitings, and Whiting-maps. Where most taken, what time a yeare? Wilde-beasts. Wigions. In what parts they are, what store, when in season, their nature and properties? Wild-fowle. What sorts of them in Ireland, what plenty of each sort, and when in season? Willows. Winds.  Which parts of the Countrey most subject to high winds, and at what times of the year; what kinds of winds most predomi∣nant in the several parts of Ire∣land? Wonderful things. The turning of wood in to stones; in Logneagh and the like; what particulars have been ob∣served about that? Wood-cocks. Where in great plenty, when they come in, and when they go out. Particulars observed about the nature and properties of them; What places fittest for glades? Woods. Where any great woods de∣stroyed within these fourty years; upon what occasions, and by whom; what profit made of the Lands recovered out of the woods: What great woods stand∣ing to this day; and in what Counties and Baronies?
Woolfs. In what parts of the Land any are left, and what store, what wayes used to take them; peculi∣ar observations concerning their nature and properties? Wooll. Where the best wooll, where∣in the Irish wooll differeth from the English; what store of wooll yearly useth to be transported from Dublin, and other places, and at what rates; the right ordering of wooll for sale? Wormes. What severall sorts of wormes in Ireland, what harme done by them, and how they are de∣stroyed? FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 8. line 18. for to devour, Read do devour. p. 12. l. 11. for add then r. and then. p. 17. l. 2. for ought like. r. ought not like. p. 19. l. 6. for the blacknesse. r. and blacknesse. p. 21. l. 23. r. from Kernels. p. 23. l 25. for should not r. would not. p. 25. l. 1. for bear very r. which bear very p. 29. l. 31. r. Meade. p. 41. l. 14. for af. r. of. p. 46. l. 26. for folling. r. felling. p. 48. l. last. for have r. halfe. p. 53. l. 6. for Moreney r. Morin. p. 59. l. 9. for two r. three. l. 28. for detection. r. dire∣ction. p. 60. l. 3. for which begun. r. which we begun. l. 37. for sassarfas r. sassafras. p. 61. l. 12. for at a cherry. r. as a cherry. p. 64. l. 14. for dnopping. r. dropping. l. 21. r. search. p. 66. l. 25. r. Calaninaris. p. 71. l. 32. for Kue. r. Rue. p. 73. l. 6. r. these cattel. p. 78. l. 22. for vessels. r. bushels. p. 76. l. 29. r. exsiccate. p. 75. l. 23. r. but. l. 30. r. small matter. IF any desire to have the great Clover of Flaunders, or the best sorts of Hemp and Flax-seeds of those parts, or Saint Foine, La Lucerne, Canary-seeds, or any sorts of Seeds of this kinde: Let them enquire at Mr. James Long's Shop at the Barge on Billings-gate; and they shall upon timely notice have them procured new, and very good from France or Flaunders at reasonable rates.
The Titles of other Treatises of Universal Husban∣dry, lately published for the general benefit of the Nation, by Mr. Sam Hartlib. The Reformed Husbandman, or a brief Treatise of the Errours, De∣fects and Inconveniences of our English Husbandry, in plough∣ing and sowing for Corne; with the reasons and general Remedies, and a large, yet faithful offer or under∣taking for the benefit of them that will joyne in this good and publick work. An Essay for Advancement of Husbandry-learning: Or Propositions for the erecting a Colledge of Husbandry, and in order thereunto, for the taking in of Pupils or Apprenti∣zes, and also Friends or Fellows of the same Colledge or Society. An Invention of Engines of Motion, lately brought to perfection, whereby may be dispatched without winde, water or horses, any work now done in England, or elsewhere, (espe∣cially works that require strength and swiftnes) either by winde, water, Cattle or Men, and that with better Accommodation, and more profit then by any thing hitherto known and used. LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall Market, next doore to the Golden Hart. 165.
