I1062 E31_6 99859877 111978
A FAMOUS VICTORY OBTAINED, By Sir William Brewerton. By Sir Thomas Fairfax. By Sir William Fairfax. IN A pitcht Battle against the Lord BYRON, (Chief Commander of the Kings Forces) at the raising of the Sledge of Namptwitch. TOGETHER, With a List of all the Commanders that were slain and taken in the said Fight. ALSO, In what estate the Towne of Namptwitch now is, and the miserable condition of the Enemies Forces in these parts. Printed according to Order. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop. Febr. the 2d. 1644.
A FAMOVS VICTORY Obtained by Sir VVILLIAM BRERETON, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX: Against the Lord BYRON: Chiefe Commander in the Kings Army. ALL worthy Sir, I make no que∣stion, but you have heard of the last defeat given to Sir Ni∣cholas Biron and his Serjant Ma∣jor, and al∣though Sir Wil∣liam Brewerton hath beene much distressed in these parts,
for want of supplyes, and although the Cowardlinesse of the Manchester men; yet since they have gained their lost re∣putation, and stick to us with a great deale of valour, and at times done great executi∣on upon the enemy. The Lord Byron the Kings Generall, hath beene so terrible un∣to us, and sheweth so little mercy on those he overcommeth or taketh prisoners, that some of our forces were unwilling to venture on any designe, where Biron was; but since thanks be to God, our valiant Leaders, Sir William Brereton, Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, and Sir William Fairfax, and Colonell Mitton, have done so worthy good services, that beleive from me, our Towne of Namptwich is for certaine set at liberty, the enemy quite routed; and dispersed in severall companies; that like amazed creatures they rove up and downe the country, and cannot make head of five hundred; which at the first besiging, was full five thousand: our foot forces are greatly wearied, but exceeding good ser∣vice
have they done, against the enemy: and as near as I can, I have set downe the truth of our late proceedings, with a List of the number taken, and slaine. Wee are here very busie for the present, and keepe a great Guard over the prisoners which wee have taken, and we beleive the Gentry shall be sent to London, and the common Irish to be tryed by a Councell of Warre, the under-Marshall and Keeper of our cut∣throates hath a beneficiall place thereof, of the Inhabitants, both men, women, and children, dayly resort to the Goale, to see what manner of monsters they be. I beleive you will have this businesse very suddenly, in regard of which, I will leave you, ho∣ping that you will pray for our further successe, and rest yours I. ISACK. From Crews-House, Ianuary the 29. 1644.
A List of the Kings Commanders taken at the raising of the Siedge of Namptwich  in a pitcht Battle between Sir William Brewerton, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir William Fairfax: Against the Lord Byron, chief Com∣mander of the Kings Forces there. SErgeant Major Generall Gibson. Sir Michael Earmely. Sir Richard Fleetwood. Sir Francis Boteler. Collonell Warren. Collonell Moncke. Collonell Gibs. Major Hammond. 14, Captaines. 1. Castillion. 2. Wither. 3. Leverson.
4. Case. 5. Kise. 6. Woodwofe. 7. Pae. 8. Morgan. 9. Lewis. 10. Signum. 11. Toothwood. 12. Thomas. 13. Lidcot. 14. Billingsley. 20. Lieutenants. 1. Smith. 2. Bates. 3. Saintford, &c. 26. Ensignes. Browne. Brewerton, &c. 4. Canoneers. 2. Cornets. 2. Quartermasters. 1. Captatn Lieutenant of a Regiment. 6. Peece of Ordnance. 4. Trumpets.
41. Sergeants. 40. Drummes. 61. Corporals. 20. Carriages. 120. Women with great Knives. 200. Slain on the right Wing, besides. 700. Taken on the left Wing, 21. Gentlemen of Companies. 80. Fiery Bullets shot into the Town, but none did execution; but one, which lighted into a Stacke of Hay. Postcript. SIr my intentions were to have sent you a more ample Relation, and to have certified you of each particular which happened both be∣fore and in the Fight, but the Messenger was in such extraordinary haste, I am forced to omit it till the next occasion, intreating you to take this in good part. Vale.
