L1798 E638_4 99865749 118000
A TRUE ACCOMPT of the late REDUCEMENT OF THE Isles of Scilly Published; In regard of the many false and Scandalous reports, touching that SERVICE. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Giles Calvert, at the black spred Eagle at the West end of Pauls. 1651.
A true Accompt of the late Reducement of the Jsles of Scilly, published in re∣gard of the many false and scandalous Reports touching that Service. FOr as much as some men have taken upon them to write and report very falsly, and indeed scandal∣ously, traducing the unspotted reputation of faithful Instruments in managing the late Re∣ducement of the Isles of Scilly: I hope 'twill be account∣ed no transgression, if I take leave to represent an honest and true Account of the service done there. I shall not venture, as some have unworthily done, to say ought upon bare hear-say, but shall write upon bet∣ter knowledg, being actually in the service from first to last, and an eye witness of what was done. And why I may not with more reason expect to win credit upon that Account, then those who have written and reported swelling words of vanity, and yet never ha∣zarded their carkasses within Cannon shot of danger in the service; I see not. 'Tis to be feared, I wish it be not so, That greediness of honour have promped some to prepossess the world with their own worth above what was meet; and not only so, but thereby, detracting from others, have, with
too much affectation, attempted to pin the Honour of the work upon their own sleeves. I shall avoyd Partiality in my Relation, and follow the unbyassed way of Truth; I refer my self to the Test, let any disprove me if they can. The manner of the service was thus: After we had layn at Sea, from Saturday April 12. til Thursday 17. in the morning betimes (each Officer having received Orders over-night) we boated our Sol∣diers, intending to gain a landing place upon Triscoe, to that end we divided our Boats and Men into two parts, the one to land in a sandy Bay by their Fort within old Grimsbay Harbor, the other in a more stony Bay, some∣what to the Westward of that; But the quickness of the Tyde had set our Boats so much to the Eastward out of the way, and the fearful Pilots directing another course among the Rocks, we were necessitated to set all forwards toward Old Grimsbay Harbor. The Enemy perceiving our motion, drew their chief strength thi∣ther-wards to oppose us. Our Boats being all of them exceedingly cram'd with men, and many of them very slenderly accomplished for such a service, rowed exceed∣ing heavily, & could not by any means be brough to row up close one with another, and som were set fast upon the Rocks for want of water: Whereupon Orders were given, that the Boats should stop under a Rock till they came up altogether, that we might joyntly set upon the Work. But in the Progress, the Pilots, and many of the Powers (who were taken up in the West Country, very backward to the service) misguided our headmost Boats to a little Island called Northworthel, standing in he entrance to Old Grimsbay Harbor, and within half
Musket shot of Triscoe, divided by the water, and so sci∣tuate, as none, save those who were acquainted, could know whether 'twere part of Triscoe or not. To this place the timerous or treacherous Pilots directed, af∣firming once and again that it was Triscoe; and when Major Bawden replyed, he was doubtful of it, in regard he discovered none of the Enemy coming down to op∣pose their landing, one Nants (accounted the most knowing Pilot for the place) affirmed resolutely (upon his life) that it was Triscoe, whereupon three Compa∣nies presently landed; but the Mistake discovered, pre∣vented the landing of any more, yet not without som dis∣order upon our business; Notwithstanding which, and that the Tyde and opportunity might not be lost, Orders were given, that the rest of the Boats should row on into the Bay, where we intended to land; but our foremost Boats were again misguided, and unadvisedly made, to that part of the Iland nearest hand, occasioned the rather as I suppose, for that the Enemy had there drawn down a Body of Musketeers, and fired much upon our Boats, with whom our men desired to be doing, but the place proved craggy & inaccessible, so that we could not land: Here was hot firing between our men and the Enemy, (the Rocky shore being the only Interponent;) They had a sufficient advantage against us, having the Rocks for their shelter, and our men so very thick crowded in their open Boats, as many of them could not make use of their Arms: indeed it was a miracle of mercy that we lost not very many men here; if any of our Boats had been foundred, all the men must needs have been lost; for every Boat was so exceeding full, that in such an extre∣mity, one could not possibly have helped another.
Now to be plain, when the Boats drew somewhat neer, and the great, small, and case shot flew about to some purpose, and danger must be lookt in the face, (for I believe we endured about 70 great shot, besides mus∣kets in abundance) many of the Boats, in stead of row∣ing forward into the Bay, turned the Helm, and rowed backward, and aside, from the business. And notwith∣standing Lievt. Colonel Clark (of whom, to speak the truth in this place, I hope will be no offence) strugled all he could to draw them on, earnestly calling to one and commanding another to follow him with their Boats, yet would neither commands nor threats per∣swade them to observance; but, do what he could, they rowed off. This I must affirm for truth, for that I heard and saw the gentleman above-named standing on the head of his Boat, amidst the thickest of the shot, under this performance. And I beleeve there want not suffi∣cient testimonies; Captain Dover may please to re∣member, that he among others was called to, yea and commanded too, upon pain of death to follow on with his Boat: What his Answer was, and how carefully observed, cannot be unknown to himself, nor yet to o∣thers; for I am sure his boat rowed off, and came no neer. After some time spent, I think neer half an hour, in this perilous, yet succesless manner, we withdrew to Northworthel, the little island where our Boats were first misguided; Our loss was not great in respect of the ha∣zard, which I wish may be recorded upon all our hearts as a signal testimony of Gods abundant goodness and favor to us; Some four Soldiers and one or two Sea∣men were slain, and the like number of the Enemy, with Colonel Wogan wounded.
Three Companies were left upon Northworthel to keep the Enemy busie, and the rest were landed upon an adjacent island, called Tean, from whence we had a better discovery of the Enemies shore; The place yeelded but little fresh water, which, through the num∣ber of our men, was soon troubled, and made unfit to drink, which together with the want of provisions, and the raw constitution of our men newly come on shore, made this cold nights lodging the more irksom and comfortless. The next day, April 18. the enemy spent some great shot at us, which fell among some of our Tents and brake them, but did no farther harm; We labored to get some provisions a shore (which could not be sudden∣ly done, our ships riding at that distance) for want of which our men were indeed distressed: and some there∣upon murmured even to discontent, repining at the con∣dition of the service they were to undergo upon such faint terms; But through a supply of victual, and care∣ful regard of Lievt. Colonel Clark, all was put into an exact posture, in order to a second attempt; To which end Capt. Hatsel and Capt. Smith were sent aboard Ad∣miral Blake, to desire that the Boats, and Rowers who would stick more resolutely to their Oars, might be sent to us, which he did: And that we might be the better be∣steaded in our landing, he moreover appointed about 150 or 200 Seamen (who were better acquainted with Marine affairs) to attempt with us, under the conduct of Captain Morrice. We thought it necessary to deal with the enemy spee∣dily, while the weather was seasonable, for should it have proved otherwise, and our ships have been forced
off to Sea, we must either have perished, or have given our selves up to the Enemy for a morsel of bread. Up∣on Consultation, we resolved (it being judged best) to storm the Enemy by night, and to that end, had, in this day-time, carefully observed how to direct our course to the place we intended for landing, (which was about ¾ of a mile, and interrupted with many rocks in the way,) For now we became our own Pilots. We boated our men (having drawn off those three Companies from Northworthel in the dark of the even∣ing, and left there onely some 80 men to Alarum and amuse the enemy in that quarter while we fell on,) and between 11 and 12 of the clock at night set forward (the Seamens Boats being head-most,) at which time it pleased God that it was very calm, so that the ene∣mies Friggots, whom we doubted might injure us in our passage (being thereunto designed) and do most prejudice, could not come up to do any harm, though they spent some great shot at us. We made fires upon Tean as if we had continued there, the smoke wherof was blown towards the enemy, which somewhat obscured our passage; Yet the enemy discovered us when we came about half way over, and took an Alarum, and ere we attained the shore fired many Ordnance upon us, which did no hurt. The boats came up for the most part roundly toge∣ther, and put to the shore, where the enemy disputed our landing with stout resistance, in so much as the Seamen were forced back into the water; yet our men charged them resolutely, even to club-musket, and through the blessing of God worsted them, killed upon the place one Captain, and some 12 or 14 others, took
Prisoners 167. whereof four Captains, the rest fled, none had escaped, had we been acquainted with the Island. The Enemy opposed us at this place with about two hundred of their best men, but the Lord was pleased to make their strength as stubble, and to give the place with a greater advantage into our hands, then if we had succeeded in our first Attempt; for the Enemy grew the more confident, and sent over another supply of their best men from Saint Maries Island to make this the more sure, which made up in all above 300 men, a great∣er strength by far then was imagined: But the Lord was our Helper, graciously answering to the Word given out amongst us, which was [Help Lord.] This nakedly represents the sum of our Proceeds, which indeed is circumstantiated with so much of the manifest Providence and Power of God, as might make the most deserving Instruments (concerned in the work) humble and sober, and not to have high thoughts of themselves. And now what reason there is for some to write and report, That the Seamen did all the work, That they alone gained the landing place, That they did the main, the work, That the work was undertaken by, &c. undervaluing and declaiming the service of the Souldiery, let all men judg. Truly I would not detract a hairs bredth from their worth, nor would I write one word that might provoke emulation, or stir up animosity, I love the girdle of A∣mity and Unity; the Sea-men did good service, and the Souldiers did no less. But that the main work, or gain∣ing the landing place, was (as some have too largely
written and reported) solely performed by them, I must deny as untrue. For although the Sea-men were in the second or third headmost Boats, (as, I conceive, in reason they should, in regard of their better experience for guidance of the rest through that Rocky passage in the night, and greater skill and acquaintance with Maritine service, and besides having under them the choycest and best accomplished Boats for that purpose,) yet had not the rest of the Boats been carefully kept on together with them, and, as it were, in the nick of time, put to the shoar and the Souldiers immediately grapled with the Enemy (who to give them their due, sternly oppo∣sed,) without doubt the Sea-men had come to an ill Market, and must needs have perished: For 'tis well enough known, that upon their landing they were pre∣sently beaten back into the water, even under their Boats, and were as soon relieved by the Souldiers, whose cou∣rage was no whit daunted from doing their duties: I in∣sert not this as any blemish, the best men in the world may receive a check, but that the clear truth of the bu∣siness may be fully known. This appears no fiction; besides a Cloud of Testi∣monies, honest and valiant Corporal Perry, of Captain Northcots Company, carryed the mortal witness of this charge to his grave, who then received his deaths wound upon the edg of the shoar. But if one hundred fifty, or two hundred Sea-men, (which were the utmost) thus interested in the work, be accounted such a high matter; it may be remembred that (upon Conference between the Sea and Land Com∣manders at Plymouth about this business) the Assistance of so many Sea-men was no more, nor indeed so much,
as was thought requisite to the carrying off this Mari∣terrene service, which, give me leave to say, is another manner of business, and of another complexion, then that we usually are acquainted with at Land. To say more; Put the case (though it be not the case here) a party of Souldiers or Sea-men should of them∣selves have carried that or the like Attempt against an Enemy, without the actual Assistance of the residue of the Forces orderly following to the service, should that party have so vainly blown the Trumpet before them, as that they had done the main work? the Honour of it was due to them,—&c. causlesly decrying and tradu∣cing the rest of the Forces. Truly, I conceive, so doing would not, only, be accounted a frothy vapour, but an un∣handsom peece of injury to the rest. All that can be said to this particular (as far as I can see) is, That Admiral Blake sent about one hundred fifty or two hundred Sea-men to assist the Land Forces in the storming of Triscoe: God was pleased to give a blessing to the Attempt, and thereupon we forced our Entrance, spoyled the Enemy, and gained the Island: A slender ground, methinks, for any to vent such lofty lan∣guage on the one hand, and causlesly to bespatter the good service of the Souldiers on the other. What should move Captain Peck to insert in his let∣ter such false intelligence to Major General Desborough, as that the first days attempt failed through the timer∣ousness of some Commanders of the Soldiers, that the Seamen did the work, &c. his own heart best knows; little reason I beleeve he had: I am sure he shot his bolt at randome, and could write nothing of his owne knowledg; for indeed neither himself, nor any other
Sea-Commander hazarded themselves in either of the Attempts; The Seamen who were with us the last day were commanded by Captain Morrice, a Passenger to the Barbadoes; And when Captain Peck was question∣ed about this, by some of the Officers at Triscoe, why he would offer to injure and disrepute the Soldiers, by writing such detracting language, without any real ground of truth, things which he indeed knew not; and withall desired that he would name some that had failed their duty; He answered, he could name none; nor knew nothing, but by hear say, and report of some Sea∣men, and that he was sorry his writing should any ways prove prejudicial, and that he thought no more harm in what he wrote then he intended to his own heart. I would not have been thus particular but for the Truths sake. No better ground, questionless, had some others, to give the like blinde Account of the business; and a∣mong the rest Captain Pecks Brother (as I am inform∣ed) took upon him the boldness, very unworthily to traduce the reputation of Lievt. Colonel Clark, and to exercise his tongue very scandalously; the Gentle∣man hath no need of my pen to vindicate or commend him; his merits and faithful endevors in this peece of service, will, I question not, survive the lying reports of all detractors. If any failing may be imputed to him, I think it can be no other, unless the over-much care and pains he took in prosecution of the work may be so accounted; indeed he underwent too much for his body, which was but sickly when he came from Ply∣mouth, and which the Sea had much oppressed with continual distemper all the while he was on ship-board,
and now more weakened on shore for lack of natural rest, &c. Yet I am confident none can truly say, he ei∣ther swerved from his duty at any time, or favored him∣self from hazard, or yet accounted his life precious for the works sake. But 'tis more then probable, this Gentleman, as some others, who have impudently lashed with their tongues, wanted a true prospect of the business, being muffled up in the smoke of the Ordnance fired from Aboard, the ships far enough out of danger; and mistaking so much at hand, ran into grosser absurdities farther off, speeding those false reports abroad, where (for present) were none that could contradict them. 'Tis a good part of Religion to bridle the tongue; if that were observed more, we should have less strife and emulation. Thus much I have adventured to publique view; I hope I have therein not exceeded the bounds of sober∣ness and truth; my end is, that this peece of service may be truly understood; and the Honor and Worth of faithful Instruments vindicated. Indeed I was hi∣therto loth to exercise my pen upon this subject, lest I might hazard the breach of amity; and, truly, had not done it now, had not the lavish tongue and pens of some gone about to crop off the best flower in a mans garden, viz. his honor & reputation: And therfore speaking but the truth, I hope I shall justly give no offence; If of∣fences come, woe be to them by whom they come. Let the exceeding goodness of God to this unthank∣ful Nation, in lopping off the bough even with terror, and giving into our hands a place stufft with about 12
or 1300 men, a greater number by many then we were, and but yesterday the remora to our Maritine affairs, a scourge to the Merchants, thought invincible for strength, and desperate to attempt, with so little loss, and in so short a time; Let, I say, the eminent hand of Gods good Providence in these particulars teach us all to live the life of Faith, and to walk more humbly and thankfully before him, and not to forget and undervalue such signal mercies, or disesteem such faithful instru∣ments, whose hearts and hands (I may confidently say) were really fixt, and through Gods blessing became in∣strumental for the compleatment of the work, which as it carries in it a singular high advantage to the Com∣monwealth, so let it gather from all our hearts due ac∣knowledgments of praise and glory to the God of our Salvation, who hath delivered and will yet deliver us, if we wait and put our trust in him. Jos. Lereck. FINIS.
