l2089a e705_25 99866187 166626
A Conference with the Souldiers. OR, A Parley with the Party of Horse, which with drawn drawn sword, entred the Sessions at Mr. John Lilburn's Trial. Gentlemen, WHat are you? Are you English-men, and true English souldiers raised for maintenance and defence of the ancient Rights and Liberties of Eng∣land, [the chiefest whereof are peaceable, free, and unforcible legal Trials, for mens lives and estates] if you are such [as you ought to be] how is it that as a party of armed souldiers you enter the place and legal Courts of Justice, with horse and swords drawn, and in the very face thereof, cuting, beating, haling by the hair of the head and tram∣pling upon the people peaceably there, as is their right, to see that all men have justice come them. Can you imagine that in so doing you do not over-aw, af∣fright, and terrifie the Jury men present? and, in effect, tel them Mr. Lilburn's blond must now be had, and that right or wrong they must find him guilty: But, dear friends, what is this ye do? Was ever such a thing done in the late Tyrants time? Nay, when in any time was the like violation of the liberties of Eng∣land? And what is it moves you thus to do, in his case, more then in all others? Is it because you are commanded so to do? Think you that will suffice to justifie your actions at the Day of judg∣ment before the most just and Al-seeing God? who hath made you men, furnished with judgments and consciences, a∣ble to distinguish between good and evil; and not beasts to rend and tear, fetch and carry, terrifie and affright, kill and destroy, without demanding a cause, or making some scruple for consci∣ence sake Make you no difference between enemies in Armes, or in open Hostility, and peaceable people, when you are com∣manded? The Lord work upon your hearts.
You would be offended any should say you are not Christians: Christ∣ians judge nothing before the time: you, by this your violent appear∣ance, doom him to death, before any thing is legally proved against him: whereas Christians, in doubtful cases, ought to judge the best; and all things, before proof, are to be esteemed at least doubtful. But you judge, possibly, as you are told by some who thirst after his blood, that his crimes are notorious and evident: Good christian soul∣diers be not deluded; nor delude your selves; for you cannot but know, that the worst the Parliament laid to his charge, was no more, but that he had scandlized Sr Arthur Haslerig, and the Committee of Haberdash∣ers Hall; and published a Petition (offered to the House) before they had read it: And for this, mark how they senten'd him (for its your own case) they fine him more than twice his estate; to wit, 7000 pounds, banish him for ever, and enact him to die as a Fellon, without benefit of Clergy, if he returned: This was their Judgment; and no marvel: for his Adversaries were his Judges; and this without once hearing what he could say in his own defence; so hasty were they to be rid of him and cause they had: for had he staid, he was like enough to prove those things called Scandals, real Truths, to the hazard of Sr Arthur's new-gotten huge Estate, and to the laying open the foulness of some of the Committee; and which yet fearing he may live to effect, is now one main cause his life is so violently persued. You have heard much of the unrighteous Judgments of the Councel Table, High Commission, and Star-Chamber; but never in the worst of their Times was the like unto this: And are all those Courts justly thrown down? And have you and your Officers routed the Parliament, that made this most cruel Judgment, and Act; and can you now thus violently appear to justifie his Trial thereupon, in such sort, as if you would force them to finde him guilty: And in so doing, do ye not draw his innocent blood upon you; yea, though the Jury should acquit him, as, if they have any conscience or fear of God in them, they must do, and no doubt will; as fearing him that can kill the soul, more then you (that would your conscience permit you) can onely kill the body. But it is to be doubted, there are other matters that raise your hatred against Mr. Lilburn; for a certain libellous book hath been officiously dispiersed and read to and amongst you and the rest of the Army, inti∣mating, That Mr. Lilburn hath been tampering to bring in Charls Stuart; and this (the more effectually to deceive you) under the Ouches or di∣vers
Witnesses. But, dear friends, in this also you are not to be hasty in belief; for you know the like was published before his Tryal at Guild-Hall, by the Councel of State, to inrage the Souldiery and honest par∣ty against him, and not one word proved true: So when you shall understand what wretched perjured Creatures those Witnesses are (men∣tioned in that book) you will grieve at the horrid wickednesse of such devillish stratagems: Besides, a person of unquestionable credit with the chief of your Army, hearing of the mischievous slander of Mr. Lilburn, hath offered, and is ready at all times, to depose upon oath, that during Mr. Lilburn's residing beyond seas, and since the War with Holland, he had the best and truest Intelligence of all proceedings there, from him, and most advantagious for the State of England; Which Mr. Lilburn certainly had never done, if he had had any design for Charles Stuart: But if you believe those false aspersions, onely so long as that through your passion and violence you shall occasion his destruction, his deadly enemies by you obtain their bloody desires, and you contract matter of sad repentance for ever. The holy Scriptures Rule to Souldiers, is, that they accuse no man falsly; but to act violently, or earnestly, upon a Report, is no lesse in Gods sight. They are also to offer violence to no man; much lesse to a prisoner: towards whom, the very Heathen Souldiers, in Paul's Case, have left you, and all Christian Souldiers, a great example of care and tendernesse. On therefore! be not worse then Romans unto him; Be not like Danes or Normans to the People, and Courts of Justice: Be not like men who have made ship wrack of all good Conscience: But be unto all in all your demeanour as becommeth Christians; full of Mercy; full of Compassion: And cease not to perswade with your Commanders, to finde you Employment more agreeable to your Understandings and Consciences; it being in all Cases more safe to obey GOD rather then MAN. The Publisher to the Reader. COuntryman, I pray thee take notice of two things in this place; first that those lying and false informations lately published against Mr. Lilburn are printed for or by the councel of States-Printers, or Book∣sellers, viz. H. Hills, G. Calvert, and T. Brewster, and so in reason may be judged to be Printed by the authority of the Councel of State them∣selves
or by the Authority of their Supream Lord, Master, and Creator the General. 2dly. I pray thee observe the persons from whom those informations or depositions came; first from one Isaac Burkinhead alias Rogers, as he na∣med himself beyond the seas, a most prophane, deboist, drunken Rogue, who in his conversation beyond the seas to delude the Cavaliers, and to make them believe he was really as they were, in his cups made no scru∣ple, as som of his own comrades have credibly reported, to take a glass of beer or wine, and in their presence to drink it, & wish that might be his poison if he were directly or indirectly an Agent, Intelligencer, or Well-wisher to the Parliament of England, the Councel of State, the Gene∣ral, or Mr Scot or any appertaining to them, or that wished them well. The second person named as informer is Captain John Titus, a man of so vicious a life in his Cavalier way, for whoring, drinking, swearing, and for-swearing, as the world hath scarce his fellow, whose several per∣juries upon Judicial Records in England, are said by some of his own kindred not to be a few. The third witnesse, is one Capt. John Bartley, an Irishman or Rebel, and a grand Traitor and Pyrot for the late E of Derby, and who, as be∣yond sea he averred, could not be permitted in England to live, and who had no way to preserve himself, his wife, and children from starving be∣yond sea, but to combine with Mr Lilburns great adversaries and their Agents, to do as wickedly to Mr Lilburn as he hath done. The fourth witnesse is one Rich. Foot, a young delboist, wicked, and prophane rogue, that robbed and stole from his brother, who lives near Blackwell-Hall, betwixt 2 and 3 hundred pound in gold, and run a∣way beyond sea with it, of a great part of which he being checked of by one Harbin, or the like name, Mr Lilburn out of his respect to one Col. Gamet, and Mr Ralph Parker, did the best he could to assist them in getting some part of it again, and did, but alwaies scorned to discourse with such a thief and rogue as the said Foot upon State-affairs. The fifth witnesse against Mr Lilburn is one Staple-Hill, which the pub∣lisher knows not; but in Mr Lilburns name and behalf earnestly desires as much liberty to publish a full and absolute answer to those most false, lying, base, roguish Cavalier informations, as there was given to the sellers thereof, and then shall leave himself to the honest judgement of the Reader, to consider whether are baser follows, Mr Lilburn, or his mighty and great adversaries, that imploy such notorious known rogues to tell lies and false-hoods on purpose to destroy the innocent. FINIS.
