L243 E1017_27 99867048 119338
Colonell Iohn Lambert's SPEECH At the COUNCIL of STATE, OR The Lord President's Report unto the Parli∣ment, of the Discourse of Colonell Iohn Lambert before the Council. LONDON Printed by Iohn Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.
Colonell Iohn Lambert's Speech at the Council of State, the 5. of March 1659, before his commitment to the Tower of London; Or the Lord President's Report unto the Parliament, of the Discourse of Colonell Iohn Lambert, before the Coun∣cil, made in Parliament 6 March 1659 Tuesday, 6. March. THe Parliament doth dispense with Colonell Lambert's not appearing upon the Proclama∣tion issued forth against him, and that it be referred to the Council of State, that taking security of Col. Lambert for his peaceable demeanour, he per∣mitted to live quietly at his own house in the Countrey. Mr. Ansley Reports from the Council of State that Monday March 5. 1959, Col. Iohn Lamber was called into the Council to give security acco¦ding
to the Order of Parliament, of the 1 of March instant; which being accordingly propounded unto him by the Lord President, he spake to this effect. That he did acknowledge he had the advantage of a sight of those Votes which passed the House concerning him, and did look upon them as a very great favour and Iustice from the House, that they would please to take notice so far, as to remove that inconvenience that was both upon his Person and his Estate; and said he must needs deal freely and plainly; that he did cast himself upon the Parlia∣ment, & now upon the Council, in hopes of a far∣ther testimony of their favour, then upon those Votes. He said, that he did not at all think it amisse, that there should be care taken to preserve the Peace of these Nations; for he had himself when he was in that station, held it his duty to do so: That what ever may be suggested against him, he hath his own satisfaction within him: what ever reports may be concerning him, he conceives they do not extend toward him for as to reports, he cannot be safe ei∣ther here or at his house, if all reports may be ta∣ken for truth, he said, that for his own part, he can hardly say, that since he came last to Town (and more especially within four dayes since) that he hath not said any thing, nor medled in any thing that might tend to hinder settlement: But on the
contrary, as he had opportunity to converse with any, he contributed in his discourse towards set∣tlement, and no otherwise: He said he did exer∣cise plainesse, and hop't not to fare the worse for it; that he had a long time contended for a due and moderate Liberty for the People of these Nations; and he must needs say, that he did not know how to put difference between himself and the good People of these Nations; he desired his Case may be truly and fully known, before such a distinction be made, to put a marke or Character upon him: He said that Common Liberty had day after day been granted unto others, but not unto him; how∣soever he did freely cast himself upon the ingenuity of the Parliament and Council. Having ended his discourse, the Lord President desired his answer, as to what security he would give. To which he replied, It was not fit for him to ar∣gue, that he understood the Council were under command from the Parliament, and he did not yet know whether his case was well stated to the Parlia∣ment, but should cleerly howsoever submit to what should be done concerning him, That he knew not what kind of security the Council did in∣tend. That giving security in this kind, was very strange unto him. Hereupon he withdrew. That the Council after consideration of what Colonell
Lambert had said, came to this Resolution, to pro∣pose unto him to enter into a Bond of twenty thou∣sand pound, with four good securities, upon con∣dition to live peaceably at his house at Wimbleton, and not to act any thing to the prejudice of the Go∣vernment or disturbance of the publick peace, and not to remove from Wimbleton without leave of the Parliament or Council of State, and to render himself upon summons from the Parliament or Council of State, and this Bond to continue in force till the Parliament or Council of State give further Order to the contrary. Hereupon Colonell Lam∣bert was called in again, and the Resolution of the Council made known unto him by the Lord Presi∣dent, and he desiring leave to speak a few words, spake to this effect. That he desired to take the free∣dome to say, that it was severe on his part, That he had met to day with an Ordinance of Parliament of Indempnity to many persons who have had their hands in severall actions of higher nature then him∣self had, he found them all indempnified and resto∣red to the same condition, which formerly they had been in, he said he would not say that that Or∣dinance did reach as to his person, it is not clear whether it doth so or on, he said he was unwil∣ling to give it under his hand, that he desired not to be put into the condition with others, and though there hath been among our selves dif∣ference
of judgements, waies and forms, yet as to the main point, he said, he could not be taxed in the least kind. That he finds himself there equally with the greatest offender: that he did cast himself upon the Council to dispose of him as they thought fit, and then he withdrew. And the Council there∣upon Resolved to call in Colonell Lambert once more, and positively to demand of him whether he would give security as was lately propounded unto him, whereupon he was called in, and accor∣dingly the Lord President acquainted him with the Resolution of the Council, to which he Replied, That he did believe he could not procure the secu∣rity proposed, That he did not hear a fault assigned to him, therefore he desired leave to petition to the House, adding, That if he be found an offender, he will submit; if none, he beseeches he may be consi∣dered. That he was not willing to give it under his hand that he is an offender, though he freely sub∣mits to the Parliaments pleasure, but being un∣heard, uncharged and untax't, to write it under his hand, that he is a guilty person, not fit to be trusted in his own Countrey without a clog and tie upon him, he knows not what to say to it, but he shall submit. Being pressed again whether he would give that security propounded, he said, he believed he could not doe it, twenty thousand pound being a summe that he believes he cannot get sureties for.
Hereupon after he was withdrawn, it was Orde∣red, That Colonell Iohn Lambert be forthwith committed to the Tower till further Order, for re∣fusing to give security according to the Order of Parliament, but in stead of that, standing to justify his Innocency, That a Warrant be prepared ac∣cordingly. The Humble Petition of Iohn Lambert Major General was read. Resolved, That the Parliament doth approve of what the Council of State hath done in commit∣ting of Colonell Iohn Lambert to the Tower. FINIS.
