M1836A 45097855 171435
Dr. Merrett Aged 81. and upwards, Dr. in Physick, of Oxford 53. Years, Practitioner in London from the Year 1638. Fellow of both the Royal Societies, Keeper of Dr. Harvey's Musaeum in the College of Physicians, Censor Eleven Years, which never but one ever was, &c. makes to his Parish of St. Andrews Holbourn this Proposition following, viz. THat he will give without Demand of any Reward, to 150 Persons, Medicines of his own making, in all Fevers, Fluxes whatsoever; which are the two Heads of Diseases most Mortal every where, especially in this Season of the Year? He excepts all Invaders, which the Law calls Empericks, viz. Apothecaries, Chirurgeons, and all inferior Interlopers, because he well knows, they will play all the Tricks that Malice and Fancy can Invent; which with all care and diligence he will prevent. He will give Advice to no more than ten in a Day, till the aforesaid number is Completed. He expects that all those who are able should come to his House in Hatton-Garden, near the Chappel, those that are not, he will Visit within the Circuit of the Garden, if further from him, he expects a Coach. Not that he excludes any other, that are not Parishioners, during the aforesaid time, but to such he will give his Medicines and his Advice together, at the same rate found in Apothecaries Bills, and with better success than any of the Shop Medicines, and fewer of them in every Case; and promises to take but three shillings a Quart for a Cordial call'd Pearl, which the Apothecaries make them pay ten or twelve Shil∣lings for the same quantity, and much the like rate in other Medicines. His Cures are performed in a short time in acute or other short Diseases, without Dangerous and Mortal Opium, never us'd by him; rarely any Chymical Medicine, or any other of the Shops; or Jesuits Bark, painful Blisters, Cupping-Glasses, Cly∣sters, violent Vomits, Purges, or Bleeding. His Medicines are simple, grateful, safe, and most agreeable. Whereas his Adversaries give out, that he will not Consult Physicians, he never refus'd, nor shall not; so that the Consultation be according to the Statutes of the College, viz. in Latin; and therein inquiry to be made into the Disease, the Cause and Symptoms of it; and a right Application of Remedies to them all; viz. of the indicans and indicatum, the sole Charistical mark of a Complete Physician, and the distinction of him from all other, whether Rational or Emperical; for both the lat∣ter pretend alike to uncertain Experience, but to sensible and unquestionable trials, à priori. He desires the Christian and Ingenious Reader, not to take up false Reports, and credit them, without clear Evidence of the Truth, or false Conclusions from bare words or feigned Actions; which he will clear to any that shall declare them, and satisfy the scrupulous with thanks. He will shortly Republish his Character of a Complete Physician, and the Frauds of Apothecaries, a third Edition, and thereto his way in general of his attainment of the top of his Art; the Knowledge of simples à priori; long sought for, but never attain'd by any; as the Learned, and true Physician, or Naturalist, Dr. Lister, un∣known to me, but by his Writings, affirms in his Excellent Preface to his Book of Diseases, and all other Physicians I have read. Whereas in six Libels against my Book of the Frauds of Apothecaries, each Libel∣ler insinuated tacitly a Scandal against me, I cannot but expect another from the Col∣leges putting me out; both which shall be answer'd in my aforesaid Book, to the Eternal shame of my Adversaries. The Reader therefore is requested to suspend his Belief till the Narration be Publisht out of their own Records and other Courts of Law; and the Author declares, he will Answer no Nameless Libels. To Answer the Objections of many, I have, by this Proposal, set my Candle on a Candlestick, and suffer'd my light to shine before Men, that God might be glorified, and Men benefited by my continued stubborn labour, and great Expences I have been at to attain this great Light; especially to incourage Men of my own Faculty to the like Undertaking. His hours of Attendance shall be from Nine in the Morning to Twelve, and from Two to Five in the Afternoon.
