M2186 E175_7 99872769 157079
THE SOULDIERS TRIVMPH: AND The Preachers Glory. In a Sermon preached to the Captains and Souldiers exercising Arms in the Artillery Garden, at their Generall meeting in S. Michaels Church Cornhill in London, the 31. of August, 1641. BY MATTHIAS MILVVARD, B. D. Minister of S. Hellens. Bern. ad Milites Templi, cap. 1. Infoelix victoria, quasuperans hominem, succumbis vitio. LONDON, Printed by W.E. and I.G. for Iohn Clark, and are to be sold at his Shop under S. Peters Church in Cornhill. MDCXLI.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES. PRINCE OF GREAT Britaine, Son and Heire apparant to our Soveraigne Lord, CHARLES, King of Great Britaine, &c. Long happinesse in this, and eter∣nall blessednesse in the next world. Most gracious Prince, IT hath pleased your Highnesse to honour the Company of the Artillery Garden, by vouchsafing to be their Generall; wherein you have so endeared and obliged them to your service, that upon just occa∣sion their lives and blouds are for
your defence, ready tobe laid down. To whom then doe I owe this De∣dication, if not first to your High∣nesse? which if your Grace deigne to take into your Princely Patro∣nage, I have the utmost of my am∣bition. My weaknesse (I confesse) forbad me to aspire so high, but your Gracious clemencie invited me thus far: And indeed you may challenge it as a due debt, (if it were worth the owning) it being the first Sermon preached since your Highnesse so much honoured the Company. You have a great Part to act, (most excellent Prince) when God shall please to call you to it, whose word will teach you to governe your selfe and people; to rule justly; and a∣mongst the Courtly adulations and crouchings, not to be lifted up, but
to remember your selfe to be but man; not so much to consider how great you are, as how good you should be; to acknowledge your power to be lent you for the ad∣vancement of Gods true worship; to love God more then your earth∣ly dominions; to punish slowly, to pardon easily; to bend your re∣venge more for the Common∣wealths safety, then to satisfie your owne desire; to mollifie sharp De∣crees with the lenity of mercy; to desire to command your selfe, as well as others; to subject your own passions to Reason, as well as men; to remember that you rule over men; that you must rule according to Lawes; that you must not al∣wayes rule, but one day be called to your accompt before the su∣preame
Judge of heaven and earth; and having ruled well, to receive an immortall Crowne in his everlast∣ing Kingdome. VVhich shall be the prayer of Your Graces humbly devoted, Matthias Milward.
To the Right VVorshipfull Alder∣man, THOMAS SOAME, one of the Colonels of the Honourable City of London, and President of the Artillery Company. Captaine PHILIP SKIPPON, Captaine of the same Company. AND To Captaine JOHN VENN, Deputy President. Lieutenant VVILLIAM MANBY, Treasurer. AS ALSO To the worthy Captaines of the City, Martin Bond. Marmaduke Rawdon. George Langham. Edward Ditchfield. Thomas Covell. Edmund Forster. William Geere. Samuel Carlton. Tobias Massy. Randolph Manwaring. Henry Sanders. Nicholas Beale. Robert Davies. Matthew Forster. John Bradley. Rowland Wilson. James Bunce. Tho: Chamberlaine. Tho: Buxton. And to all other Gentlemen exercising Armes in the Artillery Garden, London.
Noble Sirs, I Bring you here together, and cite your names in the view of his Highnesse, your Princely Generall; that as he beheld you in your War-like marches, so he may know you in your religious postures. I have joyned your sword to ours, Preachers and Souldi∣ers together; one hath need of another; we to pray for you, you to fight for us; being humm'd at by a company of Brownists as we walk the streets; whose very cloaks which we buy of them, they hate upon our backs. Pudet haec opprobrie nobis. This Sermon, I heare, hath undergone some censure, (but by the weaker sexe) for reciting Stories in it, as it is said; but they which spake it, considered not that I was to speak to Gentlemen that are both Souldiers and Scholars, and not to women, who are now grown such learned Doctresses, that they will take upon them to teach any Minister both what and how to preach. An over-shooting expectation is an enemy to all honourable actions; and where that is not satisfied, the undertaker suffereth disgrace. From me therefore seeing nothing of worth can be expected, I cannot suffer much in my reputation, if I have done that which is worth nothing: Yet as it is, I am bold to present it to your view, being in a manner enforced thereunto: For though your desires were command enough, yet there is required a Vindica∣tion both of my selfe, and you; Of my selfe, that the world may see my doctrine and preaching is not so hete∣rodoxall, as the malicious would make it; Of you, that mine enemies may see your judgement hath not so excee∣dingly
erred in making choice of one, not altogether so unworthy as their envy reports me. It would trouble me, said Seneca upon like occasion, if Cato, or Lae∣lius, or the other Scipio did thus censure me: Nunc malis displicere laudari est, 'Tis praise to be disprai∣sed of those that speak ill, who never yet learned to doe well. They are like bawling dogs, (saith he) qui non feritate, sed pro consuetudine latrant, that bark more for custome then curstnesse. However, such as it is I present to you and the worlds view. I can make it no better then it is, and if others will make it worse, yet my hope is you will make the best of it. Finally (worthy Gentlemen) Feare God, honour the King, be religious in peace, be valiant in war, fight the good fight of faith, Agonotheta Deus, God the Lord of battailes hath promised you immarcessibilem coronam, a never∣fading crowne, and triumph in his Kingdome. So prayeth Your faithfull Symmachus, and Fellow-souldier, Matthias Milward.
THE SOVLDIERS TRIVMPH, &c. BEloved Christians, worthy Gentle∣men, Souldiers and Citizens, ye have had many excellent Instru∣ctors, who have led you forth to fight the Lords battailes in your spirituall warfare, and they have phrazed their Sermons in your owne Martiall termes, of Motions, Postures, Marches, Ala∣rums, Retreats, and the like; Whatsoever your Discipline affords in your War-like Dialect, I shall desire you to pardon me if I tread not in their steps, nor walk their round, whom I may sooner envie then imitate: For, I professe inge∣nuously, as I should hold it both an honour and ornament, if I could present my service in your language; so I am loth (being to speak before our Christian Hanniball) to shew my self through ignorant boldnesse an old doting Phormio. I shall therefore speak plainly, yeelding the glory of learned eloquence to those who have gone be∣fore me. And now after so many directions gi∣ven
you to fight, I purpose to lead you forth to a triumph, yet not (I hope) before the victory, for even in this Church militant, whilst we live, we have some triumphs: So saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.14. Now thanks be unto God which alwaies causeth us to triumph in Christ. THese words may be called The Triumph of the Church Militant, whose Catastrophes of Sor∣row being turned into Tro∣phees of Ioy, she doth in the midst of devilish malice and worldly misery lift up her head with heavenly comfort, praising God, who alwayes in his Son giveth victory. In all these things, saith S. Paul, , Rom. 8.37. we are more then Conquerers. If so, then certainly trium∣phers, Now thanks be to God, &c. In this Triumph I observe foure things: 1. The Actors. 2. The Author. 3. The Time. 4. A Thanksgiving. First, the Actors or Triumphers are of two sorts: 1. The Preachers. 2. The Hearers. 1. The Preachers: From whence I note the glory of the Ministerie in us; for though we be
made Spectaculum, a gazing stock to the Angels, to the world, and to men, yet Vs, He causeth us to triumph. 2. The Hearers: From whence I note the comfort that comes to you; for seeing your good is the cause of our joy, you also are Actors in this Triumph; We rejoycing in your Salva∣tion, You, in our Ministration. Secondly, the Author is God, he causeth us, for seeing neither we nor you have cause to tri∣umph in our selves; Not we, for we are onely Gods Labourers; Not you, for ye are Gods Husbandry: Therefore He whose Labourers we are, whose Husbandry ye are, he causeth us to triumph; We for you, you by us, both in Christ, He causeth us to triumph in Christ. Thirdly, the time of continuance, how long it lasteth; Not like the Pageants or triumphs of the world, a tedious toile, and a quick spoile, set up in a yeare, and pulled downe in a day; not per annos, for a few yeares, but perennis, for ever, Alwayes he causeth us to triumph. Fourthly, then follows a Thanksgiving, like the shout of an Army after a victory, like that of Israel, when the Arke of God came into the Hoste, Now thanks be to God which alwayes causeth us to triumph in Christ. 1. The Preachers of the Word of God are Actors, He causeth us to triumph. Our triumph stands in three things: Watching, Feeding, Or∣dering: And for these the Church is compared to a City, to a Flock, to a Bride. To a City,
Matth. 5. whereof they are watchmen, Esay 21. To a flock, Iohn 10. and they are the Shepherds. Ier. 6. To a Bride, and they are the Paranymphi, the friends of the Bride-chamber, Cant. 2. Three things therefore are due from them to the Church, Munimenta, Alimenta, Ornamenta, saith Bernard: As she is a City, she must be watcht for her safety; As a Flock, she must be fed of necessity; As a Bride, she must be ordered with decency. In these stands our triumph. First therefore ye shall see a description of this City, Apoc. 21. It was all of gold, it had a great wall, and high, twelve gates, three East, three West, three North, and three South, and it lay foure square. To this heavenly Ierusa∣lem, the Church may be compared, Cujus mu∣rus concordia, antemurale patientia. Bern. in dedi∣cat. Ecclesiae. Vnity of the Citizens is the wall, for Civitas est civium unitas; a good conscience and patience are the Bulwarks. It is called holy, be∣cause established in the holinesse of faith; It is new, because the Law dies, the Ceremonies fade: The Law, like old Zachary, is dumb, and cannot speak, because Iohn, which signifieth Grace, is borne. Luke 1.20. Old things are passed away, all things are become new. New hearts, Ezek. 36. New tongues, Act. 2. A new commandement, Iohn 13. It is called Hierusalem the vision of peace, for Christ the Founder of it, and confounder of the enemies of it, is our peace. The twelve gates resemble the twelve Articles of our faith, through confession whereof we enter into the
Church. The foure parts of the world shew the amplitude thereof. Lastly, this City lyeth foure square, which is a resemblance of our faith, love, hope, and good works. They are all of one length: for how much a man belee∣veth, so much he hopeth; what he hopeth, he loveth; and as he loveth, he worketh: And thus (as saith the Prophet) thou shalt be called a City sought out and not forsaken, Esay 62.12. But now, saith the Preacher, I have seene this wisdome under the sun, A little City, and few men in it, and a great King came and compassed it a∣bout, and builded Forts against it: And there was found therein a poore and wise man, and he delivered this City by his wisdome, but none remembred this poore man: Then said I, Better is wisdome then weapons of war, Eccles. 9.14. But I know not how, this Ci∣ty is betrayed, there is a conspiracie of the Pro∣phets in the midst of her, Ezek. 22. and a confe∣deracy of the people, Esay 8. I meane Iesuites and Separatists, they craftily crept in to spie out our liberty, these have wickedly gone out to be∣tray our peace; not content to drink of the sweet waters, but trouble the residue with their feet, Ezek. 34.17. yea like so many Saepiaes have vo∣mited forth Inke, with too much gall in it, to di∣sturbe our Churches peace, and dash our tri∣umph. I wish there had not been men arising out of our selves, speaking perverse things, Act. 20.30. For as the sea would be quiet of it selfe, if winds, and vapours, and exhalations did not trouble it; so the people would have been tra∣ctable
and peaceable enough, if some seditious Orators, the blustring brethren of Boreas, had not set them in agitation. When Ioab understood that his enemies were encamped both before and behind him, he divi∣ded his Army betweene himselfe and his bro∣ther Abishai, with this direction, If the Aramites be stronger then I, thou shalt help me; but if the children of Ammon be too hard for thee, I will come and succour thee. Let us doe so: and like those in Peters ship that beckoned to their fellows in Andrews boat, aid one another against the common adversary. They write of Lady Margaret, Countesse of Rich∣mond, mother to King Henry the seventh, that the would often say, On condition that the Princes of Christendome would combine themselves, and march against the common enemy the Turk, she would most willingly attend them, and be their Laundresse in the Camp. God unite us at home among our selves, that the seamelesse coat of Christ, rent by schisme and faction, may be made up, that so we may triumph in Christ. Secondly, the Church is a flock, and must be fed of necessity, and in this also stands our tri∣umph. Feed, feed, feed, saith Christ to Peter: Earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord, saith the Prophet Ieremy, for that is your food: You are thrice called upon to heare, we thrice called up∣on toteach, shewing thereby that your joy and our triumph are both twisted upon one threed: O ter foelices & amplius quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis divulsus queremoniis extrema citius solvet amor
die, as he said of man and wife. Thrice happy shall we and you be, if our unity be not divided with unjust complaints, if our love to Christ be mutuall, and our care to serve him equall. The Priests lips, saith the Lord in Malachy, shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7. The reason there is given, For he is a messenger of the Lord of Hosts, which teacheth us and you our duties: First us, He is a Messenger, that requireth fidelity; a messenger of the Lord, that re∣quireth sanctity; of the Lord of Hosts, that requi∣reth magnanimity. Secondly, you: A Messenger, therefore you must give him audience; of the Lord, therefore yeeld him obedience; of the Lord of Hosts, therefore you owe him reverence. I am sorry to think that our Church should be troubled with two cruell mothers: One hath dry breasts, and yet will needs be a Nurse; wanteth knowledge, yet will have a charge: Another hath flowing breasts, yet will give no suck; hath learning enough, but will take no paines. Now both are bad, and hinder your joy, and our tri∣umph. We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts, what shall we doe for our sister when she shall be spoken for? Cant. 8. Nay indeed, how can we speak for our sister when she should be done for? and therefore one is oftentimes the punishment of a∣nother: for they who through wilfull sloth have dryed up their breasts, God gives them a bar∣ren wombe that they cannot conceive. Give them, O Lord, what wilt thou give them? Give them a bar∣ren wombe, and dry breasts, Hos. 9.14. Dost thou
love me? saith Christ, Feed, feed, feed. This is the second part of our triumph. Thirdly, the Church is a Bride, and must be ordered with decency. It is true, as Clem. Alexand. saith, her chiefest ornament is , with the ornament of goodnesse, for the Kings daughter is all glorious within, and without too, her garments are of wrought gold. There is therefore some outward beauty which the Church hath, comely Ceremonies, void of superstitious abuse, which serve to edifying, and preservation of uni∣tie and order; for if there were none at all, it would bring in , Will-worship, and every one after his owne fancie would fashion new formes of behaviour; We should have as many factions as fancies, and as many Gospels as Gossips. Againe, if there should be too many Ceremo∣nies, that would induce , superstition; and through multiplicity, men might be turned from the simplicity of Gods true worship: There∣fore there are not many, to keep us from super∣stition; but some, to keep us in order. We all call for reformation, but of mis-governors, not change of government. Is there no way to pre∣vent drunkennesse, but by digging up the Vines? I grieve to think on them which exclude them∣selves from this triumph which wee have in Christ, because they leave our Church; and the Church doth well to leave them that have bro∣ken downe the walls of peace: Yet I could wish, that though they be without the walls, they may
be within the Liberties, but that the Liberties go no farther then the Bars of Order, and these Bars have they broken also. Well, Christ is the Bride∣groome, the Church is the Bride, she must have her peacefull ornaments: Yet as Tertullian said, Sunt qui te etiam per ornamenta ferient; That which is some part of our Churches glory, there be that wrest it to her shame: of whom I will say no more, but O miseram Sponsam talibus concreditam Paranym∣phis! I rejoyce, saith S. Paul, beholding your order, Col. 2.5. and he gave commandement that all things should be done , decently and in order. Gal. 6.16. the Apostle exhorts to walk in rule, : The word  is a military march, which requireth order: And the Church is compared to a well ordered Army, Cant. 6. Who is this that looketh forth as the morning, faire as the moone, pure as the sun, terrible as an Army with banners, acies ordinata. God is the God of or∣der, and wicked men are noted by the Apostle to be such as are , that walk disorder∣ly; and therefore all that are enemies to good order, let them take heed of that place, Where there is no order, Iob 10.22. We should be like so many beames, shining from one Sun of Righte∣ousnesse; like so many brooks derived from one fountaine of Grace, sweetly united, orderly dis∣posed: for the Churches glory consists in Watch∣ing, Feeding, Ordering, and in that she trium∣pheth, Now thanks be to God which causeth us to tri∣umph in Christ. Thus ye see how we that are Preachers, are
Actors in this triumph, but yet not without you that are hearers; we triumph in you, and you by us, both in Christ. 2. For Natura nostra est, Ordinatio autem vestra: Our nature, as men, is our own; our Ordination, as Ministers, is yours: If we live well, it is our gaine; if we teach well, it is your gaine: and like the Angels in Iacobs ladder, are alwayes as∣cending or descending: When they ascend, they informe the judgement of the learned; when they descend, they speak to the capacity of the simple. Ascendunt, ut erigant magnos; descendunt, ut nutriant parvos. See how S. Paul ascends, 2 Cor. 5.13. Whether we be besides our selves, we are it unto God: See how he descends, Or whether we be so∣ber, we are it unto you; because Sancti excedunt in contemplatione, sobrii sunt in praedicatione. Paul ascen∣ded, when he said, We speak wisdome to the perfect: He descended, when he said, I gave you milk, not meat. How ever it be, we esteeme you a great part of our triumph, for we preach Christ Iesus and our selves your servants for Iesus sake. How comes, it then, that we are so much mis∣construed in our preaching? What comfort can we have, when prejudice precludes your judge∣ment? For though we passe not for mans judge∣ment, yet we see it to be a daily consequent of our labours, to be judged as often as we speak. If we come in the spirit of meeknesse, it is accounted weaknes; if we reprove their sin, they say we for∣get our Text: Art thou here mine enemy? saith one, 1 King. 21. What said this mad fellow? saith another.
Thus whilst we, like birds of the morning, record the praises of God, one or other that hath bent his tongue like a bow, lies ready to shoot out his arrows, even bitter words. Wherefore beloved, seeing wee desire to have you partners of our triumph, see that ye be like minded, having the same love, and fulfill our joy: For what is our joy, or crowne of rejoycing? are not even you it at the presence of the comming of the Lord Iesus? 1 Thes. 2.19. Yes, you are our glory, and our joy. Now thanks be to God. Now worthy Gentlemen and Souldiers, I must neglect you no longer, whom having spoken to as Christians, I must now exhort as Military men, for you I behold this day in a triumphant man∣ner, the joy and honour of this City. You have been taught by others, the causes of undertaking a War to be three: Necessary defence, due re∣venge, and reparation of dammage. But that ye may conquer and triumph, I shall commend un∣to you these three vertues, Piety, Iustice, For∣titude. 1. Piety, saith the Apostle, is profitable for all things, it hath the promises of this life, and that that is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. Other vertues without this, are like force and agility in the body without eye∣sight, nature without grace; like blind Sampson without a guide. All that which we call Vertue, if it be not directed by the feare of God, and true godlinesse, are names void of the things. What is prudence without it but a childish dexterity, by which every one resolves of his actions, as hee
is a Lawyer, a Merchant, a Scholar, but not as he is a man? so being wise in the retaile, he may be a foole in grosse. Valour without it, degene∣rates into ambitious desperatenesse, and hardens a mans courage to mischiefe: And temperance without godlinesse is rather a Diet then a Vertue; a meere abstinence for Healths sake, not a profes∣sion for Religions sake. Piety therefore is necessary for all men, and for a Souldier not least of all; for he that goes forth every day to hazard his life, had need be prepared for a good passage: Therefore saith God, Deut. 23.9. When the Host goeth forth against the enemie, take heed of every wicked thing. A man must be at peace with God, before he fight with his enemies. When Iehoshaphat heard War pro∣claimed against him, it is said that he feared; and set himselfe to seek the Lord, 2 Chron. 20.3. It was Cornelius the Centurions honour, a brave Cap∣taine, that he was a just man, and feared God. It is he that must be sought in the first place, for The horse is prepared for the day of battaile, but safety or victory is of the Lord, Prov. 21.31. When Io∣shuah fought in the valley, Moses prayed in the Mount: When he held up his hand, Israel prevai∣led; and when he let fall his hand, Amalek pre∣vailed, Exod. 17.9. He that will conquer, must observe this rule, Armanda mens fide, manus prece, vita castis moribus: He must have his mind armed with faith, his hand with prayer, his life with chaste manners. Would you triumph then Gentlemen? with a
faithfull confidence trust in God: Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will trust in the Name of the Lord, said the best Warriour of the world, Psal. 20.8. for the Lord God is he that go∣eth to fight for you, against your enemies, to save you. When Henry the second was at S. Davids in Wales, and from the cliffes in a cleere day disco∣vered the coast of Ireland, said, If it be no farther, I with my Ships am able to make a bridge thither: Which speech being realted to Murchard, King of Lenister in Ireland, he demanded if the King added not with the grace of God: when it was an∣swered that he made no mention of God, then said he more cheerfully, I feare him the lesse, that trusteth more to himselfe then Gods help. We cannot overcome, unlesse we fight under Christs ban∣ner; No conquering, no triumphing without Piety. 2. How can the War be religious, if not just? the Conquerours sword ought to be swayed with the arme of Iustice: it is that which measures out right to men by equall proportion, and to be exercised even towards our enemies: it is that which guards vertue, and combats vice. When the Souldiers came to Iohn Baptist, and demanded of him, And what shall we doe? Luke 3.13. he an∣swered, Doe violence to no man, accuse not falsely, be content with your wages. I have read, that the Ro∣mane warfare was a Schoole of Vertue. Aurelia∣nus the Emperour gave this charge to his Tribu∣nus Militum, Vpon thy life, sayes he, contain the hands of thy souldiers; suffer them not so much
as to kill a chicken, or pull a grape of another mans; oyle, or salt, or wood let none exact, but be content annona sua, with his allowance: De praeda hostis, non de lachrymis provincialium habeat, Let them take of the spoils of the enemy, but not live by the tears of their Countrymen. See a pas∣sage to this purpose, Num. 20.17. when Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the men of Edom, he observed this order: Let us passe I pray thee through thy Country: we will not passe through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the water of the wells; we will goe by the Kings high way, we will not turne to the right hand or to the left. That Iustice therefore may be preserved, not onely violence and oppression, but all beastly re∣venge must be avoided; men must not fight a∣gainst nature, but against enemies: Therefore God commanded his Souldiers not to cut downe trees bearing fruit: because (saith one) lignum est, & non homo, nec potest bellantium contra nos augere numerum: They are wood, not man, and cannot encrease the number of enemies, Deut. 20.19. It was a good answer of Anaxilaus a Spartan Cap∣taine, (as Xenophon hath it) who being accused for yeelding up the towne Bizantium committed to his charge, he answered, As long as he fought with men, he defended it, but when he saw he was to fight with nature, and that they perisht with famine whom men spare in war, he thought good to give it up. Tully was an excellent man of Law, and knowing what Iustice was, would have the Sword give place to the Gowne. It were in∣deed
a note of excellent modesty, and might be assumed, but how? as greater Hosts in their owne houses give precedencie to meaner guests, or as we say of doting parents, they are content to be made fooles by the wit of their children: but to ascribe it as a due or right, he thinks not right, for the Gowne can but meditate, and say, In Iustice this ought to be done, when the Sword saith, For Iustice sake this is done. Be just and triumph. 3. You must have Fortitude, else Iustice is weak: it is not possible to triumph without that. It is a Probleme in Aristotle, why Fortitude should raise more admiration then Iustice, Pru∣dence, or Temperance: We are not so affected with wonder when we see these, as when we behold a valiant Captain, or brave Commander, he answereth it thus: Because the object of Tem∣perance, and exercise of it, consists onely in the moderation of pleasure; of Prudence, in the or∣dering of Civill affaires; of Iustice, in giving su∣um cuique, every man his owne: but Fortitude, the proper Vertue of a Souldier, hath for its object Victory, which cannot be had without blowes and wounds, danger and dint of Sword. A Soul∣dier dares march against death, and out face it, which others tremble to think on. This renow∣neth them above all other arts, for they are at∣tained with quiet study, warme case, and sound rest; but the Souldier finds difficulty in his de∣signes, and danger in his attempts, whereas co∣wards are the scorne of men, and contemptible,
as having nothing of price but their lives, scarce that, nor any thing wise but their feares. You shall know a valiant man by this, He is undaunted when he encountreth force, and yeel∣ding when he meets with weaknesse and disabili∣ty. The juster that wrath is, the more commen∣dable is mercy. One writes of Henry the Great of France, when he might have hewed the Pari∣sians in pieces, puts downe his Pistoll, and saves them, saying, He would not suffer them to take harme, who were not in case to doe any. Tiberius would not take away the life of his enemie by treachery, and told the Prince of the Celts, that Rome had a sword to kill with, and not an Apo∣thecaries box. When revenge lies in a mans hand, the usuall way to appease, is by submission and entreaty: yet sometime resolution and courage doth that which submission cannot doe: As that valiant Prince of Epirus, Scanderbeg, following a souldier to kill him; when the souldier saw that no means of humility would mollifie his Captaine, resol∣ved at last to encounter him with his sword: This brave resolution staid his fury, whom he not one∣ly forgave, but received into favour. Our Histo∣ries write of Iohn Beaufort, Earle of Dorset, with fifteene hundred men, being encompassed be∣tweene the sea with fifteene thousand French, Arminac the Generall of the French sent to him, and advised him to yeeld: But he answered, It is not the manner of the English to yeeld without blows, neither am I so heartlesse as to deliver my
selfe into their hands, whom God may deliver into mine: And accordingly it came to passe, God gave him the honour of the day. It was Gods charge to Ioshua, Onely be vali∣ant, and of a good courage: See that in Nehemiah, when he was advised to hide himselfe in the Temple to save his life, Should such a man as I fly? saith he: And who is he that being as I am, would goe into the Temple to save his life? I will not goe in, Nehem. 6.11. When the children of Isra∣el began to mutiny, having heard of Gyants and Anakims in the Land of Canaan, Come, let us make a Captaine, and returne into Egypt, Num. 13.30. & 14.9. but Ioshua and Caleb stilled the people, saying, Feare not the people of the land, they are bread for us, their defence is departed from them, and the Lord is with us, feare them not. What a triumphant exploit was that of Eleazar, 1 Macc. 6.43. perceiving that one of the beasts was ar∣med with royall harnesse, he made a lane through his enemies with his sword to approach that Elephant, and creeping under him, wounded him in the belly; and with the fall of the beast being crusht to death, suo sepultus est triumphe, was buried in his owne triumph, or rather tri∣umphed in his owne buriall. Syracides saith of David, that he plaid with Lions as with Kids, and with Beares as Lambs, Syr. 47.3. Valiant souldi∣ers armed with divine fortitude, Tam alacres ad interitum quam ad triumphum rapiuntur, are carry∣ed as cheerfully to their death, as to a triumph:
quam gloriosi revertuntur victores de praelio, tam beati moriuntur Martyres in praelio: From the bat∣taile they returne glorious Conquerours, in the battaile they die blessed Martyrs. Whatsoever happens in a just Warre, the Souldier is crow∣ned: If conquer, with a triumphant Garland; if vanquished, with a Martyrs crowne. Securus interimit, securior interit, saith Bernard: he sin∣neth not when he kils, nor perisheth when he dies. The way to attaine to this Fortitude, is, to keepe a good conscience. Nothing makes a man so much a coward, as the guilt of sinne. When David had lost his holinesse, how faint-hearted he became! He that played with Lyons and Beares like Lambs and Kids, runs away from his owne sonne: being disarmed of that de∣fence, Factus est in peccato timidus, qui fuerat in gratia metuendus: Whom the state of grace found valiantly active, the guilt of sin made fearfully fugitive. There is no way but this to conquer, and it must be by this, if ye desire to triumph. Now thanks be to God, who causeth us: And so I come to the Author. 2. God is the Author of all the good we doe; it is he that worketh, velle & perficere; you can∣not triumph but by him: The race is not to the swift, nor the battaile to the strong. When Abra∣ham returned victorious, Gen. 14. Melchisedech met him, and gave God the glory, Blessed be the Lord God, who hath delivered thine enemies into
thine hand: And Abraham told the King of So∣dome, I will not take so much as a shooe-latchet of thee. S. Chryfostome giveth two reasons: 1. Be∣cause he acknowledged God to be the giver of victory. As if he should say, I brought nothing to this War, but voluntatem & promptitudinem, a prompt and willing mind; Victoriam & trium∣phum operatus est Deus, The victory and triumph is the Lords. 2. That the King of Sodome might not arrogate the glory of his riches to himselfe, but to God: As if Abraham had said, I have God that enricheth me, keep thy gifts to thy selfe, he is my buckler and my exceeding great reward: a buckler to defend me, a reward to en∣rich me, Gen. 15. David laid up the sword of Go∣liah in the Tabernacle of God, thereby acknow∣ledging God to be the Author of his victory. Io∣shuah built an Altar unto the Lord of whole stones, over which no man had lift up an iron, Iosh. 8.31. The reason is given by a Rabbin, that the good which men obtaine by their prayers, they are beholden to no hand for but the hand of heaven. I am able to doe all things, saith the A∣postle, through the help of him that strengtheneth me, Phil. 4. to fight, to overcome, and all in Christ: Nihil possum a meipso, omnia possum in eo, saith the Apostle. To him that overcommeth, saith Christ, I will grant to sit in my Throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my Father in his Throne, Apoc. 3.21. Observe how S. Paul triumphed in those scars which he received for Christ; I beare about in my
body, , the marks of the Lord Iesus, tanquam aliquod trophaeum. Wounds received by Christi∣ans in the Lords cause, how honourable are they! Paphnutius having had his right eye put out for the Name of Christ, Constantine the Emperour would often call him into the Palace; and as if he sucked a blessing from those ble∣mishes, would cherish the disgraced place with kisses. S. Chrysostome professeth, he had rather be like Peter, a prisoner for Christ, then like the Angel that set him at liberty. Our triumphs are in suffering, Rom. 8. more then Conque∣rours. The world, I confesse, hath her triumphs also, but not in Christ; yea Chriots, and pomp of triumphs, like the Chariots of Pharaoh pursu∣ing gods people. Shall I crave leave to present before you a short view of two or three of them? First, Malice, mounted upon a Chariot, runs upon the wheeles of mischiefe, cruelty, rashnesse, impatience, & impudence; drawn along with two fierce beasts, Secular pompe, and Carnall pow∣er; fed like Diomedes horses, with the flesh of men: A generation (saith Solomon) whose teeth are swords, and their jawes, knives to eat up the afflicted, and the poore from among men, Prov. 30.14. God is no Author of this triumph. Next, Luxury hath her Chariot that runnes riot; they drive like Iehu, as if they were mad; wheeled with Gluttony, Lust, Pride, and Sloth; drawne along with two pampered and high-fed
horses, Plenty and Prosperity; Oblivion the Coach-man. After these comes Covetousnesse, warily moving; her Chariot hung all with iron hooks, running upon foure wheeles, Pusillanimity, Con∣tempt of God, Inhumanity, Forgetfulnesse of death; her horses, like her selfe, spare and leane, called Tenacitas and Rapacitas, Greedy to catch, and Loth to forgoe; raind up with the bridle of Holding fast, and whipt on with a Desire of Ha∣ving more. These be the Devils and the Worlds Page∣ants, their end is Praecipices, and downfalls: for they that climbe by privie sinne, shall fall with open shame. Thou, O man of God, saith S. Paul to Timothy, fly these things. It is our glory that are Preachers, to win soules; it is your comfort. We cannot triumph without you, nor you without us. What a joy will it be at that great day of ac∣compt, when we shall returne our poore talents with advantage! When Peter shall lead in triumph after him Iury; Andrew leading Achaia; Iohn, Asia; Paul triumphing with a world of souls after him: and some of us, I hope, triumphing with some of you. Now thanks be to God which causeth us in Christ. But if this triumph be not constant, where is our comfort? It followeth therefore in the next place, the continuance of time, 3. Alwayes he causeth us to triumph. Alwayes in Christ, for he having triumphed over death and hell, doth lead Captivity ca∣ptive,
, he hath unloosed the sorrows of death; so we in him doe alwayes triumph: A good conscience is a continuall feast; the Comforter abideth with us for ever; it is ever working: For as the creatures of God do alwayes continue their actions to which Nature enclines them, The fire alwayes burneth, if it have mat∣ter combustible; the heavens alwayes moving, except by an Almighty power commanded to stand; the Sun alwayes shining, though clouds obfuscate his bright beams to us, yet ever cleare in it selfe: So the righteous, whom God causeth to triumph in Christ, are alwayes moving in the spheare of Obedience, alwayes warming with the flames of Charity, alwayes shining with the bright beames of Sanctity. The Father hath not left me alone, saith Christ, because I doe alwayes those things that please him, Iohn 8. so doe we in Christ: Alwayes hope, Hos. 12. alwayes pray, 1 Thes. 5. alwayes give thanks, Ephes. 5. alwayes rejoyce, Phil. 4. alwayes burning, shining, and teaching, and so doing, alwayes triumphing. S. Augustine upon the Prophet Davids words, All the day long will I praise thee, hath this Medi∣tation: In prosperity, because I find consolati∣on; in adversity, because I feele thy mercifull correction: When I was lost, thou foundst me; when I sinned, thou pardonedst mee; when I returned, thou receivedst me; when I con∣tinued, thou crownedst me: For he that gi∣veth the end, giveth all things belonging
to the end: The grace of inchoation, to be∣gin well; of continuation, to goe on well; of consummation, to end well: Voluntatem praeparat adjuvandam, adjuvat praeparatam: He prepares the will that he may help it, and he helps it when he hath prepared it, and so he causeth us alwayes to triumph in Christ. Alwayes? Now thanks be to God. So I come to the last Part. 4. The Thanksgiving. Amongst the Iews were as many Thanks-offerings, as Offerings of Expiation and Atonement: To teach us, to be as thankfull for blessings received, as in our wants we are importunate to obtaine them. The excellencie of this service would be considered, which is preferred by the Lord himselfe before all sacrifices; peculiar to Saints; the service of the life to come, when all other almost cease: it is all we are able to render. Non habeo nisi mi∣nuta duo, Two mites is all I have, a soule and a body: Et si millies rependerem, quid sum ego ad De∣um? If I should give my selfe a thousand times, what am I to God? Nature it selfe teacheth this duty: The very ground payes back the cost be∣stowed upon it; Non ingratus ager: The Sunne drawes up vapour from the earth, sends it back in raine. Vnde exeunt flumina, revertuntur ut iterum fluant: The rivers return to the sea from whence they came. As in the Sun beames, the more their multiplication, the greater the reflection: so for Gods blessings shewed forth to you by his Ministers in every place, the greater should be
your fruitfulnesse, the more your thankfulnesse. Who causeth us alwayes to triumph in Christ. Now thanks be to God. Now here me thinks I should make an end, but that one thing is wanting to the accomplish∣ing of our triumph, which presents it selfe to our view this day: That is, to acknowledge the cau∣ses of your triumphing, which are many. 1. In your Princely Generall, Patron and Protector of your Company, our Illustrious Prince CHARLES, of whom it may be said, as of Titus the sonne of Vespasian, Delitiae humani generis: The honour of Armes, whose hopefull vertues are the food, life, and soule of Souldiers. In this we have cause to triumph. 2. In the order, and splendour, and , the united hearts and fellowship of your whole company: Though ye differ in your individuals, as so many severall persons, and perhaps in opi∣nion, yet you make up together one compacted Body of an Army; and as touching your com∣mon good, have but one soule: Like the foure Elements, though of opposite qualities, yet they meet harmoniously in a middle temper of mans constitution, & concordi pace ligantur. In this wee have cause to triumph. 3. In your brave Commander, the Captaine of your Yard: Of whom I could say much, but that I feare to offend his modesty, Et ne damnum illius laudibus mea faceret verecundia, Lest my mo∣desty also might damnifie his due praises. Onely
thus much, because I will not sinne against Iu∣stice, whilst I am afraid to offend Modestie: If you desire to be instructed in Militarie Discipline, accompanyed with religious mildnesse, Christi∣an sobriety, wise temperance, manly fortitude, I say no more, but Follow your Leader. In this we have cause to triumph. 4. In the bounty of our generous Citizens, and noble Benefactors, who have begun a glorious work, your Campus Martius, your Field of Ho∣nour. The Romanes had such a place, which they called their great Schoole of defence. It was gi∣ven to the people by a Vestall Virgin, Caia Tar∣natia; but Tarquine the Proud, the last King of Rome, tooke it away from them, and converted it to his owne use, in sowing corne there: Which corne, when he was deposed, the Romanes threw into the River Tiber, judging it unfit, that any should reap commodity from so holy ground: In processe of time, the sheaves of corne being stopt in a shallow Foord of the River, became firme ground, and was called The holy Island; and after the expulsion of Tarquinius, this Campus Martius was restored to its former use, wherein they exer∣cised Chivalrie, and feats of Armes. The like to this is yours; but never a proud Tarquine will ali∣enate the use of that so happily begun. Goe on therefore ye worthy Citizens, finish your noble Schoole of Defence: If I have erred in commending you, ye will pardon my charita∣ble mistake. I did deliver freely what I thought
you had done, or what I beleeved you should have done, or what I hope you will doe. It is wis∣dome to prepare for War. We have enjoyed peace a long time, (blessed be God) but that peace hath bred some surfets, which we pray God to cure with gentle purges, without letting bloud. Lipsius gave this to be the reason of our Halcyon dayes in Q. Elizabeths raign, Quodjam in pace Britannia, imperio debet pacati sexus, We did owe our peace to that quiet and mild sexe: And yet we have had, and still have masculine Princes, and still enjoy peace, blessed be God; But what then? shall that lull us asleep, and secure us from all Martiall meditation? because the Summer quarter hangeth upon us, shall we think that Winter rots in the Skie? Goe on therefore, let not so glorious a work be hindered with faint-hearted avarice, but bestow your bounty for their convenience, who will be ready to spend their bloud for your defence. In ancient times, when the Captaine returned from the Wars in trium∣phant manner, he entred the City, Non apertis portis, sed disruptis muris, Not by opening the gates, but by making a large breach in their walls: To signifie, as Plutarch saith, that having so great and valiant Souldiers, they needed no walls to defend them: As Homer calls Achilles, , so these are the walls of the City. This is one of the glorious things that are spoken of thee, O City of London; and it must needs joy your hearts to see so many brave Worthies
issue out of your sides, like the flower of Greece out of the Trojan horse. In this also we have great cause to triumph. Now thanks be to God which causeth us to triumph thus on earth, even in this Church Militant, and the same God bring us at last to the Church triumphant in heaven, through the blessed merits of his Son Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be ascribed all honour, power and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
