M1974 E7_22 99859858 111958
An Exact of Lievtenant Generall MIDDLETONS LETTER: To the Honourable Sir WILLIAM WALLER. And by him communicated to, and Read in the Honourable House of COMMONS, on Saturday last, being the 24. of this instant Moneth of August. 1644. Wherein is set forth a VICTORY, Obtained against the Enemy by a Partie of Horse and Dragoones, under the Command of Captaine Fincher, Quarter-Master Generall to Sir William Waller, at Farrington. Wherein were taken, slaine and dispersed neere 600. Horse and Foot of the Enemy; As also a List of the Names of the Officers that were taken, with many other particulars in that great Defeat. And withall, How one Captain Blunt a Papist, killed most cruelly a godly Minister, which Captain, was with many others, there taken Prisoners in this Fight. LONDON, Printed according to Order, by G. Bishop. August. 28. 1644.
An Exact of Liev. Generall MIDDLETONS LETTER, To the Honorable Sir WILLIAM WALLER. Honoured Sir, THE Forces I am to have from Lime, are to be to morrow with mee at Charde, the London Regi∣ment at Weymouth, I think will be with me a day or two hence, our pistolls and Saddles are landed at Wey∣mouth; I have given Orders to Commis∣sary Fox, to bring them to my Quarters
at Charde; I have taken a Course to re∣cruit, by leaving a proportion of Horse upon divers Hundreds in Summerset∣shire; I doubt not, but the Horse will be in a good posture ere long; Having re∣ceiv'd intelligence of some new Leavies neere Bristoll, I commanded Captaine Fincher, Quarter-master Generall, with a party of three Hundred Horse, and one hundred Dragoones that way, he came very opportunely about the time they were to March to their rendezvous, kil∣led only five in the place, dispersed and took the rest prisoners, I have sent you a Liste inclosed, of the prisoners Names; I hope the leavie is marr'd: One of the prisoners, Captaine Blunt, a Papist, killed a Minister not long since, most cruelly; I intend to send over all the pri∣soners to Lime, I think this Captaine Blunt deserves to be hanged. Your Ho∣nour
may acquaint the Committee of both Kingdomes with this cruell Act: It is impossible to heare of any thing from my Lord Generall, but by sea, hee is in good condition, as I am informed; since our comming into these parts, wee have not onely stopped their leavies of men & money, but likewise we have streigh∣tened the Kings Army much of provisi∣on, I doe heare his Majesties Army is either retreated, or intends shortly to retreat; I cannot affirme the truth of this. I doubt not, but I shall be able shortly to informe you; for I intend to go towards Exeter, and as neer as possi∣bly I can, to the Kings army, with a good party of Horse and Dragoones, so soon as I have distributed the pistolls to the severall Troopes; Colonell Stroude is here, and hee is to raise a Regiment of Horse, which I make no question hee
doe quickly. If the Parliament will im∣ploy their Forces this way, the VVorke was done. Ilchester 21. Aug. 1644. Your humble servant John Middleton.
Prisoners taken at Farrington. Edward Bisse Colonell. Captaines. EDward Davies, Iames Kirton, Iohn Hasset, Iohn Blunt. Walter Swaine Lieu. of Horse. Lievtenants of Foot. T Thomas Heath, George Bingham, Thomas Rirketon, Edward Day. Walter Swayne, Coronet. William Massy, Quarter-Master.
Henry Zouche, Chaplaine to the Collo∣nell. Iohn Swenbrooke, Servant to Captaine Hassett. Henry Biggins, Servant to Collonell Bisse. William Sims, Chyrurgion. William Brooke, Servant to Lieutenant Swayne. Thirty Eight Troopers, Twelve Foot Souldiers, Three Barrells of Powder, a good quantity of Match and Bullets, neere a Hundred Horse. FINIS.
