M2750 E329_8 99861370 159613
A TRVE RELATION By Colonell Morgan, In a Letter of the totall Rou∣ting of the Lord Ashley, by him and Sir William Brereton at STOVV. With the Names of all the Prisoners by them taken. These being true Copies and exami∣ned, are Printed and published accor∣ding to Order of PARLIAMENT. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbanck at Grays-Inne Gate. March. 24 1645.
A True Relation by Colonell Morgan in a Letter of the totall routing the Lord Ashley by him and Sir William Brereton at Stow. Gentlemen, HAving received a Com∣mand from the Honoura∣ble Committee of both Kingdomes to take the charge of a brigade of Horse and foote drawne out of the Gari∣sons of Gloucester, Hereford, and Evishalm,
to prevent the Lord Ashley's conjuncti∣on with the Kings forces at Oxford, and to effect that designe, I drew forth and randevoused seasonably neere Evishalme and Warwicke, notwithstanding the Lord Ashley endeavoured by all meanes to get by mee, which much foyled my brigade to prevent, in marching from place to place, to secure the place upon River Avon. Yet after some considera∣tions, I perceived that hee was unwil∣ling to passe over so long as I lay neer the River. Resolved upon Thursday last to quarter and campe in the most conveni∣ent place (wheresoever hee made his pas∣sage) to fall upon him, and that night had intelligence of his march from Droit with neer 100. horse towards Bedford 3. miles from Evishalm, whereof I presently advertised Colonell Whaly and Colonell Fleetwood, and sent post to Sir VVill. Brere∣ton for the assistance of his horse, which was accordingly granted: but upon Fri∣day the Lord Ashley still continuing his
march, and Sir VVilliam Brereton not come up, was forced to hold him in action for the space of 4. houres, skirmishing with by parties, and keeping my body drawne up in a most advantagious place for pur∣sute, in case he should passe by me before sir VVill. Brereton came up, which about nine a clocke that night he did, where∣upon I resolved to pursue, thinking it more advantagious to fall upon his reare, then at that time to draw out to meete him in the field, and in my pursute Sir VVilliam Brereton came up with 800 horse (of whom I desired to receive orders, but he referred the whole command of the field unto me, then being equall in num∣ber to the Lord Ashley's forces, consisting of 3000. I commanded 400. horse & 200 Firelocks to charge his reare guard, to put him to a stand before he should passe through Stow upon the Would, and as my intelligence informed me, the King was to have joyned with him within 7 mile of that place, where hee made choyse of his
ground, and had the wind with him, yet trusting in God, I drew up and charged him, whom halfe an houre before day on Saturday morning I put to a total route, killed many Gent. and Officers of quali∣ty, took prisoners the L. Ashley and all his foot officers, whose names are in the in∣closed list, besides 1600. common soul∣diers, whereof many being wounded, I gave liberty to goe to their owne homes, taking the oath of the 5th of April, the rest I have sent to Gloucester: there is al∣so taken 2000. arms & all their ammuni∣tion. Sir VVill. Brereton desired that the L. Ashley should be his prisoner, which I willingly condiscended unto, not doub∣ting but hee will give a good account of him to the Parliament; this good successe (the glory thereof I desire may be given unto God) will prevent the King from drawing an army into the field which he expected: I am now marched towards Worcester, where I shall observe such or∣ders as I shall receive from the Parliament
and the Committee of both Kingdomes, and in the mean time shall endeavour to make use of all opportunities to weaken the enemy, and to advance the publike service, which shal alwayes be the desire of him who will ever subscribe himselfe to bee Gentlemen, Your faithfull friend and servant, THO: MORGAN. Cambdin the 22 of March 1645. at 6. a clock at night. A List of the persons taken by Colonell Morgan, at Stow in the Would, March 21. 1645. The Lord Ashley Colonell Corbet Colonell Gerard Colonell Mauldsworth Left. Colon. Broughton Major Billinsley Major Hardnego Major Shaltonstone Cap. Edw. Gray Cap. Tho. Gilbert Cap. Peacoke Cap. Silvanus Halsell Cap. Arding Cap. John Bonner Caps. Heury bound Cap. Josuah Emy Cap. Hutton Cap. Harris Cap. Jewnger Cap. Harison C. Jo. Mathews Reform. C. Devenport Reform. C. Georg Writ Reform. C. Potts Reform. C. Smith Reform. Lief. Hill Lief. Hopson Lief. Edriswick Lief. Warberton Lieut. George Faucote Lief. Hobman L. Banjamine Thrubury Lief. Fletcher Lief. Kerke
Lief. Powle Lief. Smith Reforma∣do. Lief. Hart Reforma∣do. Lief. Kelby Reforma∣do. L. Uaughan Reforma∣do. C. Lief. Ashton Lief. Edw. Barker Cornett Godfrey Preses Cornett Brookes Cornett Roberts Cornett Russoll Cornett Francis Hesketh Ensigne Blackbourne Ensigne Horton Ensigne Dethick Ensigne Ellis Ensigne Farmor Ensigne Ayres Ensigne Cliever Ensigrne Hopson Ensigne Colebrook Ensigne Broughton Ensigne Mason John de Ashfield Clarke Alexan. Clogley Chaplaine to Sir W. Uaughan Edw. Parker Marshall Gen. Quartermaster M. Stone Quarterm. Watts Quarterm. Gardiner Robert Neale Chyrurgion Richard Ashton Generall servant to the L. Ashton Master Williams On our side two Lieften. slaine. Colonell Rous Go∣vernour of Eversham woun∣ded. FINIS.
