m398a 36282382 150122
THE SPEECH Of the right Honourable EDWARD EARL of MANCHESTER, Lord Chamberlain of His MAJESTIES HOUSHOLD. Delivered at the Guild-Hall London, on Thursday, being the first day of December, 1664. at a Common Hall there held. Where were also present The Earl of Bridgewater. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Berkley of Berkley. Lord Moone. Lord Ashley Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Bennet. Viscount Cornebury. Sir Thomas Clifford. Colonel Popham. Mr. Waller. Colonel Fretzvile. Sir Philip Warwick. Sir John Berkenhead. Mr. Ashburnham. Sir George Reeve. Sir William Lowther. Members of the honourable Houses of Parliament. EDINBURGH, Re-printed, 1664.
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
THE SPEECH Of the Right Honourable, EDWARD, Earle of MANCHESTER, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Household. Delivered at the Guild-Hall, London, on Thurs∣day the first of December, 1664. at the Common Hall there held, &c. My Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and you the worth Citizens of this great and famous City of London. I Hope our coming hither this day, and upon this occasion, will be as satisfactory to you, as it is gratefull to us: Some of us have formerly addressed our selves unto you, by His Majesties Command, for the Loan of several and great summes of
Money, and we found such a ready compli∣ance with His Majesties desires, as we can give testimony to the Nation, that in your duty and affection to your King, you have out-done all other Cities, even the greatest Cities of the Christian World; and let this honour remain with you, and be entailed to your posterities for ever. But we come not now to ask, but to give a return of thanks, hearty thanks, from the Lords and Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment, for your forwardness in assisting the King. What you intended as a private and personal duty and kindness to your King, the Parlia∣ment owns as a publick service to the King∣dom; and that upon a just account: For His Majesty borrowed not these summes to convert them to His private expences, but to employ them for publick use, to prepare and set forth a Fleet, able to contest for victory against all the naval powers of His insulting and injurious Neighbours: And in order to this design, His Majesty hath impaired His own Stock, by exhausting His own Stores; He hath improved his own Industry, and not
spared His own Personal Labour and Dili∣gence: and to compleat and perfect this De∣sign, His Royal Highness, His Majesties dear and only Brother, hath exposed Himself to hazzard and danger. And this Prince is of such an accomplished Gallantry, that, through the blessing of God, you need not question a happy Success under so good a Conduct. All this His Majesty hath done as the Fa∣ther of His Country, not consulting His own Interest, but for the Honour of the Nation, and to secure and advance the Trade and Com∣merce of His Kingdoms, in which this City hath so eminent a concernment and advantage, as probably we may conclude this Prophesie will not only be fitly applied, but truly fulfilled in your dayes, unto the City of London; The Harvest of the Rivers is Her Revenue, and she is be∣come a Mart of Nations. Thus you see the happiness and advantage of living under such a King, whose generous nature prompts Him to remember and to acknowledge benefits, as well as to receive them. His Majesty declares to the Parliament what the City of London had done for Him, and
what He had done for the Safety and Honour of the Kingdom, by their kind and cheerfull assistance; and expresses Himself in such a phrase, as makes you partners with Him in all the happy consequences of this great Expe∣dition. The Parliament having received this account from the mouth of their King, return you their Thanks, with the full consent and the unani∣mous Votes of both Houses, the Lords and Commons, which I here deliver to you as a Record of their acknowledgements of your Services done to the King. And now give me leave to offer our Well-wishes to you, That this City may never want the Favour, Countenance, and Protection of such a King; and that His Majesty may alwayes finde the Fidelity, Affection, and Assistance of such a City.
And after a great Shout of GOD SAVE THE KING, the Lord Chamberlain having presented to the Right Honourable the LORD MAIOR an order of both Houses of Parliament, the same was delivered to Mr. Avery, Deputy Town-Clerk, who then publickly read the same, and follows in these words, viz. Die Veneris, 25 Novemb. 1664. ORDERED by the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal, and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, That the Thanks of both Houses of Parliament be given unto the City of LONDON for their forwardness in assisting His Majesty; and in particular, by furnishing Him with several great summes of Mo∣ney toward His Preparations for the Ho∣nour, Safety, and Trade of this Nation. Jo. Browne, Cleric. Parliament. Edinburgh, Reprinted, 1664.
