M456 669.f.6[73] 99871110 160934
THE MANNER AND GOOD SVCCESSE OF THE LORD BROOKES Forces in pursuing the Cavaliers from COVENTRY. In a Letter to an Honourable person in London, August 24. 1642. SIR, I Give you a short, but true Relation of what past yesterday, being the 23. of Au∣gust, between the Cavaliers that lately left their breach made at Coventry, to their shame and losse, and to the great dishonour of their Master, not daring to enter it; and the thrice Noble, and valiant Lord Brooke, Commander in chiefe of those Forces sent by the Parliament, for the reliefe of the distressed in War∣wickeshire, Northamptonshire, &c. The Cavaliers being come to Dunsmore Heath, from the aforesaid City, and the Lord Brooke drawing neare to them, each understood by Scouts, of the neerenesse each to other; the Lord Brooke intended to have reposed himselfe, his wearyed Troopes, and Regiments after their long March, but understanding that his ene∣mies were upon retreate, he forthwith advanced, and in the morning early, having set his Army in order, planted his Canon in a place most convenient for to annoy the enemy, let flie at them, and made such a lane, that the enemy was so long in re-ordering, that they thought they would not have made head againe, but at last they did, and made good the fight for 8. or 9. Charges each upon other, the Parliament party let flie another Canon among the Infantry, who were a∣bout 200. and as is conceived, many were slaine, at last the Cavaliers left the field, taking all their dead and maimed with them, in this encounter not one of the Parliament party was killed or hurt, but on the other, many; Captain Leg was taken prisoner, and some others. Of the Lord Brookes side some 12. were wounded by the firing some powder, and one shott himselfe through the foote with his pistoll, and another his fellow through the back: the Messen∣ger will be gone, otherwayes I would inlarge, in telling you of the wondrfull courage and shouts of joy the Parliament party made when they came in sight of the enemy, and that all the worke of the Commanders, was to order them, and keep them back, all of them being desirous to be of the forelorne hope if they could: Likewise I should tell you of the joy of the Country people, that those that pillaged and plundered them, are now met withall: The Kings Majesty went th night before to Leicester, and thence we conceive will Northerly, but we hope, what by the pur∣suit of the Parliaments Army, and the courage of the Countrey people, most of the Cavali will not be able to overtake him: VVhen a more exact Relation can be had, I shall send it interim I rest, Yours. London Printed for Humphrey Blunden. 1642.
