m3147 e411_20 99860681 161235
A DECLARATION of Captaine JOHN MƲSGRAVE Prisoner in NEWGATE. Vindicating him against the mispri∣sians and imputed reasons of his s imprisonment for high Treason against the STATE. With an Order, or Proclamation: By the Committee of the City of London, with the Committee of Lords and Com∣mons for safety: for Listing in the late ingagement, &c. 8ber: 23 LONDON, Printed for John Musgrave, and are to bee sold in Newg-rket, 1647.
A DECLARATION of Captaine John Musgrave Prisoner in Newgate. THat the Fidelity of the most e∣minent and faithfull in the late Service for the Parliament have run under the lash of notorious scandals and reproaches, is evi∣dent enough beyond the neces∣sity of my attestation; under which disgrace as my present Condition hath made mee an Accessary, so I cannot doubt but when my Integrity is truly manifested, that generall Opinion (which in the Ignorant has abused me) will, in the judicious find that Construction may plausibly free mee from all the dan∣gers of their calumny, and I must confesse I were a Bastard to my name, an infamy to all that love mee, and a reprobate to the Cause I am under; if (after a generall traduction of both the Houses, and the parti∣cular abuses of some Pamphletiers,) I did not in some measure indeavour to give the prejudicate world some punctuall assurance, what Rule I have followed in all my concernments, from the first of my service unto this minute of my commitment, not that I itch after a printed credit, or expect an Eulogy from the cryer; but finding the folly of the Presse so Epidemicall,
my gulrity shall not hinder my progresse in that quity. To this purpose I might run over a Catalogue of particulars from the very Originall of the Service; but in regard the generality of the Officers, (with whom I have served) and the Impresse of the House upon mee, in respect of that small pay which upon the perusall of severall Certificates was (in order) al∣lotted mee, may anticipate a part of satisfaction to those who were ignorant of mee; and for such as tru∣ly knew mee, I need no prevention, since for the most part wee marched hand in hand together, in the joy∣full accomplishment of our Commands. Ʋpon the point. The Crime I am accus'd of, doth onely prove a more then common constancy in the adherence to those Principles, which at first gave life and beeing to our Armes; in the maintainance of which if my blood or my paines had been too deare, the censure I am under had been too calme; but when the issue of our toyle and sweat returned us home, and that expected Salary (which hath rare∣ly been awanting either to successe or perseverance) was not onely delayed us, but wee were also ingag'd, in our attendance unto such patience and extremity; That it was the onely wonder the stones were mute; which had they been sensible had been lesse pardonable then the insurrection of the Apprentices. Of whom since it is my occasion to be a mentioner, and with whom I am accused to be a partaker, I must necessarily here protest against my most envious and serious observer, For my presence in their company
will prove neither my intention or action, then my con∣dition  divers respects may admit of a contrary con∣struction. The more serious Traduction (if so I may call it) once formerly my joy, now made my Scandall. For if those invitations of the Prerogative, the Prote∣stant Religion, the Priviledges of Parliament, the Li∣berty of the Subject, &c. Were out of their several∣ties moulded into an unity of the Covenant, and the imposition of that, not onely made Nationall, but Sa∣craetall: Why should an adherency be my Crime, since the various hazzard of my life upon it, abetted by the stampe of your legallity) did make it apparantly Religious, as also Conscionable. If this suffice not, but there needs must bee a necessity for some expiation by a President. Why in the Speakers absence, since the sitting was declared no Parliament, in case of any ont or assault, must it then bee made high Trea∣son, and why taken from the Shrubs and not the Oake, from the sprig and not the root, since the in∣gagement beeing imputed notorious, and of eminence, it requires an Annalogy in the punishment; unlesse ac∣cording to the Fable, as Dogs have been beaten in the presence of Lyons, onely for the abatement of their naturall fiercenesse; and as boyes have been whipt to intimate a duty to the youthfulnesse of Princes: So am I probably to bee disciplin'd out of a life, meerely for a rule of Obedience to such, whom in the height, of Magistracy, endeavouring my incouragement among thousand others in conjunction with them; they
must be taught a dutifull Retractation of their errors by the subordination of my sufferance. For my accusation of a power in the disposition of Offices and Commands within the Tower, is onely an allegation from the frivolous vanity of those who are simply pretenders to my persecution; for Places of that nature, and consideration, are rarely dispen∣sible to other persons then of such eminence and tran∣scendency, that could hardly in justice admit mee serviceable upon the smallest resentment of my disabili∣ties; and therefore my accuser, was so farre from the sence of an abuse in this; that instead of my shame, hee did ignorantly indeavour the advancement of my power and credit. As for spreading of papers in Churches, it was ne∣ver my Crime nor the tearing of them; in which place to my best understanding, I have endeavoured to shun Superstition, and to expresse true devotion, as I con∣ceived might bee most acceptable to God, and inoffen∣sive to man. As for my beeing in that bloody businesse at Guild∣hall, I was not there, neither can I bee justly taxed for having any hand in that businesse, as by many thousands do justly appeare. For other accusations (as I want them not) they are ill applyed; in regard beeing no way conscious of them, they might have had reference to such a creature, whose patience and loynes had received pre∣paration for such an injury; seeing the affliction of my bondage, and the want of livelyhood so prevaile up∣on
mee, that that advancement of griefe might better have stayed with the contrivers of it to abate the exorbi∣tancies of their jollity. To conclude, For a testimony to those that may be ignorant (for those that know mee these are imper∣tinent) I desire this satisfaction bee duely pondered. That in all the Traductions that ayme at my life (if either their verity or weight could justly touch me) the continuance of it would bee a vanity to my selfe; But since the uprightnesse of my Conscience, and the recollections of my heart, assure of an intensive inno∣cence; I shall henceforth with lesse trouble and more liberty, imbrace that thraldome, which in conclusion can admit of no other resolution, then either present Martyrdome or freedome. JOHN MVSGRAVE. 3 Augusti, 164. By the Committee of the Militia for the City of London, &c. WHereas there have been divers tumultuous and disorderly Assemblies within the Cities of London, and Westminster, to the endangering the Parlia∣ment and City, and parts adjacent: For prevention ther∣of, we the Committee of the Militia aforesaid, accor∣ding to the duty of the trust reposed in us, do hereby strictly charge and command, That no Inhabitants, In∣dwellers,
or Strangers, either on House or on Foot, shall come to∣gether in any Assemblies whatsoever, with Arms or without Arms, except such as the Committee of Lords and Commons for safety, or this Committee shall raise for the safety of the King, Parliament, and City. Now if after publication hereof, any Persons shall presume to assemble, or come together in any tumultuous way, under any pretence whatsoever; That then, and in such case all Colonells, Captaines, and other Officers and Souldiers are hereby required, according to their Commissions, to suppresse and disperse the same, and in case of resistance, them to sight with, kill and slay at Enemies to the King, Parliament, and City, and di∣sturbers of the Peace of the whole Kingdome. A to avoid effusion of blood, all House-keepers and ∣thers in case of such lts as aforesaid  commnded by And that all foot Souldiers that will  ∣servation of the King, Parliament, and City, let t ¦pair to the New-Artillery ground where they shall be Listed, Armed, and paid sevn shillings per wk. Ordered that this Proclation be f¦with Printed and published, and Proclai∣med by the Provost Mshall by soun of Trmpet. Tho. Paingr, Clerk to the said Committee. Lon Prid by Rird Cs.
