N293 E877_1 99865703 168378
THE LIGHT OF CHRIST, AND THE WORD OF LIFE. Cleared from the Deceipts of the Deceiver, and his litterall Weapons turned upon his owne head. Also the Man of sin found out, who is hiding himselfe in a heape of Confusion, pretnding Antichrist is not yet come. Occasioned by laying open some Deceipts in a Booke titled, The deceived and deceiving Quakers Discovered; Subscribed Mathew Cassin and William Jeffery, bre∣thren in iniquitie, who are joyned to deny God, Christ, the light, and Spirit, in his Saints, and calls it teaching Christs Spirit apart from his body, and an evill Spirit, to witnesse the Spirit of Christ in the Saints. Set forth that the Simple may see the wiles the Devill hath to keepe them from the word of Life, the Soules salvation. By a lover of Israels seede, called James Nayler. Even now there are many Antichrists, and whosoever denyeth the Father and the Son, the same is he that is the lyar and the Antichrist. Abide in me and I in you, for without me you can doe nothing. LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end of Pauls. 1656.
THE LIGHT OF CHRIST, and the word of Life. MATHEVV CAFFIN who to shew thy selfe amongst the body of opposi∣tion hath raked up a heape of filth out of thy owne heart to cast on the Chil∣dren of light, adding lye to lye, so be∣gins and so ends, for in thy beginning thou sayes even now are there many Antichrists; And in the end of thy booke thou say'st that Antichrist will but be one single man; And as is the beginning and ending, so is the whole bulke a lumpe of lyes, slanders, and Confusions, as one would thinke the Devill himselfe might blush at, As that the Quakers saith, and cannot but say that Christ ascended not into heaven with that body which God raised from the dead, and glori∣fied; And that we say the body and blood of Christ is un∣profitable; That we Imagine Christ never dyed, That we say that the offering of Christs body to be broken and his blood to be shed avails not, so as through faith therein to set free from sinne; And that we deny the holy Scriptures; And much such like, which to write after thee might fill a vo∣lume; but seeing they are but slanders most of them cast up∣on our persons, and that our practises doe every day testifie against them, so that none but who are willfully blind, but they may both heare and see contrary, and seeing we need looke for no other but that all manner of evill must be spo∣ken against us without cause by the lyar who is that Anti∣christ: for his names sake who hath called us out of dark∣nesse, we shall therefore willingly receive it as great rules,
till the Lord our righteousnesse make Esau ashamed at his envies. There is onely two things which as to the way of God, may prejudice some who are simple, which I shall lay open thy deceipts in, and for the rest leave it to discover its author, and by what spirit he is guided, which the least Child of light may easily Judge being nothing but a heape of slan∣ders, from the old roote severally spoken to in other places. Those two I shall mention is touching the light of Christ, and the Word, which thou denies to set the letter in the stead; which two things being cleared the whole worke falls to nothing, but false ccusations. The first is thy envie against the light of the world, that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. And to undervalue this thou sayes, That false and erronious is that Spirit that bids men give atten∣dance to a light within, as their onely teacher; And that Christ did not Commend people to a teacher within; And that men are not led into all truth by a light within them; And that to suppose that God in men is their teacher, is an Error, not knowing the Scriptures; And that it is not to be found in all the Scriptures that Christ or any of his did coun∣sell ignorant people to waite upon a light within them, &c. And that to declare the light within is another report, and another Spirit than Christ and his Ministers, and much the like thou inveighs against the light, shewing thy selfe utterly blind, and a Child of darknesse; And yet sayest thou the Gospell is hid, and the Creature lost, where the God of this world hath blinded the minde, and yet wilt thou have no light within; And sayest thou it concernes us to have our lights burning, yet denies the light within, but doth not tell people where their lights must burne without them, nor where their enlightened minds must be without them; And much such darke mudde stuffe comes out from the waters of Babylon, too much to gather up after thee, whereby thou seekes to darken and undervalue the light of the world, as not to be a teacher sufficient, that so Antichrist might keepe people in blindnesse, and so in their sins. Such a worke as none was ever found in but the Devill and his Instruments, quite contrary to Gods Covenant, and the end of it, even the
Covenant of light, in which God hath placed all his promises and power, yea where God himselfe dwells, even in the light of Christ the true light that lighteth every man that com∣eth into the world, which was the message that the Ministers of Christ was to declare, which Antichrists Ministers op∣pose. And that this light is the onely leader and guide to all sorts of people, and in all estates, and that without beleeving and following this there is no salvation, but without it all are in darknesse: I shall make it plaine by the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and their testimony of it against whome thou beares thy testimony, and the rest of the Children of darknesse, even against that light which is the anoynting, which was typified by that pure oyle of the Tabernacle; of which the Law and the Prophets prophesied, even the ever∣lasting Covenant of light, both to Jews and Gentiles; As saith the Prophet, Isa. 42. 6. And in the 49. 6. God calls it a light to the Gentiles, and for salvation to the ends of the earth. And this thou would limit onely to such as thou calls beleevers, which indeed appeares the greatest enemies to it. And in the 10h Chapter 17. he saith, This light shall burne up as a fire the briers and thornes in his day. Also Isa. 60. 3. 19, 20. And through his whole Prophesie he makes it the summe of his worke to foretell the Coming and beautie and power of this light, and all the rest of the Prophets, which would be too large to mention. And John Baptist the greatest of the Prophets, who came to see this light, he testifies of him what he is, and what he doth, that through him all might beleeve, whose whole testi∣mony was of this light John 1. he saith, This is the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world; and calls him the Word that was in the beginning, by whom all things was made; and saith, in him is life, and the life was the light of men, and that this light shined in darknesse, but the darknesse comprehends it not. And this light thou denies and would li∣mit to some persons, who act in darknesse and cannot com∣prehend it, though it shine in darknesse; wherefore saith the blind guide, this is another report, and another Spirit, and
such a thing is not to be found in all the Scriptures, but can∣not see thy blind Spirit, opposing the living Spirit of light and life in all the Saints, both in Scriptures, and to this day. And Simeon the Prophet he testifies to this light, and saith, He is prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his people Israell; and calls it Gods salvation, Luke 2. 30, 31, 32. But saith the false Prophet, and Antichrist, this is not sufficient alone, though it be Is∣raells glory and salvation, and the Gentiles light. And saith Christ of himselfe, I am the light of the world, he that followes me shall not abide in darknesse, but shall have the light of life, John 8. 12. But saith Antichrist, this light is not sufficient of it selfe. And saith Christ, Take heed that the light thats in thee be not darknesse. The light of the body is the eye, therefore when thine eye is single, the whole body is full of light, but when thy eye is evill, thy whole body is full of dark∣nesse; Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darknesse. And this he spake to the people and the Pharisees, Luke 11. But saith Antichrist, it is not to be found in all the Scriptures, that Christ or any of his did Counsell Ignorant people to take heed to a light within them; and saith the Blasphemer, False and Erronious is that Spirit that bids men attend to a light within. So the lyar and the Antichrist is now revealeing, and there are many Antichrists who thus oppose Christ his light and doctrine, who have the hornes of blas∣phemy, and dare blaspheme God in his Temple, Calling the Spirit of Christ false and Erroneous; And saith that to sup∣pose that God in men is their teacher, is an Error not know∣ing the Scriptures; when the Scripture saith, You shall all be taught of God, John 6. 45. And know you not that yee are the Temple of the living God, as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walke in them: and the Temple of God is holy, whose Temple ye are, but sayest thou for to suppose God to teach thee, is an Error, and so art not afraid to blaspheme God in his Temple. And saith the Scripture, All thy Chil∣dren shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54. 13. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his bro∣ther, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the
least of them to the greatest, Jere. 31. 34. Heb: 8. 11. But saith the Children of darknesse, where the Son of perdition sits in the Temple of God, this is Error, who are strangers to this Covenant of light, and without God in the world, who are of such the Apostle tells on, Eph: 4. who because of the blindnesse of their hearts (through denying the light within) are alienated from the life of God, and so become past-feeling, and so are given to sin and plead for it, though it be their destruction, for all that deny the light within are heart-blind, and so strangers to the life And here are all you blind guids of all sorts, enemies to the light, stumbling at it which is the Corner Stone, and so all that hate the light loves your evill deeds, and so plead for them while you live, and so the words of Christ is fullfilled upon you, John 3. 19, 20. And saith Christ, I am come a light into the world, that who∣soever beleeveth in me, should not abide in darknesse, and hee exhorts the Pharisees and unbeleevers, (who beleeved the Scriptures) to beleeve in the light of the world, which John calls the true light, which ligheth every man that cometh into the world; and saith Christ, God so loved the world, that hee gave his onely begotten Sonne, that whosoever beleeveth on him should not perish, but have everlasting life; but he that belee∣veth not, is condemned already, and this is the condemnation that light is come into the world and men love darknesse rather than light: and this he spake of them that beleeved the let∣ter, as you blinde guids doe now, but would not beleeve in the light of the world, as you doe now who deny Christ to be the light of the world, and would limit him only to be the light of Beleevers, which beleevers, when searched, you are found to be enemies to the light; but saith they that beleeve, he is a light to lighten the Gentiles, Luk. 2. 32. And the peo∣ple that sate in darknesse saw a great light, and to them that sate in the Region and shaddow of death, light is sprung up; Math: 4. 16. But saith Antichrist, hee inlightneth none but such as are inlightned already, that so he may keepe all in darknesse that are in darknesse; but the Children of light know that there is no other thing to inlighten them that sit
in darknesse, whose minds the God of this world hath blind∣ed, but the light of Christ, and till then, the Gospell is hid, and the vaile is over the heart, and all other meanes, till the eye be open is unprofitable, and it is his light alone which is that eye, and his Spirit alone, that takes away that vaile, 2 Cor: 3. 16, 17. And that it is his Spirit alone that guides into all truth, John 16. 13. Even the same Spirit which re∣proves the world of sin, ver: 8. But saith Antichrist, men are not lead into all truth by a light within, so by thy doctrine the Spirit of truth must either not be within, or else darknesse within, for sayest thou men are not lead into all truth by a light within; but saith the Scriptures, Yee have an unction from the holy one, and yee know all things, and this anoynting abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anoynting teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lye, and even as it hath taught you, yee shall abide in him, but saith the lyar, that spirit is false and erroneous, that bids men give attendance to the light within, as their onely teacher, when the Spirit of God saith, Yee need not any man to teach you, but as the same anoynting that abideth in you, teacheth you of all things and no lye is in it, and commands them to abide therein. And this spirit thou calls false and er∣ronious, and so art found that Blasphemer against the Spirit of God, and an open lyar, who saith there is not such a Scrip∣ture as directs to a light within for the onely teacher, and though in thy Book thou sayest wee must wrastle against the Powers of darknesse in this world, yet art thou found in the world joyned with the Prince of the world, to wrastle against the light of the world, even the spirituall light of Christ, which all the holy men of God did ever beare witnesse too, and preached to them that was in darknesse, and witnessed it to be that by which they was inlightened, even the light within, which shined out of darknesse in their hearts, which gave them the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus, which was their treasure in the earthen vessels, which they Preached and not themselves, that the Praise might be wholy of God, who had given them this light in Christ Je∣sus, wherefore they renounce the hidden things of dishonesty,
not handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifesta∣tion of this truth commend themselves to every mans consci∣ence in the sight of God, and not to the fleshly wisdome nor braine knowledge, but to the light in every mans consci∣ence, 2 Cor. 4. and they exhorted them, to have no fellow∣ship with the unfruitfull works of darknesse, but to reprove them, and said all things that are reproved are made mani∣fest by the light, and whatsoever doth make manifest is light, and this they preach for the light of Christ, Ephes. 5. 11, 13, 14. and doth also declare that the want of this light having their understandings darkned, and the blindnesse of their hearts is the cause why men are past feel∣ing, and so given themselves over to lasciviousnesse, to work all uncleanesse with greedinesse, Eph. 4. 18, 19. But he saith the Sains have not so learned Christ, if they have heard him and been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, being renew∣ed in the spirit of their minds who sometimes were darkness but now are light in the Lord, and so walk as children of the light bringing forth fruits of the Spirit in all goodnesse righ∣teousness and truth: and this light was their message, which they declared to their hearers, as the way to the bloud of cleansing; saith John, This is the message as we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light and in him is no darknesse at all, if we say we have fellowship with him and walk in darknes we ly & do not the truth, but if we walk in the light as he is in the light we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin, 1 Joh. 1. 5, 6, 7. This light they Preached, to be the way out of the world, following Christ who led them therein, who saith, I am the light of the world, no man cometh to the Father but by me, this light they preached to be the way to cleansing by the blood of Jesus, and this light they preached to keep out of the occa∣cion of stumbling, and said they that walk in darknesse know not whether they go, because that darknes hath blinded their eyes, 1 John 2. 10, 11. And this was the end of their Mini∣stry, which was the end of the Covenant, and the end of Christs coming, even to open the blind eyes, and to bring them that sit in darknesse out of the Prison house, Isa. 42. 7. And this was the end of the Apostles Ministry, to open their
eyes and to turne them from darknes to light and so from the power of Satan to God, Acts 27. 18. And this eye was within them that was blind which they was to open, which the God of this world had blinded which Christ calls the light of the body, and therefore saith, Take heed that the light thats in thee be not darknesse, Luke 11. 34, 35. Which eye the blind guides who loveth the world and their sin have closed, and their ears they have shut, whose hearts are wax∣en grosse, so that they can neither see hear nor understand, Mat. 13. 15. And in this state are all you blind guides, blind leaders of the blind, who can neither speak nor walk ac∣cording to the Law and Testimony because ye know not the light in ye, nor can any but from that light within, and there∣fore in your blindnesse are opposing the light of the world, which the Law and the Prophets prophesied of, which had the Testimony of Jesus which we witness to be the light of the world, who are come to the end of the Law and the Prophets, even the new Covenant, where the Law is writ∣ten in the heart, and the spirit of Prophesie received which is the testimony of Jesus, which we knew not till that eye was opened, and therefore went along with you in your blind worships and selfe taken on performances from the letter, which gave us no life, which life we witnesse now in the Spi∣rit by faith in the light of Christ, and his commands in Spi∣rit is life and power for obedience to the faith, in the light it is seen and accepted, in which light we see you and your la∣bours which are without, not in the light and spirit, and de∣ny you, and your sparks, your kindling, your literall Teach∣ing, and selfe righteousnesse, and all your brick making, who are in the Aegyptian darknesse, enemies to the light of Israel and its seed; And you we see to be enemies to Zions Redemp∣tion, as you are enemies to the light of the world, both in your selves and others. And this I say further to thee, and the rest of thy dark generation, That all your boast of Religion and knowledge in the letter, will not bring you to God, without the light of Christ, nor can any one that is in ignorance come to know the way to life but by the light of the world, and untill man
be led thereby he cannot come out of his darknesse, even with that light that reproves the world, and manifest your evill deeds must he be led; though the beasts of the field, who know not what liberty the Sons of God have in his gar∣den, calls this a Spirit of bondage, which is bondage to the beastly nature, but is freedome to the Sons and Seed of God, which the love of God is too who loves purity, but hates ini∣quity. And whereas thou and the rest of you would confine the light of Christ onely to such who are enlightned already, I say who must enlighten the rest? is there some other light to be preached before him? is not he the author as well as the fi∣nisher? who are enlightned indeed knowes this that he is the light in the times of darknesse, and there is none besides him, and that he giveth life to all who receive his light and follow it, but those that rebell against the light knows not the wayes thereof, nor abides in the paths thereof, Job 34. 13. There in that Chapter thou maist read thy selfe, and thy way, and work: Is this the end of your talking of the Spirit, and is it now become an error to say its sufficient to teach and guide out of darknesse, and is it some carnall thing that must en∣lighten the mind and guide the heart of man, which is in darknesse, such a doctrine as this was never preached by any of Christs Ministers, whose message was to preach Christ all∣sufficient in all, to work the whole work in fallen man both to light and life, which if thy doctrine be not quite contrary let the work in thy book testifie. Thy second thing that thou wouldst prove is, that the let∣ter of the Scripture is the word of God, and so the Rule and touchstone to judge spirits with, and that by which the world must be judged, and much such like that belongs to God and his Spirit alone in Christ Jesus, wouldst thou in opposition thereto ascribe to the letter, not knowing what the word Rule and Judge is; And this to prove thou addes a great heap of confusions and contradictions, but cannot find one Scripture that saith the letter is the word. But thou instances that place Marke 7. 12, 13. which hath relation to the 5 Commandement, and with a deal of
confidence thou affirmes that Christ calls the letter the word in this place, because he saith they make the word of God of none effect by their traditions, so thou hast proved the letter of that Commandement to be thy word, but in thy 24 page having forgot thy word thou overthrows it againe, and sayes the Apostle calls that the letter of the Law which killeth, and the ministration of death written and engraven in stones, by which no flesh shall be justified, of which letter the Apostles was not Ministers of. So by thy proofe thy word is that by which no flesh shall be justified, but is the letter that killeth, and ministration of death, of which words the Apostles was not Ministers, and in thy 39 page thou sayes it is done away, so thou hast lost thy word, and such like wild confused drunken stuffe, thou hast to prove the letter the word, wherein thou hast rightly proved thy word to be that which the Apostles was no Mi∣nisters of nor by it shall any be justified, and this is thy main pillar which falls thus on thy own head, but where the light of Christ is denyed, the blind must needs stumble, though at noon day; but they that have the word know that the word they made voyd by their traditions, was what God had written in their hearts, of which the outward was a figure, Isa. 51. 7. Psal. 119. 11. Mat. 13. 15. Another proof thou brings, Acts 2. 41. which saith they that gladly received Peters word were baptized; in which thou hast proved the letter not to be the word, for they that Peter preached to had the letter before they received Pe∣ters word, which word was Christ, of which the letter te∣stifies. Such like as these are all the rest of thy proofes, many grosse lies mixt amongst them, not worth the while to ga∣ther or repeat after thee. As thou art not ashamed in thy 25 page to lye against the Apostles words, saying they were Ministers of the letter, which the Apostle plainly denies, 2 Cor. 3. 6. As indeed is the most of thy work in thy book to oppose plaine Scripture, and contradict thy selfe. As for in∣stance: Saith Paul Gal. 1. When it pleased the Father to reveal
his Son in me, that I might preach him, I went &c. Sayest thou page 26. The Apostles went forth testifying the Lord Jesus not come within them. Saith Christ the Spirit of truth, When he is come, he shall testifie of me. Sayest thou page 33. Which Spirit the Saints receiving did not declare him to be their onely inheritance. Saith Christ, The Spirit of truth shall guide you into all truth, John 16. 13. Sayest thou page 15. Men are not led into all truth by a light within. Saith Christ, Take heed that the light that is in thee be not darknesse, Luke 11. Sayest thou, False and erronious is that Spirit that bids men give attendance to a light within. Saith Christ, John 5. 25. The houre is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voyce of the Son of God, &c. Sayest thou page 45. Not come and now is. Saith the Apostle 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded light to shine out of darknesse, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, &c. And speaks of some whom the God of this world had blinded their minds, least the light of the glorious Gospell should shine unto them. Sayest thou page 8. (as to the same thing) not from a teacher within, but from the Apostles; who plainly affirme that they were to give the light of the knowledge of the glo∣ry of God, so putting the Apostles instead of God, and be∣lying them, says they affirme it, when the Apostle saith, God gives it, and not they. And thus thou shewes thy selfe all along to be that man of sin, that old gainsayer, who opposeth thy selfe against the truth of the Scriptures, and yet would have the letter thereof to be the word which thou canst thus turne and wrest against the truth, but the word thou knows not which can∣not be wrested, altered nor changed; nor canst thou prove the letter to be it, though many crooked wayes thou takes to
doe it, but its hard to take the letter to prove against the word, which doth testifie of the word from whence it came. But seeing thou canst not prove the letter to be the word, I shall prove that the letter is not the word, and the letter it selfe shall witnesse with me therein. First, That which one may have and not have the word, is not the word; but one may have the letter and not have the word, so the letter is not it. That one may have the letter and not have the word is plaine, John 5. 38, 39. The Jewes had the Scriptures, and Christ bids them search them, and they thought to have eternall life in them, yet Christ tells them they had not the word. So the letter cannot be the word which one may have and yet not have the word. Whosoever hath the word hath life, but so hath not all who have the letter. Whosoever hath the word hath God, but so have not all who have the letter. The word is without beginning or without ending, but so is not the letter. That which can be changed by men is not the word, but the letter is and hath been changed by men, 1 Pet. 1. 25. The word of the Lord came to such as had the letter, and some of them received it and some received it not, yet all had the letter and believed it: All that hear the word it quick∣ens, but many hear the letter but are still dead, in sin. And such they are who know not to distinguish between the word it selfe and the letter which is the declaration thereof, which letter the Devill and wicked men get to plead against the word, and for their sins, which is the great use the letter is wrested to at this day; let any of the servants of God re∣prove sin in the word of the Lord, and presently the Serpent gets a Scripture to plead for it, and so to give God the lye, which was his work before the letter was, to wit, to oppose the word, in open lying, but now hath got the letter to hide
him, and can now come as boldly (with, it is written) Luke 4. 10. to uphold his sin and imperfection, as ever he did with his lye to Eve, to set up his kingdome of sin and imper∣fection at the first, which then he got in by subtilty without Scripture, but now by the letter would maintaine it by force, and if any believe to attaine that estate againe, before he en∣tred, with boldnesse from the letter he will prove him an he∣retick, and find Scripture to murther him for it also, he ha∣ving but power, to doe it, and this is the use the Scriptures are of when such give meanings of them and preach them whose eye he hath blinded and have not the word, in them, from which the Scriptures came, and without which none know them nor understand them: And thus the Jewish Rabbies put Christ to death by the letter, John 19. 7. And so doth he suffer to this day in whom ever he is, by the worlds Teachers wresting the letter; therefore saith Peter, such wrest all Scriptures to their own distruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. And this is the ground of the Devills envy against the chil∣dren of light at this day, because we exhort people to the Spirit of Christ, and to his light to enlighten their mindes, that they may not read without understanding, and so wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, which things we our selves did while we was in our fallen wisdome, for while man is in darknesse the best of Gods gifts are perverted to a wrong end, but being enlightned from the word, the gift is seen and sanctified to its right end, without which it cannot, for God hath placed the blessing and right use of all his mercies in his Son, who is the light of the world, the word by which all was made and is upholden, therefore is he first to be preach∣ed, who is first and last, to enlighten people that sit in dark∣nesse, death, and delusion, which light being first received, all the gifts of God are yea and amen therein to his praise and the creatures good, for without faith all is lost, and it is not faith in the gift, that saves, but faith in the giver, for many did believe in the Scripture, and thought to have eternall life therein but could not believe in the light of the vvorld, and so denyed the giver, and the Scriptures could not save these,
but in their thoughts thereof deceived themselves, who had not the word in them, and so stuck in the letter, but would not come to the light of life, for it is he that hath the Son hath life, and not every one that hath the letter, and such a∣lone have the word of life, which such as stick in the letter knows not nor can hear, John 8. 47. Nay there was many that heard Christ speak, but did not nor could they hear the word, John 8. 43. And this was much more then the letter, yet such blind and deaf creatures being blinded by the God of this world, they thought to have eternall life in the Scripture. Saith Christ v. 47. He that is of God heareth Gods words, ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God; yet did Christ speak the words of God, and they did hear him carnally (as carnall men doe the letter) and could make him answer to his speech, but could not hear the words of God, as Christ plainly saith, and here thou maist read thy blindnesse. Also that place Acts 17. which you think makes so much for you to prove the letter the word, it doth but fall on your own heads, as all other Scriptures doe, for them of Berea was not called more noble then them of Thessalonica, because they had the Scriptures read, for the Jews of Thessalonica had the Scriptures read every Sabbath day, but this was their nobili∣ty in that they received the word gladly with all readinesse of mind, and then searched the Scriptures dayly; first they received the word to enlighten, and then searched the Scrip∣tures in the light: so this doth plainly prove that they had not the word before, though they had Scripture before, so that here you doe but prove that the letter is not the word: Also this place clearly proves that one may have the Scrip∣tures all their lives, and read them in way of worship con∣stantly (for so did both these sorts of Jewes) and yet neither know word nor Scriptures untill they received the word of light; but when the word is received, or not received, that makes the difference of believers, and unbelievers, the one owns, the other envies and persecute though both have the Scriptures; this Scripture proves this in the Jewes, and your practice proves the same in you Gentiles, who call your selves
Christians, who are found joyning with the lewd people, as they did, and stirring up their minds to persecue through your lyes, which otherwise might be silent, so your worke is seene, and makes it manifest what word you know, as all thy yes and slanders in thy booke, may testfie thee to be one of that envious broode, which is the most they serve for, for us they touch not, yet is thy reward no lesse, yet this all may note that the searching of the Scriptures without the word first received, cannot find the way to faith, as this scrip∣ture doth plainly prove, for till the eye be opened with the light of the word of life, The Scriptures are a mystery to the Carnall understanding, and all that man can doe with them in that state is to wrest them to his own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. And you who are Judging of Scriptures, and setting o∣thers so to doe, without the light of Christ, are they who lead the blind, and resist the holy Spirit, as did your fathers so doe you, resist the Spirit with your Imaginations from the letter. Be ashamed of your doctrine, hath the Spirit given out the letter to testifie of the light of the world and its sufficecy, and that there is no other way out of the world but Christ the light of the world, and that the light & the way are one. And doe you pervert this against the light to prove it not sufficient? Hath God given his Word to his seede in every generati∣on, and hath promised that it shall never depart out of the mouth of that seede for ever, Isa: 59. 21. By which Word all was made, and all his are to be guided and sanctified; and be∣cause the testimony of some few of those who had this Word is in writing, to witnesse that Christ is this Word, and that all are to waite for him. And will you take this letter, and pervert it against this Word, to set it in its stead, to keepe from this Word, and call it the Word which doth but declare of the Word? now is the deceipt of your high notion found out, who have pretended so much light and Spirit, that now the true light is come, and the gift of the Spirit is manifest for every one to profit withall, you are found the greatest oppo∣sers, and set your selves to make the people evill-affected a∣gainst the light and Spirits teachings, though no man can say
that Jesus is Lord, but by that Spirit which is given to every one to profit withall, 1 Cor: 12. 3. 7. And all your prayers and worships that are out of this light and before it, are blind and abominable. And all you prove in this your opposing the light and Word, is but your selves Children of darknesse and wholy Ignorant of the Spirits teaching, and the least Child of light shall Judge you herein, for the least that ever knew any thing from God, eyther of Judgement, teaching, or promise, or power, they know they have it in Spirit, and such know that what the Saints declare of in the letter which they received of God in Spirit, will not satisfie their longing soules, unlesse they can have it from God in Spirit also; so that your opposing the spirituall light and power, doth but give occasion to all that have the lest sight of the Spirit, and its teaching, to see you heart blind, and so joyning with the God of this world to blind the minds of others also, and the least of the Children of light, can you not deceive with this, onely you discover your Babel which you have builded with∣out the light and Spirit, in your Imaginations from the let∣ter, without the light, the ground of all the false worships, sects, opinions, and devisions. The seate of the hypocrite, and Court of Conceites, in which you blesse your selves in darknesse without God in the world, not having the Father and the Son in you, and so are out of the doctrine of Christ, 2 Epistle of John 9. 10. And so are shut out of the habitati∣on of the Children of light. O blind men, how hath your wisdome perverted you, and the Devill deceived you? Is this the doctrine of Christ, that his light is not sufficient to lead without something else joyned with it? That the Spirit is false and erroneous that bids take heed to a light within, Luke 11. 35? And that Christ did not Commend people to a light within? Is this the doctrine of Christ, That men are not led into all truth by a light within them, John 16. 13. Rom: 8. 14? That to suppose that God in men is their tea∣cher is an error, John 6. 45. John 14. 26. John 17, 23? That to declare the light within is another report and another Spi∣rit? That its an error to say that Christ is in the Saints in their sufferings suffering with them, Acts 9 5. 2 Cor: 1. 5.
Colo: 1. 24? That its an error to say that is the true light, even the light of the world that lighteth every man that comes into the world, and that it alone is sufficient, Joh: 1. 9. John 8. 12. And that the light of the world is the onely way, which leads to all other things, but no other thing can lead to it, but it selfe? John 14. 6. John 8. 12. And much more such like doctrine, the man of sin is not afraid to preach o∣penly, thereby to deny the light of Christ to be sufficient, least that light should reveale him all against the doctrine of Christ. And that he may not be suspected to be the Anti∣christ, and man of sin, who is thus opposing Christ, and plead∣ing for sin; you would perswade us that the Antichrist will but be one single person when he comes; That so while peo∣ple are looking for him in a single person, he may thus op∣pose the light and spirituall appearance of Christ in his Thou∣sands and ten thousands, who are gathered as the sand of the Sea for multitude, to oppose the light and plead for sinne. And to confound your selves, you say againe that even now are there many Antichrists, but cannot see your selves to be they, who are armeing your selves thus against his light and appearance, and as one of his last shifts, to set the letter in his stead, which doth but declare of his appearance who is the light of the world, made manifest to enlighten them that sit in darknesse, and destroy the workes of the Devill, in all that beleeve and follow him. And where this light is received and followed, you are therewith Comprehended, your worke and the end of it, and in all that you doe in thus opposing the light of the world, you are but breaking your selves against the Corner Stone, foolish women who are pulling downe your own house with your owne hands, for the more you resist the light the more it shines, and the more you Raile against the light and Spirit, the more you are manifest to be out of the doctrine of Christ, who is that light and Spirit, and you doe but give an oppor∣tunity to all that see your worke, to see the Innocency of that light you oppose, and to see you set against that which is the onely thing testified of in the Scriptures, and so shall that in every tender Conscience witnesse against you, and for that
Spirit you resist. So behold your doctrine, and compare it with the Apostles, and with Christs, and the Prophets, and let that of God in your conscience gve righteous Judgement upon you, if this of yours be the doctrine of Christ, had John said concerning Christ, This is the true light that lihteth eve∣ry man that cometh into the world; but it is not sufficient with∣out something else, had he been a forerunner of Christ? or of something else? Had Christ said I am the light of the world, beleeve in the light and follow it, but it is not sufficient with∣out something else with it, for it is but a naturall light; had not he then taught them a naturall foundation in stead of a spirituall, who said beleeve in the light, that you may be the Chidren of light; had the Apostles gone forth to preach Christ the light for every one to beleeve in, & said, this is our message wee have received of God and declare unto you, that God is light, and whatsoever makes manifest is light, and all things that are made manifest are reproved by the light, but this light is not sufficient, had they then preached Christ all in all, a sole ground and authour of faith; nay had they not been mad-men that would have beleeved them, if  had thus preached as you doe, a light and Spirit but not . Had the Prophets preached a Covenant of light  to beleeve, and when they had done told them that it was not sufficient without the letter, had not they destroyed their faith in their generation before the letter was written; nay goe through all the Scriptures and find any of the Chil∣dren of light in your doctrine if you can till then for shame cease calling us deceived and deceiving Quakers; many of us have been too long deceived with such blind guides, enemies to the light, who have alwayes resisted the Spirit but the light hath appeared and is received, by which we see the deceivers, and no more by them can wee be deceived: neither can Anti∣christ cover himselfe in the letter, whose worke is to devoure the light and Spirit that gave it forth, it will not serve your turne whose end is contrary, that which was given forth to testifie of the light of the world will never say it's not suffici∣ent; and that which saith he is the authour and finisher, you cannot make it say there must be something before him, and
that which saith hee is all in all will not limit him; and that which saith the Spirit giveth life the same saith the letter kills; so behold your work and be ashamed, such dead deceitfull blind doctrine, is sutable to such dead workes you bring forth and darke wayes you walke in; the Children of light sees you, whose faces are tur∣ned from you and are set out of the world, in which your Reli∣gion stands conformable to it: and in vaine doth Pharaoh pursue, or Aaleck smite the hindmost it is but that you may be drown'd in your envy, and with the floods of your own confusion, that thereby your names may be blotted out and become a curse be∣fore the Lord and his people, for all your envy and hard speeches you have spoken against the truth, slanders and false accusations you cast upon the servants thereof; though wee have not desired this evill da to come upon you by persisting in your wickednes, the Lord he knoweth, and for the abominable lyes thou hast cast upon us in thy booke, wee are content to beare them, being no o∣ther thing then our portion in this world, yet that thou hast spo∣ken them falsely, every day shall make them more manifest. And this I shall say unto them all, before all the world, if the Lord our righteousnesse, whose righteousnesse we serve in soule and spirit, doe not cleare us thereof by a godly conversation, then paper and inck will not; so to the Lord and into the hands of his power we referre our selves therein. And this I say as of the Scriptures, God is at liberty to speake to his people by them if he please, and where they are given by inspiration he doth so, and so is he at liberty to speake by any o∣ther created thing, as to Balaam by his Asse, or by his owne Im∣mediate voyce; but of him I have learned to know his word, from that he speakes by, and not to limit him, though you have not. And this I say further, that men may read the Scriptures in the booke without, all their time, and till the eye and eare be opened within, with the light of Christ, they cannot heare the words of God in the Scriptures, no nor from Christ himselfe were he in the flesh his owne words shall be my witnesse herein, John 8. 47. and your practises prove it dayly. ANd now a word to thy brother, in the latter part of thy book, whose work is to clear the Whore of Babylon from being the Antichrist, and that the man of sin, and the Antichrist will but be a single person; such a work as none of the men of God ever
undertook, but the children must plead for their Mother; And yet in thy pleading for her, least thou should injure the kingdom of the man of sin, the Antichrist, thou first puts it out of question, that none needs to fear him come already, they may sleep quietly for that, and when he doth come he will be but a single man, so none thats now alive needs fear in the least that they are he, for sayest thou he will be but one man: thus hast thou cleared the world of the man of sin, and the Antichrist for the present, but can∣not see thy selfe to be he who art pleading for his kingdome till dooms day (as people call it) in thy 76 page: And who art lying against the holy Ghost, saying that Antichrist will be but one man, and that he is not yet come, contradicting the Spirit of Christ, who saith, even now there are many Antichrists, 1 John 2. 18. So thou art the Antichrist who art the lyar, 1 John 2. 22. And saith the Spirit, he is Antichrist who denyes the Father and the Son; so thy companion is one who saith, To suppose God in men to teach them is an error, p. 17. thus he denyes the Father to be his onely Teacher; And thou art another, who calls it an error to preach up the Spirit of Christ within for a Teacher, p. 68. and calls it an evill Spirit, and herein thou denies the Son; and many such An∣tichrists there are in the world who both deny the Father and the Son, for he that denyes the one denyes both, and he is an Anti∣christ that so doth; and no new thing it is to the children of light to see such who have received the spirit of the world in their hearts, to deny the Father and Son there to teach and lead, and these was the Antichrists John saw who was gone out into the world, and so the Spirit of God and of the world could not both be confessed in one heart, 1 John 4. but where the Spirit that was of God is, there Christ is confessed in heart, and God also, but who hath corrupted his ways, saith in his heart, There is no God, Ps. 14. 1. So try thy wayes, and try thy words, who denies Christ within, and calls it teaching up the Spirit of Christ apart from his body, to preach Christ within, and sayes its an evill Spirit, to say Christ is in them, and thus the Reprobate who knows not Christ in thee art become a Teacher, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Hast thou not here shewed thy selfe the Antichrist indeed, who thus opposes Christ in his Saints; Doth not he say, Without me you can doe nothing, abide in me and I in you, he that abideth in me and I in him the same bring∣, forth much fruit, for without me you can do nothing, Joh. 15, 4, 5.
Doth not Christ say to the Father (touching the Saints) I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, John 17. 23. Did Christ here preach up his Spirit apart from his body? Or was this an evil Spirit, and a Spirit of error as thou says it is in us? And did not all his Ministers preach the same? Doth not Paul say, when it pleased the father to reveal his Son in me that I might preach him, Gal. 1. 16. And Christ in you the hope of glory whom we preach, Col. 1. 27. And know ye not that Christ is in you except you be Re∣probates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. My little children of whom I travell in birth againe till Christ be formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. And he that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life, 1 Joh. 5. 12. And he that abideth in the Doctrine of Christ hath both the Father and the Son, If any come and bring not that Doctrine receive them not, nor bid them God speed, 2 John 10, 11. And was this an e∣vill Spirit in all these, and many more too much to set down here? Or did they preach Christ apart from his body, as thou chargest us for the same testimony we bear now? Or were this good in them, and is it an error in us to witnesse the same? O how is the hidden things of Esau found out; are they not blind indeed who cannot see Antichrist now revealing, and who he is that denies the Father and the Son, thy work and thy brothers in this book, and many such Antichrists there are in the world, that deny Christ come in the flesh, and now the light reveals you, what Spirits you are of; Is all your talking of Christ come to this, that if any confesse him, it is called an evil Spirit, and an error, and out of your Synagogues must be cast: Was there ever such a blind generation, who have denyed the light, the Spirit, the Father, and the Son, and now deny the letter also, that any should own what is in it declared, further then to talk on? Is it not time for all you that loves your souls to come out from amongst these blind men, who thus resist the Spirit, and thus blaspheme God in his Temple, even in the bodies of his Saints, calling him an evill Spirit, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. This blind do∣ctrine may serve to keep your selves in your imaginations, but a∣mongst the children of light it can doe no hurt, with the light are you comprehended, and all your dark airy Spirits, the Shepheard is in his flock, its too late to tell us its a delusion, neither can you hide Antichrist nor the man of sin any longer, you are seen many Anti∣christs who denies Christ, but who hath received the Christ the a∣noynted, and have the ction in them knows all things, and nei∣ther
you nor your mother can be hid, no he that hath begot you, thus to pead aginst Christ in his Thon, bush and be ashamed you bood of Ba∣bell, ad see you confusion and stop your , dost not thou in thy 69 pge after thou have clled it an evill spirit ad an error to winesse Christ within, and said it was to peach him apart from his body, ye. the sayest thou Christ doth dwell in their hearts by faith, but note (sayest thou) that faith is the substance of the thing hoped for, ad so being by faith thou wouldst make people believe its not eally so, but some imagination or thought of a thing to come, and yet sayes, faith is the substance of the thing hoped for. Also p 78. where thou art pleading for the Whore of Babylon not to be the Antichrist, thy argument i, that the Whore of Babylon confesseth Christ come in the flesh, so thou hast proved the Whore of Babylon to be of God, for saith John expresly, Every spirit that confesseth Christ is come in the flesh is of God, 1 John 4 2. so thou hast wl proved for thy mother, if any b so blind as to believe thee, but where Christ is appeared her confession is seen to be like her children, who say he came 16 hundred years since, but if any confesse him come now in them, she and her brood would muher them, but but if all be of God who thus confesse him, then who is not, for I never yet met with any that did not: Thi confession little hurts the man of sin or his kingdome in your hearts, one that confesseth the life of Christ made mani∣fest in mortall flesh, doth more trouble the Devil's kingdome, then all the Whores confession and his children ever since the mystery of inquiy came in; and therefore it is that this confession is death to her and her children, and the man of sin hath all hs up against it where it is, and this is the cause why all this venome is cast upon us in your book, but the knowledge of Christ in our hearts bears all without trouble, yet such a body of confusion death and darknesse is amongst you since the light of Christ appeared, and you re∣sisted it as the like hath not been seen since the world was, especialy among you who once had some tendernesse in you, what a wok is this of yours af∣ter all your venome, to undertake to clear Babylon of the man of sin, and of the Antichrist, nay to clear all the world of him, and sayes he is not risen, and sayes in your 37 page you think the sixt head of the Roman Monarchy did hinder the coming of the man of sin in Pauls time, and something else hath hindered him since, for he is not risen yet by your doctrine, but being blinded by him cannot see that its he in you that is now uttering all this con∣fusion to hide himself in your hearts, & in others also, by denying Christ with∣in, and setting you to look for the man of sin yet to come, which must be one man when he comes, but were you not blind indeed you might look in and see from whom it is that all this lying, slandering, and confusion, and wickednesse, comes that is sent out into the world, this comes not from God but from the Devil and man of sin, which did you see, shame would stop your mouth from being so busie in that you know not on. FINIS.
