P3383A 99895918 153494
TAKE heed in time: OR, A briefe Relation of many Harmes which have of late been done by fire in MARLBOROUGH and in other places. This copy was drawne up and Printed, on purpose for the World to take notice of, and to be carefull to prevent the danger of Fire. Written by L. P. London Printed for F. Grove, and are to be sold at his shop on Snow-hill, 165
A briefe Description of the Towne of MARLBOROUGH, And of the Harmes that were there done upon Thursday the 28th of Aprill, this present year, 1653. THe famous and flourish∣ing Town of Marlbo∣rough in Wiltshire had of late two faire Pa∣rish Churches, one cal∣led by the name of St. Peters, and the other Church called by the name
of St. Maries: There was like∣wise many faire Streets and stately Buildings, especially one gallant Street, called the High street, in which they kept their Markets, which Markets consisted of all kind of necessarie provisions which was brought in far and near by the Coun∣try people. And indeed it was a gallant place both for Corn, Butter, Cheese, and other such like provisi∣ons as any was in all the Country: The street wherein the market was kept, is supposed to be in length and breadth fall as large as Cheape-side, and on both sides had many goodly shops well filled with rich and cost¦ly Commodities, Silks and Tafe¦ty, Cloath, and Lace, Linnen and Woolen, Gold and Silver, no bra∣ver Wares can be had or bought in London, then was to be had in the famous Towne of Marlborough. At the upper end of the market-place
was a gallant Building called the Town-hall, wherein the Magi∣strates sat and held the Sessions of the Peace at appointed times: There were many faire Inns. Taverns, and Victualing houses to entertain Carriers, and Travellers, and such which had occasion to make use of them, for it stood upon the Roade betwixt London and Bristoll: and to be briefe it was a Towne of very good Orders and Government. And thus having told you the sci∣tuation and substance of the Town, I shall, with Gods leave, though with a grieved heart, declare unto you the manner of the ruine and de∣strustion of the same.
Here followeth a brief and true Relation, as near as it can be gathered, of the harmes that were done by fire in the Town of Marl∣borough in Wiltshire, April 28. 1653. ON Thursday the 28 of April in the house of one Mr. Freeman a Tanner, as some of his Servants were imployed with drying of Bark, the Barke took fire so suddenly, that it quickly did much harme, the house standing on the South side of the street, towards the West end of the Towne neare unto St. Peters Church, the fire prevatled so much that it tooke hold of the dwelling house, and so running a crosse the street from one side to the other, it came to be of such force, and vehe∣mency that the like was never seene
in England before, by the report of some of them that were eye witnes∣ses of that sad obiect. It burned on both sides of the street, all the Inns, Tavernes, Gentlemens houses, Shop keepers houses, Grosers, Mercers, Habber∣dashers, all manner of Tradesmen that were in habitants in that street, lost both Houses and Goods by means of that consuming fire. Yet that was not all, it burned downe the market house, and run into St. Maries Parish, and burned the Church and many dwelling houses in that Parish, so that in St. Pe∣ters Parish, and St. Maries Pa∣rish, it is verified, that at least three hundred Families were dispossed of their habitations, all which was done in the space of three or foure houres, For when the fire had fastened on one of the houses where were Piles
of Wood and Fagots in their back∣sides, it flamed and burned so strong∣ly that all that ever could be done could not quench the fire untill it had devoured, and burnt to ashes, all these places which I have here na∣med. Yet that is not all, for it was not the houses that were burned alone, but also the Goods that were in them, there was Brasse and Pew∣ter, Gold, and Silver melted, the value whereof cannot bee made knowne, there was Silkes and Taffety Woollen and Linner cloth and many other rich commodities consumed to ashes. There was foure or five tun of Cheese which was laid in slore in the Market house consumed to no thing. And to be breif, every man that dwelt in the Town is sensible of the misery that happened, but no man
can tell the value of what was lost. And thus was the stately flou∣rishing Town of Marlborough con∣sumed with fire on a sudden. It would make a heart drop tears of blood that had but heard the dolefull cryes and heavy moanes that past between men and their Wives, Parents and Children. The Wife crying out to the Hus∣band, O dear Husband what will become of us and our Children; The Husband auswering the Wife we are all undone, I know not what to doe, The Children crying for bread, the Parents had none to give them, nor so much as a house to put their heads in, nor a bed to lay their wea∣ried limbs upon. And thus were the poore made poorer, and some of the richest be∣came as poor as the poorest.
And now are they all in a sad con∣dition, the Lord in his mercy send them comfort. Little did they that had plenty in the morning thinke that they should be made destitute & desolate before night. Wherefore I desire that all good Christians would both looke upon their af∣flictions and lay it to heart, and with all possible and speedy meanes that may be done, helpe to releive their wants. Gods Word and a good consci∣ence sayes, that hee that hath two Coats ought to give one to him that hath none. If it be so, I trust that the good people, and well dispo∣sed Christians, that have plenty, wil with the eyes of compassion; and bountifull hearts reflect upon our distressed friends of Marlborough. It is an old saying that one can∣not help a great many, but a great many may help one: So I would
have it to be, that all the Cities and Shires in England, may forthwith lend their assistance to relieve the di∣stressed people of Marlborough, and to doe by them as they themselves would be done by if the case were their own. One thing concerning Marlbo∣rough we have great cause to give the Lord praise for, and that is this, al∣though there were so many houses burnt, and so much goods and trea∣sure consumed with scorching fire, yet there were not many people de∣stroyed, onely those which shall here after be spoken of. There were foure Dutch men which laboured and took pains and did their best endeavours to quench the fire, of which two of them were killed outright, and the other two are since dead of their wounds. Of o∣thers there were none but a Post boy that lost his life, and a Taylors
wife burned to death in her owne house, and as for Francis Freeman the Tanner, at whose house at first the fire began, it is said that he pro∣fest himselfe to be Christ. I pray God that hee may take heed in time. Thus having told you the man∣ner of the consuming destruction of a late famous ancient Towne: I purpose also in a brief discourse of a∣nother strange mis hap done by fire in St katherines Lane near unto the Tower of London, hoping that others will take better heed in time to come. On Friday being 9 April a wo∣man that was the mother of a child being vext with some of her neigh∣bours set her child by the fire in a carelesse manner, and went forth of the Room in anger, but before shee returned againe the child was mor∣tally wounded with the fire, for it
burned off one of the Armes, and one of the Legs, and so mortified the body of it, that the child lived in burning misery about the space of two houres, and so gave up the Ghost. This came to passe through carelesnesse, and because the mother did not take heed in time. And this was Printed for others to take example by. Many more such examples might here be spoken of, if occasion should serve and this I am verily perswa∣ded, that if people would be more carefull, there would not be halfe so much harme done by fire as is, there∣fore I desire all people whether they be Masters, or Servants; Pa∣rents or Children, to have speciall care how you afterwards repent when it is too late. Fire and Ma∣ter are said to be good servants but ill masters, and so certainly they be, for where fire can get the master∣ship
all goes to ruine, fire is such a devouring monster that it takes pitty of no person as you have been told in the former discourse.
Here followeth a brief Re∣lation of a sad and lamentable accident which happened by fire this present year, 1653. AT a gallant market Towne called Layton in Shropshire, there dwelt and lived many wealthy Gentlemen and rich trades∣men, to which place often times ma∣ny of the Country people which were men of rank and quality would come for recreation to eate drink and bee merry with their friends. But see what happened upon a time, when the people, towns men and o∣thers were in the midst of all their ioylity, suddenly a fearfull fire arose which began at a nominated place of the Town, and consumed in little time above a hundred and fifty
houses burned to ashes, and melted Gold, Silver Plate and other goods to the worth of two and forty thou∣sand pound, thus was merriment changed into sorrow, and their ioy into mourning, good reason there∣fore have all men to take warning by their harmes, and seeke to prevent danger before it comes upon us, FINIS.
