P4302 E196_27 E196_28 99859746 157457
TWO SPEECHES MADE BY IOHN PYMM Esquire; the one after the Articles of the Charge against the Earle of STRAFFORD were read. THE OTHER, AFTER THE ARTICLES of the Charge against Sir GEORGE RATCLIFFE were read. LONDON, Printed for IOHN BARTLET, and are to be sold at the gilt Cup, neere St. Austine gate. 1641.
Mr. PYMS SPEECH MADE THE 25th. of Novemb. 1640; After the Articles of the Charge against the Earle of STRAFFORD were read. My LORDS, THese Articles have exprest the Character of a great and dan∣gerous Treason; such a one as is advanced to the highest de∣gree of malice and of mischiefe: it is enlarged beyond the limits of any de∣scription
or definition: it is so hainous in it selfe, as that it is capable of no aggravation: a Treason against God betraying his Truth and worship; against the King, obscuring the glory, and weakning the foundation of his Throne; against the Common-wealth, by de∣shroying the Principles of safetie and prospe∣ritie. Other Treasons are against the Rule of the Law; this is against the being of the Law: It is the Law that unites the King and his Peo∣ple; and the Author of this Treason hath endeavored to dissolve that Union; even to breake the mutuall, reversall, indissoluble band of protection and Allegiance, whereby they are, and I hope ever will bee bound to∣gether. If this Treason had taken effect, our soules had beene inthralled to the spirituall Tyran∣ny of Satan; our Consciences to the Ecclesi∣asticall Tyranny of the Pope; our Lives, our Persons and Estates, to the Civill Tyranny of an arbitrary, unlimited, confused Govern∣ment. Treason in the least degree, is an odious and a horrid Crime: other Treasons are particu∣lar; if a Fort be betrayed, or an Army, or any other treasonable fact committed, the King∣dome may out-live any of these: this Trea∣son would have dissolved the frame and being of the common wealth; it is an Universall, a Catholike Treason; the venome and ma∣lignity
of all other Treasons, are abstracted, digested, sublimated into this. The Law of this Kingdome makes the King to bee the fountaine of Iustice, of peace, of protection; therfore we say, the Kings Courts, the Kings Judges, the Kings Lawes: the Roy∣all Power and Majestie shines upon us in every publique blessing and benefit we enjoy: but the Author of this Treason would make him the fountaine of Injustice, of confusion, of publique misery and Calamitie. The Gentiles by the light of Nature had some obscure apprehensions of the Deity, of which they made this expression that hee was Deus optimus maximus, an infinite goodnesse, and an infinite greatnesse. All soveraigne Princes have som Characters of Divinity im∣printed on them; they are set up in their do∣minions to bee Optimi, Maximi, that they should exercise a goodnesse proportionable to their greatnesse. That Law terme, Laesa Majestas, whereby they expresse that which we call Treason, was never more thorowly fulfilled then now: there cannot bee a greater laesion or diminution of Majesty then to bereave a King of the glory of his goodnes. It is goodnes (my Lords) that can produce not only to his people, but likewise to himself honour and happines. There are Prin∣cipalities, Thrones and Dominions amongst the Divels; greatnesse enough; but being
uncapable of goodnesse, they are made un∣capable both of honour and happinesse. The Lawes of this Kingdome have invested the Royall Crowne with Power sufficient for the manifestation of his goodnesse and of his greatnesse: if more bee required, it is like to have no other effects but povertie, weaknesse, and miserie, whereof of late we have had very wofull experience. It is farre from the Com∣mons to desire any abridgement of those great Prerogatives which belong to the King; they know that their owne Libertie and Peace are preserved and secured by his Prerogative, and they will alwaies be ready to support and sup∣ply his Majestie with their lives and fortunes for the maintenance of his just and lawfull power. This (My Lords) is in all our thoughts, in our prayers, and I hope will so be manifested in our endeavours; that if the proceedings of this Parliament be not interrupted as others have bin the King may within a few moneths be put into a cleere way, of as much greatnes, plentie and glory as any of his Royall Aun∣cestors have enjoyed. A King and his people make one Body: the inferiour parts conferre nourishment and strength, the superiour sence and motion: If there bee an interruption of this necessary intercourse of blood and spirits, the whole Bodie must needs bee subject to decay and dis∣temper:
Therefore obstructions are first to be removed before Restoratives can be appli∣ed: This (My Lords) is the end of this Accu∣sation, whereby the Commons seeke to re∣move this person whom they conceive to have bin a great Cause of the obstructions betwixt his Majestie and his People: for the effecting whereof they have commanded mee to desire your Lordship that their proceedings against him may bee put into as speedie a way of dis∣patch, as the Courses of Parliaments will allow. First, that he may be called to answere, and they may have Libertie to replie, that there may bee a quick and secret examination of witnesses: and they may from time to time be acquainted with the depositions: that so when the cause shall bee ripe for Judgement: they may collect the severall Examinations and represent to your Lordships in one entire Bo∣die the state of the proofes, as now by mee they have presented to you the state of the charge.
