P709 45097886 171465
An Abstract OF A LETTER From a Person of Eminency and worth in Caledonia to a Friend at Boston in New-England. SIR, I Have Received your kind Letter of the 26 December last, and Communicated it to the Gentlemen of the Council here; to whom your kind Sentiments, and Readiness were very ac∣ceptable. Certainly the Work here begun is the most Ripened, Digested, and the best Founded, as to Priviledges, Place, Time, and other like Advantages, that ever was yet begun in any part of the Trading World. We Arrived upon this Coast the first, and took possession the third of November: Our Scituation is about Two Leagues to the Southward of Golden-Island, (by the Spaniards called Guarda) in one of the best & most defenceable Harbours perhaps in the World. The Country is Healthful to a wonder; insomuch that our own Sick, which were many when we Arrived, are now generally cured. The Country is exceeding Fertile, and the Weather Temperate: The Country where we are Settled, is
dry, and rising ground, Hills but not High; and on the sides, and quite to the tops, three, four or five foot good fat mould, not a Rock or Stone to be seen. We have but Eight or Nine Leagues to a River, where Boats may go into the South Sea. The Natives for Fifty Leagues on either side are in intire friendship and Correspondence with us; and if we will be at the pains, we can gain those at the greatest distance. For our Neighbour Indians are willing to be the joyful Messengers of our Settlement, and good disposition to their Country-men. As to the Innate Riches of the Countrey, upon the first information, I always believed to be very great: but now find it goes beyond all that ever I thought, or conceited in that matter. The Spaniards, as we can understand, are very much surprized, and alarm'd, and the more that it comes as a Thunder-clap upon them; ha∣ving had no notice of us, until three days after our Arrival. We have Written to the Praesident of Panama, giving him Account of our good and peaceable intentions, and to procure a good Understanding and Correspondence; And if that is not condescended to; we are ready for what else he pleases. If Merchants should once Erect Factories here, this place will soon become the best and surest Mart in all America, both for In-land and Over-land Trade. We want here Sloops and Coasting Vessels; for want of which, and by reason we have been all hands at work in fortifying and fitting our selves (which is now pretty well over) we have had but little Trade as yet: most of our Goods Unsold. We are here a Thousand one hundred Men, and expect Supplies every day. We have been exceeding unhappy in loosing two Ministers who came with us from Scot∣land; and if New England could supply us in that, it would be a great and lasting Obligation. Fort St. Andrew. February, 18th. 1698, 9.
CALEDONIA. THE Declaration OF THE COUNCIL Constituted by the Indian and African Com∣pany of Scotland; for the Government, and direction of their Colonies, and Settlements in the Indies. THE said Company pursuant to the Powers and Immu∣munities Granted unto them, by His Majesty of Great Britain, our Soveraign Lord, with Advice and Consent of His Parliament of Scotland: having Granted and Conceded unto us and our Successors in the Govern∣ment for all times hereafter, full Power to equip, set out, freight, and navigate, our own or hired Ships, in War-like, or other manner, from any ports or places in Amity, or not in Hostility with His Majesty; to any Lands, Islands, Countries, or places in Asia, Africa
or America: and there to Plant Colonies, build Cities, Towns or Forts in or upon the places not Inhabited, or in or upon any other place by consent of the Natives or Inhabitants thereof, and not possest by any European Sovereign, Potentate, Prince, or State; and to provide and furnish the aforesaid Places, Cities, Towns, or Forts, with Magazines, Ordnance, Arms, Weapons, Ammunition and Stores of War; and by force of Arms to defend the same Trade, Navigation, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, Plantations, and other Effects whatso∣ever; and likewise to make Reprizals, and to seek and take repara∣tion of Damage done by Sea or by Land: and to make and con∣clude Treaties of Peace, and Commerce with the Sovereign Princes, Estates, Rulers, Governours, or Proprietors of the aforesaid Lands, Islands, Countries, or places in Asia, Africa or America. And reserving to themselves Five Per Cent. or one Twentieth part; of the Lands, Mines, Minerals, Pearls, Stones of Value, precious Woods, and Fishings: have further Conceded and Granted unto us, the free and absolute right and property in and to all such Lands, Islands, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Forts and Plantations, as we shall come to, establish, or possess in manner aforesaid; as also to all manner of Treasures, Wealth, Riches, Profits, Mines, Minerals and Fishings, with the whole product and benefit thereof, as well Under as above the Ground, as well in Rivers and Seas, as in the Lands thereunto be∣longing; or for or by reason of the same in any sort; together with the right of Government and Admiralty thereof; as likewise that all manner of Persons who shall settle to Inhabite, or be born in any such Plan∣tations, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Factories, or places shall be, and be reputed as Natives of the Kingdom of Scotland; and generally the said Company have Communicated unto us a Right to all the Powers, Properties and Priviledges Granted unto them by Act of Parliament; or otherwise howsoever, with power to Grant and delegate the same; and to permit and allow such sort of Trade, Commerce, and Naviga∣tion unto the Plantations, Colonies, Cities, Towns, and places of our possession, as we shall judge fit and convenient. And the Chief Captains and Supream Leaders of the People of Darien, in compliance with former Agreements, having now in most kind and obliging manner, received us into their Friendship
and Country, with Promise and Contract to assist and join in de∣fence thereof against such as shall be their or our Enemies in any time to come. Which, besides its being one of the most Healthful Rich, and Fruitful Countries upon Earth, hath the advantage of be∣ing a Narrow ISTHMUS, Seated in the Heighth of the World, between the two vast Oceans, which renders it more convenient than any other for being the common Store-house of the Insearch∣able and Immense Treasures of the Spacious South Seas, the door of Commerce to China and Japan, and the Emporium and Staple for the Trade of both Indies. And now by Virtue of the before-mentioned Powers to us given, We do here Settle, and in the Name of GOD Establish Our Selves, and in Honour, and for the Memory of that most Ancient and Renowned Name of our Mother Kingdom, We do, and will from hence-forward call this Country by the Name of Caledonia: and our selves, Successors, and Associates, by the name of Caledonians. And suitable to the Weight and Greatness of the Trust reposed, and the valuable Opportunity now in our hands; being firmly resolved to communicate and dispose thereof in the most just and equal manner for Increasing the Dominions and Subjects of the King Our Soveraign Lord, the Honour and Wealth of our Country, as well as the benefit and advan∣tage of those who now are, or may hereafter be concerned with us: We do hereby Publish and Declare, That all manner of Persons of what Nation or People soever, shall from hence-forward be equally free and alike capable of the said Properties, Priviledges, Protections, Im∣munities, and Rights of Government Granted unto us; and the Mer∣chants, & Merchants Ships of all Nations; may freely come to, and Trade with us; without being liable in their Persons, Gords or Effects, to any manner of Capture, Confiscation, Seizure, Forfeiture, At∣tachment, Arrest, Restraint or Prohibition, for or by reason of any Embargo, breach of the Peace, Letters of Mark, or Reprizals, De∣claration of War with any Forreign Prince, Potentate or State; or upon any other account or pretence whatsoever. And we do hereby not only Grant, and Concede, and Declare a general and equal freedom of Government and Trade to
those of all Nations, who shall hereafter be of, or concerned with us; but also a full and free Liberty of Conscience in matter of Religion, so as the same be not understood, to allow, connive at, or indulge the Blaspheming of Gods Holy Name, or any of His Divine Attributes; or of the Unhallowing or Prophaning the Sab∣bath Day. And finally, as the best and surest means to render any Go∣vernment successful, durable and happy; it shall (by the help of Almighty God) be ever our constant and chiefest care; that all our further Constitutions, Laws and Ordinances, be consonant and agreeable to the Holy Scripture, Right Reason, and the Examples of the wisest and justest Nations; that from the Truth and Righte∣ousness thereof we may reasonably hope for, and expect the Bles∣sings of Prosperity and Increase. By Order of the Council, Hugh Ross Secretary. NEW EDINBURGH, December 28. 1698. Boston, Printed May, 15th. 1699.
