R2074 E1239_1 99869246 121621
JUDICIALL ASTROLOGIE, Judicially Condemned. UPON A SURVEY and EXAMINATION Of Sr: CHRISTOPHER HEYDONS Apology for it, In Answer to Mr. CHAMBERS. And of Will. Ramsey's Morologie in his pretended Reply (called Lux veritatis) to Doctour NATHANAEL HOMES his Demonologie. Together with the Testimonies of Mr. W. Perkins Resolution to the Countrey-man; Mr. John Miltons Figure-Caster; and Dr. Homes his demonologie, all here exhibited against it, Seconded and backed by 1. Evident Scripture. 2. Apparent Reason. 3. Authority of Councils. 4. Justice of Laws. 5. Arguments of Fathers, School-men, and Modern Learned men. 6. Concessions of Ptolomy, &c. friends of Astrology. 7. And the wicked practises of Astrologers themselves. ISA. 47.13. Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monethly-Prognosticatours stand up and save thee from those things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves. LONDON, Printed by Roger Daniel for Joseph Blaik-locke, in Ivie-lane. 1652.
To the Christian Reader. SInce the Sunne of Righteousnesse arose from the Sea of Bestiall persecution, and the Kingdome of patience (Revel. 1.9.) became a Kingdome of power, wherein the Lamb begins to reign, who is over all God blessed for evermore, we may easily perceive the clouds of blasphemous opinions, and diabolicall practises arise daily, from the Bottomless pit; labouring to eclipse his glory; especially from the judgement, and practise of those subtill Engineirs of Satan the ASTROLO∣GERS, whose religion is the same with Jacob Beh∣mens, the German-Conjurer, as appears by Master Lil∣ly's recommending his Works so highly for Gospel light, in one of his Almanacks. They talk much of Christ: But what is THEIR Christ, but the appearance of God in every Creature; a Dog, or a Cat, by consequence; as Bothomly, in his dark and light side of God (lately burn∣ed by publick command) most blasphemously avouched. They talk much of self-denial. But what is that think you? Not the denial of inordinate affections, but of the eternitie of humane bodyes as Master L. preacher of O. T. in F. (who is rejected for a notorions H. yet rants in Blasphemy) affirmes saying (as they all hold) whatsoever had a beginning, shall have an end. laying the body of our Blessed Saviour, and of all the Saints, equall with the beasts that perish. They blaspheme the holy-Ghost, saying that the spirituall knowledge of Christ in the flesh, by which he is justified (1 Tim. 3.16.) is carnall; per∣verting that saying of the Apostle, that he knew not Christ after the flesh, as if he had denyed him in the flesh. When as there is a large difference, between knowing of Christ
IN the flesh, and AFTER the flesh, or ACCORDING to the flesh, that is, Judaicall administrations, or humane wisdome, which is not according to the Word. This is that Antichrist 1 John 4.1, 2, 3, that Spirituall wickednesse, which (because Rome works according to humane Traditi∣on) hath left the foundation, and gotten another Christ. This is that sinne of Turker, who are now under a vial, yet ac∣knowledge Christ to be , that is, the breath of God; denying his humane body to have suffered, but a Jew in his stead; and say, Mahomet is above him. This opinion produceth diabolicall practises, as Sodomy, Witchcraft, and JUDICIAL ASTROLOGIE (which may be done by the Hebrew Characters as well as by the Starrs, onley 'tis not so cleanly a conveiance, as some have confessed). Hence are the entire-professours thereof given up to vild affections; and their very reason is diffe∣rent from that of naturall morall men. The diabolicall communion they have in the Spirit of Antichrist, with each other, makes them so confederate that a saucie boy, as if the devil had annointed him with brimstone, for his un∣natural itch, not to be conversed with by Christians, writes so learnedly against the gravest Doctours, and Pillars of the Church, of Jesus Christ. And hence is it, that Master Lilly boasts in his Almanack, that a boy of seventeen years of age, shall shortly transcend the ablest Divines in Christ∣endome, in preaching by THEIR Spirit. Hence it is that Jacob Behmen commends the Lilly of the wonders, and he HIM; like Nemo and Vulcanus viz. hic laudat versus illius, ille suos (Martiall.) though they never saw each other. Hence they  shuffle in their abomi∣nations  (2 Pet. 2.1.) like jugglers, into the minds of people; who being taken with admiration at the success of their ambiguous Prognostications (like that of the Ora∣cle of Apollo, Aio te Eacidem Romanos vincere posse) run after them to their own destruction. You that fear the Lord, and are built upon our Scri∣pture-Christ,
let me intreat you, 1. To take heed of fel∣lowship with them especially in spirituall things. What fellowship hath Christ with Belial, light with darknesse? 2. Go not to them for Counsell; for so you desert God as Saul, when he went to Endor. For which cause the Lord doth signify in his word his special displeasure against him. 3. Remember that of Deut. 13.1, 2, 3. God permits their Predictions to come to passe, on purpose to try you. 4. Take heed of stumbling at the way of Christs power in our Ar∣my, for these mens being friends to this present govern∣ment. For it is prophesied by the Scriptures, that they shall arise from among us (Act. 20.30.) that shall speak , Herefie must be for the manifestation of the ap∣proved. 2 Cor. 11.19. I commend you all, dear brethren in the Lord, to the protection of the Almighty, and to the MAN Christ Jesus, whom the Lord hath appointed to judge the world in righteousnesse (Act. 17.31.); praying with all prayer, and Supplication in his spirit, that you may follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: and that since judgement doth begin to turn to righteousnesse, the upright in heart may follow it: and that the Lord would tread down Sa∣tan, Witchcraft, &c. under our feet; and according to his promise (Zech. 13.2.) cause all the FALSE-PROPHETS and ƲNCLEAN-SPIRITS to passe out of the land; which is the prayer of Fournace Novemb. 15. 1651. Yours in Christ Jesus WILLIAM ROVVLAND.
JUDICIALL ASTROLOGIE Judicially Condemned. A word by way of Preface. AS the Husband-man first chops off, and kicks aside the brush and rubbish that he may with his Axe come at the root of the Oke; so must I deal with Will. Ramsey; wholy∣ing in the way, must be first spurned aside before I can come to Sir Christopher, as Will. hath order∣ed his Method. THE SURVEY & EXAMINATION of Will. Ramsey's EPISTLES, and the foul Language of his Book. THe Doctour hath spoken so much, and to so good purpose, in his Demonologie against Judiciall Astrologie, and Will. Ramsey so little to it, whereby to enervate any thing of that Treatise (it still standing as an impregnable Bullwark) that as to him, there is little left for me to say, unlesse it be to tell W. Ramsey so much; and to reprove him for his ill handling the Question; that deceived souls may be reduced. Poor Will. it seems by his Pamphlet, he was distracted when he penn'd it. For he confesseth in his Epistle to All Well-willers &c. that he was more perplexed, and trou∣bled at that instant of time his Treatise was penn'd, then all his life. So he. O strange distemper! and as strange a phantasie, that counts the time of his penning of eleven
sheets, but at the rate of an instant. He confesseth fur∣ther (ibid.) that his Genius was weak; and that he went, or ran from house to house, and made it where ever he came. By which words, I professe I do really suspect, Will. Ramsey went about to his Brethren Astrologie-fa∣vourers, to beg, or borrow some Latine, Greek, and He∣brew; but lost some of it as he went home. See anon whether I speak not really true. Out of all let the judi∣cious Reader make the Crisis of the mans Cranie. Col∣late his Epistle to the Reader, with his Book, and you shall see sutable fits and feits. Where (poor man) he sinnes grievously, sometimes in his raving, and sometimes in his mopish melancholick fits. In his raving,Ira furor Inevis est. Hor. he miserably fomes at the mouth, with the froth and spittle of Malicious, Fool, Ignorant, Knave, Babling Priests, Wretch, &c. some of which he drivels and slavers on M. Raunce (for writing against Judiciall Astrologie) the rest on the Doctour, and all Ministers without distinction. He is so bold a youth in his Title page as to stile himself Gent.I am in∣formed that in compa∣rison he is but a Boy. which I should have con∣strued Gentile-man, or at least Gentle-man, but that his language is the language of a Peasant or Boore; unlesse the Astrologer excuse himself, that he was then under the powerful influences of the Constellations, Canis major mi∣nor, Taurus, Aries, Lupus, Leo, Scorpius, Serpens, Dra∣co, &c. Never any in their sober witts, have accounted D. Homes ignorant, or fool. And of malice against A∣strologers, the Doctour must needs be free, in that he pro∣fesseth that the Astrologers never did him (that he knows) any personall wrong afore the penning of his Demonologie, whereby to kindle any malice against them in his breast, and to vent it in that Book. His Treatise of Demonologie fairly testifies for him, wherein he doth so∣berly handle the question of the unlawfulnesse of Judi∣ciall Astrologie; touching upon no mans person. And there also professeth his love to the true Mathematicks,
even as with great delight he studied them in the Univer∣sitie. And further, I can assure the Reader that he calls God to witnesse, that meer pressures of conscience, to discharge his faithfullnesse to Christ (as he is a Teacher to one of his Churches) in declaring against sinne and errour, for the preservation, or reduction of poor souls, made him write. But as was the manner of the times in the reign of Arminianisme in England, to question any mans learning, though the ablest Scholar, if he spake a∣gainst their Tenets; so now are the manners of Astrolo∣gers, to call their betters every way by the names of fools, ignorant, &c. if they do not sing to their tune but contrary. You shall hear by and by Will. Ramsey de∣spise Fathers, School-men, Councills,See his book. c. 2. p. 38. &c. that speak the least word against Astrologie. When Will. Ramsey is in his mopish fits, I cannot, I ingenuously confesse, either gather that he sayes any thing at all to the Head he propounds; or what it is he would have said: For instance, let the Reader consider well that head, chap. 1. sect. 6. p. 33. Astrologie profitable for health. Nor can I reconcile Will. Ramsey with Will. Ramsey, there is such contradiction in his words. For page 11. line 25. me thinks saith he, Doctour Homes be∣ing a wise man, (the phrase signifies an habituall wise∣dome, as tis spoken without limitation and so left univer∣sall) yet in the very next page, but twenty three lines af∣ter, he calls Doctour Homes a fool. If he say the Do∣ctour was a fool in condemning Astrologie; then W. R. further like one impos contradicts himself. For in his Epi∣stle to the Reader parag. the third, he confesseth, that of his knowledge many Discreet Gentlemen would some∣times condemn Astrologie. Finally this Epistle, and his whole book compared to∣gether will sufficiently argue, that the man was miserably lost in his reason when he pen'd it. For what are those Astrologicall predictions that D. Homes levels his Demo∣nologie
against, but of such things, as which either they themselves are (as to us) accidentall, as the successe of bu∣sinesses, or their causes are internall, as mens wills, and free choise, as to undertake a journey, build, &c. or not. Thus D. Homes in his very entrance upon the point of Astrology; chap. 1. §. 1. and §. 2. And in the very next page, viz. 112. he allows conjecturing, and of things whereof any naturall reason can be yielded; as (saith he, quoting and consenting with D. Willet &c.) there are naturall signes in the simple bodies, as the hea∣vens and air, of the alteration of weather, as into winds, or rain, &c. as also in compound bodies, either vegetable, of seasons to set plants, or trees; or in humane bodies of convenient time to let blood, or purge. These are imme∣diate effects in nature, of the Celestiall bodies. There are also mediate effects, as Comets, which shew siccity, heat, and combustion; so the Crow cryes against rain, be∣cause the clammy moysture of the air affects and afflicts him in the clinging of his feathers, &c. But the Doctour doth there deny signs of humane events. So also in page 160. of his Demonologie he opens his he art wide to shew what he means by the Astrology against which he raiseth his battery of reason, viz. against such an Art or Science (as Astrologers would have it called) that undertakes to predict and foretell what shall befall MEN, and CI∣TIES, and COMMON-WEALTHS, in relation to HƲMANE affairs, ARBITRARY actings, SPONTANEOƲS and voluntary transactions, that depend upon the movings of mens wills. To the same ef∣fect the Doctour speaks in his 113, 165, 167, pages of his Demonologie. And therefore it is WILL. RAM∣SEYS ILL CUSTOME OF TELLING UN∣TRUTH (to call it no worse, though justly I might) to say, the Doctour or other Antagonists to Judiciall Astro∣logie know not, or do not ponere what they mean, when they speak against Judiciall Astrologie. The Doctour as
clearly, as if written with Sun-beams, doth often inculcate what he allows, and what he disallows, as even but now hath been plainly declared;The state of the questi∣on. adding oft in his Demono∣logie, that all Naturall Predictions (which the Astrolo∣gers would cram in to their Judiciall Astrologie, with contradiction enough) is to be called, and considered in a way of Art or Science, either as METEOROLOGIE, or PHYSIOLOGIE, or pure ASTRONOMIE according to the nature of the subject under conside∣ration. Thus you have heard the Doctour as plain (as they say) as a Pack-staff; now let us hear what those predi∣ctions are that Will. Ramsey is pleased in his Epistle to the Reader to disavow or grant. Which are the very same that the Doctour denyes or grants, and William speaks them in higher words then the Doctour. I will give them unto you in his own words. His heads upon a just particular account are six. 1. Saith he, the rules of Astrologie doth (so W. Ramsey is pleased to joyn a Nown plurall and Verb singular together; but this is a small matter with him, who after is miserably out in his Latine, Greek and Hebrew. But for present, I was forced to touch his English upon whose score it lyes, because I promised to give you his mind in his own words) I say, Will. Ramsey saith in the first place, that the rules of Astrology doth not meddle with vain contingencies; or such as have an indifferent respect to the opposites, as depending upon unknown, or indeter∣minate causes, which may happen one way or other. 2. Will. Ramsey saith, Mans will is not subject to the influence of the stars; neither hath Astrology to do with it, but accidentally so farre as the soul with the faculties thereof follow the temperature of the body, which (the friends of Astrology themselves acknow∣ledge) is impeded and altered so many wayes, as that Astrologicall predictions of man come to nothing. See
the Doctours Demonologie chap. 10. §. 4. 3. Nei∣ther doth Astrologie meddle with the Providence of God. 4. Or shew cause of miracles. 5. Or med∣dles with the secrets of God, for they are past finding out. Astrologers are but men that contemplate natu∣rall causes. 6. Astrologie or the influence of stars have no fatall necessity, except some contingency be mixt therewith; for this were to deny the providence of God. Thus W. Ramsey; whereof the last is delivered with that wonderfull contradiction of fatall necessity and contin∣gency. But you have them as he gives them. Now let the Reader that hath a mind to understand the right, compare the Doctours, and W. R. his stateing of the Question together, and he shall find those six things afore said, set down by William in that his Epi∣stle to the Reader, fully to agree with the Doctours Te∣net in the main. Therefore W. R. in his great warfare in his ensuing Pamphlet against the Doctours Demonologie, either as a distracted man departs from his own princi∣ples; or else plainly fights against himself; let William take his choyse. And if he be like some of his brethren he will choose the former. For however they state the question in words, I am sure they practise in deeds quite contrary; underta∣king to know by the starres who, and where are the Theeves and stollen goods of such, and such a robbery; the cattle and Drovers that carried them away, from such and such a ground, at such a time; and the like feits; and these they practise for money. Yea they are bold to predict the events of warres, the successes of marriages, and thousands of such meer humane events, which the Scripture pronounceth uncertain to us. The battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the swift. Promotion cometh not from the East (starres) nor the VVest (starres) &c. but all fall out as Gods providence disposeth. Yet those A∣strologers
will boldly undertake to predict such things, as their Almanacks and Astrologicall Predictions, &c. do testifie. By which writings they gain credit and cu∣stome of miserable seduced souls, to fee them and feed them with money for meer impostures, as many of their Clients do daily complain; saying, the Astrologers had their money (not forbearing to name the men and the money,) but they were never the neerer to find that they promised them. But if this were all that Astrologers did do, it were not so intolerable. But they have practised some things that are not to be indured in any Common∣wealth, viz. to disswade men of quality from marrying worthy Gentlewomen, using lies for their arguments,An into∣lerable practise of Astro∣logers. forge∣ing those things of the Gentlewomen, to disinable their per∣sons, and to reproch them in their repute, as are not fit here to be named; but at due time and place shall be made good before any Court of Justice by undenyable proof. And at the rate of Will. Ramsey's sounding the Trumpet, the battle is likely speedily to begin. And William Ramsey himself, for all his stateing of the question aforesaid, undertakes to predict many hu∣mane events (quite without the sphere of the state of his question) in his discourse of the Eclipse of the Sun at the end of his rayling reply to D. Homes his Demonologie. Amongst the rest he predicts,In the last page save one. that before that Eclipse hath finished its effects, Ministers shall be in lesse esteem, then they would fain perswade the vulgar, concerning the stu∣dents in Astrology. Whatever the Epithets be he gives to Ministers there; he intends not them for distinction, but for agnomination to them all, good as well as bad, or else he would not lay the cause of that prediction to be the Ministers opposing Astrologers, and upbraid Doctour Homes. And let me tell thee William a prophesie out of the Word of God against Judiciall Astrologers,A Pro∣phecy a∣gainst Astrolo∣gers. that as Aarons rod swallowed up the Enchanters rods (Exod.
7.12); Balaam was killed when the Priests and Le∣vites of the Lord were preserved (Numb. 13.22.); Daniel the Prophet is preserved and honoured, when sen∣tence of death was pronounced against the Astrologers, (Dan. 2. vers. 2.14.27.28. &c. to the end of the chapter): and the persons having familiar spirits, and the Diviners, and Exorcists, &c. fell before the Apostles (Acts chap. 8. chap. 19. &c.): So these last and great∣est sort of wicked men, that lead poor souls from God to the Devill, from his word to their circles and figures shall (without repentance) according to all the prophe∣cies of the old Testament against Astrologers, Magici∣ans, Enchanters, Sorcerers, &c. quoted in the Doctours Demonologie, perish with Antichrist and all Christs ene∣mies at the great destruction of the wicked near approch∣ing, for making way for the Saints Triumph a while on earth over all their enemies, Revel. 21.8. & 22.15. Now William, and thy brethren, runne your course in Ju∣diciall Astrology, according to your wonted manner of practise at your perill; and venture it whither your Ec∣lipse, or the light of our Sun (the word of God) will prophesie more truly. I wonder in what starre or constellation, or their po∣stures William could reade this goodly change, that godly Ministers must be discountenanced, and lying Astrologers (as the Scripture calls them) shall be advanced? His telling me there of ☽ to a □ of ♄ &c. with many the like anticks, figures, gibberish and cantings, is lesse, is worse then nothing, unlesse he could demonstrate to me (for that's the honour of a true Mathematician to de∣monstrate most potently) by reason, why such postures and features of starres and constellations must needs pre-signi∣fie such and such events,Demon∣strationes Mathe∣maticae  po∣tnssi∣mae. of which the Astrologers so con∣fidently predict. To tell me of Traditions, that of old time for many generations upon such signs, such events have come to passe; is no more (if Astrologers say true
in that) then what Conjurers teach and practise, viz. draw such and such circles, making these and those figures, with using of this posture and that form of words and the spirit will rise at command; which, though true, is called by the consent of all good men, conjuring, and is diabolicall, because there can be no naturall reason given of it, nor a divine rule to justifie it. The application in a due proportion is obvious. If thus therefore Judiciall Astrologers (as ye call them) do constantly in their practise transgresse against W. Ramsey's stateing the question (in his said Epistle be∣fore his Christian Judiciall Astrology, as with a strong contradiction in adjecto he calls it) William hath little reason to weary the readers eyes and ears with irksome and nauseous repetition of that common rule (liable e∣nough to exception) Abuse should not take away the use; or that instance, Heresies crept into Religion, should not put away Religion. We have a Bible for our Religion; no Scripture for Judiciall Astrologie, as before stated. And other Astrology (if they will have it so called) that is naturall, not meddling with the six particulars aforesaid (as W. R. resolved the question) will get them little cre∣dit (the meer Naturall Philosopher will tell as much), and gain them lesse money. You heard afore by Austin of himself and others, and by Master Perkins, and M. Brigges (in the Doctours Treatise of Demonologie) that Astrology hath an innate tendency further, and be∣yond an immoration within the bounds of Naturalls, and therefore they repented of their studies in that way. For that which constantly ends in unlawful practise, argues the principles to be naught. If a thing were once of good use, but now of none, but of much abuse, that's warrant for lawfull state-powers to remove it; and Hezekiah's breaking in pieces the brazen Serpent will justifie it.2 Kings 18.4. So that in things not necessary, the rule is, Abuse must take away the use. Yea in necessary things, Paul would not eat
flesh, rather then offend his brother, as Astrologie doth the generality of true godly men,The judge∣ments of God hang o∣ver a na∣tion for the sins of Astro∣logers & their cli∣ents, a State permit∣ting. fearing that it will hasten judgement on the Nation; as Saul at last favour∣ing such kind a-stuff, brought himself and the nation to great ruine: If Astrologers can not, as those among the Egyptians (when Israel was in Egypt,) and those among the Chaldeans (Judah being captivated in Babylon) and those in the Roman Empire (in the time of the ten Per∣secutions) cause persecution, (as their practise hath been by testimony of histories) yet their own impieties by that very Art, and their seducing poor souls from fear, and faith in God, do greatly threaten a common calami∣ty, especially if connived at by the State. So the Pro∣phet, Isa. 2.6. Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the East with Soothsayers like the Philistims. How home this reacheth Astrologers, hath been discussed in the Do∣ctours Demonologie:Daemo∣nol. c. 10. §. 3. p. 124, 125. Little therefore can be justly spoken for Judiciall Astrology, more then to say 'tis all drosse, 'tis all abuse, 'tis all (as Austin saith) A great Errour. Yet W. Ramsey will make an Essay to justifie Judi∣ciall Astrology (if he can) but in such a dialect as would make a wise man the rather believe that the Art is of the Devill, because the Artists in their defence of it speak the language of the Devill. Not Evil speakers, or slanderers, are saith the Apostle Devils, 1 Tim. 3.11. where the Greek is , id est, Not devils; and 2 Tim. 3.3. false accusers, the Greek is  Devils. See the like phrase, Tit. 2.3. So VV. R. here. So some others in their Almanacks or Prognostications. But my purpose concerning VVill. Ramsey's language (at once for all, to quit my hands of his words, and be free for his matter) is this. 1. I shall most willingly give the day and Garland for railing and reviling gratis to VV. Ramsey. It may be
the poor miserable creature can speak no other language; he knowing no more then what his Physicall and Astro∣logicall profession teach him, which savour no other. And if he be a Scot (as some judge by his name) then 'tis proper for him to be infinite proud and opprobrious where he dreams he may domineer. He thinks (to use Vir∣gils phrase) ARIETE CREBRO, as with the battery of the Ramshead. rather to force the fort of the Do∣ctours Demonologie, then to winne it by the art and rea∣son of School Polemicalls. Rather (as Alexander M.) to cut the Gordian knot then solve it;Quint. Curt. de vita A∣lex. thereby (as he said) to delude the Oracle, in case he could not fulfill it. Doth VVill. Ramsey dream that he onely hath the wit to jeer, or the sole liberty to rail in print? or doth he dote that he is a man of that composure of person and parts, that he is shot-free from all darts of Rhetorick? Could I but match him in profanenesse of spirit, and er∣rour in judgement, I could repay him home neer from all the Topicks of Rhetorick Cicero useth in his invective o∣rations. But (as Chrysostome said) I fear sin. Yet he might, especially pretending to predictions, have progno∣sticated to himself that IF THE DOCTOƲR SCOR∣NED TO ANSVVER, HIM, some body else might shew VVilliam his folly, least (as Solomon saith) he should be wise in his own conceit: And might (like a wise man) with soft words, but with arguments of steel en∣deavour to convince VVilliam of the viciousnesse of A∣strology, which God and all good men generally detest. That VVilliam hath not taken the like sober, modest, se∣rious way to defend his art, it hath got him nothing. It is to prudent men the sign of a bad cause, that needs to be defended with bad words; which perhaps, may raise a great dust, and cast a fogg before the eyes of men parti∣ally passionate; but do loose with men of a pure judge∣ment in the credit of the cause. 2. I shall also passe over (as not regarding) his silly
jests and jears (unworthy nameing) savouring of a light and slight spirit in him, as if some PEG—A—RAMSEY guided his pen not VV. R. Gentleman. 3. For his lifting and labouring to confute the Do∣ctour, puffing blowing, and panting (as if almost out of breath,) fetching his wind with As I hope, and I be∣lieve, and I do think (so often repeated) I have confuted the Doctour; with his calling a main (as he recovers his breath) to the Reader, in his Nota, Nota, Nota bene, to attend; I pitty both the man, and the Reader that follows him; that he should be so clamoured by him to run to fee (in comparison) a NOTHING. Whether I speak truly, let the sequell prove. And had it not been to tell the Reader so, especially young men in danger to be led away with Astrologicall impostures, I should never ac∣counted VVill. Ramsey worthy any thing that might be called a Reply, Survey, or &c. And therefore I was loath Doctour Homes should so much disgrace himself, and credit VVill. Ramsey as to have his name in print to any paper to him. For 'tis wittily observed by the Heathen,Ovid. l. 13. Fab. 1 that it was too much honour to Ʋlysses, being a Coward, that he might contend, but in words, with gal∣lant, valiant Ajax for the Armour of Achilles.Galenum non pa∣rùm er∣rasse pu∣to qui Thessalū, dum no∣men ejus proterit, Aliquem esse docu∣erit, & cujus ra∣tionem haberet. Cardan. de vita propria cap. 16. And it was the judgement of the great CARDANƲS one of VVilliam's profession both wayes, that famous GALEN (VVilliam's Master) did much erre in so often mentioning in his writings his frivolous Antagonist Thessalus; for by that (saith Cardanus) Galen did teach men to think that Thessalus was some body, and at all regarded by Galen. Let not VVilliam or his adherents puff at this, as if but flourishes; but attend the short Surveyes of his chapters and sections, and then see whether reason can cry him up, for wit, honesty, or learning.
The Survey of Will. Ramsey's 1. Section of his 1. Chapter. The Definition of Astrology.W. R. his 1. Section THat the Reader may the better judge of the controversie between Doctour Homes and my self, I think best here before I enter upon any part of his discourse, to set down what this art of Judiciall Astrology is, which I undertake to defend. Ptolomy lib. 1. cap. 1. Of his Quadripartite, defines it thus, Astrology is that art (joyning it with A∣stronomy, as making no difference between them, though M. Homes and other adversaries thereunto do) which teacheth by the motions, Configurations and Influences of the Signs, Stars and Celestiall Planets, to judge and prognosticate of the naturall effects and mutations to come, in the Elements and inferiour and Elementary bodies. And who so takes Astrologie to be any other thing, is altoge∣ther ignorant of the Art, or guilty of inveterate malice in traducing so noble and admirable a science, esteemed and allowed of in all ages, and that in great reverence and honour, as well as the Students thereof (as in its due place shall be made to appear) by the chiefest and no∣blest of the people. Though Doctour Homes would fain persuade the vulgar and ignorant sort of people that it is a Doctrine of Devils, and unlawfull, which shall in its due place be made to appear (as also the rest of his weak arguments and cavils,) that they are meerly ma∣licious, ignorant, weak, and inconsistent with reason or the thing in question; which that he may not be igno∣rant of, as also for the better understanding of the Rea∣der,
I do here more plainly rehearse by way of Quere; viz. First, whether Astrology, or foretelling, or Progno∣sticating by the Stars, be a lawfull Art, free from all Dia∣bolicall practises and devices. Secondly, Whether Astrology may not lawfully be studied and practised, by the best of Gods people, with∣out offence in the least, either to the law of God, or man (if they concurre with the rules of the Scripture) which is the full matter in controversie, and to be in this follow∣ing discourse discussed, handled and cleared; and if so, then certainly the malicious ignorant condemners of this Noble and most profitable Art studied by mortals, (as in its due place shall appear) ought to be severely punished, and that with exemplary infliction, that posterity may take warning how they condemn what they are ignorant of; and likewise be encouraged to apply their minds to the contemplation and knowledge of all Arts and Sciences, especially this most heavenly and divine study of Astro∣logy, or the language of the Stars. Now you have heard the distinction of Astrology the subject intended, by it you may not onely see the causes which concurre to the constitution of the nature of the Art, but also the finall cause, whereunto all the precepts of the Art are to be referred; seeing then the knowledge of the effects of the Stars in the Elements and their bo∣dies, dependeth of the motions, Configurations, and Influences of the Celestiall bodies, Astronomy or Astro∣logy (for by the learned, there is made no distinction be∣tween them as severall Arts, but generally conclude them (as indeed they are) one and the same Art) is divided into two parts, the first speculative or theoricall, which con∣sisteth in the knowledge of the heavenly motions; the other part is that which consisteth in the effects and pro∣perties of the former motions, and without this (viz. A∣strology) the other is meerly vain and of no use, or to none
or little purpose; the former, viz. Astronomy furnisheth the Astrologer with matter and stuff wherein to exercise himself; the other, viz. Astrologie disposeth the matter, and accordingly judgeth as the case doth require, and therefore to be esteemed the more noble part of this Science. Thus VV. Ramsey. SURVEY. Behold here VV. R. at the very first, begins his Pamphlet with 3 gross UNTRUTHS. For,If Will. Ramsey begins with 3. great un∣truths, in his en∣trance, how shal we be∣lieve him in the rest of his Pam∣phlet 1. there is no such definition as he affirms, nor any thing in form of a definition, in relation to Astrologie in that place of Ptolomy, as his eyes can witness, who of purpose read the Preface and first Chapter once and again in two seve∣rall Editions. 2. Ptolomy doth there (contrary to VVilliam Ramsey's assertion) put a wide difference be∣tween Astronomy, and Astrologie. For he begins that his Book thus: There are two things, O Syrus, speciall and most chief, by which are made Astrological Predicti∣ons. ONE, which is first in order and power, where∣by we apprehend at all times the motions of the Sun and Moon and other Starrs, and their postures amongst them∣selves, or towards the Earth. The OTHER is that, whereby we consider by the natural qualities of the Starrs the changes that are wrought in Bodies that are congruous to those postures. And of these doctrines, the FORMER hath its proper Art, albeit the end of the SECOND be not added unto it, &c. In which words most evidently, Ptolomy distinguish∣eth Astronomy from Astrologie of the nearest kinde, viz. Natural; in so much that he saith, Astronomy is a per∣fect Art without that Astrologie. Yea, and (as it follows there,) we have this into the bargain, that Ptolomy doth sundry wayes, and with severall reasons in that Treatise shew the uncertainty and imperfection of Astrologie; but cries up the certainty and perfection of Astronomy. 3. The Learned (contrary to VV. R. false assertion) do
make a distinction between Astronomy and Judiciall Astrology, as severall Arts. For they thus distinguish. OU∣RANOSCOPIE, or URANOLOGIE, or OURANOGRA∣PHIE (the genus) is either Astronomy or Astrology,Alsted. Eneycl. l. 11. p. 1. c. 1. p. 4. c. 1. (the species.) Astronomy is concerning the motion and measure of the Stars. Astrologie handles of the effects of the Stars; called also Prognosticall, or Judiciall Astrologie. Adde to these three untruths, the impertinencies or equivocations of W. R. in this his 1. Section; who having defined Naturall Astrology, he puts quercs of the law∣full study of, and Prognosticating by Astrologie. By which if means Naturall; he is extremely imperti∣nent. For the Doctour allows it (as I have shewed) onely he would have it called by another name, as a part of another Science. If he means Judiciall; then he plainly equivocates, defining one kind, but prosecutes an∣other. Lastly, VV. R. is what he was at first, an avoucher of untruths, so he began, and so he concludes the Section; saying, That Astronomy is meerly vain, and of no use without Astrologie: Which is most false as his own Pto∣lomy witnessed afore; and renowned Keckerman is his second; who wrote a famous System of Astronomy, de∣claring the excellent use thereof, without handling of any Astrologie at all: wch Astronomy for me to commend here, by the enumeration of its excellencies in particular were to carry water to the sea; or hold a candle to the Sun. I therefore leave all pure Astronomers, Chronologers, Geo∣graphers, Navigatours, &c. to decry the false Assertion of VV. R. W. R. his SECT. II. In answer to some cavils of M. Homes his, wherein he denyeth Astrology to be warranted by Scri∣pture, proved to be erroneous and false. Having thus painted forth the matter and form of the
thing intended to be insisted on, I come now to shew you what M. Homes his utmost power and malice against it is: and first his blind zeal begins to shew it self, in per∣suading the Reader it is condemned by the Scripture, and no wise thereby tolerated; his words are, It is no where allowed in the Scripture, under the notion of Astrology, but every where spoken against as we shall see afterward: and all that he can shew us and make us see, is but six places of Scripture, which is far from being worthy of the Title of a generall condemnation, when there is none but knows the extent of the Scripture to consist of many half dozen Chapters, nay of Books, Ergo, not every where condemned; and those places neither, but imagi∣ned by him to condemn Astrology, when indeed they serve no whit at all for his purpose, as in its due place shall be made appear. But by the way, is it every where condemned? doth not the King and Prophet David say, The heavens declare the glory of God, Psal. 19.1? and in another place, The language of the stars, (which is the signification of the word Astrology  the lan∣guage of the stars; and is it not allowed any where in Scripture under the notion of Astrology?) Is heard over all the earth, or the uttermost parts thereof, Psal. 19.3? as if he had said, there is no part free from the power of their influences; for their power hath a generall extent o∣ver all Nations, Kingdoms, Countreys, Provinces, and Languages. I pray, who can restrain the sweet influences of the Pleiades? Job 38.31. And did not the stars in their courses fight against Sisera? Judg. 5.20. One of these places had been enough to have convinced him of great wickednesse, in denying the Scripture doth any where allow of Astrology; for if he never read these places, then he is wicked, and no lesse then wilfully wic∣ked, to conclude what he understands not; if he hath per∣used them, then most malicious to speak against truth; I may even as well say diabolically wicked, and that he
teacheth rather the Doctrine of Devils, for the Devils Doctrine is falshood; and if he preacheth such gross lyes as these, he is the Devils Preacher, and not Astrologers: neither is Astrology a Doctrine of Devils (as shall he made clear to him before the closure of my Discourse) as he in his 160. page line 21. is pleased to terme it. So then, now I hope the Reader doth clearly see, these his first words of his Discourse, to be meerly envious, slan∣derous, and malicious, or (at the best) most ignorant; for it will puzzle all his brains, and M. Raunces, nay and all that dare or will take their parts, to make any one of those passages of Scripture (he brings to confute or con∣demn Astrology) to serve in the least for his turn, as in its due place shall be cleared. Then saith M. Homes, As other things that are natu∣ral, which are brought to countenance Astrology, are not tolerated by the Encyclopaedia, and general order and Seats of all Arts and Sciences within their own Spheres, to be accounted Astrology. For instance, First, (saith he) Some urge that we know the Tides of the Sea, by the state of ☽, and Tempests by other Stars. which I am confident M. Homes cannot deny, but he will render himself more ridiculous then already, which he endeavours to do thus; These and of the like nature, are properly handled in that part of natural Philosophy, which we call Meteorology; and so likewise are all fiery Meteors, Comets, &c. and so by consequence are made an integrall part of Physicks: for if you will say, because of their external efficient cause. viz. the Starrs, they are to be handled as a part of Astrology, by the same reason there will be left no such Science as natural Philosophy, because all inferiour Bo∣dies below the Moon (as saith the great Philosopher Ari∣stotle) depend upon the superiour Celestial bodies of the Heavens. In all which he doth but shew his great mistake in the ground of Astrology, and his envie thereto; for how can M. Homes prove this is a meer urging, or an opi∣nion
of some, that the ☽ is the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; or that it is rather to be attributed to that part of natural Philosophy, which is called Meteo∣rologie, and so consequently to be a part of Physicks; when all the World knows, that hath any experience or understanding in Astrology, that he is as far from hitting the mark, as if he had mist the Butt. Wherefore for his better instruction, (for I see he is not so well verst in Astrology as he pretendeth, or as one that is to condemn it should be) I will make it appear to him, that the ☽ is the absolute cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and this is the opinion of all or most knowing and learned Writers, both in this Art and other Sciences; and not onely so, but it is so clear to all the Learned, that his great Friend Picus Mirandula, which was a stronger Champion (or at least more knowing in the Art then he) against Astrology, doth confess the ☽ to be the positive and sole cause thereof. And thus, if he have any understanding in the Art (as by his writing, I must confess (as I now but said) I see none) let him take the true time of the Seas flowing first, and then observe in what part of Heaven the ☽ is acci∣dentally placed by her violent diurn motion, and he shall finde it to flow till she come to an absolute □ aspect of the place she was in at the first beginning to flow; and then will continue ebbing till she come to the direct ☍ or opposite place in the Heavens &c. Still let him observe exactly when she comes to the □ or ☍ of the place of her first beginning, and he shall never err in this point. This is sufficiently well known to the learned Practitioners, and the sons of Art: yet note that ☉ and other Starrs may hasten, hinder, and alter the ☽ influence, as he may see at ☌ and ☍ of ☉, or the Change and Full; in Spring-tides, and Neap-tides, at quarters and half-quarters. I would he had not been ignorant of this, and then perhaps, (this being the beginning of his discourse) he had not undertook
to lay Pen to Paper against this most heavenly, most ad∣mirable, and most contemplative, delectable Study and Science of the Stars and Celestial Bodies. So by this time he clearly sees how inconsiderate and rash this his sophistical and fase argument is. Secondly, saith M. Homes, Others say that by Astrolo∣gie we know Eclipses and Changes of the Moon; but we say Astronomy doth challenge this as belonging to it, &c. My answer is, that I say, (what ever he telleth me others may or do say) he cannot but know that those that say so are not versed therein, and are ignorant. And thirdly, saith he, If any one urge that Astrolo∣gie handles of the Qualities and Effects of the Stars, we reply, that so doth Astronomy, of their Qualities, name∣ly, of their light and colour, and natural Philosophy of their Effects, in watery, aiery, and fiery Meteors: as much as to say, Astrology is no Science at all, but will give its property to another Study; if this be not slander∣ous and malicious, let the weakest in the world judge: he might as well then all this while have called it, Natural Philosophy, as Astrologie. And then he tels us, if we admit of the Title Alsted gives to Astrologie, viz. A∣strologia planetaria, or Planetary Astrology, and of Doctor VVillets Titles, viz. Astromancy & Genethliaca; then saith he for conclusion by all observe, that there is no place left for Astrologie: by which he clearly renders himself the most malicious of all wretches, to deny that Art, which above 298. of the most wise of all Ages have studied and practised (their names you shall have hereafter in its place;) both before and since Christs time; whose antiquity may be derived from our first fa∣ther Adam: maintained by Princes and Kings; reveren∣ced by that greatest of Worthies, Alexander the Great; and not condemned by any of the Fathers; or the pra∣ctice thereof prohibited by the Church, farther then that they should not hereby be drawn from the study of Di∣vinity,
as you shall see by and by. M. Homes me thinks being a wise man, should not write against, (and that in such a zealous manner) a thing which is not in rerum na∣tura, or in posse, as in his first Section of his tenth Cha∣pter, he studies to make Astrologie appear; to what purpose then are all his arguments against Astrologie, when he will not admit of any such thing in the world? what doth he write against then? and why doth he so much condemn the students thereof? Because he knows not the validity thereof; because he knows not the rules and fundamentals thereof; because indeed he is altogether ignorant of the same; and let him not be an∣gry I plainly tell him so, (plain dealing is best among friends) for if he did, he would have been so far from writing or speaking against it, that he would have been more furious and hot with any one should have con∣demned it. then I am with him.Railers are cal∣led Dia∣bolicall, yea De∣vils. 1 Tim. 3.11. 2 Tim. 3.3. Tim. 2 3. as we shewed afore. SURVEY. One would wonder to hear VV. Ramsey thus rail, and call the Doctour diabolicall, &c. when as the Doctour in his Treatise, gave no mans person the least ill word. Therefore whether of the twain appears to be more diabolicall, let the Reader judge. And 'tis as great a wonder to see the Doctours Treatise of Astrology so orderly digested into Sections, and VVilliam Ramsey to so leap from the one to the other, as if he were confound∣ed in his apprehension; or else that he would fain rather coosen the Reader, then clear the controversie. But to the matter. To that marked with (A) we say, It is enough to make it a speech of truth, and a true confutation of Astro∣logie; that wheresoever the Scriptures mention Astrolo∣gie, there the Scriptures also disallow it: which they dis∣allow in more then six places of Scripture, or seven, as the Doctour hath observed (if VVilliam reckons right) al∣though the Doctour reduced them all to seven heads. To that at the letter (B) it is so weak a proof of a
Scripture allowance of Astrology, that it is not worthy the answering; onely I am willing to make W. Ramsey see it, if I can. For the Heavens declare the glory of God (as 'tis presently there expounded) as they are Gods Handy-work. But the inference of William; The Hea∣vens declare Gods glory, therefore Astrology is lawfull, is so ridiculous as that with the bare naming of it, it is confuted. For THE LANGƲAGE OF THE STARS which William saith, is in another place, I am sure is IN NO PLACE OF CANONICAL SCRIPTƲRE. For Williams Exposition on Psal. 19.3. it must give place to the Apostles, Rom. 10.18. viz. of Preaching the Gospel, not of Astrology. For the Pleiades in Job; they are answered after. The fighting of the Stars against Sisera, Jud. 5.20. Junius ex∣pounds to be the Windes, Rains, Hails, Tempests, &c. caused by the heavenly Bodies, to the discomfiting and routing Sisera's Army (compare Josh. 10.11. Exod. 9.23.) which makes nothing for Judicial Astrologie. Thus with a touch it appears, that William Ramsey is deceived in his conclusion to the said proofs, that one of them were enough to convince, &c. For, nor one, nor all, nor an hun∣dred such, are in any shew sufficient to convince a pru∣dent man of the lawfulness of Judicial Astrologie. And therefore his hope (as he presently adds) that by them the Reader doth clearly see that the Doctours words were meerly envious, &c. is Williams meer dream. To that of W. Ramsey marked with (C) and from thence to the end of this Section, we need onely say thus. That William is toyling at the Labour in vain, to shew the Doctour that the Moon is the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; who knew it afore ever William did, and it is granted by him in his Demonologie, (if William will see) onely he saith, other Sciences shew that, with∣out the help of Judicial Astrologie.
And to that audaciousness of William Ramsey daring to say in the face of all learned men (that shall see his Pamphlet) That those that say we know Eclipses, and Changes of the Moon by Astronomy,A most grosse bold un∣truth of W. R. a∣bout the funda∣mentals of Astro∣nomy. as challenging that to belong to it, are NOT VERSED THEREIN, and are IGNORANT, &c. I will onely say, that it shews such ignorance, or worse in W. Ramsey, as for civilities sake I will not call it by its true name. Doth not famous Keckerman in his System of Astronomy, as an integrall part of the body of Astronomy handle the Eclipses of the Sun, in his Syst. Astron. lib. 1. cap. 13. very large∣ly? And doth he not likewise of the Eclipses and Chan∣ges of the Moon, in the same Book, 1. cap. 14. more largely? And doth not the renowned Astronomer Al∣sted do the same in his System of Astronomy, very large∣ly; ƲRANOSCOP. lib. 11. par. 2. cap. 5. cap. 12. cap. 13. cap. 14. with Diagrams, Figures, Pictures to present them to the eye, as well as with Theorems to present them to the ear? For how possibly can an Astronomer do his work, to handle of the measures and motions of the Starrs (which is of the definition, and so of the essence of Astronomy) and not handle of the Eclipses and chan∣ged postures and Aspects of the Planets, &c. For W. Ramsey and others quoting of Sir Christopher Heyden, we shall after in a more convenient place in our Survey, shew all men that will peruse this Survey, how they and Sir Christopher, are grossly mistaken. I need add no more but the reprinting of the Do∣ctours 1. Section of Astrologie word for word, as a full answer to the last part of this Section of W.R. from (C) to the end; and it will clear and confirm any of the things by me spoken afore; which is to a syllable (if the Printer fail not) as it here followeth.
A Repetition of Doctour Homes his SECTION I. Of the nature of Astrology in some distinctions, descriptions, and observations. IF I should distinguish of Astrology as Alsted doth, calling it, Astrologia Judiciaria, that is, Judiciall Astrology, as Master Perkins, and Master Geree call it; or should I distinguish as Doctour VVillet, that this Art is partly Theorical, partly Practical, and the practical is partly allowed, and partly rejected; as if hereby we would separate and set apart for lawfull use, the name and thing of any kind of Astrology; 'tis of our indul∣gence, and more then we need to do. For keeping to our terms, either first to the term Astrology; it is no where allowed in the Scripture, under that notion, but every where spoken against, as we shall see afterward. As o∣ther things that are naturall, which are brought to coun∣tenance Astrology, are not tolerated by the Encyclopaediae, and generall order, and seats of all Arts and Sciences, within their own sphears, to be accounted Astrology. For instance; first, some urge that we know the Tides of the Sea by the state of the Moon; and tempests by o∣ther Stars, &c. But these, and of the like nature, say we, are properly handled in that part of natural Philosophy which we call Meteorology; as also are all fiery Meteors, Comets, &c. of all which the essentiall internall causes, matter and form, and one externall, namely the end, be∣long thereunto, are there handled, and thereby are made an integral part of Physicks. For if you will say, be∣cause of their externall efficient cause, viz. the Stars, they are to be handled as a part of Astrology: by the same reason there will be left no such Science as naturall Philosophy, because all inferiour bodies below the Moon
(as saith the great Philosopher Aristotle) depend upon the superiour Celestiall bodies of the Heavens. Secondly, Others say, that by Astrology we know Eclipses, and changes of the Moon: But say we, Astro∣nomy doth challenge this, whose proper work is to teach us the Sphears, Planets, and nominated fixed Stars, with their motions, measures, distances, conjunctions and op∣positions; whence arise Eclipses of the Sun, or Stars, and changes of the Moon. I give but a touch upon some particulars, as an hint to understanding men to conceive of the rest. Thirdly, If any urge that Astrology han∣dles of the qualities and effects of the Stars: We reply, that so doth Astronomy of their qualities; namely, of their light and colour; and naturall Philosophy of their effects in watery, aiery, and fiery Meteors. Or secondly, if we admit of another term, or title which Alsted gives to Astrology, calling it, Astrologiae Planetaria, i. e. Planetary Astrology; then we de∣mand what becomes of almost all the System of pretend∣ed Astrology, if its ground work be founded mainly on the Planets, the main part of Astronomy? What then becomes of the notions about the tenth Orb, the twelve houses of the Heavens, the twelve Signs, with hundreds more of such kind of knacks wherewith they are wont to build up Astrology? Or thirdly, If we entertain those other terms and ti∣tles that Alsted, and Doctour Willet, &c. give to A∣strology, calling it , Astromancy, and Genethliaca, that is, The calculatrix of Nativities, or Magick; all these are disgracefull terms; and so un∣usefull to insinuate a lawfull Astrology. By all observe, that there is no place left for Astrology; but it is as meer a phantasie as Palmestry.
W.R. his SECT. III. Proving Astrologie to be an Art. ARistotle, lib. 2. cap. 2. Phys. affirmeth that Astro∣logy is Scientiamedia, a Science between the Ma∣thematicks and natural Philosophy, for the Principles are meerly Mathematical, and in practice are applyed to sensible matter as the Physical subject thereof: moreover he ranks it also amongst the Liberal Sciences; and annex∣eth it to Philosophy in such a sort, that he seemeth indiffe∣rent to use the name of a Philosopher and an Astrologer for the same. So likewise Averroës in his Commentary on the 12. of the Metaphysicks, text 44. speaking con∣cerning the power of the heavenly bodies, in the procreati∣on and conservation of all worldly things, and in their mutual consent, and assisting one another in their mutual operations, he resembleth them to good Governours in a Common-wealth, that joyntly concur in one unanimous consent for ordering the same: His words are, Dispositio in juvamento corporum coelestium ad invicem in creando en∣tia, quae sunt hîc, & conservando ea, est sicut dispositio re∣gentium bonorum, qui juvant se adinvicem in regendo bo∣nam eivitatem. And in his Commentary on the second Book of Physicks, his second Chapter, sheweth that natu∣ral Philosophy and Astrology have one and the same sub∣ject, and yet are distinguished by a divers consideration. And in the third of the Metaph. Comment. 7. he affirmeth the knowledge of the Starrs to be a Mathematical Art; and so it hath ever in all ages by the most learned Philoso∣phers been esteemed. I believe M. Homes nor no man else that knoweth any thing, will deny that it is one of the Li∣beral Sciences, & if he will condemn it as none, he must be content to lose one of them, which were to render himself
the eighth wise man; what Science I pray will he place in the room of it, since he thus indeavours to excommuni∣cate it, for he tels us it is as meer a phansie as Palmestry? and yet Galen (one of his learned that he brings to con∣demn Astrology with the word Sophisticum, that it is Sophisticall, page. 115. l. 11.) as Physitians them∣selves report, teacheth to know the temperature of the body by the palm of the hand; and his reason is, because the mind commonly followeth the constitution of the bo∣dy; thus you may see how he carpeth and catcheth at any thing that he thinks will make in the least, for his turn; as also of Alsted's and Doctour VVillets Titles of A∣strology; when the question is, whether either of them knew the common rules of the Art. SURVEY. This borrowed Axe borrowed of Sir Chri∣stopher is dull: tis most true, that that of Astrology which hath any truth of BEING, is a Science not an Art; but is to be referred to other Sciences, and to be called by their name, according to the matter handled; as hath been often cleared in the Doctours Demonology. And if it be a Science, how then can it be an Art? The learned know they are Species logically opposite. Let VVilliam therefore learn it, afore he believe this grosse non-sequi∣tur to be good viz. Tis a Science, ergo 'tis an Art. And if Aristotle doth say (for I can believe VVilliam in no∣thing but what I see, we have found him so often tardy in notorious untruths) that Astrology is Scientia Media, and VVilliam will (as he doth) expound it, to be A Science between the Mathematicks and Naturall Phi∣losophy;Sect.  how then doth VVilliam Ramsey agree with himself afore, where he will have Astronomy and Astro∣logy to be all one? For all liberall Artists do know that Astronomy is of the pure Mathematicks. But VVilliam consents that Astrology is a Middle thing between the Mathematicks and Naturall Philosophy. But in this VVilliam goes on as he began to TELL UNTRUTHS;
for there are no such words in Arist. Phys. lib. 2. cap. 2. in three severall editions in Greek and Latine, which I carefully read over; and some of them twice over. But this I got and William hath lost by it, in my reading that Chapter. viz.  (saith Arist. ibid.)  (alii Sed o∣mnes in∣terpretes trovis modo legentes, reddunt Mathe∣matica∣rum sci∣entiarum vel. facul∣atum.) . i. e. those mathematicall disciplines or Sciences that are more the Physicks, or nearer to Naturall Philosophy are the Opticks, Musick, and Astrology. Let W. Ram. therefore cease his anger against the Doctour, for saying Astrology viz. that which can be owned, viz. naturall, is in many respects to be referred to Physicks, and to be called proportionably by the name of some parts of it, as Meteorology, &c. That which W. R. affirms out of Averroes on the twelfth of Metaph. is nothing to Williams purpose. Nor that on the second of Physicks; but rather against, viz. for us touching the onenesse of Physicks and allow∣able Astrology; more justly therefore called Naturall Astrology, if it must have any thing of the word A∣strology in its name. For as for the Judiciall, 'tis in the corrupt phantasie of men and devils (according to the Scripture) rather then in nature. Nor is that on the 3. of Metaphys. to Williams purpose. We allow the know∣ledge of the stars to be a Mathematicall Art, or rather a Science; yet we allow not Judiciall Astrology to be a lawfull Science. But do give that honour to Astronomy. But cui bono, to what purpose is all this waste of Wil∣liams words? For if all were yielded that William speaks to prove Astrology to be a Science, yet doth it not infer that any Astrology is a distinct Science, much lesse Judiciall Astrology to be any thing at all in rerum natura. From W. R. endeavour to justifie Palmestry; by his confession he had received it by a report from the Physi∣cians that, Galen did teach to know the temperature of the body by the palm of the hand, I inferre 1. (as I afore
suspected) that VVilliam borrows his best Feathers (that make any better shew then railing) from other Fowles. 2. That I feel VV. Ramsey's Pulse, that he neither hath read much his Master Galen, nor understands the mean∣ing of such a speech, as that it signifies no more but that by the Pulse, or by the heat, driness, coldness, or moisture of the Palmes may be discerned the temper of the Body, without Palmestries canting upon the Lines of the Hands. Lastly, VVilliam Ramseys questioning Doctor VVillets and Doctor Alsteds knowledge of the common Rules of Astrologie, RENDERS HIM SO IGNO∣RANT NOW, IN MY EYES, THAT I BEGIN TO REPENT I HAVE GONE SO FAR IN ANSWERING SO WORTHLESS A MAN, WHO KNOWS NOT THAT WHICH ALL INDIFFERENTLY LEARNED MEN DO KNOW, viz. that Doctour VVillet in his learn∣ed Questions on the Pentateuch, and Daniel, touching Astrologie, and Doctour Alsted in his learned Ency∣clopaedia of 27 Arts and Sciences, and particularly his System of Astrologie do manifest to the World, that they were not ignorant of the utmost of Astrologie. W. R. his SECT. IV. Proving the lawfulness of Astrologie, being not impugned by the Scripture, nor Councils; but allowed of by the wisest and greatest men. VVHat hath already above been said, is clear to any judicious impartial eye, that this Art is lawfull, where I say, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, &c. But to clear it more plainly, the Psalmist in his very next words saith, The Firmament sheweth the works
of his hands, Psalm. 19.1. which is clear to me is meant thereby that he effecteth by them, (and no o∣ther thing) (though I must confess there are divers in∣terpretations thereof) my reason is, that otherwise, every thing which is created doth declare the handy work of God; I believe Master Homes will finde Aquinas and Hierome of my opinion: He hath heard also, that there is no speech nor sanguage, where the voice of the Starrs are not heard, Psal. 19.3. which may serve here again very well for the purpose in hand; and to speak more plainly, that God doth not prohibit mortals from the study of them; you may see how the holy Ghost by Stephen, in the 7. of the Acts, vers. 22. speaking in the commendation of Moses, giveth him (over and above the commendation that was aforesaid) that he was learned in all the wisedom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and deeds, which is clear to any rational man, that if it had been any wise sinfull, dia∣bolical, or odious in the sight of God, Moses would not have applied his study thereunto; or at least, it would never have been recorded in his praise. I might instance here Daniel, Solomon, and others, but this is so clear, that to insist longer hereon, were but vain, since there is no one place in the Scripture that can be shown to speak po∣sitively against Astrology, or the study thereof, more then to remember us not to give the glory of the Creatour to the Creature, &c. as in the answer to his divine proofs shall appear. Wherefore then since it is warrantable and lawfull out of the Scripture to study this Art, nay and as we see by experience, warranted by God, in the shewing of blazing Starrs to Astrologers onely (not to the vulgar and proficient in other Arts) to forewarn the people of the danger and punishment to come; and if it were not so he might as well shew signes on earth to the illiterate, by common vulgar things; as in heaven to the learned Astrologer, who onely can judge of the effects. Where∣fore
then I say, of necessity the Art must be allowed of by Councils, being the wiser sort of people, especially by the godlier sort of Councils, whose acts and determinati∣ons will be grounded on piety and the Word of God, and if otherwise; I value not what their censure is; for they are but men and (guided by their own reasons and opini∣ons) are but frail subject to infirmity and errour, Huma∣num est errare. He cannot but know also that even the pal∣pablest truths have been condemned by Councils, either for some self-interest, or for abuse of the thing condemn∣ed; as for instance, the Bacaran Councils (as well as the Roman Senate) hath condemned Astrologers, but how? not because they were Students in that heavenly Science, but for trusting in Astrology; (and who is so superstitious, may not lawfully be termed an Astrologer, for Astrolo∣gers are in no sort hereof guilty) the words of the Coun∣cil is in the Cap. 9. of Bacaran Councils, Si quis animas, & corpora humana fatalibus stellis credit adstringi, sicut pagani & Priscillianus dixerunt, anathema sit, Who so trusteth in the fatal necessity of the Stars, as the Heathens and Priscillianists do or say, let him be accurst. To al which, there is no Astrologer, but will willingly conde∣scend; for by this, is not Astrology nor Astrologers in the least condemned, but the abuse of the Art, to give that to it, which properly belongs to God the Creatour of these heavenly bodies; the decree is against those that trust in them, or believe a fatal necessity, not that study the knowledge of them, and make a true use of them. So likewise the Council or Parliament in England, made a Law against those that multiplied Gold and Silver, why? not because they condemned that heavenly revelation, or practise of the most blessed Stone of the Philosophers, but they forbad the multiplication of Gold and Silver, in that they thought it too great a treasure for any private sub∣ject, and to prevent rebellion, commotions and insurrecti∣ons in the Common-wealth, like wise Pilots sitting at the
Stern, did study to prevent the Storm which was likely otherwise to shipwrack the safety thereof. So that I say then, there is no Council, (if they have any spark of Re∣ligion, Learning or Policy) that will shew themselves so ridiculous, as to decree any thing in the least, against ei∣ther Astrologers or Astrology, taking it as it is in it self, and not abused; which is not the fault in the Art, but the Artist in going beyond the Art; for if under the colour of Astrology, I study Necromancy, is Astrology therefore to be condemned as unlawfull, because together with it I study unlawfull Arts? No sure, since this is a thing so far different; therefore it is good to put the Saddle on the right Horse. And this my argument is thus confimed, for that in former ages, both the greatest and wisest sort of people were Practitioners and Students in Astrology; as first we may see by the Egyptians, amongst whom it was not law∣full for any man to take the function of Priesthood on him, except he were an Astrologer; nor could any be cho∣sen King, except he were of the Colledge of Priests. And Rhodiginus reporteth that for the prevention of Treason, there was none born within that Kingdom, whose Nati∣vity was not brought to the King to be judged on. And Dion recordeth the same to be practised by Tiberius; and we see in Daniel, that the Monarchs of Babylon attempted nothing of importance, without first asking counsel of the Chaldeans. And the Kings of Lacedaemonia had none in their Councils neither were any suffered to sit, but who were Astrologers: and also among the Persians, none was ad∣mitted to the Crown, but who were excellently skilled in Astrology; nay, to this day there is no King but hath his Mathematician about him. So then, it is cleared, that there is no Council but what is ignorant of Art and Religion, that will condemn or decree any thing against Astrology, and how it hath been esteemed amongst the wisest and great∣est of the people. And that ye may be the better confirm∣ed
in what hath been already said; I will give the names of most of the chiefest Patriarks, Fathers, Kings, Empe∣rours, and Philosophers, (according as that worthy and noble Sir Christopher Heyden sets them down at the latter end of his Book, in defence of Judicial Astrology) that have been Students in this noble Art. ASTRONOMERS and ASTROLOGERS from ADAM. 1 Adam, 2 Seth, 3 Enoch, 4 Kenan, 5 Mahalaleel, 6 Jared, 7 Henoch, &c. In all about 200. SURVEY. 1. The Title of this Section doth ex∣tremely cheat the Reader, whiles he believes to finde W. R. discourse following it, to make it good; which it doth no more do, then Chalk proves Cheese to be Cheese. To his vain repetition, abusing the sacred Word of God in Psal. 19. hath been spoken afore; onely William adds a confutation of himself; that all the Creation shew the handy-work of God. And therefore by Williams own consequence, all the World should be the proper subject but of one Discipline, viz. of Astrology. His BELIEF that Aquinas and Hierome is of his opinion. 1. Begets in me a belief of a report that was brought to me by a godly Scholar that hath some ac∣quaintance with some of Williams way, but upon ano∣ther account, THAT William was helped by some of his Brethren or their Teachers in his Christian (un∣christian-like) Astrology. 2. Begets a belief in me that William cannot tell where, or what, either Aquinas or Hierome speaks for Judicial Astrology. For W. R. af∣firmeth nothing, quotes nothing, either of the place, or
their words. The Doctour hath not so dealt with W. R. and his Brethren. 3. That William mistook his infor∣mation, or his informers mistook. For Aquinas hath no∣thing at all, and Hierome saith nothing for Astrology, upon the Psalms. But this I can assure Will. Ram. that Aquinas in his Summes hath much against Astrolo∣gy. And it were just to bid him and his Prompters go look it, because they deal so unfairly with the Doctour, and jugglingly with the Reader, either in non-quoting, or in quoting Non-ens. But to clear mine integrity to the Reader; it is in Aquinas 2 a. 2 ae. Qu. 95. where Aquinas putting the Question whether the divination that is made by the Starrs be unlawfull? 1. He saith, SED CON∣TRAEST, quod Augustinus, &c. That is, That of Austin is against the lawfulness of Divina∣tion by Starrs;Illos Planetarios quos Mathematicos vocant, con∣sulere non desidebam; & quod tamen Christiana, & vera pietas expellit, & damnat. In 4. Confess. I did not (saith Austin) desist consulting with the PLANETARIES, whom they call MATHEMATICIANS, &c. which thing nevertheless Christian, and true piety expelleth,Conclusio. Contingen∣tium, & casualium per certitudinem divinatio su∣perstitiosa & illicica est. and condemneth. 2. Aquinas his CONCLUSION is, To divine by the disposition of heaven∣ly bodies, as by a certainty, touching con∣tingent and casual things is superstitious, and unlaw∣full, &c. 3. In his RESPONDEORespondeo, dicendum quòd sicut dictum est, di∣vinationi quae ex opinione fals & vana procedit, in∣gerit properatio; daemo∣nis, ut hominum animos implicet vanitati, aut fal∣fitati. Vanâ autem aut falsâ opinione utitur, si quis ex consideratione stellarum, futura velit praecognoicere, quae per cas praecognosci non pos∣sunt. Pst ergo consideran∣dum, quid per coelestium corporum inspectionem de futuris possunt pra∣cognosci. Et de his qui∣dem quae ex necessitate e∣veniunt, manisellum est quòd per confider: tionem si ellarum possunt prae∣cognosci, sicut Astrologi praenanciant Eclipses fu∣turas. Non possent dispo∣sitiones & motus corpo∣rum coelestium reduci in unam causam communem quae sit corporali, Possunt autem reduci in unam cau∣sam communem quae est providentia divina. Sed aliâ ratione disponuntur  divina providentia mous & situs coelestium corpo∣rum, & aliâ ratione even∣tus contingentium futuro∣rum; quia illa disponuntur scumùm rationem neces∣sitatis, ut semper & coem modo proveniant; hc au∣tem secundùm rationem contingentiae, ut variabili∣ter contingant. Unde non potest esse, quòd ex inspe∣ctione syderum accipiatur praecognitio futurorum, ni∣si sinut ex causis praeco∣gnoscuntur effectur. Du∣plices autem effectus sub∣trahuntur causalitati coe∣lestium corporum. 1. qui∣dem omnes effectus per accidens contingentes, sive in rebus humanis, sive in rebus naturalibus. Quia, ut probatur 6. Metaph∣ens per accidens non ha∣bet causam, & praecipuè natualem, cujusmodi est vitus coelestium corpo∣rum. Quia quod per acci∣dens fit, neque est ens pro∣priè, neque unum, sieut quòd lapide cadente fiat Terraemotus. Haec enim, & hujusmodi non sunt sim∣pliciter unum, sed simpli∣citer multa. Operatio au∣tem naturae semper termi∣natur ad aliquid unum, si∣cut & procedit ab uno principio, quod est forma rei naturalis. 2. Autem subtrahuntur causalitati coelestium corporum actus liberi arbitrii, quod est fa∣cultas voluntatis & ratio∣nis. Intellectus enim sive ratio, non est corpus, nee actus corporis organici, & per consequens, nec vo∣luntas quae est in ratione,  patet per Philosophum in 3. de anim. Nullum autem corpus potest im∣primere in iem incorpore∣am. Unde impossibile est, quòd corpora coelestia di∣ectè imprimant in intel∣lectum & voluntatem. Hoc enim esset ponere in∣tellectum non differre à sensu. Unde corpora coele∣stia non possunt esse per se, causa operationum li∣beri arbitrii, possunt ta∣men ad hoc dispositivè inclinare in quamum im∣primunt in corpus huma∣num, & per consequens, in vires sensitivas, quae sunt actus corporalium orga∣norum, quae inclinant ad humanos actus. Quia ta∣men vires sensitivae obedi∣unt rationi, ut pater per Philosophum 3. de Anim. & 1. Ethic. nulla necessi∣pas ex hoc, libero arbitrio imponitur, sed contra in∣clinationem coelestium corporum homo potest per rationem operati Si quis ergo CONSIDE∣RATIONE ASTRO∣NUM UTATUR AD PRAECOGNOSCEN∣DOS FUTUROS CA∣SURALES, VEL FOR∣TUITOS EVENTUS, AUT ETIAM AD COGNOSCENDUM PER CERTITUDI∣MEM FUTURA OE∣RA HOMINUM, pro∣cedit hoc ex falsa & vana opinione. ET SIC OPE∣RATIO DAE MONIS SE IMMISCET. Unde erit divinatio SU∣PERSTITIOSA & illicita. upon that Conclusion he enlargeth much against Judicial Astrology; the summ whereof (to give it you in his own words) is this. DICENDƲM quod &c. i. e. We must say, (saith Aquinas) as hath been said afore (Art. 1.2.) the operation of the Devil doth pour in it self into that divination which proceeds from a false and vain opinion, to the end that he may inwrap the mindes of men in vanity or falsehood. And if any
man will fore-know future things by the consideration of the Starrs, which by them cannot be fore known, he is the man that follows a vain, and false opini∣on. Therefore we must consider, what of future things may be fore-known by in∣spection into the Starrs. And indeed as concerning those things which come to pass by necessity, it is manifest that they may be fore-known by consideration of the Stars; as Astrologers do foretell Eclipses. The dispositions and motions of the hea∣venly Bodies, cannot be reduced unto one common cause which is natural; but may be reduced unto one common cause, which is divine providence. But the motions and situations of the heavenly bodies are by divine providence disposed one way, and the events of future contingencies ano∣ther; because, the former are disposed according to the manner of necessity, that they always come to pass, and after the same manner. But the later, after the way of contingency, that they happen va∣riously. From whence it cannot be, that the foreknowledge of future things can be ta∣ken by inspection into the Starrs, other∣wise then as effects are fore-known by their causes. Now there are two sorts of effects that are exempted from the efficacy of the celestial bodies. 1. All effects that happen by accident, whether in hu∣mane, or natural things: because as 'tis proved in the sixth of Metaphysicks, an entity by accident hath no cause, especially natural, such as is the vertue of heaven∣ly
bodies. Because that which is by acci∣dent is neither an entity properly, nor an oneness; as for example, whiles a stone is falling there is an Earthquake, &c. For these and the like things are not simply one, but absolutely many. Now the operation of Nature is always terminated unto some one thing, even as it doth flow from one principle, which is the natural form of the thing. 2. The acts of free will (which is a faculty of the will and reason) are exempted from the efficacy of the heavenly bodies. For the intellect, or reason is nei∣ther a body, nor the act of a corporeal or∣gan, and by consequence, neither is the will, which is within the reason; as ap∣pears by the Philosopher in his third Book of the soul. Now no bodily thing can make an impression upon an incorporeal thing, Whence it follows, that IT IS IM∣POSSIBLE THAT THE HEA∣VENLY BODIES CAN DI∣RECTLY MAKE AN IM∣PRESS ƲPON THE ƲN∣DERSTANDING AND THE WILL. For this were to make the under∣standing not to differ from sense. From whence it follows, that the heavenly bodies cannot be a cause per se of the actings of free will, yet may they disposingly incline to this, so farr as they impress upon mans body, and by consequence, upon the sensi∣tive powers, which are acts of the corpo∣ral organs, which incline to humane acts. Yet because THE SENSITIVE POWERS ARE OBEDIENT
TO REASON (as appears by the Philosopher in his 3. book of the soul, and in his 1. book of Manners) NO NE∣CESSITY HEREBY IS IM∣POSED UPON THE SPON∣TANEOUS WILL, BUT A MAN CAN ACT CONTRA∣RY TO THE INCLINATI∣ON OF THE CELESTIAL BODIES, BY THE POWER OF HIS REASON. Therefore, IF ANY MAN shall make use of the CONSIDERATION OF THE STARRS to foreknow CASUAL, or CONTINGENT EVENTS, or also to know with certainty the FU∣TURE WORKS OF MEN, this proceedeth from a false and vain opinion, and so the OPERA∣TION OF THE DEVIL INTER∣MINGLES IT SELF, from whence the divination is SUPERSTITIOUS AND UNLAWFULL. Thus farr Aquinas; on whom commenting we have learned, and profound Caje∣tan to boot. Et ex his patet (saith Cajetan) quomodo in∣telligendum est, &c. that is, By these it is apparent, how we must understand that celestial bodies are not over-ruling our elections or free chusings, and voluntary acts, and how the consultation of Astrologers about the Nativities of men, &c. are condemned. For if these things be applied for a certainty of knowledge of contin∣gencies; or (which is the same thing) if we must use such a figure of the Nativity, &c. as a law, they are diabolical and condemned. And this Austin intends in his fourth book of his Confessions. But if they be onely to attain a con∣jecture of natural inclinations, they are not evil. With all know, that albeit some truth may be had out of those things, yet THE WAY OR MANNER
OF THE CONJECTURE IS SO WEAK THAT IT IS SCARCELY A CON∣JECTURE. And this because of humane igno∣rance, of the greatest of Causes, both Celestial and next Causes. For the whole of that we know in these kinde of the things, doth not deserve to be called A Part (how small soever) of those things we are ignorant of concerning the same as in relation to us and still daily are so ignorant untill the whole compleat course of heavenly bodies be once gone over. Because the Starrs are unknown to us, how they are one towards another, and their moti∣on is not compleated untill six and thirty thousand years be over. I say that daily there is a new situation of the starry Heaven, which situation yet hath never been con∣sidered, unto which the Planets and Starrs being re∣ferred, who can tell what causality they are clothed with, or how they cause, change, or destroy. I mention not the Calculation of Motions, because perhaps it is impossible to have Instruments exactly to know the rising and setting of Starrs, as I hear it from the Astrologers themselves. As for W.R. alleadging Moses and Daniel, he de∣serves rather a Ferula, then an answer, because the Do∣ctour hath fully answered that those Saints were not judi∣ciary Astrologers; so that William could not here give us any solid reply. William Ramsey's proof in this Section, that Ju∣diciary Astrology is not condemned by the Word of God, is onely his passing his Word for it, which is worth nothing, for how unable he is to keep his Word will appear after. His alleadging that God shews Bla∣zing Starrs onely to Astrologers is a gross untruth, confu∣ted by thousands of the vulgar yet alive in England, who saw the Blazing Starr many nights, that appeared afore the Swedish Warrs in Germany. For what hinders, but Shepheards, Sailers, Watchmen, &c. illiterates should
perceive that which is obvious to the common eyes of mankinde; and distinguish a Comet from a Starr by his nearness, motion, and his feather or long tail. And just as William proves here Judicial Astrology not to be condemned by the Word of God; just so (and no wiselier) doth he prove it not impugned by Councils; namely by bare facing it down with a bold forehead (whiles that Councils to the contrary are in his sight) that of necessity the Art must be allowed by Councils, yet in the same place professeth his contempt of Councils, if they be not of his minde. Is this Williams proof of the lawfulness of Astrology by Councils? To one of those Councils alleadged by the Doctour (for he alleadged two in his Demonology, and might have done more) Will. can say nothing. To the other he hoped he could;W. Ram. is shame∣fully out in his LATIN. See be∣fore in this Section at * but hath miserably disgraced himself in not construing a plain piece of Latin right. For the words of the Council, as Will. Ram. reports them, Si quis animas, & corpora humana fatal, bus stellis credit adstringi, sicut Pagani, & Priscillianus dixerunt, Anathema sit; are according to true Grammar, thus to be rendered; If any one doth be∣leive the Souls and Bodies of Men to be bound to, or necessitated by fatal Starrs, as the Pagans and the Pri∣scillanists do let him be accursed. So that if you compare Will. Ram. interpretation with this, which is close ac∣cording to the Latin, you shall finde that he did not onely leave out something, because it might prejudice him; but (which is the thing I mainly insist upon) he doth interpret the Latin most falsely in the main thing; which condemns any with Anathema, that shall believe that the Starrs have a necessitating power over mens Bodies and Souls; which in plain English is, to believe the Astrologers to say true, who in their practise, so teach, and by that undertake to predict humane events by their Judicial Astrology. For the Philosophers Stone, he hath little cause to call it Blessed, seeing the attempts about it have undone Will.
Ramseys father,Testis M. Rowl. Mini∣ster. who lies in Prison by it. Though the late King bore with his father defeating him of his expectati∣on, and of scores of pounds, yet other men will not, can∣not bear such wrongs. Nor hath Will. Ram. so blessed himself with his father skill, and the Philosophers Stone, as to enrich themselves, and deliver him. To his large alleadging the honour and antiquity of Astrology, a brief answer will serve; viz. 1. That till Will. Ramsey or his associates do produce some true Christians, whiles such, to have been practisers of Judi∣cial Astrology, all his instances amount but to the Pro∣verb, Ask my Fellows whether I be a Thief: or to a self contradiction. For the Astrologers W.R. W.L. &c. when they see their advantage, inveigh against godly and learned Ministers, with the name of Priests; and H.H. Vox coelorum, in the behalf of Astrology saith, the Roman Laws against Mathematicians and Prognosticatours did mean Chaldeans, and yet now the Priests and the Chaldeans must be alleadged for the honour of Judicial Astrology. 2. If Will. Ramsey doth not here intend a difference between Astronomers and Astrologers (contrary to his Tenet afore) in that he puts both names in the Title to his Catalogue; yet he thinks learned men may put that difference; so that if any of them should whip him for his false Scrowl, proving many of them no Astrologers; yet they may be found Astronomers. 3. W. Ram. Catalogue of them from Adam, &c. is ridiculous. We have no such thing in the Bible; and there∣fore can know no such thing. For Greek Homer the Poet is the ancientest humane Authour that is extant. The man flourished about 911. years afore Christ. The onely Au∣thour pretended, of the greatest antiquity, viz. concern∣ing things so ancient as the beginning of the Empire of Babylon, and of Ninus the first Emperour thereof, is one Berosus; of whose writings (saith learned Sleidan)
almost all men make a doubt, and think them counterfeit. The most judicious and true Chronologer, leaves out Be∣rosus. Helvicus puts him in ad annum Mundi 3690.Lib. 7. cap. 37. which is but about 281. years afore Christ, which is but yesterday in comparison of Adam, Seth, Enoch. Pliny saith, this Berosus was an Astrologer. And of the true, and forged Berosus learned Gesner in his Bibliotheck writes thus, There are extant in our age five Books of Aniquities, ascribed to Berosus, but all the more learned judge they are not of Berosus, but feigned by I know not what Fabler, and set forth in Berosus his name. To this famous Pezelius on Sleidan adds. Josephus (saith he) cites the Histories of Berosus, l. 1. con. App. & Athenaeus l. 14. The genuine Berosus perished. There remains the Fictions of Annius Viterbiensis a Monk; neither are the fragments of Metasthen and Manethon of a better me∣tall. W.R. his SECT. V. Demonstrating the antiquity of Astrology. VVE have seen already how Astrology hath been proved lawfull by the Scripture and reason, not condemned by Councils, but admired and honoured in all ages, by the wisest of the ancients; we come now to shew its antiquity, and from whence it had its first original: Concerning this point, there hath been much controversie amongst Writers, but most hold, that it was first revealed to man in the infancy of the World by God; Ari∣stotle deriveth it from the Egyptians, Tully from the Assyrians, others from the Sidonians, Chaldeans, Persi∣ans, Indians, Arabians, and Greeks; but however it is most certain, if we will believe the ancientest Historiogra∣phers, that the Priests and Kings amongst the Egyptians, the Chaldeans among the Babylonians, the Magicians a∣mong
the Persians, the Gymnosophists among the Indians, the chief Philosophers of Greece and Italy, and the Druides of France were all Astrologers, and esteemed by those Nations for the wisest men. But Josephus in his An∣tiquities, lib. 1. cap. 2. deriveth it from Adam and Seth: and that they taught it to their posterity, and that Seth was so well skilled therein, that foreseeing thereby the destruction of the World, first by Water, then by Fire, least the knowledge should perish by the Flood, engra∣ved it in two Pillers, the one of Stone, the other of Brick; and he farther witnesseth that of Stone to remain in Syria in his own time; and in the 3. Chapter of the same Book, he affirmeth, that man lived so long before the Flood (by the permission of God) to learn Arts and Sciences, espe∣cially naming Astrologie and Geometry, the which (saith he) Ediscere non potuissent, nisi sexcentis viverent annis, could not be learned under six hundred years time, for these are Studies that require much experience, and parti∣cular observation, which could not be done on an instant. Again in his eighth Chapter of the same first Book of his Antiquities, he further affirmeth, that Abraham having learned this knowledge in Chaldea being the place of his birth, when he came into Egypt, he first taught the Egyp∣tians the knowledge of Astrologie and Arithmetick and since the Egyptians have been most exquisite therein, so that some Historians have believed Atlas King of Egypt to be the first inventer thereof, others have thought He∣noch and Atlas to be both one, but most Historiographers hold Atlas to be after the Flood. And that Astrology is derived from Adam. SURVEY.Antiqui∣as sine retitate est vetu∣stas er∣roris. Were it not that the Reader might suspect my leaping over something that were considerable, I would have left out this Section, it being a vain Tauto∣logy. We have already answered to the antiquity of Astrology; and in particular to Josephus. The Fathers rule is excellent, Antiquity without verity is the ancient∣ness
of Errour. All that are here reckoned up to counte∣nance Astrology were either the worst of men, viz. Hea∣thens, or diabolical Magicians, or Idolaters; or both, or all (as were the Druides, whom some ancient Au∣thours call Magos, others idolalatras) or the most uncer∣tain, if not the foolishest of Traditions (as that of the two Pillars) of which Josephus hath store, and therefore not to be regarded in what he saith of such ancient times of Abraham, as we have given sufficient reason in the Survey of the former Section; or self-contradictions; as that a man could not learn Astrology under six hundred years, yet now William, and William, and I know not who will pretend great skill in it at half sixty: or Ridi∣cles; For naming Adam to be an Astrologer he might well think, the Reader would judge if he was an Astro∣loger he was so after the Devil had given him the fall; and if there were a derivation of Astrology from him as such, it was in the traduction of sin. For conclusion of this Section; let me deal truly, seriously, and plainly with William, that it is brought to me by good hands from his own Brethren in Astrology that they set him on work, because he was one of the silly mean ones among them, thereby to disgrace the Doctour. But I will say what others say, that William hath but blown upon the Question. Demonology stands like a Castle of Steel. The Astrologers have laid their heads, and prompt∣ed Will. Ram. but nothing is done but the disgracing of their own cause. W.R. his SECT. VI. That Astrology is the most profitable Study reveated under the Sun to mortals. WHich I shall indeavour to make clear thus; first, that it is most profitable for the knowledge
of Moral Philosophy, viz. of our selves and others. Se∣condly, for Natural Philosophy. Thirdly, for Physick. Fourthly, for Health. Fifthly, for Husbandry. Sixthly, for giving a reason for Climacterical years (which other Arts cannot) and other things. Seventhly, and lastly, for Military Discipline. First, that it is most profitable for the knowledge of Moral Philosophy, M. Homes will not deny (if he know any thing in the Art,) that the constitution of the body, and the disposition of the minde is by Astrology known; so that hereby we receive a double benefit, viz. First, ad∣monition to refrain what may prove noxious and hurt∣full to our health. Secondly, encouragement to apply our selves to that whereunto we are born apt by nature; besides we may also be warned hereby of what may cause the minde by ill government to offend others. And for felicity the chief end of Moral Philosophy; no Art or Science can compare with Astrology, for it teacheth a man what pertains to the goods of the body and minde, and so also to moderate the unruly affections, whose violence carri∣eth away the minde from that golden mean wherein ver∣tue dwels and keeps her place; so likewise in the external goods, it resolveth a man what hopes or likelihood by his own industry, or otherwise he hath to attain to the riches of this world; and also teacheth him how to increase the same, by what means, at what time, and in what place it wil be best for him, or most profitable to this intent or pur∣pose. So that then ye see Astrology to comprehend more in one part, then all the Arts in the World put together, in any or all parts. Secondly, for Natural Philosophy, it bringeth no less help hereunto, then to the former, for hereby the Philoso∣pher cometh to know God the upholder, and immoveable Greatour of all things, by the constant inchangeable mo∣tion of the Heavens; and the corruption and generation of all things, by the motion of ☉, ☽ and other Planets
in the Zodiack; and that there is a certain prefixt time of every ones life that is born, allotted by the Starrs, and that this is divers according to the nature of every Con∣stellation, and the measure of every proper revolution; as also the reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, by the motion of ☽. He comes also by Astrology to know the rising of Meteors, the motion of Comets, and innurnerable other things, much conducing to the fur∣therance of his knowledge, experience, and skill. But this is so clear, I hasten to what is further to be said in the praise and utility of Astrology, least I spend too much time in confuting such weak stuff, as is this discourse of M. Homes, against so apparent a noble and excellent Art. Thirdly, for Physick; for all that knows any thing in Astrology, can acquaint M. Homes, as also his great friend Galen (as most falsely he accuses him (in his 115. page) to condemn Astrology as Sophistical, when indeed he himself appears no other at the best, to wrong so wor∣thy a man,) That he that shall administer Physick when the Sun comes to the Equinoctial points, or in the Cani∣cular or Dog-dayes and the like, knows very little in the one or the other, viz. Physick or Astrology; and is ra∣ther to be accounted a fool then a Physician; and further, Galen admonisheth men not to trust themselves with that Physician that is not versed in Astrology; and Hip∣pocates also saith, that that Physician which is ignorant in Astrology, is not fully, nor can he be perfectly known in his Art; for without Astrology, he shall never be able to give Physick safely, viz. when to purge by evacuation or vomit, or Phlebotomy, or for what humours, or in what quantity, neither can he know or come to the under∣standing of the chief Piller of his Art, viz. the true cause of the Malady without it, neither with it, (if well learned therein) can he err: Besides Galen further affirm∣eth, that Physick given at unseasonable times, doth not
onely little avail or help, but oftentimes prove very hurt∣full, even to the endangering of the life of the Patient; and that these times are onely to be known and judged by the Starrs. Fernelius (a learned Physician) doth here∣unto also condescend, as also Ficinus; for there is nothing more certain, then that Astrology doth plainly deliver Rules for all the parts of Physick abovesaid, (which M. Homes I am confident (if any whit read therein) dare not but confess) and not onely so, but also teacheth the critical dayes, without which they cannot be known with any certainty; wherefore it is, that those Physicians igno∣rant in Astrology, conclude the seventh and fourteenth dayes to be dangerous, when most times they are deceived, and so consequently apply contrary Remedies to their Patients, much to their prejudice, if not absolute destructi∣on: the reason is, the ☽ by her various motion cometh sometimes sooner, and sometimes later, to her □ and ☍ or quadrat and opposite part of the place she was in at the beginning of the Disease, viz. Sometimes she comes to her □ in seven dayes, sometimes not till the eighth or ninth day, other times at the sixth day; and to her ☍ sometimes at the fourteenth day, sometimes at the thir∣teenth, other times not till the sixteenth day. I would fain now M. Homes, you would shew what Art in the whole earth, is more beneficial to Physick, then Astrologie &c. but I hasten to the remaining proofs. Fourthly, for Health, which none but the most ignorant and malicious will deny, since the constitution of the bo∣dy is the onely ground, wise Physicians go upon, and look first to; that that foundation being laid, they may then fall to the rebuilding of the Patient, otherwise (as you have heard) destruction (like a house founded on the sand) is to be expected. Then consequently the most en∣vious cannot but confess and acknowledge it to be the most profitable thing for our health under the Sun. Wherefore then let us see whether the Husbandman will
acknowledge it to be beneficial to him in the way of li∣ving, viz. Husbandry. Fifthly, Husbandry, and first let me ask him, whether he lops his Trees from the time the Sun declines from our Horizon, till he again re-enters the equinoctial point? or if he knows not (if he should) that it will not grow again? or whether he use to sow Pease in the increase of ☽? or if so, whether they will then ever leave blooming or blossoming? or whether therefore he doth not observe and remember to set them in the wain, or decrease of ☽. Nay, it is reported of the women in the North, both of Eng∣land and Scotland, that they diligently observe a time of the Moon to set their Egges, that they may all come to good; and furthermore, let me ask the Husband-man, whether he observeth not a time to graff, and prune his Trees? but this is so common, that to spend more time hereunto were to no purpose. Sixthly, for rendring a reason for Climacterical years, it happening by the profection of the Planets and Horo∣scope, ascendant or first House (as ye may call it) to the ☍ or □ aspects or their places in Nativities, or by the moti∣on of ♄ if he have power in the Nativity, for Ptolomy and the wisest in this Art, give ♄ as much power in the decree of severall years, as the Sun hath in moneths, or the ☽ in dayes; and if his course be observed, it will be found finished much about the same number of years, as the Moons is in dayes; and further, that ♄ in every seven years comes either to □ or ☍ of his place in the Radix of Nativities. And further know, that if there be no danger (as we finde by experience) of some mens lives, at these years, they have either some of the beneficial Planets in their eighth House, or the direction of the ascendant, or Aphetical places are free from all impediment and af∣fliction, of the interficient and malignant Constella∣tions. Seventhly, and lastly, for Military Discipline, History
is full of Examples herein, and for brevities sake (because I will hasten to conclude this first Chapter, that I may proceed to M. Homes his second Section) I will here con∣tent my self with this one, which the Indian Histories shew forth unto us; which is, that Columbus having the Art of Astrology, and being in a straight for want of Vi∣ctual, together with the whole Army of the King of Spain, Ferdinand; and foreseeing an Eclipse of the ☽ within few dayes to happen; threatned the Indians he would send infinite Plagues amongst them, if they speedi∣ly relieved them not; in token whereof they should at such a time see the ☽ light taken from them, which they at first slighted, but when they saw according to the for∣mer words, that the Moon began to be darkned and grew so more and more, and being ignorant of the cause there∣of, did not onely send them the Victual they formerly re∣tained from them, but also threw themselves at Colum∣bus feet, asking forgiveness: So then ye have had (as brief as may be) shewn unto you, what Astrology is, that it is an Art, and a lawfull Art, allowed of by Scri∣pture, the antiquity of it, and the utility of it; there is it may be some Arts, that may be beneficial or helpfull to another; but you see both positively and conclusively, that Astrology is generally helpfull to all Arts and Sci∣ences; nay, what other Study in the whole World in this point is like it, or able to compare with it? SURVEY. Will. Ramsey in his Title might well have excepted Divinity and Religion (if he hath any) and have distinguished of Astrology. For sure the Art pre∣tending to tell that the Thieves that committed the Rob∣bery about Brainsford the last Summer, that such a way the womans Cows were gone. That Mistris—his Sweet-heart would prove a Shrew, with infinite the like (that may be produced in time) do not at all conduce to Natural Philosophy, Physick, &c. which VVilliam reckons up.
Its ill a signe by VVill. Ramsey's manners that Astro∣logy is profitable for Morality (unless VVilliam will de∣ny he hath any Astrology.) And therefore nor our Phi∣losophers, nor Aristotle the Prince of them mixed any directions out of Astrology, in their Moral Philosophy. As for the disposition of the minde VVilliam assured us in his Epistle to the Reader. That the will of man is not subject to the influence of the Starrs. And learned Huet in his EXAM. INGEN. tells us a readier way then by Starrs. And of the body, we know the temper, farr better by experience of the effect, then by conjectu∣rals from causes, if Starrs were any certain cause. But VVill. Ramsey's Ptolomy in his first Book tells us among other causes of the uncertainty of Astrologicall Predicti∣ons, That though bodies are affected by the Starrs, yet the seed of generation may alter the case. As for the predicting what hope a man may have, by his own industry, or otherways to get goods, it doth little tend to Moral Philosophy, and doth less appertain to Astrology, if VVilliam be an honest man of his word, in his particulars he layes down in his Epistle to the Reader before enumerated of Natural Philosophy, I have several times shewed VVilliam, that the thing of natural Astro∣logy is a part; judicial, non-ens, or worse. And without either, thousands of people that are no Astrologers, or Philosophers excellently well know God to be the Creator and upholder of all things; whiles Phi∣losophers and Astrologers have turned Atheists, or worse, Rom. 1. To say, the Starrs alot every mans prefixed time of life, is to intrench upon Gods Decree and Providence, and to avouch a fatal necessity in the influence of the Starrs; with which VVilliam promised us in his Epistle to the Reader his Astrology should not meddle. His great Preamble of the usefulness of Astrology for Physick amounts to thus much upon experience;
1. That there are in this Nation many Christian learn∣ed and succesfull Physicians, who are neither well-skill'd, nor well-will'd to VV.R. his Astrology. If need be we can give him their names. 2. That the matter of Will. Ramsey his Judicial Astrology being humane events; as whether a man shall be rich, and, &c. as before he expressed, and his Bre∣threns writings and practise do testifie; the natural judge∣ment upon mens bodies is quite hereto general from it. 3. That thousands of English men, yea, the most of the common people, that are no Physicians, do well know; yea, feel (without the help of Ramseyan Astrolo∣gy) that the Canicular dayes, &c. are not the best times for taking Physick, unless upon great extremity; and therefore are no Fools. His great clattering together of the names of Hippo∣crates, Galen, Fernelius, and Ficinus, is but a Scar-crow to scare silly birds, I mean weak-headed Youths from the truth, and a juggle to conjure them into his Circles by Charmes they cannot understand. For William (accord∣ing to his manner of unfair dealing) doth neither quote their words, nor the place where they so speak, as he inti∣mates. And though we have hunted after him, and beat the thickets, yet we can finde no such thing. But this we finde. 1. That Hippocrates saith of Astronomy, (nothing of Astrology) that it is not altogether unusefull for the facul∣ty of Physick. (as his Dialect i) . But how doth he there make it out? Sure∣ly onely thus; Because (saith Hippocrates) together with the times of the year, the ventricles of men receive a change; and so goes on of the difference in health the vari∣ety of windes may make. Now judge, understanding Read∣er, how little this makes for Judicial Astrology. 2. Gallen the Commentary upon him (to omit the Sophisticum quoted by Alsted in Astrology that doth so much anger Will. Ramsey) saith onely this to that point,
Coelum in his verbis, &c. i. e. Hippocrates in these words doth put Heaven as the cause of all vulgar diseases: yet,De Aēere locis, & Aliquis. Sect. 3. & differt; inquit Xeno∣phon, : Galen in 1. l. Hip. de mor∣bis vul∣garibus. saith Gallen, (correcting his Master) sometimes the drinking of corrupt water may cause an universal disease. And then goes on to discourse of the severall diseases that befall men in the four quarters of the years, distinguishing those quarters by the rising and setting of severall Starrs or Constellations proper to them. Which is all the hint we have in Gallen to the point in hand. 'Tis true the Index puts high titles, and great emphasis on these places. But you see here what the matter is upon true account. 3. 'Tis true, that Fernelius saith, Purae simplicis{que} pe∣stilentiae causa, &c. i. e. The cause of the meer and sim∣ple Pestilence is the configutation of the Heavens by their vertue. But withall he presently avoucheth, Quae neque temporum mutatione, neque ulla manifestâ qualitate, sed solo eventu deprehendi potest. i.e. That that efficacy of the Heavens cannot be discerned, either by the change of times, or by any manifest quality, but meerly by the event. 4. Williams quoting of Ficinus was to him (to use an Astrological phrase for their use, though not approved by me) most unlucky of all the rest. For he though pro∣fessing himself a Physician doth bang Judicial Astrology all over his vast works. I shall here give but a touch. In his book, in Plotin. cap. 2. the title of the second Para∣graph or Head is, That for many causes the judgement concerning future things is most difficult. And then begins his discourse thus, Quod autem nec homo, nec daemon, &c. that is, that neither man nor devil is able by the sole in∣spection of the Heavens to see the lesser matters accurre among us, &c. which he there proves strongly by many reasons; too long for me to epitomise in this intended breif Survey. Now let the observant Reader judge what Will. Ram. hath got by those names he so rattled together. From
them all not such a word as Astrology; much less Judi∣cial. Least of all any inference that if there be a conside∣ration of the Heavens for sickness, Physick, &c. that therefore they can tell me where is my lost Cow; who was the Thief that robbed me. By this, my soul loathes the silly weakness of the rest in this Section, and shall kick it off for naught. By expe∣rience we all know any observable effect of the Moon; as all men, Physicians, or others, are often enough de∣ceived in judging the Crisis meerly by that Planet; by reason that the different natures of the Patients, and va∣rious change of Windes and Weathers (to which Hippo∣crates ascribes much) &c. do much alter the case.Hipp. lib. 3. Aphor. 5 And Will. Ramseys notion upon Health is to me non∣ens or non sense, as I have touched afore. For Husbandry, the Clownes can tell more then the Astrologer: as pre∣sently he doth intimately confess that he learned Hen∣houswifry of the Northern women, not they from the Astrologer. A very sutable observation, to usher in his Fable of the Climacterical years; unless he mean that which we have by experience, that every seventh year a man that observes shall finde a great change in his body, in regard of di∣et, &c. otherwise that Scripture assures us that every man by Gods decree hath an appointed time. And for conclusion William tells us a Tale of Columbus, &c. which the Astronomer (without Astrology) can do; onely, if he be honest, he cannot tell a Lie to get Victu∣als, or Money. But the story and the practise is tolerable enough in the opinion and practise of divers Astrologers about London, &c.
W.R. his CHAP. II. I Am come now to Mr. Homes his second Section, wherein we shall see how he vents his malice most in∣vectively all along against Astrology, thinking he bring∣eth the learned to condemn it; but what are the learned Schoolmen, or great Philosophers to me, or their sayings in this matter, further then they have truth and reason on their side? If they follow their own opinions and con∣ceits without sound reason and warrant, I see no warrant or reason why I should regard either them, their words or quoters. W.R. his SECT. I. Wherein is further shewn the legality of Astrology, HIs first learned man (then) he begins with is To∣status, who he saith in his Commentary on Levit. 19. Quaest. 28.29 &c. hath these words, the which Doctour Willet gves him viz. Of things which are (as to us) accidental as the success of business, or their causes internal, as mens will and free choice, as to undertake a journey, or to build or not build; predictions are not onely uncertain but superstitious: and the same is to be said of casting of Nativities by the conjunction of the Planets; But if he had considered what reason or ground Tostatus hath for these words, he had never thus laid them open; and I much wonder he being a Divine, he had not first himself considered and weighed the Text, which that he may now do, I will here set it down: Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards to be defiled by them; I am the Lord your God. Levit. 19.31. Where we clearly see there is no part of the Text, once in the least mentioneth or meaneth Astrology; it is against the seeking after those that have familiar Spirits and Wi∣zards.
W. R. his SECT. II. Wherein is shewn that the Stars are Signes and Causes. HE then brings Doctour Willet in these words, All manner of conjecturing (which saith he is meant by Astrology) is not unlawfull, whereof any Natural or Di∣vine cause can be yielded; as first there be Natural Signes in the Heavens and Air, as of the alteration of weather, of windes, of rain, &c. This doth no whit hurt Astrolo∣gy; mark but the words, all manner of conjecturing is not unlawfull, &c. and saith M. Homes, see he calleth it (meaning Astrology) but conjecturing onely; but doth M. Homes conjecture it to be no other? if he do, it is his ignorance. But let me not forget my self, and spend too much time about him. It hath been already shewn, that the Starrs have the applause of power on the natural things of this world, as also the great Ptolomy (whose word in this case I believe will be taken before Doctour Willets or M. Homes his) gives his word for it; besides experience also as above shewed; (and you know Expe∣rientia docet:) there is no more to be said, but that Astro∣logy is not (as Doctour Willet saith) unlawfnll; neither doth he in any wise condemn it, for in his following words he tells us, There are natural Signes in the Heavens and Air, which cause rain, winde, &c. The cause of which, is no other then the influence of the Starrs, which if he deny, all Writers on this Art are contracted, as also the Scripture to boot; if then this be not a strong Argument, let himself judge. But to clear this point more fully: What, saith Master Homes, is the cause of Rain, alteration of Air, and the like? If his Master, Doctour Willet, did not these words shew it. me thinks he should not have left the Reader unsatisfied; and not onely so, but have proved the Starrs to have no influence thereon, nor to be causes
of these alterations, and then his argument had been good. But they are causes; And first let me give you Moses judgement herein, who plainly tells us, The Stars are for signs and seasons, Gen. 1.14. which M. Homes will say is fulfilled in the words following, viz. And God made two great lights, the one to rule the day, the other to rule the night, Gen. 1.16. To which then I answer, by way of Quere, to what end then are these invincible, irresistable and innumerable hosts of Heaven? were they made for no other use then to gaze on? the Sun and Moon will sufficiently serve our turn for matter of light, if we look no further into their uses; but the Scripture further putteth this matter quite out of doubt if we will believe Gods own word, Job 28.31. For he speaking of his Omnipotent power, asketh his servant Job, whe∣ther he, or any one else Can restrain the influence of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion: On which words S. Austin on Job, referreth all men to the study of Astro∣logy, for the understanding of that place; and not onely so, but shews us that under these two constellations, the Lord doth comprehend the influence of all the Celestiall host, figuratively expressing pars pro toto; and to shew you by experience the verity hereof, if you will neither believe S. Augustine, Moses, nor God himself, except you see and feel; (not to insist long on this point, which is cleared by such strong and invincible witnesses, one whereof is able to be sufficient testimony against all Ma∣ster Homes his learned Judges and condemners of Astro∣logy,) for confirming and clearing hereof, then I might here again instance that palpable experience we have of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, by the influence of the Moon (as abovesaid); but to manifest it yet further, let him call to mind the increase and decrease of Shel-fish, the mutation and variation of times, and innumerable o∣ther effects of the Stars, which (if time and convenien∣cy would permit) migh  recorded, and let him then
study the cause hereof, and he will then without doubt be of another tenet; let him observe also when ♄ and ☉ is in □ or ☍ or when ♂ and  is in □ or ☍ or ♃ and ☿ are so posited, and let him tell me then, what altera∣tions they produce in the air both by Rain, Snow, Wind, Tempests Thundering and Lightning, and the like, ac∣cording to their severall positions, the nature of signs and houses and mansions they are in; (which if he be not alto∣gether ignorant of the Art, he may daily see) These and the like effects, are most vulgarly known by expe∣rience, so that therefore he might even as well have con∣fessed those signs he speaketh of, to be the Stars, and cau∣ses their influence, since he doth not nor cannot shew me any other thing they are, without wronging and slander∣ing the Art, and contradicting the most learned therein, as also the Father S. Austine Moses, nay and GOD himself. D. Homes might as well then have left out that other addition of Doctour Willets, where he saith, That the Stars have not the same influence in Summer, and in Winter, Spring and Autumn, and so consequently will conclude them First not to be signs (contradicting Mo∣ses, and the word of God, Gen. 1.14. as aforesaid;) Secondly, Nor causes, Quia ex unitate causae sequere∣tur similitudo effectûs, Of the same cause there should follow the same effect; but there followeth not the same effect from the same signs, appears by experience. As much to say, the Stars are neither causes nor signs, be∣cause they produce not fruits in Winter, as well as in Sum∣mer, or because they cause not snow in Summer, or Buds and Blossoms in Winter. O rare cavill! but since he is already by what is abovesaid, confuted; I shall here adde nothing but this, that since the question is, whether they are causes and signs, because that passage in the first of Genesis manifelts they are signs, I will (if he will be con∣vinced by the word of God) here give him to know they are also causes; I will hear the heavens, and the heavens
shall hear the earth, and the earth, the corn and the wine, &c. Hos. 2.2. And in another place, the increase of the earth is referred to the Influence of the Sun and the Moon, Deut. 33.14. By all which we may clearly see (unless blinded with malice and wilfulness) that they are both signes and causes, of all our earthly injoyments and hap∣pinesses; Et si Scriptura, & ipse Deus nobiscum, quis contranos. W. R. his SECT. III. Wherein his allegations against the ground of the Art are condemned; and his bringing S. Augustine and Galen against it, proved fallacious. SEeing then it is most clearly so, that the Stars are signes and causes as abovesaid, what need these envious car∣pers or malicious gainsayers of the truth be heeded or re∣garded? but let these perverse rags of paper perish with themselves, not worthy the least remembrance. And in∣deed had it not been rightly to insorm the vulgar, and to make them see, that high language serveth not to con∣demn truth, I had buried both them and their filthy rags in perpetual oblivion; but I hope since they must be re∣membred, it will be but for their disgrace, not chronicled for their worthiness, but perpetual infamy. But this is not all, he comes next to condemn Astrolo∣gy by Keckerman, and that with as weak Arguments as he did the rest: Keckerman, (saith he) a most learned Philosopher, and Christian, although he favours some things which men now a dayes call part of Astrology, did not in all his two great Volumes in fol. of Arts and Scien∣ces Jet forth any Astrology. A wise story indeed; because Keckerman writeth not of Astrology, therefore there is no such thing: but if Keckerman hath not, yet as wise and as learned, and greater Philosophers have, as if the
being of Astrology depended on his writing hereof,Look the second Chapter of this Treatise. or it were a whit farther from being an heavenly Science and a lawfull Art, because he omitteth it: fine Logick and rare reason, if rightly understood, and the depth there∣of throughly searched! because Aristotle knew not the reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, therefore no body else doth, neither is there such a thing in Na∣ture; and because Moses writeth not of the Creation of Angels; Ergo, there is none: O profound and in∣vincible reason! But to proceed, (he saith) he is sure he hath these words against it, Manent tamen, &c. The Starrs abide, as of other sublunary effects, so of effects in man, the common and remote cause, which many wayes may be hindred, not onely by the first cause, God, but also by particular causes, partly in the Heavens, partly in the Air and other Elements; so that the Predictions of Astrologers are with ifs and ands, &c. which is as much to the purpose as comes just to nothing; for first, that God can alter the course of the Starrs, there is no Astrologer but will confesse (but whether he will or no, or ordinarily uses so to do, is the question) so that Master Homes gets little by this querk, since he affirmeth nothing that any Astrologer will deny. But if Master Keckerman maketh it not appear what particular causes hinder the effects of the Stars, me thinks for the strength of his argument Master Homes should have done it; for it standeth not with any rea∣son, that subordinate causes as are the Air and o∣ther Elements, should predominate or rule over the first moving Causes, viz. the Starrs; this the weak∣est capacity that understands the Art will affirm, and you have but now heard that the effects of the Starrs cause alteration and mutation of the Air, as we also daily see by experience; and therefore his As∣sertion, that the Principles of Astrology are not con∣firmed on true Principles, is here also condemned
as erronious, false and malicious; for we see Astrologers seldome fail in their judgements, except when they swerve from the rules of Art: wherefore Alsteds assertion also is here no lesse simple then the rest, who saith, Astrologers are also often deceived; and what then? because a man that never was at London, misseth his way, once or twice, shall he conclude there is no such place? sure it should rather teach him to observe diligently his roade, and not turn on the right hand nor the left; and if the Astrolo∣gers would as warily observe their rules, this objection of the ignorant had never been thought on. But Ma∣ster Homes, is Divinity false and no wise to be heeded, because there is so many errours and schisms crept into the Church? or because every one attaineth not to a full perfection of the Spirit? or because humanum est errare, man is frail and subject to failings? no sure, ex∣perience, reason and truth teacheth us to the contrary. Wherefore he might very well have omitted these slen∣der reasons, as also that place of Galen, where he saith, sophisticum est, it is sophisticall: but how? not as ha∣ving no verity therein, but in the superstitious abuse thereof, for you see clearly in the first Chapter of his Treatise, Galen holdeth that man a fool, rather then a Physician, that is not an Astrologer: and in all his works hath Astrology in great esteem and applause, and moreover testifieth his own practice hereof, especi∣ally, lib. 3. de diebus decret. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. and the like. So he brings Saint Austin to condemn it thus in these words, in his Treatise De Doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. cap. 21, 22. est magnus error, magna dementia, et superstitio: Astrology is a great errour, madnesse, and superstition; it is clear that Saint Austin here speaketh of the superstitious use thereof, as in attributing fatall necessity thereto, and in too much trusting and confiding therein, as may appear by what you have already heard S. Austin saith of it; but to clear
it more fully,L. 5. c. 4. & 1.20. c. 6. contra Faustum Manich. S. Austin confesseth that before his con∣version, he followed the heresies of the Manichees, who maintained the stars to be adored and prayed unto, and therefore to reclaim the multitude, which went thus a whoring after the wayes of the Heathen, this good man useth these words to recall them, and unite them to the belief of God: But I hope M. Homes will not say that Astrologers are thus superstitious and wicked; he that saith Astrology (as I said before) is any other thing then what is delivered by Ptolomy, in the second page of this Treatise, knoweth not what Astrology is; Neither will he affirm I hope, that S. Austin condemns Astro∣logy, but the superstitious abuse thereof which is clear, for he delivereth five opinions concerning destiny. First, that by destiny is understood the providence, will and power of God, and therefore he warneth the Astrolo∣gers, that they continue their opinions, but correct their tongues,1.5. c. 1. De Civ. Pei. for through custome of speech the vulgar com∣monly understood nothing by the word fate or destiny, but the inevitable power of the Stars. The second is quite contrary to the former, ascribing all to the absolute power of the Stars, without the will of God: But this opinion derogating from the omnipotent power of God, and his providence in all our actions, he saith ought to be rejected, not onely by those that pro∣fesse the true Religion, but which serve or worship any gods at all, though never so false. The third so attributeth to the decrees of the Stars, that yet they believe them to have this power in such sort derived unto them from God, that thereby they can, and do determine of us and our actions as they will themselves: which opinion he thinketh is very wrongfully held of hea∣ven, to maintain such wickednesse to be, as it were, inact∣ed in that most shining Senate, that were the like acted in any Court or State on earth, it were worthy to be sub∣verted.
The fourth opinion is, That the Stars have neither power nor will to operate on us at their own pleasures, but as they do necessarily execute that which God imposeth upon them; which Saint Austine accounteth more into∣lerable then the other, for that it teacheth us to conceive that of God, which they hold unworthy to im∣pute unto the Starrs, against such he sufficiently de∣clareth. These opinions, Saint Augustine renounceth, as they rather utterly deny the power and providence of God; or, as they impute absolute rule and dominion of the Stars immediately over the will of man necessari∣rily inforcing us in all our actions; or as they throw all our sinnes upon God, whilest they make him by the Stars inevitably to inforce us to evil: wherefore had Master Homes (as it had befit a learned man) first ex∣amined his Authours with good observation and delibe∣ration, and not so readily taken hold on every thing he finds delivered by others, that he imagineth will serve for his turn; I'm confident, he had not thus inconside∣rately alledged Saint Augustine against Astrologers, for (as I defined before in the second page, what Astrology is, so the same) Ptolomy confesseth the Stars not to have any fatality, as working by or with a fatall necessity on the will or soul of man as much as S. Austine him∣self; giving them no farther operation in these matters, then the most Orthodox and Learned Divines do. The fifth opinion is, Which neither esteemeth the Stars of their own wils, (as if they were living souls) to decree future events, nor necessarily to usurp power over minds, but onely to signifie the inclinations of the ele∣ments, and of all things compounded of them. Now that Saint Austine meant not such Astrologers as deny necessity (as Master Homes would fain per∣suade the vulgar to believe;) but onely ascribe power unto the Starrs to work upon sublunary bodies; is
evident by his words, Non usque quaque absurdè dici possit, adsolas corporum differentias, afflatus quosdam valere sidereos, sicut in solaribus accessibus, & reces∣sibus; videmus etiam ipsius anni tempora variari & luna∣ribus incrementis, et decrementis augeri et minui quae∣dam genera rerum; sicut Echinos, et conchas, et mira∣biles aestus oceani, non autem, et animi voluntates positi∣onibus siderum subdi: where we see nothing exempted from subjection to the Stars that is bodily, but onely our spirituall part. And he ascribeth not this power to the Stars in generall, as that their specificall virtues are not possible to be known to man, for he concurreth with A∣strologers, that the quality of ♄ is cold, &c, as you may further see at the beginning of this Chapter. So that you may see how falsly and injuriously he brings in Saint Au∣gustine against Astrology. VV. R. his SECT. IV. Wherein Astrology is defended against his al∣legations, from Master Perkins his words. MAster Homes comes then to tell us Master Perkins a learned man and famous, writ a Treatise a∣gainst it: so did Melancthon, a greater Scholler then he, and as knowing a Divine, write as much and more for it, then he ever did against it; what if I should tell him of some that have writ against the Scripture, is the Word of God therefore false and to be rejected? he saith Master Perkins calls it profanenesse, and idola∣try; but let the Reader seriously and diligently but observe what hath been here already said, and he can∣not but understand Master Perkins spake onely against the abuse of the Art, not as it is in its self; against the superstitious confidence and trust in the Starrs, not the learching and studying of the influences and effects of the
Stars on Elementary bodies; and as much as this comes to, all that study the Art will confesse, Ergo M. Homes is mistaken to think by these words of M. Perkins to con∣demn Astrology, since he saith no more then all Astrolo∣gers themselves will say. Wherefore not to dwell longer here, we come now to his eighth learned man which con∣demns Astrology, which he tells us is M. Geree who hath (saith he) written a Treatise against Astrology. I could if need were, cite as many, and more that have written against the Divine Word of God, then he can make appear hath written against Astrology; shall any man be therefore so impudently wicked to conclude, the word of God is not true, or not to be credited? no sure, this were altogether as impudently wicked as M. Homes his sequel or conclusion is ridiculous, sophi∣sticall and envious. M. Chambers also writ a book a∣gainst Astrology, which I wonder he remembred not also, but that learned Sir Christopher Heyden return∣ed him such a repulse, as that none of the Antagonists or ill wishers to the Art, ever durst undertake to give a reply thereunto; for he doth not onely refute Ma∣ster Chambers, but also Picus Mirandula, Melton, Perkins, and Geree to boot; wherefore I referr all those that would be further resolved herein, and desire to dis∣cern between truth and falshood, to the perusall of the discourse it self, it being a piece of that exquisite wit and learning, that none can be able to surpasse it, if (in the whole World) be worthy to compare with it. W. R. his SECT. V. Wherein his cavilling M. Briggs, and others, are convinced. VVE now come to hear what he can tell us of learned M. Briggs, against Astrology, which
is briefly thus much, That after an earnest desire to at∣tain the perfection thereof, he seriously applyed himself unto the study, but in conclusion, when he thought to have had joy of his wearied labours, he was satisfied with nothing but uncertainty, and meeting an other A∣strologer, told him how he had been deceived in the rules of the Art, who (for his comfort) concluded also as he did, that there was no certaincy therein, upon which he left off further studying thereof. Now I would very fain know of any man (which shall be all the answer I shall give to this sophisticall cavill) whether by these words Astrology be convinced as uncertain, because Master Briggs and another, (or suppose half a dozen more) could find no certainty therein; when Ptolomy, Galen, Hippocrates, Saint Austine, and thousands more, found not onely certainty therein, but concluded and agreed that it was the most beneficiall and pleasant Art under the Sun: and whereas he cites Phavorinus against Astrology in these words, Aut adversa eventura dicunt, &c. which is, They foretell either things of prosperity or adversity; if of prosperity, and they fail, then thoushalt be prosperous or happy in hoping for that good, if of ad∣versity, and hit not right, then thou wert miserable in fearing in vain; &c. which agrees with what he saith M. Briggs would undertake to do, viz. To prove the rules of Astrology contradictory, viz. It shall be so, and it shall not be so, which is the meerest cavill of all the rest, to say, Ergo, Astrology is uncertain. I will un∣dertake then a greater matter then M. Briggs, for let there be what Art or Science that M. Homes can devise nominated (though never so true) I will undertake to speak as much, nay and with more proof against it, then all these his learned men hath done in this his character of the present times; (he forgot to put in those that deny the truth; nay, and not onely so, but sophistically and maliciously maintain it to their utmost indeavours, think∣ing
the citing of S. Austine to be proof enough to ter∣rifie the Reader from undertaking this study, or conti∣nuing therein, not observing the words of his Authour, and together with the Fathers to include the Councils; but tels us not how and upon what grounds and reasons they disallowed of the Art, lest then his malice be discovered.) Wherefore let me then for a conclusion, as well to this Chapter, as his cavils, ask him these two questions; whether a man may not (if enviously disposed) speak against the most manifest truths, nay against the very word of God, and wrest the Scripture to their own in∣clinations and intentions? And secondly, if he be proved hereof guilty, in the next Chapter, to wrest the Scripture sense to confute Astrology; whether he be not more fit to be brought under the lash of the Law, then Astrolo∣gers? So have you his learned men against Astrology confuted; we come now to the main point of all, viz. Whether Astrology be condemned by the word of God? SURVEY. Thus with large patience have we gi∣ven long leave to Will. Ramsey to speak thus much together, without interruption; saving onely, that in his meer impertinencies, and some unmannerly jeerings and railings, these Sections of his are made by the Re-Prin∣ter, in part to keep silence. But to the matter. What a huge company of Levers in one place doth he bring to break an Egg! What a many of Candles doth he light up, in another place, to shew us that the Sun shines; which we saw and acknowledged afore he lighted them up! He hath shot a great many sharp words, and with much virulency; but at Rovers, so that he doth not onely misse the mark, but also not hit the Butt. Did the Doctour in∣tend in the least his Quotation of Authours that have been against Astrology, in a way of argument or proof? His words in the very beginning of his second Section (which Will. Ramsey hath all this while so puddered
himself to confute) shew William the contrary, if he had been willing to see. Because (saith the Doctour) the Astrologers give out, that there is no body against this Astrology but one Perkins, or some one or two more, men not acquainted with Art; or in the like slighting speeches; it will be very convenient to quicken your atten∣tions, as to a point considerable, by setting before you the judgement of severall learned men touching Astrology. Indeed if I do here but reprint that second Section of the Doctour, which Will. pretends to confute, it will be a sufficient confutation of all these five Sections of Willi∣am's second Chapter. D. H. his SECT. II. Of the Opinions of the Learned touching Astrology. BEcause the Astrologers give out that there is no bo∣dy against this Astrologie, but one Perkins, or some one or two more, men not acquainted with Art; or in the like slighting speeches; it will be very convenient to quicken your attention, as to a point considerable, by set∣ting before you the judgement of severall Learned men touching Astrology, with their reasons. Tostatus, a great learned School-man hath a great deal against it, in his Commentary on Levit. 19. Qu. 28, 29. &c. Do∣ctour Willet gives us the summ of Tostatus, and his own judgement thus. Of things which are (as to us) acci∣dentall, as the successe of businesses, or their causes in∣ternall, as mens will and free choife, as to undertake a journey, or to build, or not to build; predictions are not onely uncertain but superstitious: And the same is to be said of casting Nativities by the conjunction of Planets. So Doctour Willet on Levit. 19. in his 41. Qu. the head whereof is, The Vanity of Astrologers, quoting of, and referring us to Tostatus. The same Do∣ctour,
Willet on the same Chapter, in his 32. Qu. hath this discourse: All manner of CONJECTURING (see he cals it but Conjecturing) is not unlawful, whereof any naturall or divine Cause can be yielded: As first, there are naturall signes in the Heavens and air, as of the alteration of weather, of winds, of rain, &c. And in compound bodies, as in setting, and planting of Trees; and in humane bodies, as when tis good to let blood, to purge, &c. These are immediate effects in nature of Celestiall bodies: There are also mediate effects, as Comets which shew siccity and combustions, and so many portend Wars, which is caused by wrath among men, which cometh of siccity and heat: So the Crow cryes against rain, because the moisture of the air affects his feathers: And the Dolphin against a tempest swims aloft, because the Sand in the bottome is stirred. For these creatures that are led onely by sense, have a quicker feeling of such naturall accidents, then man hath, who is most occupied in the use and exercise of reason: For, Attentio ad operationes se∣cundùm rationem, &c, that is, The attending upon the operations of reason, doth take away the attention to the operation of nature: And therefore FOOLS and SIM∣PLE persons, that are LEAST GUIDED by reason, are more sensible of naturall things then WISE men. Again, there are divine and extraordinary signs * which God speaks of, that shall be for signs at such a time, or of such a thing. As Matth. 24.29. And the Dove descending on Christ, Matth. 3.16. But there is no Judiciary Astrology in all these. Doctour Willet adds on the same Chapter, Qu. 33. (to give it you in a word) thus; Signs observed by men, of humane events, cannot be signs; first, because Ex varietate causae variatur causatum: The Stars have not the same influence in Summer, and in Win∣ter, Spring, and Autumn. Secondly, Ex unitate cau∣sae
sequeretur similitudo effectûs: Of the same cause there should be the same effects. But there follows not the same effect after the same signs, as appears by ex∣perience. Thirdly, Keckerman a most learned Philo∣sopher, and a Christian, although he favours some things, which men now a dayes call part of Astrology, did not in all his two great Volumes of Arts and Sciences in Fo∣lio, set forth any Astrology; but in his Works hath these passages against it, to this effect: Manent tamen &c. The Stars abide, as of other sublunary effects, so of ef∣fects in man, the COMMON and REMOTE Causes which many wayes may be hindred, not onely by the first cause, GOD, but also by particular causes, partly in the HEAVENS, partly in the AIR, and other ELE∣MENTS; so that the PREDICTIONS OF ASTROLOGIE, are with IFFS and ANDS. So that it follows not, this man is born under an un∣happy Star, therefore he hath a dull wit. So Kecker∣man, System. Phys. lib. 2. cap. 3. De Motu Cocli. The same Keckerman in another place hath these words. Di∣sciplina Astrologica, &c. The Discipline of Astrolo∣gie about the Predictions by Heavenly bodies, or Stars, is not yet confirmed upon true principles; there∣fore no marvell if that part of Astrology, which is conversant about the predictions of Comets, doth rest upon most uncertain principles. It is granted to Astro∣nomy to use such Hypotheses, or arguments, or princi∣ples which are not in nature, but are conceived onely by a kind of similitude: But Astrology may not use such Hypotheses. The Astrologers assign several Coun∣tries and Cities, to severall Celestiall Signs; But of Cities plainly, no reason at all appears. So Keckerman Syst. Phys. lib. 6. cap. 5. De Cometis in genere. Fourthly, Alsted the great Philosopher of these times, and a Christian, sets forth a thing he calls Astrology; but see his faithfulnesse in this; Astrologia (saith he)
vitio, &c. Astrology by the vice of man hath more vanity in it then Astronomy. Astrology because of our imbecility is conjecturall. And he adds. Astrologers are often deceived.: and therefore we do rightly (saith he) pronounce the divinatory part of Astrology to be but Conjecturall. Fifthly, The great Galen saith of Astrology, Sophisticum est, &c. Tis a sophisticall thing; Contrary to experience. Sixthly, So famous a man as was S. Austin famous for learning and godlinesse in his time, having been addicted to Astrology, afterwards repents of it, and renounceth it, in his Treatise, De doctr. Christiana, lib 2. cap. 21. in fine, & initio capitis 22. His words are these. It is Mag∣nus error, & magna dementia, superstitio &c. that is, Astrology is a great errour, a great madnesse, a super∣stition easily refelled. Saint Austin brings in another, on Psal. 63. as a pe∣nitent renouncing this Art, Paganisme and Judaisme: For we know that the Scriptures do much forbid it to the Jews, as the evill of the Heathens, as we shall see plen∣tifully afterwards. Seventhly, Master Perkins, famous for learning and godlinesse, as his Works shew, hath not only a Trea∣tise against Astrology (though once much addicted to it) but also gives us his repentance and renouncing of it in his Preface to the Reader before his resolution to the Coun∣trey-man. His words are these: I have long studied this Art, and was never quiet till I had seen all the secrets of it, but at length it pleased God to lay before me the PROPHANENESSE of it; nay I dare boldly say, the IDOLATRY, although it be covered with fair and golden shews: Therefore that which I speak with grief, I desire thee to note with some attention &c. Eighthly, Master Geree, known to me to be a godly and learned man (being Collegians in the University) hath a learned Treatise against Astrology (which if men read
well, they dare not, if they have any truth of grace, give themselves to Astrology) His Treatise is called Astrolo∣gia-Mastix common to be had for a small matter. Ninthly, Master Geree avoucheth Master Brigs some∣times Geometry Reader at Oxford an eminent godly man (a man I my self knew well, and have been at his Le∣ctures) and a man for his skill in Mathematicks, I think I may say (saith Master Geree) that he was second to none. Of this Master Brigs, Master Geree gives us this account: This loving Friend of mine (saith Master Ge∣ree) upon a question moved to him by me, touch∣ing Judiciall Astrology, told me this remarkable Story of himself; When he came to Cambridge first, he thought it a fine thing to be of Gods Counsell, to fore∣know secrets, and resolved to have that knowledge, what labour soever it cost him; and so early applyed himself to the study of the Mathematicks, beginning with Arithmetick and so to Geometry, and Astronomy; and to lay a good foundation he left none of these Arts, till he had attained exactnesse in them: The foundation thus layd, he then applyed himself to his main scope, the search of Judiciall Astrology; but there he found his expectation frustrate; THERE WAS NO CERTAIN∣TY in the rules thereof. When he had tyred his body and wits in vain, he was much dejected with the frustrating of his expectation: At last he repaired to a man in Cam∣bridge, famous in that Art, and a practitioner in Pro∣gnostications by it: to him he made his moan what pains he had taken to be expert in Astrology, and how the un∣certainty of the rules of that Art did now defeat his hopes: The Astrologers reply was, that THE RULES OF THAT ART WERE UNCERTAIN INDEED, NEI∣THER WAS THERE ANY CURE FOR IT: whereup∣on Master Brigs relinquisht that study. And he did then affirm to me, that he would undertake to the skilfull∣est Astrologer in the VVorld, that let him set down any
conclusion touching any man or State, yea or WEATHER, and he would prove it CONTRADICTORILY; that is, Both that it would fall out so, and that it would not fall out so, from their own Rules and Principles; whence (saith he) you may see apparently that there can be no certainty in the rules of that Art. He further added, that his opinion was; To those that addicted themselves to the practises of Divining Astrology, the Devill did at first secretly lend his assistance; and at length, gra∣datim (that is gradually) did (unlesse God prevented) entice them into contract. Tenthly, Dominicus Nanus, Barthol. Amantius, Francisc. Tortius, Joseph Langius; have gathered these collections touching Astrology: Astrologia, &c. Astro∣logy is the Speech of Stars (,) But Astro∣nomy is (,) the Law of the Stars; as a∣scribing more certainty to Astronomy then to Astrology. This Astrology is said to be invented by Atlanta, King of Mauritanie, witnesse Pliny, l. 7. of his Naturall History; which if true, is no commendation of Astro∣logy. Contemplantur Astronomi, &c. that the Astrono∣mers contemplate the Stars, not as Judiciary Astrolo∣gers and Chaldeans, condemned by the Prophers, but that by the situation of them, they may set forth the set, or standing times of dayes, moneths, and years; the Edipses of the Sun and Moon and other things most worthy to be known, and most profitable for the life of man. The vanity of Judiciary Astrology, innumerable wife men of Old. and in our Age have disallowed. See what God pronounceth of Astrologers by Moses Deut. 18.10. Isa. 44. Jer. 10. Phavorinus in A. Gell. lib. 14. cap. 1. was wont to reprove Judiciary Astrologers with this Dilemma; Aut adversa eventura dicunt. &c. that is, Either they foretell that things of adversity shall come to passe; or those of prosperity: If they say pro∣sperous things, and do frustrate or deceive men, then
thou shalt be miserable in hoping in vain: If they say things of adversity and do lye; then thou shalt be mise∣rable in fearing in vain and without cause. If true things answer to their Predictions, but are not prosperous things, from thence forward thou art miserable in thy mind be∣fore thou art so in the event. If they promise happy things, and they come to passe, then plainly two inconvenien∣cies will attend; namely, both the expectation of them in suspence of hope will weary thee; and the hope thou hadst, will now deflowre, or take away the grace and beauty of the future fruit of joy. Therefore by no means may we use those kind of men who presage future things. Andr. Alciat. Emblem. cap. 3. Icare per superos qui, &c. Exemplo ut doceas dogmata certa tuo. Astrologus caveat quicquam praedicere; praeceps Nam cadet impostor dum super astra volat. i. e. As Icarus flying too high, melted his waxed wings and fell; so the Impostour Astrologer, by flying above the Stars. Astrology judiciary, or divinatory, is to be exploded with all its Patrons. So Epiphanius disputing against the Pharisees and Manichees. So Basil. Hex. Hom. 1. and 6. So Chrysostome on Gen. Hom. 5. and 6. and on Matth. Hom. 6. Surely S. Augustine who had prospered in the businesse of Astrology, after in his confessions, lib. 4. cap. 3. lib. 5. cap. 3. and 7. and lib. 1. cap. 6. De Doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. cap. 21.22. 23. De Civitate Dei, lib. 5. initio usque ad cap. 8. Con∣tra Academ. lib. 1. cap. 7. one while doth grievously complain that he was deceived, in attributing any thing to that Art; another while he doth sharply inveigh against it, and the Professours thereof. Likewise it is forbidden more then once in the Councils, as in Concil. Toletan. 1. Can. 21. Concilio Barracens. cap. 9.10.26. qu. 2.3.4. Thus, and thus far the Doctours Section, word for
word. Now let the prudent Reader judge whether Wil∣liams five Sections have confuted this; or this them; or at least, unshaken by them. So that I need add but little as to the substance; but onely briefly to animadvert upon Will. and to illustrate some brief expressions or in∣timations of the Doctour. Not to stay upon that most improper speech of Will. in his second Chapter, to charge the Doctour with malice against things; as with malice against Astrology (Ma∣lice is of a person against a person); let the Reader one∣ly note there, with a glance, how professedly Will. doth slight Learned men, if they do not speak so as having truch and reason on their side; Will. Ramsey being JƲDGE. For that's the Genuine result of his speech. And by consequence, if all the Learned men in the world beside Astrologers, should condemn Astrology, Will. would slight them (as he doth in his Book) because he judgeth them not to speak according to truth and reason. To W. R. his first Section of his second Chapter, a word will serve; viz. onely to intreat Will. that so calls on others for consideration, that he himself would con∣sider that Tostatus, or Doctour Willet doth not educe those words at (A) out of the text Levit. 19. But are his liberty of expatiating, upon unlawfull Arts in gene∣rall; and therein to declare his judgement concerning un∣lawfull predictions. Tostatus and Doctour Willet had more wit then to take a text of Familiar Spirits, to con∣fute Astrology. Though some Astrologers are not free from Familiarity with such. And B. C. proves an im∣plicite complyance. Thus much onely hath given such a blow to Will. Ramseys first Section, that the whole Fa∣brick of it falls to the ground in the eyes of them that will understand. To his second Section; and first to that Will. saith and so labours to prove that Stars are Causes; the Doctour denies it not, though that man of vast learning Mars.
Ficinus a famous Platonick Philosopher in his works hath a Tract against it. 2. To Williams catching at the word CONJECTV RING of and concerning things which are naturall causes, as of alteration of weather, &c. experience daily and evidently doth tell all men that have eyes to read Almanacks, and to see the weather; that how naturall and necessary soever the causes may be, the Astrologers predictions of it are but conjecturing, and daily prove false. Yet neither Doctour Willet nor Doctour Homes do move the question, touching the thing which (commonly) is called Naturall Aftrology. And therefore as they do not justifie Judiciall; so they do not condemn naturall. touching weather, &c. and therefore Will. is at the Labour-in-vain; uttering no∣thing against the Doctour for me to take cognizance of, till he mentions S. Austins referring us (as Will. saith) to the study of Astrology, in his Annotations on Job. chapter 38. v. 31. But how untruly W. R. reports Saint Austine, let S. Austines words testifie; which are, In∣tellexisti nexus Pleiades? &c. Num & Astrologia per∣scrutenda est ad cognoscendum proprietates istorum Sy∣derum, ut hunc locum intelligere possimus? Miror et si hoc congruit sermoni nostro. &c. Where S. Austine asks the question whether we need search Astrology to under∣stand that place? And wonders if that should agree to his speech elsewhere. And in the conclusion interprets the place, of morall not naturall things. Omnium (saith S. Austine) it a syderum nomine, omnes in ecclesia ta∣les intelligend: sunt qui conversationem habent in coelis, &c. But the Doctour is not against the thing of naturall Astrology: but, 'tis judiciall Astrology, and the calling of predicting of naturall effects by naturall causes by the name of Astrology that the Doctour is against; and therefore Will. Ramsey in his discourse of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, of thunder, rain, snow, &c. is again at the Labour-in-vain; or at a combat with his own
shadow; and so goes on to the end of the second Section; For Will. Ramsey miserably mistakes, to say, Doctour VVillet denyed the Stars to be signs or causes, as to natu∣rall effects (which the Doctour expresly granted a little afore); and as meanly doth VVill.Viz. Ex varierate causae, &c. and Ex uni∣tate cau∣sae, &c. go off of Doctour VVillets Two mighty reasons against signs of humane e∣vents, and speaks not one pertinent word to them. Let the Reader compare and judge in the thing. Quem penes arbitrium est, et vis et norma loquendi. To VVill. R. third Section, being a great body with little soul in it (as was Doctour Ames his Character of Bellarmines works (Moles absque nervis) I need not add much to the substance of what D. Homes hath say∣ed. For let me but tell VVill. Ramsey. that he hath not fairly repeated Doctour Homes touching Keckerman, and he must needs be non-plus't in his quibble. It was the fault of the Devil he quoted not the whole period of the Scripture he alleadged. And certainly the Astrologer is not blamelesse in his curt quoting the Doctour, whose words you may see afore are, That Keckerman a most learned Philosopher, and a Christian, although he fa∣vours some things, which men now a dayes call Astrolo∣logy, did not in all his two great volumes in folio of the Arts and Sciences, set forth any Astrology, BVT IN HIS VVORKS HATH THESE PASSAGES AGAINST IT, &c. Now this last clause here in capitall letters are left out by VVilliam Ramsey to the immediate ruine of all he saith, till he come to MA∣NENT TAMEN a fresh matter. Yea if that Ca∣pitall clause had not been in, it had been good Logick and reason to say what the Doctour concludes; That Kec∣kerman handling of purpose of the main body of Arts and Sciences, and among them all, the reall Mathema∣ticks, and leaving out Astrology, doth shew, that Kecker∣man was rather against then for Astrology. Or that Kec∣kerman did think there was no such lawfull Science.
Even as if Moses of purpose had set himself to handle all Pneumatology, i.e. a System of Spirits and Souls, and handling of the Souls of Animals, and of the Souls or Spirits of men, and of the Holy spirit, had quite left out the doctrine of Angels, it would well have inferred there were no Angels. But the whole Bible is not a System, but a graduall discovery of truths, (according to the growth of the Church) with explications, and repetitions. And though Moses included the creation of the Angels in the creation of the Heavens (as Will. Cousin-Philosopher acutely well ob∣serves in his Enchiridion Physicae restitutae), but expres∣seth them not (that as Divines observe, the sons of men might not dream the concurrence of Angels in the Crea∣tion) till Gen. 18. and afterwards much, that was e∣nough to clear it; Moses owned the being and Doctrine of Angels. But Keckerman from first to last doth not approve of the thing and doctrine of Judiciall Astrolo∣gy. Now for VVil. answer to Keckerman's MA∣NENT TAMEN &c. i.e. The Stars abide, &c. unto Cometis in genere, which you have here inserted out of the Doctours Demologie word for word; let the understanding Reader judge, 1. Whether VVill. Ram∣sey hath confuted it! 2. Whether the Doctour by the rule of reason or Art was bound to argue out Kecker∣mans assertions; seeing he alledgeth him onely as a particular example of one learned man among others, that was against Astrology! 3. Whether VVill. doth not evidently contradict himself in saying, That the words of Keckerman are as much as comes to nothing; and yet presently labours, but in vain, to confute them. For Keckerman doth not say, That the inferiour second causes are predominant and rule over the first, and su∣periour; so as to alter them in themselves; but that they may be hindred by them. Which is no other, but what all Philosophy, and universall experience will confesse.
And VVilliam himself confesseth in his Epistle to the Reader, That with the necessity of the influence of the Stars some contingency may be mixt, &c. And his Bre∣thren in Astrology do usually so excuse their mistakes in predictions; viz. That so the Stars promised or threa∣tened, but second causes hindred, or altered the case. Lastly, VVilliam's own dear Ptolomy so often by him called upon, doth assert as much.Cl. Ptel. Predict. Astron. lib. 1. c. 1. Deinde Regionum di∣versitas non exigua discrimina in nascentibus efficit, etiam cum eadem sint semina, ut hominum; et cum ea∣dem coeli constitntio est, tamen magna est in diversis re∣gionibus dissimilitudo, quod ad corpora, et animos atti∣net. i.e. in summe, and in a word, The difference in men both in body and mind may be great by reason of the diversitie of countreys though the seed of birth and the constitution of the Heavens may be the same. But I do ill thus farre to pursue a fly. For how simply doth VVill. answer Keckermans grand conclusions upon the pre∣misses! viz. That the predictions of Astrology are with Ifs and Ands; and that Astrology is not yet confirmed upon true Principles; and that Astrology conversant about Comets, doth rest upon most uncertain Principles. And lastly, That there is no reason appears why Astrologers should assign severall Cities to seve∣rall Signs. Of all which Conclusions asserted by Kec∣kerman, VVill. Ramsey gives no other confutation, but like that of Doctour K. confuting B. with B. THOU LYEST. VVilliam Ramsey in like manner here re∣plyes, The assertion that the principles of Astrology are not confirmed upon true Principles: is here condemned as erronious, false and malicious: which VVill. utters, as if he sate Prolocutour in some Papal Council. And that the Popes FIATUR must go for good, when they tel'd him he should have said FIAT. And as simply almost doth VVill. confute Alsted for saying Astrologers are of∣ten deceived. (of the rest of Alsted afore exprest against
Astrology Will. Ramsey takes no notice) I say, he con∣futes him simply; for it many professed Mariners or Ar∣tists endeavour to finde Terra incognita, or the Judicial Astrology—Ʋtopia, and cannot finde it, 'twere better for them to go more certain Voyages. And though many Errours may creep into Professours (of which VVill. Ju∣dicial Astrology is one, now at he Triall) yet there is no uncertainty in the Bible. But in VVilliams Astrological Bible, viz. in Ptolomy, de praedict. Astro is much uncer∣tainty, and there, even there confest by the Authour. Hu∣manum est errare, saith Will. But though it be so in sud∣dain words, and rash acts &c. yet learned men have prudently fixt a Rule, that Arts and Sciences are not tobe composed of uncertainties. No not of single certain∣ties because infinite. Scire, say they, est per causas scire. Wills Astrology must have been a Science if any thing. But Ptolomy affirmes (ibid) an uncertainty in it by reason of the contrariety of causes. As for that Sophisticum of Galen, I said afore it was quoted out of Alsted: and I do charge VVill. Ram. with a Sophisticum out of Galen, That a man is rather a Fool than a Physician, that is not an Astrologer. For, first, experience testifies that there have been and are many famous successfull Physicians that are nothing in Judicial Astrology. And secondly on the other side, though Will. pretend much skill in Astro∣logy, yet is he not famous for Physick, or freedom from folly, as his Book (now under consideration) doth amply testifie. Yea, the next passage of this Section testifies. For he never would have mentioned Austin at all; or that place of Austin, if he would not have the shame of Astrology ript up, and exposed to open contempt. But seeing Will. is so imprudent, or impudent, or both, to pretend that Austin is a friend to Astrology; William shall now have his belly full of Austin afore we part. Austin's words at length, in his second Book of Christi∣an Doctrine, cap. 22. & 23. are these; Sed ex ea nota∣tione
syderum, &c. that is, But to undertake to foretell the manners, acts, and events of men from their births, is a great Errour, and a great madness. And even with them that have learned these things (to be unlearned) i, without all doubt, this superstition confuted. For the Constellations, as they call them, is a not ation of Starrs, how they were, when he was born concerning whom those miserable wretches are consulted, by them that are more miserable. But it may be that some TVVINNES are so immediatly poured out of the womb, that no inter∣vall of time between them can be apprehended and no∣ted in the numbers of Constellations. From whence it is of necessity that some TWINNES must have the self same Constellations; when as of the things they do or suffer there are not the same events, but for the most part are so different, that the one lives most happily, the the other most unhappily; as we see in Jacob and Esau. Neither doth it appertain to the matter, for them to say, that that same least and narrowest moment of time, which distinguisheth the birth of Twins is of great con∣sequence in the nature of things, and the rapacious swiftness of the Heavens. For though I should grant, in many things that to be of consequence, yet cannot the Mathematician finde among the Constellations by what observations or considertions of them he professeth to foretel destinies. Therfore opinionatings, or conjecturings by certain signes of things taught by humane presump∣tion are to be referred to the same as certain COM∣PACTS AND AGREEMENTS WITH DEVILS. For hence it is, that men greedy of evil things, by a certain occult divine judgement are deli∣vered up to be illuded and deceived according to the merits of their lusts, the deluding Angels coozening and deceiving them. Thus Austin in the place aforesaid, gives Astrology a terrible Broad-side, how ever VVill. Ramsey would
mince the matter. And how untruly he minceth it, let the upright Reader judge by comparing VVillams flash and gloss, with the Text and words of Austin himself. From which William flies, and declines the giving of due sa∣tisfaction to them, and most impudently and impertinent∣ly tells us Stories of Austin against Faustus, and of Aug. de Givitate Dei. Just as if a man should be called to answer at London upon an Action touching Cheese; but he runs to York, and pleads to the matter of Chalk: However we must follow the Offender, till he be ferreted out of all his hiding places, and taken. If it were as VVill. Ramsey reports of Austin against Faustus; yet Austin's judgement after his conversion is to be preferred afore his practise afore his conversion. And whatsoever the occasion was of Austins speaking those words (as 'tis clear in the said place, there is no mention of Mani∣chees, or of adoration of Starrs) the Question is whether Austin did not seriously and positively speak those words (which is the intent of Doctour Homes) viz. That A∣strological predicting or foretelling of events from the Births of men is a great errour and madness? And whe∣ther it be not now under consideration, that Austin all along his Works was of the same minde, and that justly, against Judicial Astrology, be it but as Ptolomy sets it forth, wherein he affirmes for it (which is bad enough and too bad)? And particularly for Austin against Fau∣stus, William R. doth most abominably abuse him. For in his fifth Booth, cap. 4. or 20. Book cap. 6. Austin hath not one word of his being a Manichee, or of his Conversion or non-conversion, or of the occasion of those words. So all Will. Ram. quotations of Aug. de Civi∣tate Dei to make the Reader (that hath not Austin) to believe the contrary, doth but justly lay open Will. Ram. juggling, the shame of Astrology, and the glory of Truth. Will. Ram. quotation of that fifth Book of Aug. de Civitate Dei, cap. 1. shall be judge; and I will give
it you according to the English Translation of Aug. de Civitate Dei, (commonly to be had) that the Reader may see, if he please, whether I deal truly with him or no? To omit Austin's Preamble, he fals upon the questi∣on, word for word thus, The God of Heaven by his onely providence disposeth of the Kingdoms of the earth, which if any man will say is swayed by fate, and mean by that fate, the will of God, he may hold his opinion still, but yet he must a mend his speech; for why did he not learn this of him that taught him, what fate was? The ordinary custome of this hath made men imagine fate to be A POVVER OF THE STARS so, or so placed, in Nativities, or conceptions; which some do separate from the determination of God, and other some do affirm to depend wholly thereupon. But those that hold that the Starrs do manage our actions, or our passions, good or ill without Gods appointment are to be silenced, and not to be heard, be they of the true Religion or be they bond slaves to idolatry, of what sort soever; for what doth this opinion but flatly exclude all Deity? Against this opinion we profess not any disputa∣tion, but onely against those that calumniate Christian Religion in defence of their imaginary gods. As for those that make these operations of the stars in good or bad to depend upon Gods will, if they say they have this power given them from him to use according to their own wills, they do Heaven much wrong, in imagining that any wicked acts or in juries are decreed in so glorious a Se∣nate, and such as if any earthly City had but instituted, the whole generation of man would have conspired the subversion of it. And what part hath God left him in this disposing of humane affairs, if they be swayed by a necessicy from the Starrs, whereas he is the Lord of men and Starrs? If they do not say that the Starrs are causes of these wicked acts, through a power that God hath given them, but that they effect them by his ex∣press
command; is this fit to be imagined for true of God, that is unworthy to be held true of the Starrs? But if the Starrs be said to po tend this onely, and not to procure it, and that their positions be but Signes not Causes of such effects (for so hold many great Scho∣lars, though the Astrologians use not to say Mars in such a House SIGNIFIETH this or that, no but MAKETH the childe born a Homicide, to grant them this Errour of speech, (which they wust learn to reform of the Philosophers in all their presages, derived from the Stars positions: (how cometh it to pass that they could never shew the reason of that diversity of life, actions, fortune, profession, art, honour, and such hu∣mane accidents, that hath befallen TVVINNES? Nor of such a great difference, both in those aforesaid courses, and in their death that in this case many stran∣gers have come nearer them in their courses of life, then the one hath done to the other, be notwithstanding born both within a little space of time, the one of the other, and conceived both in one instant, and from one act of generation. Thus Austin in VVill. Ram. quoted place to a word. Now let the Reader having all Austin's words in this Chapter at once before his eye, judge whe∣ther he be not absolutely against all judicial Astrology disputing against it (as the Analysis and method of the Chapter plainly manifests) in a way of Dilemma's under all divisions, distinctions, and notions; and because not to be admitted in this or that, or t'other way, &c. there∣fore not to be admitted at all. And comes up close a∣gainst Judicial Astrology to explain he means that by the instance of Twinnes, the same in conception, and birth, yet exceeding different in life and death. But let me not forget one passage wherein VVill. Ram. doth extremely abule Austin and the Reader; and it is that noted with *** in his third Section aforesaid, here now under the hammer; the right reading of which words are those
words noted by us with † so that contrary to VVill. Ram. report and falsification, Austin is far from encouraging Astrolgers to continue in their opinions. Austin saith onely that if any man means by fate the will of God, that swayeth all things, he may hold this his opinion (speaking in the singular number) but yet he must mend his phrase of speech. So that Austin doth not mention Astrologers, or if he meant them, yet doth he not say, they may hold their opinions (in the Plural Number) much less their Astrological opinions. Then Austin would be heautonti∣moroumenos, a fighter against himself, a self-vexer. But for all this, VVill. Ram. will not leave Austin so, nor will I the while leave him. For all that Austin hath said de Civitate Dei, lib. 5. cap. 1. and his prosecuting his great argum ent from Twinnes, ibid. cap. 2. cap. 3. cap. 4. and the head and summ of his fifth Chapter is, How the Ma∣thematicians may be convicted of PROFESSING VANITR; and therefore farr from concurring with Astrologers, as Will. Ram. would make us believe in his marginal note; yet Will. Ram. hopes to collect out of Austin's sixth Chapter of the same Book something to favour Astrology, Non usque quaque absurdè dici possit, (saith William, picking a Daisie here and there, and then stripping off the leaves of grass about it, I mean his ill translating) Where we see saith Will. Ram. nothing is ex∣empted from subjection to the Starrs that is bodily, but onely our spiritual part, &c. and so William goes on, concluding this his third Section with a mighty outcry against the Doctour, for (as William saith) his false and injurious bringing of S. Austin against Astrology, &c. But Reader have patience ere thou judgest, till I have been at the pains to transcribe the whole sixth Chapter of Aug. de Civitate Dei as near as I can to a sillable, as 'tis in the common English Translation for thy better assu∣rance of the Doctours truth, which is thus; It often falleth out (saith Austin) notwithstanding
that in these concurrences, and unions of times, Con∣ception, and Constellation, the children conceived are the one a male, the other a female. I know two Twinnes of divers Sexes both of them alive, and Iusty at this day. They are as like in favour one to another, as their difference of sex can permit; but in their fa∣shion and order of life, so unlike, that (besides the actions which must of necessity distinguish between men and women) he is continually in warr, in the office of a Count, and never cometh home; she continually in her Countrey, where she was born, and never goeth abroad. Nay, which is more incredible, (re∣specting the powers of the Starrs, and not the wills of God and men) he is a married man, and she is an holy virgin; he hath many children, and she was never mar∣ried. O but their HOROSCOPES had a great sway in all things. Tush, I have shewn the power of that to be just nothing already. I but what soever it doth it is there in the nativity that must do it. What and not in the conception, wherein it is manifest, that there is but one generative act concurrent? For natures power is such, that a woman having once conceived cannot se∣cond any conception, untill she be delivered of the first. And therefore it is necessary, that the Twinnes con∣ception fall both in one moment. Were their divers HOROSCOPES (think you) the cause that in their birth, he became a man-childe, and she a woman? Wherefore since it is no such absurdity to say, that there are some Planetary influences that have effect onely upon diversity of formes in bodies, as we see the altera∣tion of the year by the Suns access, and departure; and divers things to decrease and increase, just as the Moon doth (Crabs for example, and all shell-fishes be∣sides the wonderfull course of the Sea) but that the minde of man is not subject to any of these powers of the Starrs; those Artists now desiring to binde our
acts unto this we see them free from, do shew us plain∣ly; that the effects of the Starrs have no power so much as upon our bodies. For what is so pertinent unto the body as the sex thereof? And yet we see that two Twinnes of divers sexes may be conceived both under one Consteilation. Wherefore what FONDER AF∣FECTION can there be, then to say, That that figure of Heaven which was one in the conception of them both, had not power to keep the sister from differing in sex from her brother, with whom she had one Constel∣lation, and yet that that fign of Heaven which ruled at their nativity had power to make her differ so farr from him in her virgins sanctimony. Thus Austin. And now for shame let Will. hold his outcries against Doctour Homes, for that the Doctour said Austin was against Astrology. And for shame let William endeavour no more to gull his Reader with pretence that Austin is for Astrology. The Battle grows hot; Will. is not able to bear the Shock. And if yet he, or his followers have not enough of Austin, let them turn to the Doctours Section of Answers to Objections, and his answr to the last Objection brought out out of Austin, where twelve places out of Austin are alleadged, which vehemently contest against Astrology,Dormo∣nolog. cap. 10. t. 5. besides others in the first Secti∣on of the Doctours tenth Chapter against Astrology. Now where is Williams boast and cry of victoria, that Doctour Homes did falsely bring Austin against Astro∣logy? Go Will. off the Stage for shame. Will. Ramsey's fourth Section hath answered so little, or rather nothing (worthy to be called an answer) to Do∣ctour Homes his faithfull Allegation of M. Perkins, Bridges, and Geree, in the Doctours second Section be∣fore inserted, which the Reader may now by the help of this Survey compare together; and may see more (if he please) of M. Perkins in his Treatise of Witchcraft, and of M. Geree in his Asirologico-Mastix, and in him of
M. Buidges (all commonly to be had) I say Will. Ram. hath said so little or rather nothing in form of an answer to the Doctour concerning these worthy men, that I need add but very little at all. Sufficit exiguo strigilatio curta caballo. 1. To Melanchton the Doctour answers in his fifth Section of confutation of Objections. Paragraph. 2. Secondly, to Will. cursed comparison of Astrology and the Scriptures together by the injury done to these to shelter that from justice (so oft repeated in his Lux V.) we answer, that a good man never wrote against the Word of God, (if some bad ones have, since the reign of Astrology) but generally all good men write against Astrology. It hath been sealed to thousands of thousands by the holy Spirit of God that the sacred Scriptures are the Word of God (notwithstanding the diabolical op∣position of some bad men) but Astrology is suspected, yea and asserted by many godly men, that is from, by or with the Devil in its predictions, or the Devil in, with, or by them; choose you whether. So Doctour Homes hath cleared it out of M. Bridges, M. Perkins, (who as∣serts other learned men up to the Apostles times of the same minde) and S. Austin who in his 5. Tom. C. 291. Edit. Basil. Frob. A.D. 1565. saith plainly, that The Answers of Astrologers are from evil Spirits. 3. To that William distinguisheth of M. Perkins Treatise of Astrology, let M. Perkins his Treatise an∣swer; which to any that shall view it, will quickly make it appear that he wholly bends himself by all manner of means to prove all Judicial Astrology to be altogether impious and unlawfull. 4. For Sir Christopher Heyden's answer to M. Cham∣bers &c. it will be taken into consideration anon. Had not William so crackt of it and reprinted it in this his Book now under consideration, the fame thereof (as great as William proclaimes to be) had not made it known to
the Anti-astrologer; but at William's incitation it may by and by receive a due answer. To Will. Ramsey's fifth Section touching M. Bridges, that of the Doctours second Section, before inserted is re∣ply enough; for Will. Ram. hath upon the matter said nothing to it, but onely told his Reader most impudently two bouncing untruths, I might (but for respect to my own civility) call it worse. † Will. Ramsey's first Ʋn∣truth here is, that Ptolomy, Galen, Hippocrates,Mentii eft contrae mentem  ire. Aug. S. Au∣stin, and thousands more found not onely a Certainty in Astrology, but concluded and agreed that it was the most benesicial Art under the Sun. For it hath been written as with Sun-beams, for evidence, that Austin is totally and universally against Judicial Astrology over all his works. That Galen, and Hippocrates onely spake a little to Astronomy. And that Ptolomy in his Astr. Praedict. lib. 1. doth grant that many ways Judicial Astrology is uncertain. For William's thousands more, of his fellow Impostours, they are Anonymi, and so cannot have the honour to be called by their names; if it were true there were such and so many. But I have found Will. so often tardy with untruths, that he is not to be believed in any thing of this nature upon his own word. Williams other bouncing utruth (if by undertaking he means performing) is this, That William will undertake to speak as much, nay and with more proof against any Art or Science the Doctour can devise to nominate (though never so true) then all his learned men in his Character of the present times against Astrology. For I suppose that was the sense he intended, or else 'tis non-sense. For I confess the man hath left it in print (if the Printer did not wrong him) with a semi-circle (I mean half a Parenthesis) and he forgot, and then flies I know not whether, as if just then in speaking that loud and lewd untruth he had lost his wits in a passion, or had been confounded in his intel∣lectuals by the just judgement of God. Turn back
Reader, and reade him at ** and see whether I wrong him! And if that be the sense he intended, then he carries a most false tongue and an impudent forehead in his Astro∣logical head. For he may sooner eat his fingers then with good proof speak against Geometry, Arithmetick and di∣vers other Sciences of the Mathematicks; whose de∣monstrations are infallible (as the Maxim is) and appa∣rantly to sense. And for the rest of Liberal Sciences, their Principles are unmovable; and their bodies unquestion∣able, whether they be Arts and Sciences? But Williams Astrology is questioned in the very Fundamentals of what is essentially proper to it, (as the Astrologers lay claim) viz. in the Theorems and Canons of predicting and Prognostications. Yea, the very System may justly be questioned (as the Doctour hath hinted) whether there be any such thing, as Judicial Astrology; or any Astrology as distinct from other Sciences. For clearly Natural Astrology (if we may indulge that name) is according to severall matters and their considerations, parts of other Sciences, unto which it is to be referred for its being. W. R. his CHAP. III. Wherein the Doctours divine proofs against Astrology, are examined and confuted. BUt before I begin, I shall desire the Reader to have a special care to remember what Astrology is, which is now in controversie, and either to be confuted and condemned, or defended and cleared; the definition whereof you have at the beginning of the first Chapter, for otherwise our pains and arguments are but frivolous on either side; wherefore I commend M. Homes in that he did not first set down the state of his question, before he began to consute it; but thinking pleno ore, to condemn
Astrology, will be enough to scare the Reader from the study thereof, leaving him to consider what it is he con∣demns, although he be altogether ignorant of the same; and so his words may have the more force, and take the deeper impression in the Readers heart to believe what he would fain, and as much as in himlies, studies to main∣rain. SURVEY. Before we hear Will. Ram. any further, something must be said to this general of his third Chap∣ter, in two particulars. 1. To joyn issue with William, to intreat the Reader to remember what Astrology is now in controversie, viz. That same Judicial Astrology whereby men undertake to foretell humane events. For as Ptolomy (whence Will. Ram. definition is pretended to be collected) confesseth (ibidem) Multi quaestus causâ, alias divinationes venditant nomine & dignitate hujus Artis, ac vulgo imponunt multa praedicentes quae non significantur naturalibus causis. i.e. Many Astro∣logers foretell many things which are not signified by natural causes, selling their predictions (under the name of Astrological) for money, making the common peo∣to believe them. And Will. Ram. in this his Christian Judicial Astrology professeth by the help of Astrology to foretell whether a man may be rich, Cap. 1. Sect. 6. Whether a Woman that came to him should have her money due to her from the Parliament; the Gentleman have his from his uncle, and where the womans Husband was that came to Will. Ram. to inquire of him, Cap. 4. Sect. 3. And so others of them predict in their Books of Prognostications, and practise in their Chambers of the like humane events. 2. To joyn with Will. Ram. in commending D. Homes in that he spake against Astro∣logy in general, under that name, for that the Scripture so doth, without any distinction; and Art doth justifie it; that there is no Judicial Asirology; no distinct Art of Natural Astrology.
W. R. his SECT. I. Wherein the Drs first Scripture proof, viz. Deut. 18.10. is convinced and cleared, no wise to condemn ASTROLOGIE. COncerning his first proof, Deut. 18.10. I have for∣merly in my Reply to Raunces Declaration against Astrology said said something and referred the Reader, to the learned Sir Christopher Heydon, to be further satis∣fied in the rest of his divine proofs, in his answer to M. Chamber, and that so learned a piece may not be kept from the knowledge of the vulgar, under the cloud of si∣lence, I will here along in the confutation of M. Homes his divine proofs, use his very arguments and word (as near as I can) against the same places alleadged by M. Chamber. His first proof then is Deut. 18.10. There shall not be found among you any one that useth Divination, or an ob∣server of times; which words saith he, by the common consent of the learned of all sorts, Signifie Astrology and Astrologers; and for the which sins, the Nations were driven out before the Children of Israel: Now that you shall see how far M. Homes is mistaken to think hereby to perswade the world against Astrology I will give you that learned Gentlemans words against M. Chamber hereon, where he saith, Picus urgeth that Achinas understand∣eth the word in the Original, to fignifie such, as observe lucky and unlucky houres, which our English translate, A regarder of times, and Tremelius, Planetarius, and and from hence they think they have pregnant evidence to condemn Astrology by this Law. I may reckon up here also M. Homes his Mercer, R. Kimchy, and Schindler, who, saith he, take the words in the worst sense, viz. The curious and Diabolical Arts,
as Magi of the Egyptians, Ergo, saith M. Homes, Astrology is not lawfull. But to proceed with Sir Christo∣pher Heydon's discourse hereon, saith he, But notwith∣standing all this, I will make it appear, that these Translations are of small force, and being admitted, little or nothing impeach this Art. And first,[A] I incounter them with the authority of Church, even from the time of Moses untill they wrote, being wholly against them. For to begin with the Septuagint, They have translated the word Gnomen, in this place  which signifieth Augurare, or to divine by the voice and flying of Birds; S. Hierome and the vulgar expounded it, of such as divine by ob∣servation by Dreams. Pagnine in his Translation inter∣preteth it Hariolus, by a general name, or such a one, as divineth at the Altar by Sacrifices. Arias Montanus useth the word Praestigiator, that is a Jugler or Cofi∣ner, that with Legerdemain deceiveth the eye-sight. (See that that is also confessed by M. Homes himself) So that besides all antiquity, and consent of the whole Church against him, we see that divers men have di∣verfly interpreted this word; and therefore I leave it to the judgement of the Reader, whether we are to give credit to the new Expositours, rather then to the ancient and learned Hebrews themselves, who best understood their own Language, or to the common understanding of the Fathers and the Church, even from the first, untill these men (which hath been long since) expounded it otherwise then all that had gone before them. And now to come to the English Translation, as we have it expres∣sed in our English Bibles; see with what reason and sound arguments M. Homes is silenced, who is not onely thus mistaken in the signification of the word, but most slanderously intrudeth Astrologers with, or at least makes them the same with Wizards, and those that have samiliar spirits; For, saith he, so that indeed (as 'tis in
Lev. 20.6.) to follow such kinde of Arts, (speaking be∣fore of Divination, by observation of times, and juggling which he all along concludes to be Astrology, as his Inter∣preters there have it) Is to go a whoring (spiritually) from Christ, and God will (saith he) set his face against such, and cut off such from among his people, weighty reasons against Astrology (saith he). The same Sir Christopher Heydon saith,[B] Concerning our English Translatours, I finde they rather leave us in doubts, then resolved; for whereas here they take the word Gnomen for a regarder of times, in other places they interpret it otherwayes, as in 2 Chron. cap. 33. vers. 6. for Witchcraft, and in the 5. of Micah. For South-sayers. So that in this inconstancy to them∣slves, they must either give better reason (then any thing I know they are able) why in this place of Deut. it should not be intepeted as well a Witch, or a South∣sayer, as a Regarder of times, or else such a regarder of times, as makes his election by Witchcraft and South∣saying, and not by Astrology. Again, suppose the word be admitted,[C] as the English translate it; yet neither is all regarding of time prohibited, neither doth it prove that regarding of time by Astrology is unlawfull, For Solomon (the wisest of men) saith, That the heart of the wise man knows time, and that to every purpose there is a time, as to plant, to pluck up, to slay, to heal, to break down, to build, to weep, to laugh, &c. which none but the fool neglecteth. As in Ecclesiastes farther in the third Chapter, and more at large: and he that ob∣serveth not time, but shall laugh when he should weep, and sow when he should reap, is unseasonable and ma∣keth himself ridiculous. Wherefore if this be the true interpretation or signification of the word, he must speak against that superstitious observation of times, which the Heathen used, and that superstitious people at present do use; the very same I may say to M. Homes.
But in answer to M. Homes his Expositours, take the interpretation of the word Gnonan, as the same Sir Chri∣stopher Heydon delivers it by M. Edward Lively, Pro∣fessour of the Hebrew in Cambridge to Queen Eliza∣beth: who was solicited by Sir Christopher Heydon to deliver his opinion and judgement of the Hebrew word, because it was objected by M. Chamber, that Tremelius did interpret it Planetarius, wherefore for the Readers better satisfaction, I have here delivered it verbatim as that worthy Knight hath it. I have looked in all the Hebrew Scripture, wherein that word is used, examining as well the judgements of the Hebrew Scoliastes in their Commentaries, as also many of the best Translations, Caldee, Greek, and La∣tine, among whom for the signification of that word, I finde this general agreement, that it signifieth an un∣lawfull and forbidden Art of South-saying, or Jug∣gling, or Sorcery, or Witchcraft; but touching the cer∣tain and special kinde thereof, there is such dissention and disagteement among them, as that there is great diversity of opinions, but none cometh to Tremelius his minde, for a planetary, (or of M. Homes his Arabrick versions, which it seems he is loath, or at least ashamed to nominate. W. R. his SECT. II. Wherein the Drs second proof is refelled, viz. Esay. 2.6. ANd if so, then I may with more confidence affirm his second passage of Scripture to the less material in all respects, for the blindest of people may clearly see. it doth no whit so much as either hint or mean Astrology, Esay 2.6. Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because they are replenished from the East, and are Sooth-sayeers like the Philistims; where
is Astrology in all this? The Text tells us. God had for∣saken his people, because they were South-sayers. but as for their being Astrologers, I see nothing mentioned. But let us see but how he tugs to bring this farr fetcht argu∣ment or proof to serve his turn; he shews us first that the word clearly signifieth South sayers, which is enough a∣lone to refell all the arguments therein let them say what they will to the contrary, Vatablus in his Notes (saith he) rendreth it Diviners; and Junius, Praestigiatores, that is, (saith he) that make shew of that they cannot do: you have heard Junius opinion but now, but what of this? Vacablus saith, the word imports Diviners, must this con∣sequently and infallibly be Astrologers, why not Necro∣mancers, Auguries, Inchanters, Sorcerers, Auruspicers? Do not all these divine? but I need not insist longer here∣on; for, he answers this point in his following words him∣self, The Septuagint (saith he) rendreth it , (saith Budeus) saith he. A kinde of fore-telling: as  (saith they) signifieth Divination, and generally the Cal∣dee, Syriack, Arabick; Arias Montanus, &c. ren∣ders it Augurers or Auguries, Ergo, not Astrologers; but saith he, farther because antiquities tell us that that the Augurers did divine as well by the Aspects of the Heavens as by flying Birds; Authours of late times com∣monly use that word to express Divination in general: O brave reason! because for brevities sake in Oration, or the like, Authours as he calleth them) perhaps use this word, therefore he will use it (being as he confesseth him∣self general) to condemn particularly Astrology? and because the Text speaketh against Augurers, and they know the Aspects of the Planets, therefore, it also con∣demneth Astrology? All that believe shall be saved (saith the Scripture) it is clear the Devils believe and tremble, Ergo, I shall conclude them not damned? rare Logick indeed!
W. R. his SECTION III. Wherein his third Text is convinced, viz. Esay 44.25. THirdly, he produceth the 44. Chapter of Esay, v. 25, &c. I am the Lord thy Redeemer, which do fru∣strate the signes of Wizards, making the South-sayers mad, foiling their wise men, and making their skill foolish. This is to as little purpose brought to condemn Astrology, as it is weakness in him to alleadge it or af∣firm it. How can M. Homes, or any one living, prove Astrology to be signified by any of these names, when it is clear (as abovesaid) it dependeth meerly on the natu∣ral influences and effects of the Starrs? which is not to foretell by the flying or voice of Birds, observation of the intrails of Beasts, and the like; nor indeed is it properly to be termed Divination, for to divine is, or doth not naturally signifie the foretelling of future events by natu∣ral causes, but by some divine instinct. But to come to the words in the Text, which he would needs inforce against Astrology; the same Sir Christopher Heydon, further faith upon these words. That they are purposely uttercd to advance the omnipotency of God, so greatly diminished by Idolatry, but to imagine that God would set forth the greatness of his power, by op∣poposing the same against that, which in it self is fruit∣less, infirm, and of no force at all, were not onely against sense, but in truth to frustrate the words and meaning of God himself; wherefore it doth necessarily follow, that so long as it pleaseth him to suffer the course of nature to proceed without interruption. Astrological signes must be confessed effectual, and not to be frustra∣ted but by miracle, and by his omnipotent power, to which that the Starrs are subject, all our Astrologers do confess, and none but an Atheist will deny. For as
God is the Creatour of all things so is he the first cause of all causes, to whom all causes are but his instru∣ments; and therefore as the instrument worketh not of it self, but when it is imployed by the hand of the Artificer, so the Heavens being Gods instruments, do not exercise their force upon these inferiour things, but as God doth use their Ministery in the Government of the world. And this he saith is taught us by the Prophet Hosea, (as abovesaid) Chap. 2.21, 22. where (saith he) he saith, not simply the heavens shall hear the earth, but first, I will hear the heavens, to shew them the power the heavens have over the earth, and that it dependeth on God. In which sense, the Scripture saith also, God worketh all in all things, and that we live, move, and have our being in him. And therefore whether we re∣spect the natural course of things, or those accidents which happen besides the order of nature, we are to ac∣knowledge it to be the supereminent power of God, as the first cause of every thing, which nevertheless can be no impeachment to Astrology, because God doth go∣vern ordinately, and therefore seldom perverteth or disturbeth that order, whereby in his eternal provi∣dence, he doth govern his Workmanship. W. R. his SECT. IV. Wherein he saith the Doctour fourth proof is refelled, viz. Esay 47.12, 13, 14. FOurthly, he brings the 47. of Esay, 12, 13, 14. Stand now with thine inchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries, Let now the Astrologers, the Star-ga∣zers, the monethly Prognosticatours, stand up and save thee. &c. Behold they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver themselves, &c. This very place (as I would have the Reader observe) is
enough to confute his former injury to Astrologers, in reckoning them no other then South-sayers, Wizards, Sorcerers, and the like, when he sees clearly the Lord here makes a particular distinction between the one and the other; for you see, Astrologers, Monethly Prognostica∣tours, Sorceries, and Inchanters paicicularly named. But to come now to the clearing of the Text which he thinks doth absolutely strike the fatal blow to Astrology; inferring from thence, that Astrology is opposite to confi∣dence in God, and that Astrologers are much of the same abomination, with Inchanters and South-sayers, and that they are to be derided, and no wise to be trusted in &c. But as I said before, the wit of man is not able to answer these his vain wrests and interpretations of the Scriptures, better then by that honourable Gentleman Sir Christopher Heydon, I here give you, as he hath it in his second Chapter, in answer to M. Chamber bringing in the same place of Scripture, and indeed with the same conclusions as doth M. Homes. I will not deny that, because God and his Prophets were not believed by the Chaldeans, (who reposed in their Magicians, South-sayers, and Mathematicians) the Prophet here in a scorning Sar∣casmus, biddeth them save their Empire from ruine, therein contemning their Power, and not their Predicti∣ons, and expresly noting that it shall not be in them to save themselves from the judgements to come. This I do plainly acknowledge, although were I disposed to stand upon all advantages with M. Chamber, sith both Vatablus, and M. Calvin in their Commentaries, confess that word Chabar doth indifferently signifie such observers of Heaven as were Inchanters thereof; I could easily avoid him as not disputing ad idem, sith not Astrologers simply, but such as withall joyned Ma∣gick, seems here to be mentioned. And it is manifest by the example of Moses, and the Egyptians, and of Balaam and Balack, that though they were Astrolo∣gers,
yet they reposed their safety against God and his people, onely in their Magical power, by which (as their Poets and others report) they profess themselves able to pull the Moon and the Starrs out of Heaven, and so doth Diodorus Siculus testific, Lib. 2. cap. 8. that though they were cunning in Astrology, yet they did onely prevent the cvils which they did fore-see, by In∣chantments and Charmes. For in truth. Astrology pro∣fesseth onely to fore see natural mutations and accidents, and not power to prevent and save. But to return to that which he most expects, I will admit as much as M. Chamber himself can desire, that the Prophet here de∣rideth the trust which was put in the skill of Astrolo∣gers (which is indeed M. Homes his chief drift also) now let him frame his argument, and he shall never be able to bring the proposition of this Chapter (which is, That Christianity and Astrology cannot stand toge∣ther) (which indeed is M. Homes his argument also, concluding Astrology, to be opposite to confidence in God) within this conclusion. For it followeth not, that because upon some circumstance a thing may be derided, that it is unlawfull. If this were any consequence, then because confidences in Princes, Psal. 1.16. in Riches, Psal. 52. in Horses and Chariots, Esay 31. in Cities, Jer. 5. in Physicians, 2 Chron. 16. in Negotiation or Trade of Merchandise. In the last verse of this same Chapter of Esay, (where the same words and phrase are used against Merchants, that before were used a∣gainst Observers of Heaven, or Astrologers, as Arias Montanus and Tremelius translate it) is prohibited, derided, and punished; we must hold the permission of Princes, Riches, Horses, Chariots, Cities, Physicians, and Merchants, to be against Christianity, and unlaw∣full. He ought therefore first to have distinguished of the trust that is here derided, and not thus to deceive by any elench, â dicto secundùm quid ad dictum simplici∣ter,
as if all trust were taken away, because some trust is derided. For in these places, and the like, onely such a trust as excludeth confidence in God is understood, and no other. As in our case, where notwithstanding God by his Prophets threatned the destruction of the Baby∣lonish Monarchy, it was not believed; but these Hea∣then presuming rather upon their own power and skill, in contempt of God broke forth, as appeareth verse 10. into these blasphemous speeches, None seeth me. Quasi dicat (saith Tremelius) ne deus quidem novit rationes meas; Nay God himself knoweth not my wayes; and again, I am and none else; and verse 7. I shall not sit as a widow, nor shall not know the loss of Children: Thus denying both God and his power; while they presume upon their own. But is this heathenish pre∣sumption and confidence to be imputed as a fault to Astrology? or is it not truly to be reputed the impiety of the Professours, and others, with whom the Prophet dealeth? who denying that to God which is due, and ascribing more then they ought to the Starrs, and their own knowledge and power, do that which Astrology never taught them, and therefore is not guilty of their ungodliness. He ought then to make a difference be∣tween the Heathen, with whom the Prophet hath to do, and Christians against whom he writeth; for though it be true that Christian Astrologers do monethly progno∣sticate, as is mentioned in the Text, by the consideration of the Starrs; yet is he not able to tax any of them with that derogation from God, or impiety, which is here derided. For to place confidence in Starrs, as in di∣vine causes and powers, is one thing, and to esteem them but as subordinate and second causes in nature, is ano∣ther; the one maketh them Gods, the other but Gods instruments, which (as our Astrologers do acknowledge with one consent) it is in his power to alter, as best pleaseth his divine will; and therefore they are very farr
from that heathenish presumption and confidence here taxed, whereby ye may see, that the trust may be repro∣ved, yet the Art unchecked. For I omit here to shew, that monethly Prognostications grounded upon obser∣vation, deduced from causes in nature, have ever been permitted and suffered, in all well ordered and Christian Common-wealths, so farr as I know; and that not one∣ly the Fathers, and those later Divines by me before re∣membred, but even M. Calvin himself, in his admoni∣tion, with others (that attribute as little as they may to this Art) do allow thereof, so farr forth as they extend to the state of the weather, of health, plague, plenty, dearth, and to the direction of the Physician, when to purge by Pill. when by Potion, when by letting of bloud; this being as farr as our Prognostications pro∣ceed; which nevertheless would not have been suffered, if God by his holy Prophet had shewed any detestation thereof, or reproved the same as unlawfull, and unchri∣stian. Wherefore when these adversaries condemn the Art for the abuses of Artists, it is clear that they do but play the Sophisters, deceiving by a plain fallacy, ab ac∣cidente. And lastly, if it be considered what S. Hie∣rome, Hugo, Aquinas, Lyra, Haymo, and other ancient Expositours, have written upon the Text, it is most cer∣tain, that not one of them is so sharp sighted as to espy out any thing in this place that may prejudicat Astrolo∣gy, but they all defend the same as fully as my self. Wherefore if in this place of Scripture M. Homes be not as farr mistaken as in all the rest of his foregoing Cavils, and maketh not himself appear to the eyes of the world to be a meer Sophister, let the impartial judge.
W. R. his SECT. V. Wherein his fifth proof is proved weak, as to his purpose, viz. Jer. 10.2, 3. Fly, he strives to condemn Astrology by the 10. of Jer. v. 2, 3. but to as little purpose as in all the rest; the words are, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signes of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them, &c. whereupon he inferreth. Astrology not to be lawfull, (because as he thinks God here by the Prophet prohibiteth the Jews to give credit to Star-gazers) but as I said before, Astrologers do not make the Starrs gods, but Gods instruments; Not in the least attributing fatal necessity to be in their power: wherefore then consequently he argueth not against, nor contradicteth, nor condemneth Astrologers by these his Cavils, since they are as far from being as guilty thereof as himself; nay, and I believe more. But for the farther clearing of the Text, and the manifesting of M. Homes his mistake, if not wilfull malice, let us hear what the same Sir Christopher Heydon saith in answer to the same place of Scripture alleadged by M. Chamber also to con∣demn Astrology: Whereupon M. Chamber inferreth, that the Prophet willeth the Jews to give no credit to the Star-gazers, (and M. Homes, trust or confidence, p. 134. opposite to the confidence and comfort in God:) But sure he that maketh this collection out of these words of the Text, never (I think) either gazed or looked upon them with half an eye: for the Prophet prohibiteth fear; M. Chamber, credit; (M. Homes, trust or confidence;) again, the Prophet speaketh of the Starrs themselves; M. Chamber, of the persons that observe them; (so M. Homes also) wherefore what difference there is between the one and the other, so farr
ought we to be from giving M. Chambers assertion any credit (and how shall M. Homes his then take? For if he will truly inform the Reader, he knoweth there is nothing prohibited in these words, but that the Jews should not learn the way of the Heathen; which when he wresteth against Astrology, he doth both shew himself to be out of the way, and to seek to seduce o∣thers, for to the creature, as in these words, Fear not the signes of Heaven; where the word Fear is not simply understood but for Religious reverence, and Divine wor∣ship: for that it is often taken in this sense, is no novelty to those that are acquainted with the speech and phrase of the holy Ghost: as for example Esay cap. 29. v. 13. And their fear toward me was taught by the precept of men: where fear is (by Christ himself, alleadging this place of the Prophet, Matth. 15. v. 9.) expounded for worship, saying, in vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines mens traditions: as likewise the very same word is used in other places, for the idolatrous worship exhibited to false gods: as 2 Kings cap. 17. v. 7. when the children of Israel sinned &c. it is said, they feared other gods. I could confirm this by infinite like testimo∣nies, were it not superfluous in so clear a case: But to prove that the Prophet even here, under this word, like∣wise revoketh the Jews from worshipping the heavenly bodies, is yet more evident by the words following: for after he hath in the two next verses expressed the vain customes of the Heathen, in erecting and adoring chose images which they worshipped; he likewise re∣straineth them from this second Idolatry vers. 5. in the very same phrase that he did at the first: Fear them not, for they stand up as the Palm-tree, but they speak not, &c. whereby there is no colour of wrangling left to him, that disposeth not himself to be obstinately per∣verse: but of force it must be confessed, that the Jews are here onely forbidden to imitate the Heathen in both these kindes of Idolatry.
["To confirm this more fully, by the consideration of other places: the Scripture giveth us plentifull testimony, that the Jews did follow the Heathen in their Idolatry to the Starrs, but are never reprehended for learning Astro∣logy of them: wherefore the Prophet Amos cap. 5. pro∣phesied to them long before, even this captivity wherein the Israelites were held in Jeremies time, because they had born (that is worshipped) the Images of Siccuth and Chiun. Abenezra and with him Montanus, under∣standing the Planet Saturn by Chiun: and S. Hierome expounding the word Coeab, thinketh it to be Venus whom even the Saracens in his time did worship: but S. Luke Acts 7. v. 42, & 43. following the Greek doth explain Amos, and saith, then God turned himself away, and gave them up to serve the host of Heaven, as it is written in the book of the Prophets: and you took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your God Remphaim, figures which you made to worship them, therefore I will carry you away beyond Babylon: and therefore not unaptly have some Expositours conceived the Images by which the Prophet doth here exprobrate the Heathen, to have been the images of the Signes, and that not without reason; because that after the Prophet hath restrained them from this heathenish fear of the Signes, immediately he giveth this reason, For the customes of the people are vain: and declaring wherein, he addeth, For one cutteth down a tree in the Forrest, &c. which should want sense, if this verse depended not on the former: thus also 2 Kings cap. 17. v. 15, 16. the History saith, they followed the Heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had charged them, that they should not do like them.
W. R. his SECT. VI. Wherein (as he pretends) the Doctours sixth proof is re∣felled, viz. Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. hath nothing in it, but words, being left of Sir Christopher unto himself; and therefore his Section is not worth the setting down, as I dare be judged by the learned of his own judge∣ment. SURVEY. Thus with long-suffering have we wait∣ed in silence, and quietly permitted William Ramsey to tell out his Tale. But I must confess, had not the most of that he hath said, been the words of Sir Christopher Hey∣den. or &c. that was wiser then himself, I do not know how possibly I could have born with him thus farr. For let any wise man judge, whether whiles he speaks, he be not like Davus iste in the Comedy viz. qui interturbat omnia. Yet though he hath borrowed all the strength he could, herein is his unhappiness, that Sir Christopher wrote long since; and so his answers do not charge home to repell the impressions the Doctour, made upon the Squadrant of Judicial Astrologers. For let but an im∣partial eye compare what the Doctour hath said in his third Section (which is the Troop against which the for∣mer Brigade hath fought all this while) and it will appear that all this while to an an inch it hath fixedly stood its ground; which for the clearer manifesting of what I have said, I have here verbatim inserted him.
The Doctours SECT. III. The condemnation of Astrology by the word of God, in severall places of Scripture. THe first place is in Deut. 18.10, 11. There shall not be found among you any one that useth Divination, or an observer of times. An ill thing that it must not be found among them, not in any one Man or woman of all the Nation: Just as 'tis said the name Baali, Hos. 2.16, 17. must be removed, not sounded, because Idolaters used it, though of the same signification with Ishi, there appointed, i. e. My Lord, or My Husband: and as the Apostle saith, Ephes. 5.3. of covetousness, Let it not be once named among Christians. So the Prophet Moses here, as from God, chargeth that there must not be any one among them that useth Divination, or is an observer of times: both which words by common consent of the Learned of all sorts, signifie Astrology, and Astrologers. The first word  which by our Translatours is render∣ed, one that useth Divination (the phrase indeed is strong and emphatical,  that is, Divining Divinati∣ons) is, as Mercer affirmeth, taken for the most part in an ill sense; and asserteth out of the Hebrew, R. Kimchi, that it containeth every Art which is used to foreknow things future. Shindler affirmeth to the same purpose, that in an evil sense it comprehends all things which are done,  i. e. by any curious diabolical Art, as the Magi of Egypt. And Elias saith that it signifies to divine things; which is attributed to Balaam (see Josh. 13.) who be∣cause he could not curse from observation of the natural Starrs, but was forced to bless; he yet exprest himself in his own Dialect, Astrologically, of a spiritual Starr that should arise out of Jacob. Avenzara, they say, an Astrologer affirmeth that this word is a common name to
all Diviners, but more proper to Astrologers. Lastly, The Arabian Version of this 18. of Deut. v. 10. renders our word, He that exerciseth Astrology. The second word in this 18. of Deut. vers. 10,  which our Translatours render, An observer of times, is diversly taken; but all close to signifie a prohibition of Astrology. The summ of what the learned Hebrews say (who must needs best understand their own Language) in brief is this  praestigiari (whence is our ) Aben Ezra will have to be derived of  A Cloud, as to fore∣tell by the Clouds; that it will be well or ill to do, or at∣tempt this or that upon this or that day. R. Solomon de∣rives it from  Time, as to signifie observation of times. The wise Ancients derived it from  An eye, and so  to signifie him that dazles the eyes of the beholder, that he may see falshood in stead of that which is true. Their words are  &c. that is, The wise men say,  is he who holdeth the eyes. R. Akiva saith, it is he which computeth times and houres; saying, It is good to go forth to day; to morrow it is good to ne∣gociate, &c. Sanedrim, cap. 7. fol. 65.2. Of these Kim∣chi, in Lib. Radicum, maketh mention. In the later Ety∣mology are signified Curious Astrologers, determining by the disposition and operation of the Starrs, certain dayes to be dayes of good, merry, and prosperous things: Others to be dayes of evil, sad, and adverse things: Thus the learned Hebrews. The Chaldee renders the said two words; the first, Divineth Divination; the second, Ob∣serveth houres, which is proper to Astrologers. Note fur∣ther, for the clearing of this first place of Deut. 18.10. that both our foresaid Hebrew words are used again by Moses, vers. 4. (and in the same manner translated by our last English Translatours: where again the Arabick Version renders  Astrologers.) And Moses adds these five strong arguments against the said Art of Astro∣logical and other unlawfull Predictions.
First, that all such are an abomination to the Lord, vers. 12. Secondly, that such Arts being used by the Canaanites, God did drive them out before the Israelites, Vers. 12. Thirdly, that unless men cast away the use of the said Arts, they cannot be perfect; that is, upright and sincere with God, Vers. 13. Fourthly, that godly men must differ from Canaanites and Heathens, in the abandoning such Arts, because God hath forbid his people the use of them. Vers. 14. Fifthly, that instead of such ways of prediction the Lord raiseth up Christ the great Prophet, (vers. 15. compare Acts 3.23.) to foretell unto them what is meet for them to fore-know: so that onely Christ. and they to whom he gives the divinely inspired gift of Prophesie, must fore∣tell things to come: No Art may undertake it; for it is opposite to Christ, and presumes upon that which be∣longs onely to divine Prophesie. So that indeed (as 'tis in Lev. 20.6.) to follow such kinde of Arts, is to go a who∣ring (spiritually) from Christ; and God will (as 'tis said there) set his face against such, and cut off such a soul from among his people: weighty reasons against Astro∣logy, without any intimation from God of any distincti∣on or limitation. The second place against Astrology, is Isai 2.6. Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Ja∣cob, because they be replenished from the East, and are South-sayers like the Philistims. The word  here rendered South-sayers, is rendered by Vatablus in his Notes, Diviners; by Junius, Praestigiatores; that is, that make shew of that they cannot do. Greek, viz. Septuagint,  that is (saith Budeus, &c.) A kinde of foretelling: as  (say they) signifieth Di∣vination. And generally the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabick, Arias Montanus, &c. render it Augurers, or Auguries, which by reason of the antiquity of the word, and be∣cause
antiquities tell us that the Augurers divine as well by the aspect of Heaven as by flying of Birds; Authours of later times commonly use that word to express Divi∣nation in general. But to come closer to the word; Learned Arias Mon∣tanus doth (as well as I) derive our word from  that is, Time; yea so doth R Solomon derive  or  (same word in descent or substance) of whose signifying Astrology or Astrologers ye heard afore abundantly. The intimations of the sinfulness and prohibition of this Divination, in this second of Isai are. First, that the Jews therein to the displeasure of God, imitated the Heathens, and uncircumcised out-casts; as those in the East, that is, the Chaldeans and the Philistime. Se∣condly, in that the holy Ghost puts such a singular note on this sin: He saith not they are Swearers, unrighte∣ous, &c. like the Chaldeans and Philistims; but they are Diviners, like those of the East, even Chaldeans, or like the Philistims. Thirdly that with a shril and strong Emphasis the Prophet tells the Jews, though considered in their highest notion, as the House of Jacob, and Gods people; Therefore for their Astrology, &c. God had for∣saken, or cast down, or sent them away into Captivity: that is, had past an irrevocable sentence so to do. The third place of Scripture against it, is Isai 44.24, 25, 26. Thus saith the Lord thy Redeemer and he that formed thee from the womb. I am the Lord that maketh all things, that stretcheth forth the Heavens alone &c. that frustrateth the tokens of the lyars and maketh Di∣viners mad, that turneth wise men backward and maketh their knowledge foolish; that confirmeth the word of his servants, and performeth the counsel of his messengers. Mark by the way (afore we scan the words in the Origi∣nal) the Geneva Notes, in the Magin of our greater En∣glish Bibles. Namely, He armeth them (say those Notes) against the South sayers of Babylon, which would have
born them in hand, that they knew by the Starrs, that God would not deliver them, and that Babylon should stand. But let us come more particularly to the words. First, 'tis evident here is mention of Diviners, a word in our English generally taken in an ill sense, to signifie those that by unlawfull Arts undertake to foretell future things. And the Chaldee, Syriack. Arabick Greek, and Ancient Latine, and that of Vatablus and Junius, render the Text in part, by Diviners, and Divinations. And Vatablus in his Notes upon this place, saith, Mendacium, that is, of Lyars, is in Hebrew  that is, of Astrologers. And Junius in his Notes on this place, faith, Signa men∣dacium &c. that is, The signes of the Lyars, of which see following in the 47. of Isai vers. 10. and so forward to vers. 14. And sure enough there in Isai 47.10. Astro∣logers expresly, and under severall other names, and no∣tions also are bitterly inveighed against, as we shall see after, in the particular scanning of that place. Let us add to all, a little more particular sifting of the words of this 44. of Isai 25.  Lyars is of  He feigned, lyed, and by  in Isai 44.25. are understood (as Buxtorfe, and R. Solomon and R. David affirm)  In∣spicientes astra, Astrologi, that is, Gazers upon the Starrs, Astrologers. And for the other word in the 44. of Isai, viz.  that you have here rendered in English, Diviners; we scanned it afore in Deut. 18. shewing you how the Hebrews, yea, the Astrologer himself confesseth that it signifies Astrologers. The intimations against Astrology in this Text are, fi-st, that it seems prejudicial to Gods Creation, and Redemption, and Providence. For when God would here comfort his people against Astro∣logers Predictions, threatning evil to them, the Lord that is most wise, to order his words, begins with this pre∣face; Thus saith the Lord thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, that maketh all things, and
that stretcheth forth the Heavens, and spreadeth abroad the Earth: Intending plainly thus much; Fear not bond∣age under evil men and things, as the Astrologers threat∣en, for I am thy Redeemer, that redeems thee from troubles, in spite of all Astrology. Fear not those Astro∣logical Genethliacos, that is, Casters of Nativities; for I formed thee from the womb: Fear not their Predicti∣ons by the Starrs and Heavens, for I spread and rowl them as I please: Fear not their predicted evils, for I make all things, and spread the Earth as I please. So that God pleads these of his Creation, Redemption, and pro∣vidential preservation, against the Astrologers that oppose these by raising false fears from their lying Arts in the hearts of his people. The second intimation is, that God doth call, and can and will make those Astrologers and Diviners, Lyars, and mad men: all their predictions shall prove but Lyes and madness; and turn their pretended knowledge into foolishness. Thirdly, that the Lord will confirm the word of his Servants, and the counsel of his Messengers; that is, the Prophesies of his Prophets, in oppofition to all Astrologers. Astrology opposeth the Word, but that shall overflow it. The fourth place against Astrology is, Isai 47.12, 13, 14. It is spoken to Babylon, v. 1. The words are these, Stand now with thine Inchantments, and with the multi∣tude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth, if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou maist prevail: Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels; let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monethly Prognosticatours stand up and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee: Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, &c. We see in the general, if we reade but according to the English, how Astrologers under all names and titles are inveighed against by God himself, and in a holy way of divine taunting of them: The Original also is very full
and home to the same effect: the first word or name in the 13. Verse,  which our English renders Astrologers, is also by the ancient Greek Septuagint rendered , and by Junius also Astrologi, that is, Astrologers whose business according to the He∣brew, is, to view and behold the Heavens for Predictions: For the Hebrew word  in his prime and native signi∣fication signifies to play the Astrologer.  saith Pag∣nin, and Schindler, is the Root whence comes  an Astrologer, Isai 47.13. Let not the Astrologers of Hea∣ven, &c. stand up and save thee; and this is the righter rendering of the word. The Hebrew Doctours also ex∣pound it Astrologers. R. Kimchi doth derive it from the Arabian Language, in which  Alhabram, signi∣fies the Decision of a matter; as (saith he) the Astrolo∣gers are so called, who decide and determine things by the prescript of the Starrs. And to put the matter out of doubt, that the Lord means Astrologers, he useth another word, by which he gives them a second name, to wit,  is Gazers in the Starrs. Astronomers look upon the Starrs, to know their colour, distance, motion; but Astrologers (saith the Lord) gaze in, or into the Starrs; that is, their business is to know the influence and predictions by Starrs, as they pretend. The Chaldee Tar∣gum doth also so render it; namely.  Gazers in or into the Starrs: and their third name  which our English renders Monethly Prognostica∣tours: Vatablus renders, Those who declare what shall come to pass every several moneth. The Arabian Version of this Verse renders them all three thus. Let them arise and deliver thee, who presage future things by the Starrs of Heaven; who contemplate the Starrs, and foretell thee what event shall be to thee. All (you see) amounts to this, that without fail, Astrologers are here spoken against. And how. First, as opposits to confidence in God: as our Notes on
the Bible affirm in these words. [He derideth (say they) their vain confidence, that put their trust in any thing but in God, condemning also such Sciences which serve to no use, but to delude the people, and to bring them from de∣pending on God. Secondly, as of the same rank, and much of the same abomination with Inchanters and Sorcerers. Babylon useth both; and as we heard afore, from them that went farr in Astrology; that Astrologers that usually hit any thing right, cannot do it but by help from the Devil. Thirdly, as a thing to be derided, that any man should undertake to presage good, when 'tis the counsel of God to bring evil upon a people. Fourthly, as a just thing with God to send such to their Astrologers in the day of evil of judgement on them, to see if they can deliver them. Fifthly, as that God will the rather bring irresistible judgement on a people that besides their evils, do believe Astrologers that they shall do well. Sixthly, that in the day of calamity, especially Astro∣logers, and those that believed them shall fall by the hot∣test fury of the judgement. The fifth place of Scripture against Astrology is Jer. 10.2, 3. Thus saith the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signes of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them. For the customes of the people are vain.  a sign or token, doth some∣times and especially when joyned with Heaven, signifies a prodigious, portentous, ominous sign. The word is the same, and the intent of the Text the same, as in Isai 44.24, &c. (afore discussed) that frustrateth the Tokens, or signes of the Lyars. The Geneva on our Bibles on the word [Signes] say thus; [God forbiddeth his people to give credit or fear the Constellations and Conjunctions of Starrs and Planets, which have no power of themselves, but are governed by him; and their secret motions and
influences are not known to man, and therefore there can be no certain judgement thereof. Deut. 18.9.] And the same Geneva Notes on the word [Customes] say thus; [Meaning (say they) not onely the observation of the Starrs, but their Laws and Ceremonies, whereby they confirm their Idolatry] so the Geneva Notes. I quote them and others the more, that ye may see, not onely mine, but the judgement of the generality of the godly and learned touching Astrology. I add, as Astrology and Idolatry are conjoyned here in the prohibition, so also was it in the practise of men: for they idolatrously made Gods of the Starrs, as of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, &c. as the names of our week-dayes do unhappily to this day signifie. And they also did astrologically use them to foretell by. And indeed in Prediction by them they made gods of them. For future things are in Gods hands, and not for us to know till he will make them known by his Word; or perform them, Acts 1.7. The Chaldee Pa∣raphrase renders that of the Text of Signes thus; And be not afraid of the Signes that are put in Heaven: which must needs fignifie the Starrs: and the Hebrew word for fear  signifies to cast down upon the earth with fear; which must intimate rather a fear of evil signi∣fications, then of adoration. The intimations against Astrology here, are, First, that it is the way of the Heathen. Now we, whom God hath with so much cost and care distinguish∣ed from the World, must not imitate the World, Matth. 6.32. Rom. 12.2. Secondly, that the Customes of the people in that and other things, are vain; and 'tis not for Gods people to run after vain things but rather as a sign of their repentance to do as Solomon Eccles. 1.2. and Paul. Phil. 3.7, 8. 3. That the regarding of such things causeth in men an evil fear, opposite to their confidence and comfort in God: so the Prophet intimates in exhorting them not to fear them.
Fourthly, that to fear any Astrology or signes &c. is an heathenish thing: We do not as Believers, but as Hea∣thens. Godly men, yea all men that profess the true God, ought to go to that God, and to him onely to know the hidden things that are future. For it is the priviledge of God onely, to foretell such things to come, either by him∣self or by his spirit extraordinarily in his Prophets; and therefore not communicated to Starrs: and whatsoever we set up, as imagining they are able to predict such fu∣ture things, we advance up into the place of God, which are not Gods; as is manifest by this very thing, that they cannot really and truly predict such things: and therefore to go to any thing to know such things to come, but to God himself, is to do as Heathens that set up false gods, and not as men that acknowledge the true God. All this is fully and plainly held sorth to us in Isai 41.21.22, 23, 24. In vers. 10. to 21. the Lord having prophesied and foretolá good things to come to pass for his people, he in a holy manner thus taunteth all other things that are set up by men in which they put confidence, as if they were Gods to declare hidden things past, or to come; verse 21. &c. Produce your cause saith the Lord bring forth your strong reasons saith the King of Jacob; let them hring forth, and shew us what shall happen. Let them shew the former things what they be, that we may consider them, and know the later end of them, or declare to us things to come: Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know ye are Gods, &c. Behold ye are of no∣thing. We do not count it inconsiderable to our business to discuss here what is the thing mainly meant in this place; as whether Idolatry or Astrology (sure enough in Astro∣logy by them that confide in it for Predictions, there is Idolatry enough, as this Text sufficiently intimateth) but we attend the Argument to confute it viz. because it can∣not foretell things to come; because that is Gods Preroga∣tive
alone: and therefore nor Idols nor Stacrs; neither Idols nor Starrs; neither Idolatry nor Astrology can predict things to come: for as Idolatry is but vanity, as 'tis oft called in Scripture: as the vanites of the Nations, or Gentiles &c. So Astrology is a lye, Jer. 60.35.36. A Sword is upon the Chadeans, &c. and upon her Princes and upon her wise men: a Sword is upon the Ly∣ars, and they shall dote. Upon which word learned Bux∣torf (ad vocem  (which is the word in the 50. of Je∣remy, onely an emphatical article is prefixed, ) signifies Lyes and Lyars, Isaiah 44.25. by which under∣stand  Gazers upon the Starrs, Astrologers, according to Rabbi Solomon: and so understand that, Jer. 50.36. Rabbi David on the same; and the Chaldee Paraphrase renders  by  oft times; which  signifies Foretellers: but Jer. 50.36. the Chaldee renders  by  Diviners: The result of all is this; First, Astrologers are by God himself called Lyars: Secondly, they that seek to them for Predictions are Ido∣laters, therein making them gods: Thirdly, that God hath exprest so much against both; both against the Astrologer and his Clients, because God will vindicate his own priviledge, that he alone is the God of truth that can truly foretell things to come. The sixth place is Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. Nebuchad∣nezzar dreamed dreams; and the King commanded to call the Magicians, and the Astrologers, and the Sorce∣rers, &c. to shew the King his dreams: Then spake they to the King in the Syriack, tell thy Servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation. The King answered; The thing is gone from me, if ye will not make known to me the dream with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be out in pieces, &c. They answered again, Tell us the dream, and we will shew the interpretation thereof. The King answered, If ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one decree for you, for ye have prepared
Lying, &c. Tell me the dream and I shall know that ye can shew the interpretation thereof. Then the Chalde∣ans answered, &c. There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the Kings matter: there is no King, &c. that asked such things at any Magician or Astrologer, &c. But as it follows in the Story, God revealed the dream, and the interpretation thereof to the King: then the King answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings, and a revealer of secrets. In all which we have these particulars against Arolo∣gers: First, that the Magicians and Astrologers, and the Sorcerers are put together, as Artists of the same kinde. Secondly, that they themselves did confessedly so name and number up themselves. Thirdly, that all these laying their heads and hearts, and Arts together, and that to save their lives could not finde out that Dream of the King. Fourthly, that the King calls them Lyars. Fifthly, the King gives a reason; namely, that if they could cer∣tainly by any Art, &c. tell the interpretation of his Dream, they might also tell his Dream. Sixthly, that by a just judgement of God, ruine is pronounced by the King, against these as Deceivers. Seventhly, they thought that because they could not tell this Dream, that therefore no man on earth else could; and that therefore the King was unreasonable to require of them to tell it; intimating strongly their incomparable ability and confidence in their wicked Arts, that what possibly could be done in that nature, by any, could be done by them. Eighthly, that God according to his Prerogative could reveal it to Da∣niel; and so confuted the Lyes of the Astrologers, &c. Ninthly, that the heathen King was hereby throughly convinced, that there was no God like the true God, whom Daniel and all godly men do worship. Seventhly and lastly, Note the word [Magician] and [Magick] (so oft used in Daniel, and joyned there with
Astrologers and Astrology) is by the vote of the Learned generally taken in the New Testament in the worse sense. Matth. 2. oft. Acts 8. Acts 13. And as oft as Ashaphim is mentioned in Daniel, the Septuagint con∣stantly expounds it by the word  Magicians. Now Ashaphim say the learned Criticks, signifies Astrologers, and those which observe the Starrs in the morning or e∣vening twylight. And though  may in the general signifie Wise, yet because those  were among the Chaldeans and Egyptians, such as used devilish Arts; it is taken in an ill sense; as of that brood (afore they repent∣ed) mentioned, Acts 19.18, 19, 20. Many of them which used curious Arts brought their Books together to be burned before all men, and counted the price of them fifty thousand pieces of Silver. The most of these Books (in most probability) were Astrological Books, for Divina∣tion; because, first, the Arts are called Curious Arts; curious in the Rules and Principles above common means of knowledge, and curious in their end and use, to predict things that were not to be known ordinarily. Secondly; they were Book-arts, which are chiefly of Astrology; few, if any, are written of Sorcery, Necromancy, &c. but come down from Generation to Generation by Tra∣dition. Thirdly, their price great, viz. Six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds Sterling, which imports also Astrological Books, because none others of unlawfull and finfull Arts (as they all are here intimated) are so much valued, as Astrological Books. Fourthly, its a thing ap∣parently known to men acquainted with antiquity, that these Ephesians were greatly addicted to Astrology and Book-magick. Therefore the Syriack and Arabick ren∣der Curious Arts by Magick. All which sorts of Arts are condemned under the name of Sorceries, Revel. 21.8. as those which shall abound in the last times, afore the fall of Antichrist, as by wofull experience we do al∣ready finde.
To these things out of Daniel, and the New Testa∣ment, I might add much, both of Antiquities and Criti∣cismes of Languages, to strengthen our Assertion; but the conveniencies of this little Volume constrains me to con∣tract my self. SURVEY. Now that the Reader hath had present∣ed before his eye what William and his Champion Sir Christopher on the one part, and what Doctour Homes on the other part have said, I can with more ease and bre∣vity explain the impertinency and insufficiency of what hath been attempted against the Doctour. To Williams first Section, and first to the Paragraph noted with [A] I answer that the Replier, W. R. or Sir Christopher Heyden is not as good as his word in his very first entrance of the Lists: For first he saith nothing at all to the word Diviner.Will, Ramsey brings us false Hebrew and fale Greek, to man∣tain his false opinion, his false interpretati∣on of Latin you had afore. Secondly, to the word Observer of times (which is given us in false Hebrew; for the word is not  but  not Gnonen, or to write it rightlier Onen but Menonen; and also in false Greek, for there is no such word in the Septuagint. The nearest that is is  but that is wide from the word William brings, and is not applied to Meonen, but is the last word save one in the Verse) I say to the word Observer of times, Will. Ram. or Sir Christopher Heydon doth not bring the judgement of the Church from Moses time and downward. But the Church hath been against them, rendering the Text against Astrology. So the Church in Israel; so the Church of the Jews; so the Greek Churches; and so the Churches formerly in Syria and Arabia. First,Because W.Ram. his great ignorance tell, D. Homes, that he the said Doctour quotes Arabick, but tells not his Authour, as if he were ashamed; therefore to inform Will. when I first quote either the five Books of Moses in Samaritan, or the Bible in Chaldee, Syriack, or Arabick, I will give him a touch of aptiquity of each, Now first for the Samaritan, Ex hoc fute Hebraeo (quit Guid. Mich. le Jay) Samaritanus Texs ducit originem, non à di∣visione religionis, sed  Colonia Cuthaeorum, quae in Samaream venerat, sedésque decem Tribuum sub Salmanasara depor∣tarum, 2. Regum, c. 17. Anno Hosts, 9. post legem Mosis 776. Mun∣d 3228. vide lur. a∣pud Hieron. in Prfa. lib. Reg. & epist. ad Galat. c. 3. for the Church in Israel, the Samaritan Pente∣teuch hath it  (so I am fain to write it because the
Printer hath no Samaritan Letters) which more evidently is of  a Cloud, or  Time, and is used to signifie an Observer of Times. The Samaritan version (which again I am forced to give the Reader in Hebrew Letters) is  which signifies one that by drawing lines exerciseth Prediction, or fore-telling, accord∣ingly upon the meaning of the word, the Learn∣ed quote and alleadge Herodot. Postquam (in∣quit Herodotus) artes. ommbus legibus vetitas, exereere coeperint in tantum, aucta est eorum vanitas, ut non solùm observatione syderum futura praedicere &c. profiterentur. Thus of the Church in Israel, or the seat of the ten Tribes. Secondly, for the sense of the Church of the Jews give of the word, viz.Chaldaeus coatextus, ce∣leberrima inter Judaeos Par-phrasis, hine de∣sumpsit originē, quod à capvitate Babylonic exolevisset Linga He∣bratca neque eam ana∣pliu intelligerent. G. M. l. J. the two Tribes called Judah; 1. their Chaldee Targum ren∣ders it  (near to the Hebrew) which the Latine Translation interprets Qui observet ho∣ras. that is, An observer of times. 2. Their Hebrew Talmud, and Rabbinical Tracts say thus on the word, These observers of times were such as did appoint times for the doing of things, saying, Such a day is good, Such a day is naught; Such a day is fit for to do such a work; Such a year or moneth is evil for such a thing. It is unlawfull (say the Rabbins there) to observe times, though one do no work, but make it known. They are lyes, which fools imagine to be true, and to be the words of wise men. Maim. in Treat. of Idol. Cap. 11. Sect. 8. Thirdly, the Churches formerly in Syria; do render the word  by a Periphrasis,Of the Syriack Trans∣lation of the Scriptures some think that the Pentateuch of Moses. &c. to the end of Can∣ticles were translated in Solomon's time, at the request of King Hiram of Tire. And all the rest or abso∣lutely all (say others) that after in the time of the Captivity of the ren Tribes; and after that in the time of the Apostles (say others) the re was a Syriack Translation made. Thus Jesudad Syrus and Greg. Bar. Hebr. Syir in Syro. Arab-Morim. & alii. or circumlocution, describing rather the Antick, or strange gesture or behaviour or manner of work∣ing in his unlawfull Art, then the kinde of the Artist himself; but they render the former word Diviner () by exercising Predictions or
foretelling, which is the immediate and native signification of the Syr. . Fourthly, for the Churches inArabicum contetum omnes Orientales eccle∣siae magnoperè veneran∣tur. Guid. Mich. 1. J. Sed hinc maximam mutuantur cenamenda∣tionem quod S. Hier orzi∣mi saecuso, quidam è sacris libris hâc linguâ scripti reperirentur, quorum auxilio librum Job. in septingentis fermè & octingent versibus, relitust. Arabia (mentioned in the New Testament) they render the word  in Moses Text, by the word  Munaggim, that is an Astrologer. Fifthly, the Greek Churches in their Translation (of whose great antiquity divers hundred of years afore Christ, and after him quoted by the Apostles I need not speak, being well known) do render our  (so small Editions of the Sept. that I have seen, which are more then one or two); whichBib. M. Gal 7. Lin∣guar. one Translation renders, (I know not why unless in relation to the speeches of Astrologers) Qni verba observet, i. e. That observeth words.Editie Paris. Sept. cum Aqu. Sym. & Theod. Another Divinationes observans. i.e. An observer of Divinations; to which let me add my mite;  saith Hesych, is Divinati∣on. And  saith Bud, &c. signifies Divinaculos consulo, to consult with Diviners. So  saith Lucian, is Ominatio vaticinii genus. So then Will. and Sir Christopher are quite out in their Greek, and quite be∣side the Authrity of the Church, unless by the old Latine Translation they mean the Popish Church; which is not worthy to be reckoned in the Balance against the fore∣mentioned Churches—Besides all them, the Protestant Churches in France in their French Translations, both former and later render the word by Prognostiqueux, that is, a Prognosticator, which is a name that Astrologers do willingly take upon them in their Books. So that we need not regard the Translations of particular men, unless it be
to give a word or item that Will. and Sir Christopher had no reason to put so much weight upon Hierom. The Vulgar, Paguni and Montanus. For 1. Hierom, aliàs the Vulgar (for they were all one at the first, till some late Interpolator corruptly made a difference) they both render it, Qui observet somnia at que auguria, he that ob∣serveth Dreams and Auguries, putting two Nouns under one Verb with a Copulative, viz. Dreams and Augu∣ries, both which are in the Astrologer, or else he would not so dote and tell us Tales. But if he observe either, he is here condemned.See the Roman Anti∣quities of Augury. Who but an Ignorant knows not, that the Augurers did prognosti∣cate from the Aspect of the Heavens, as well as by the flying of Birds (as the Doctour before hinted). And therefore Auguro or Auguror is commonly used, (as the common Dictionaries will shew Will. &c.) in general to signifie to divine, to conjecture, to foretell, to surmise what will be, to suppose, or guess. And for those that are more learned then Will. worthy of learned quo∣tations; they may know that Augurium ratio est, & conjectura futuri;Vid. Calv. Bud. Alex. ab Alex. Var. &c. sumitur autem latiùs pro quavis divinatione, sive conjecturâ, i.e. in a word, to signifie [any foretelling].Vad. ejus Lexic. Juri∣dict. and the learned Authours he quotes. And that learned J. Calvin hath these words, Augures similes sunt impostoribus, qui Mathematico∣rum liberali nomine ad umbrantes suas ineptias, profiten∣tur se fata cujusque nôsse, natalitias syderum observatio∣nes. i.e. Augures or Augurers are like to Impostours, who covering their fooleries over with the name of Ma∣thematicians, as if of a Liberal Art, do profess that they know every mans Fate, and the Nativity-observations of Starrs. But saith he presently, Maleficorum appellatio∣ne, &c. that is, Constantius established by Law such foretelling Mathematicians, that they were contained under the name of evil doers, forbidding any to consult with them. And where or under what Title in the
Law are they forbidden? Why saith he. L. Nem. 5. C. de Malef. & Mathem. So then the Civil Law also is against Divining Mathematicians. The Roman Empe∣rours edicted against them more then once;Compare with this the Doctours Epistle to his Demonol. and do make them and Augures to be all as one. 2. Pagnin and Arias Montanus (for they are both one and the same Book, and have the same word; Will. and Sir Christopher needed not to have multiplied this and the other quotation into four to make a shew to knowing men) they both render the word by Praestigia∣tor. But what hath Will. got by this? If it were as he tells his Tale, that it signified onely a Coosener, have the ancient Roman Laws (but now mentioned) or the dayly complaints of the Clients in the City of London set the Astrologers free from that? But let us tell all the truth: Praestigiator (saith a learned Etymologist) à prae & sti∣ge quia quaedam stigialia facta, prae, id est, ante faciunt. i. e. in a word Praestigiator hath (saith he) his name from doing devilish Feats. As Austin saith, (as the Doctour shewed in the Demonolog.) Astrologers have their Answers from his Devil. Add to this, that Guich. saith,  significat Praestigigiatorem, qui computat tempora, & horas; making the Praestigiator and the Astrologer all one. Now for Will. interposing that Doctour Homes [confessed]; he doth not tell you distinctly what he con∣fessed; but I will tell you,  (saith the Doctour) which our Taanslatours render AN OBSERVER OF TIMES is diversly taken, but ALL CLOSE to signisie a PROHIBITION of Astrology. This is the Doctours confession. There is nothing more in this Paragraph [A] worthy to be touched: Sir Christopher and Will. Triumphs come to nothing. And Will. is needlesly angry with the Doctour for comparing Astro∣logers with Wizards, if he doth both consider that the word is but the old English wise or wiser. So that if Astrological Will. be loth to be called wise, or would not
have Wizard to be taken according to the common use of the word, viz. to signifie one that in an unlawfull way foretells things to come, which God hath or doth not re∣veal, but by divine prophesying he is either not wise, or not just, or neither. To the Paragraph distinguished with [B] touching the English Translation, in brief thus; that though there was one English Translation in Sir Christophers time that renders in 2 Chron. 33.6.  He gave himself to witch∣craft; yet there was then also another excellent English Translation (more ancient) extant to this day, that ren∣ders the same, [He observed dismal Dayes] and our last English Translation, which was (if I do not much mis∣take) extant also in Sir Christophers time, He observed times. So here are two for one. But if perhaps some one place may render it of Witchcraft or Southsaying, it is but putting a more general word which comprehends the special, and also still keeps the Astrologer within its Circle, under the lash. For whence is Witch but from the ancient British word [Wits] as if he should Witchcraft, the skill of Wits; or from the Dutch (the true Mother of our an∣cient English Wiichelen or Wiechelen to foretell. And what doth Southsaying fignifie, but (as is pretended) to say truth, as our English phrase of asseveration, not yet quite worne out doth testifie, viz. In good sooth it is so. i. e. In good truth it is so. Now Astrologers pretend to a great deal of wit, and craft or skill and in prediction, and according (as they will say) to truth. Therefore so farr they will own the names, or at least the thing under those names. But whereas these words are commonly used in an evil sense, and therefore accompanied with the words of an ill signification, all to signifie evil Arts, and unlawfull Predictions, they are not much wide that use Witchcraft or Southsaying to signifie Judicial Astrology. Especially seeing oftentimes (as the Doctour shewed out of Austin expresly, and out of Ptolomy intimatedly) Judicial
Astrology doth degenerate into, or is accompanied with witchcraft, or soothsaying. If this will not convince William, or the Reader, we will adde a little System of the mystery of iniquity of ancient Astrology, as J. G. M. A. in his Notes and Observations upon some passa∣ges of Scripture hath collected them;Ptolem. Centiloq. Verb. 9. which to save la∣bour, and for adding ones vote more against Astrolo∣gy, I will give it you in his own words as near as the Printer can follow. 1 Sam. 6.5. Wherefore ye shall make Images of your Emrods and Images of your Mice that marre the Land, and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel: per∣adventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your Gods, and from off your Land. When the Ark was taken Captive and detained by the profane Phili∣stines, the hand of God was sore upon them, and smote them with Haemorhoids & ebullierunt villae & agri in medio Regionis illius, & nati sunt mures, & facta est confusio mortis magna in Civitate. So the vulgar addeth, the ancient Greek copies have it not. The later agree not, some Hebrew Copies acknowledge it not, saith Mendoza, as if there were any that did? 'Tis found indeed in the Dras, as Chimhi hath observed. And it cannot be de∣nyed to the Romanists but that it seemeth to be wanting, but by no means to be supplyed. 'Twere better the Ark should shake still, then that Ʋzziah should hold it up. Howsoevr 'tis true that there was a plague of Mice as well as of Haemorrhoids. Concerning which the Astro∣logers being consulted gave counsell that there should be made five golden Images of the Mice, and as many of the disease to give glory to the God of Israel. The num∣ber was according to the number of their Lords, but for the thing it self the expositours howsoever passe lightly over it, or stop the mouth of the letter with a mystery, perceiving no more of the naturall sence, then a bare tres∣passe offering, but wondering withall and not without
cause, what glory could accrew to the God of Israel from such a homely present as the counterfeit of a Mouse, or that which is worse. A thing which the holy Ghost here vouchsafed not to call by its own name, for the Keri is Tehorecem, Anorum Vestrorum. But the meaning of the Images is Stoichioticall, and to be given out of the Telesmaticall Traditions. (saith Ptolomy in the ) . id est, the generable and corruptible forms are affected by the Celestiall, which therefore the Talismans make use of by observing the entrance of the stars into them. The meaning is (saith Hali Aben Rhodoan) or as the Hebrew translation, (Abu Giafar) that the forms of things here below are answered with the like figurations above, and that the Celestiall forms have a ruling influ∣ence upon the sublunary, for example, the Scorpion and Serpent in heaven upon those in earth. Therefore the Sa∣pientes imaginum inspeciebant quando planeta de sub ra∣diis solis egrediebatur, & ingrediebatur hos vultus, eumque in ascendente ponebant, & vultum quem intra∣bant sculpebant in Lapide, et miscebant cum eo alia ad haec necessaria, faciebantque cum eo ex aptatione velde∣structione quod volebant, &c. Observed when a planet was out of his Combustion, and entered into any of these forms, then placing the planet in the Horoscope they engra∣ved the form upon a stone, then adding what else was ne∣cessary they fitted it to preservation or destruction, as they pleased, &c. These conceipts the Greeks termed , other∣wise , from whence the Arabick Talismath. The Chaldeans from the word in the Text Tsalmanija, Images. An experiment of the force is set down by Hali upon his own knowledge practised upon a Saracens ser∣vant in diebus Camorchae Kegis. The servant had been
stung with a Scorpion and was cured by his master with a stone of this kind engraven upon with the figure of a Scorpion. And the Saracen said, that the figure was cut when the Moon was in the sign Scorpio, and that the sign was in one of the four Angles. The mightiest in operation of this sort was Apolloni∣us Tyaneus, a man of that note in the Heathen ballance, that Hierocles the Stoick put him into the Scale with Christ himself, nay he accounted him the better man of the two, but which is sufficiently returned upon him by Eusebius Pamph. Cont. Hteroclem. But the performances of this man had such appearan∣ces of wonder, that they extorted this doubt from the Orthodox themselves,Justin. Martyt R. sad Orthod, quest. 24. 245. , &c. If God be the Creatour and Lord of the World, how comes it to passe that Apollonius his Talismes have so much o∣ver-rul'd the course of things, for we see that they also have stilled the waves of the Sea, and the raging of the winds, and prevailed against the noysome flies and incursi∣ons of wilde beasts, &c. And though Philostratus in that large Legend of his life hath no memory of these things, yet they are constant∣ly ascribed unto this name by Codin. Cedren. Hesychius. Olympiodorus, the Greek Ms. cited by Leunclavius. The Chronicon Alexandrinum and John Txetzes,Joseph. Scalig. Ep. 180. C. 60. of his third Cbiliad. quòd omnino legendum (saith Scaliger) siquidem horum  notitiam habere placet, et sanè lectio non injucunda. Nam in illo capite Apollonius scul∣pturâ Culicum et Ciconiarum culices Antiochiam, Ci∣conias Byzantium ingredi prohibuit. But a fuller Tradition of this matter I shall here set down out of Domninus cited by Joannes Aretiochenus Melala in the tenth Book of his Chronography.
. In the same times of the Reign of Domitian, flouri∣shed the most learned Apollonius Tyaneus, who got him∣self a great name by travelling about and making Te∣lesmes in all places where he came for the Cities and the Countreys. From Rome he went to Byzantium, and entring into that City of Byzus (now more happily called Constantinople) he made there also many Telesmes at the instance of the Citizens, as that against the storks, a∣gainst the river Lycus which passeth by through the mid∣dle of the City, that against the Tortoises, that against the Horses, and other strange things. Then afterward leaving Byzantium, he went and did the like in other Ci∣ties. From Tyanis he came into Syria, and so to Anti∣och the great, where also he was desired by the chief men of the City to make such Telesms as they had need of. And he made one against the Northern wind, and set it up upon the East part of the City. The Authour goeth on, and at large describeth Apol∣lonius his charms against the gnats and Scorpions, adding moreover that Apollonius walking upon a day with the chief men of the City, to observe the situation of the place, happened upon a ruinous pillar, and inquiring in∣to
to the purpose of that, the Citizens related unto him, that in the dayes of Caius Caesar when the City had been shaken with an Earth-quake,Johan. Antioc. Ms. in Arch. Ba∣rocion Bib. Bod. . One Debborius a Talisman to prevent the falling of the City in case an earthquake should happen again, set up this pillar, and up∣on that a marble Pectorall inscribed , but which in processe of time had been consumed by light∣ning, &c. The Citizens therefore were earnest with him, to set up a new Telesme, but Apollonius fetching a deep sigh  refused to make any further Telesmes against the Earth quakes; but the Citizens being urgent upon him, he took writing Tables and foretold as followeth. . And thou miserable City of Antioch shall suffer twice, and a third time shall come upon thee, wherein thou shalt be consumed by fire even in that part by which Orontes runneth. And it may be thou shalt suffer yet once more. This written, he delivered the Tables to the Citizens, and departed into Scleucia, and from thence into Ae∣gypt, . But the most concerning Telesme to the matter in hand is that against the Scorpions, . Apollonius
caused an Image of a Scorpion to be molten in brasse, and set it up upon a little pillar in the midst of the city of Antioch, and the Scorpions vanished out of all their coasts. A like Telesme to this was set up at Hempts a City of Syria Apamea, that which Ptolomy calleth .Geograp. Nubien, Clim. 3. p. 5. In the middle of this, saith an Arabick Geographer, a stone there is set up in a wall having upon it the figure of a Scorpion, and when any one is bitten he bringeth clay and taketh out the figure, which having applyed to the place affected, he is immediately cured. In the nether Region of Grand Cairo the Crocodiles were harmelesse, in the upper they destroyed the Inhabi∣tants.Card. de subt. l. 9. Scal. ex∣ercit. 196. Num. 6. Joan. Bod. ma. daemon. l. 3. c. 6. To provide against this, the Talismans cast a lea∣den Crocodile, which written upon with an Aegyptian charm they buried in the foundation of a Temple. This for a long time defended the people but when at the com∣mand of Achmet Ben Tolon the Caliph, the leaden Image was melted, the Crocodiles returned to their own malice again. The  or fortune of Byzantium stood with one foot in a ship of brasse, the Statue concerned the generall Genius of the whole City. The Ship was a Telesme erected against the dangers of that tempestu∣ous Sea, and while it stood entire stilled the rage, but some parts thereof being (none knew how) broken off and conveyed away, the Sea began to be as unruly as be∣fore. The cause whereof being curiously enquired after and discovered, the broken pieces were sollicitously searched, found out and put together again, and forth∣with the winds and seas obeyed.Zonar. Anna Tom. 3. in Anas. ,
id est, And that it might be certainly known that this indeed was the cause why the ships could not safely arrive, the pieces of the brasse were again taken away. Thenceforth whatsoever vessels toucht upon the Coast were driven back by the violence of the winds. This confirm'd them in opinion that the breaking of the brasen ship was that which hindred their Carriages from coming up to the City. They therefore caused the ship to be most carefully repaired. These consecrations (for so also they are called) were more usually but not onely practised in the East. For Gre∣gory of Tours reporteth, that at the repairing of a Bridge in Paris, there was found the Images of a Serpent and Dormouse in brasse, and that at the taking away of these, the Serpents and Mice came up in great number. More might be added of the Serpentina columna, and the Statua Equestris ahenea,Leunola. pandest. hist. Tur. N. 130. set up (this latter) against the Plague in Constantinople, the destruction whereof hath been followed with fearfull and periodicall mor∣talities. But enough hath been said, Mizaldus may be seen,Mizald. Cent. Ms. Gaff. cu∣riojitez innoyes sur la sculpture Talifm. des pers. c. 6. and the late Authour of the Curiosities. If we draw all up, the summe will be the Ancient Rite of Averruncation, That in case a City or Countrey should be infested with any plague either of disease or no∣xious Creature, the Talismans were consulted and desi∣red to erect an Image of the plague under a certain Influ∣ence of Celestiall Configuration. And this I say was the cause why the Philistin Astro∣logers gave counsell that golden Images should be made of the Haemorrhoids, and the Mice that marred the Land, to give glory to the God of Israel. The Telesme against the Mice according to Paracel∣sus is to have this manner of Consecration.Aachid. mag. l. 3. p. 131. e∣dit. Lat. germ. p. 102. Make an Iron Mouse under the conjunction of Saturn and Mars, and in the House of Jupiter. Imprint upon the belly Al∣bamatatox,
&c. Then place the Telesme in the middle of the house, and the Vermin shall instantly leave the place. More then so he promiseth. Take a live Mouse and tye it to the Iron Image, and it shall dye immediately. But I undertake not that the golden mice were so ceremoniously consecrated; yet that they had a Telesmaticall way of pre∣paration answerable to the beginnings and mediocrity of the Art, my own reason, and above that the weight of Maimon's words induce me to conclude. I say (saith he) of that of Samuel concerning the Images of the Haemorrhoides,More Nevich. P. 1. c. 1. that they were so called not so much from their externall form, as from a secret influence within, remediall against the plague in the hin∣der parts. The Astrologers had perceived that this God had been pleased with the Brasen Serpent, which Moses the Talisman (so they would account him) set up upon a pole in the wildernesse, Numb. 21.8. And I need not stick to affirm, that the Brasen Serpent against the fiery Serpents was the first occasion (I say not given) but ta∣ken, of all these Telesmaticall practices. And thus also we may come to know (See Plinie lib. 10. c. 27. Cyrenaici Achorum: Deum muscarum mul∣titudine pestilentiam inferente, invocant. Why the God of Ekron was called by the name of Baal-zebub, that is,  (as the Lxx) or the Fly-God. The Greek Copies of the Evangelists for the most part reade  Beelzeboul-Deus or Belus Stercoreus. So the Printed Arabick and the Hebrew Translation of Saint Mat. But I presume not originally. And so Saint Hi∣erome observed, for seeing the Idiome of Zebul is Syri∣ack, it would have been expected, that that Paraphrase should not have read as it doth, (and undoubtedly ought) Beelzebub. But for the reason, if any could be given, Scaliger was likely to give as good as another, and yet his reason
is, that the Scripture put this name upon the God of Ek∣ron by way of derision, quòd in Templo Hierosolymitano Muscae carnes victimarum non liguriebant, quum tamen Gentium fana à muscis infestarentur propter nidorem vi∣ctimarum. True indeed it is out of the Pirke Avoth, that a Fly was never seen in the Slaughter-house of the Temple. And 'twas a priviledge of the Jewish Sacrifices above those of the Heathen. But that therefore the God of Ek∣ron should be called the Fly-God, is a reason below that mans sagacity. He was properly so called as the most learned Selden. But for the cause he confesseth. Nequeo dicere,Syntag. 2. c. 6. nec mihi quis alius opinor satis potest. But the Ekronitis were pestered with noisome Flyes; To avert this Nusance the Astrologers set up the Image of a Fly Telesmatically endued; the people finding the benefit of this , made it a God. The Israelites themselves did as much to the Brasen Serpent. Thus farre J. G. and the learned Antiquities in him. Judge now whether Astrology be not Demonologicall, Diabolicall, Devilish! To the Paragraph noted with (C) we say, that if the word be admitted as in the English, with the judge∣ments of so many Churches, and in so many languages and reasons upon it as hath been declared, the intent of the Text must necessarily be to condemn judiciall Astro∣gie. And the allegation of Solomon in Ecclesiastes con∣cerning a prudentiall observing of present providences and times allotted by God for men to lay hold on, if wsie, is a meer impertinency, as to predictions of future times, by Astrology. And the distinction annext is in∣deed a generall Epithite or name of all Judiciall Astro∣logy, that tis all Heathenish, and superstitious as hath been, and will be more made to appear. Williams large quotation of Sir Ch. his alleadging Master E. Lively Professour of Hebrew, &c. amounts in reality but to
this: first, that M. Lively ingenuously confesseth, that among the diversities of men, and their opinions, there is general agreement that the word signifieth an unlawfull and forbidden Art, as suppose of Southsaying juggling, witchcraft &c. which how sufficiently they comprehend Astrology I did but now declare; and how when divers words to signifie divers unlawfull Arts of unlawfull Prognostication, come together, that which nearest signi∣fie the manner, matter, and means of Astrological Pre∣diction, must needs there signifie Astrology, the Doctour hath sufficiently declared. Secondly, That M. Lively acknowledgeth the word is taken to signifie such as take upon them to define times of good and bad luck: which is the dayly practise of our Astrologers in these times. Thirdly, that yet M. Lively doth not confess all the truth, either of the readings of the Learned, or the Reasons in Text, to prove the word signifies Astrology, which the Doctour clearly produceth. It was too common in Sir Christopher's time, for a Professour of the Universities too much to please Courtiers and great men: of which if M. Lively were free (as my Charity would willingly think) yet he could but produce his own reading, and Books then known to him. We have had the Samaritan, Syriack and Arabick Translations of the Bible brought over since. Thirdly, for M. Lively's opposing Tremelius, a most learned Christian Jew, whom the learned World admire to this day, I must justly undervalue him to great Tremelius: and if Tremelius according to the nature and circumstances of the place doth sometimes render the word Praestigiatores, that is, as M. Lively calls them, Jugglers, that word (as the Doctour hath shewed) doth very conveniently comprehend the Astrologer. As for Will. Ramsey's Ignoramus, that Doctour Homes quotes Arabick versions, which it seems he is loath or ashamed to name; I send Will. to Paul's Church-yard to the Book-sellers, who will inform him of the known
Book, and fame of the Bible in Arabick. The result of Will. and Sir Christophers struggle upon this 18. of Deut. 10. that they are content that Witchcraft, South∣saying Juggling or (at the least) Superstitious and hea∣thenish observation of times. or any thing else should be there understood, but not Astrology. But that Astrology must be there meant, the Doctour hath sufficiently dis∣cussed afore, and I have now added my two mites. And that Judicial Astrology is not free from all kinde of Witchcraft, Southsaying, and Juggling; but guilty of Superstition, Devilisine, Heathenisme, and profaneness, let M. W. Perkins, and M. J. Melton speak; whose own arguments, and in their own words you shall have ancn, all to this very tune aforesaid. To Will Ramsey's second Section touching the second of Isay v. 6. we need not say much, because his usual man∣ner of Jigs and Jeares he hath said little, yea indeed no∣thing at all, to the main strength of the place, which was urged by the Doctour. If Will. do hope it yet let it not be, that the Reader forget what Doctour Homes urged from that place, now the Copy of it is afore presented to his eye, viz. Authours of late times commonly use the word to express Divination in general. But to come clo∣ser to the word, learned Arias Montanus doth, as well as I, derive our word from  time; yea so doth R. Solomon  or  (same word in substance and de∣scent) of whose signifying Astrology ye heard afore a∣bundantly. So the Doctour. To all which Will. saith, upon the matter, nothing; nor hath he or his Sir Christo∣pher clawd off (as we say) what was discussed on Deut. 18.10. to which the Doctour referred us to better under∣stand this. If the Hebrew word is derived of Time, then in its native signification it doth more then barely signifie Divination in general; it specially relates to Astrology that undertakes to predict touching humane affairs, by or from the times or turnings of the Heavens. And seeing
William is so peremptory, he shall now have the proper idiom of the Syriack  in Isay 2.6. whose speci∣all signification is by experience and inquisition to omi∣nate and fore-tell; which is the character of the preten∣ded skill of Astrology. And Williams brave reason is a weak reason that ponderating Translatours should use words for brevity of oration. Tis true indeed that it is their wisedome as farre as the word will bear, to give the most comprchensive signification, because the mind of the holy spirit is such. But every generall comprehends the particulars, as he that saith William Ramsey to be an animal saith true; he that saith he is an ignorant man, &c. saith he is an animal; ergo, he that saith he is an ignorant man saith true. This is better logick, then Wil∣liams endeavour to make the Scriptures opposite to them∣selves. Where the word saith, He that believeth shall be saved. the circumstances of the place shew the meaning to be of justifying faith in Christ, whose property is, saith the Apostle, to work by love. But by the Devils be∣lieving, Saint James plainly signifies such a faith as works not by love. And therefore if Williams or any mans faith hath no love; it is no better then the Devils faith. Thats true Logick, and according to the mind of S. James. Beside all this, note that W. R. saith nothing to the Doctours reason from the word EAST, proving thereby Chaldeans or Astrologers to be there meant. We add here nothing touching the aptnesse of the word Sooth-saying to signifie Astrologicall predicting, because before discussed. To W. R. his third. Section touching Isay 44.25. and in it to Sir Christoph. reason I will say nothing; be∣cause the Doctours exercitation upon the words (set down afore in his Demonologie) stands still as a wall of Brasse. William hath onely alleadged a fragment of the text, and in a different Translation from the Doctour, and our best translation. And Sir Chr. reason, viz. that Astro∣logicall
signes must be confessed effectuall, and not to be frustrated but by miracle; &c. is a most unwarrantable speech; contradicted by many friends to Astrology, and by Will. Ram. himself in severall expressions in his Epistle to the Reader. Therefore I have nothing to do here; but to passe hence to the fourth Section of Will. Ramsey on Isay 47.12, 13, 14. In answer to which if the Reader will be pleased but to turn back and read the Doctours short discourse upon that 47 of Isay, he will find that there is little need I should speak much to Will. and Sir Chr. words here. Briefly therefore. 1. Willi∣am here confesseth that the Lord here with particular di∣stinction, names Astrologers, Starre-Gazers and Monethly Prognosticatours. whereby he gives faire way that this Text may have its full blow at the head of A∣strology. 2. That Will. doth think that in the judge∣ment of some, this text may seem to give a fatall blow to Astrology, yet saith never a word himself, to stave it off. 3. He calls in Sir Christopher to speak for him; in whose words there are severall great mistakes. For 1. Vatablus hath nothing at all in his Commentary on that 47. of Isay 12, 13, 14. touching Chabar. 2. Sir Christo∣pher urging of Chabar and Calvin, is against himself and his cause. For Chabar is in the 12. verse, to signifie en∣chantments; and therefore by Sir Christophers argument, there also Astrology is forbidden (as well as v. 13.) and so also contrary to W. R. struggle, enchantment goes a∣long with Astrology. 3. In that criticisme on Chabar, Calvin is greatly against Sir Christophers Astrology, Cal∣vin on verse 13. STENT NƲNC. Hîc perspicimus quos potissimùm consiliarios intelligat Propheta; nempe divinatores illos, qui vano scientiae nomine sese populo venditabant, quasi futura omnia tenerent ex ASTRO∣RƲM CONSPECTƲ. Sed de JƲDICIARIA ISTA ASTROLOGIA, & ejus VANITATE priùs diximus. Si quis objiciat, istorum non fuisse peri∣cula
cula, quae impendebant amoliri; respondeo horum monitu idfacturos fuisse Babylonios, si cladem praevidissent. Cùm non praeviderint, sequitur VANISSIMAM ipsorum esse APIEM Frustà verò nonnulli obtendunt insci∣tiamartis, non artem ipsam exagitari à prophetâ. Allo∣quitur enim Chaldaeos, à quibus haec soientia profecta est. Sulsè autem dicit, coclos ab ipsis sociari; quia perinde proferunt sua decreta, ac si stellarum colligatione, & complexu, constrictum tenerent humanum genus. Quan∣quam si quis malit incant ores vertere, sensus non male; & verbum  utrunque significat. Etsi verò Astro∣rum ordinem speculari per se malum non est, longius quam liceat prorumpere dicit propheta, qui obscuros re∣rum event us inde colligunt, ac videtur obliquè specula∣tores istos opponere prophetis, quo magis detestabiles red∣dat: quia divinas omnes praedictiones extinguant, &c. So that by this of Calvin touching , William and Sir Christopher are shot with their own Bowe. Wherein Calvin doth declare that this place doth not onely con∣demn Judiciall Astrology, as opposite to confidence in God but also as opposite to divine prophecying, as being an Art of very vanity in it self; As an are that would pretend by the stars to know future events, yet could not fore know to fore-admonish of the judgements that were coming. And that the Prophet doth not reprove onely the ignorance of the art as some would pretend, but the Art of Astrology it self, in that the Prophet speaks to the Chaldeans from whom this Science sprung. As a presumptuous art that would bear men in hand, as if they held all man-kind by the colligation and complex of stars, &c. As likewise the Doctour before shewed that a ma∣ny evils in all Judiciary Astrology are here forbidden. So that if disobedience to Gods word and Christianity, can∣not stand together, then Judiciall Astrology and Chri∣stianity cannot stand together, what tale soever Sir Chr. or Will. Ramsey tells us to the contrary — For 1. those in∣stances
touching Princes, Riches, horses, Physiciaus, &c. the Scripture expresly forbiddeth onely confidence, &c. in them; but elsewhere commends the use of them. But doth not so speak of Astrology; but every where it men∣tions it, condemns the thing — 2. That of Merchants in the last verse of that of Isay with Tremilius and Ari∣as Montan, on it; it comes all to nothing; there is no such thing; unlesse they mean laborasti a pueritiâ, is in 12. verse and last verse, which were but a childish labour to take off the edge and dint of that mighty Text in verse 13. against Astrology. I am sure Junius hath these words on that 37. of Isay 13. Emphatica demonstratio, &c. that is, This (saith Junius) is an emphaticall de∣monstration of the vanity which is in all Chaldaeans and Mathematicians, &c. So that we argue ad dictum simpliciter, that Judiciall Astrology is absolutely for∣bidden; because so here; and wheresoever the Scripture names it, it gives it never a good word. 3. That that on verse 10. None seeth; with Tremilius his Quasi dicat is a meer impertinency: because there one sinne is con∣demned, here in verse 13. another. 4. To the distin∣ction they would have put between Heathens and Chri∣stians, is a vain motion, when Jews or Christians follow the sinnes of Heathens and become as bad, or worse then they, sinning against greater light; God reproves both alike, and the one and same word of God to be to the end of the world, is intended against all; as we may see in the Prophets and Apostles application of the Scri∣ptures, from the beginning of the Bible to the end. 5. The distinction of making stars causes, and subordinate in∣struments, comes to nothing, as in Logick, (for instru∣ments are causes) so in the present dispute about Judici∣all Astrology. For Will. Ramsey tels us but now, that Sir Christopher should tell us that strange untruth, that the influences of the Stars cannot be altered without a miracle. Which if it were true; the Astrologers confi∣dence
in the stars is very great. And our relick from their fatall necessity very small, by the word subordination. But Keckerman (as the Doctour shewed) demonstra∣teth that the influence of stars may be altered by many petty naturall causes below. 6. Tis untrue that all well ordered and Christian Common-wealths have permitted and suffered Judiciall Astrologicall prognostications; (which is the question in hand, and that which W. R. pro∣fesseth in this his Lux Veritatis; witnesse his three Schemes or figures). The Romane Common wealth forbids it in a law. See the Doctours Epistle afore his Demonology — And again (as I have shewed afore) it was forbidden in a law by Constantius. l. Nemo. c. 5. de Malef. & Mathem. And some of the Kings of France have questioned Astrologers. And the Epistle before Sir Christophers Heydens Astrologicall discourse confesseth, that in the times of the Kings of England, that discourse would not be permitted to be printed. Besides some of Williams brethren in Astrology have been que∣stioned for their predictions, as they themselves can best inform him. And lastly, if any times or places have not punished such, tis but their permission and sufferance (as the objectours words are) which is of unlawfull things, properly. 7. Tis untrue that the Fathers or Calvin do allow Judiciall Astrology (as hath been cleared by the Doctour and my self) or that the Astrologers med∣dle not but with weather, health, plagues, &c. William, and the yearly Books we have shew the contrary. 8. For calling Master Chamhers, the Doctour, or any other Anti-astrologer by the name of Sophister, it must be re∣torted. He is a Sophister indeed, that alleadgeth A∣quinas on Isay 47. for Judiciall Astrology, when Aquinas hath no Commentary on Isay, and in his summes, he is against it, as I have afore largely shew∣ed. He is a Sophister that will say, that will also say Haymo on Isay 47. is for it; when he is flatly against
it,Let Will. see his Au∣thour using Auges for Astrologies before h m. Cicero saith, Ac. gurari pro divicure u∣su pimu. Cic. de div li. Stentz] (saith Haymo on the place) Augu∣res coeli hoc est Astrologi; qui vulgò Mathe∣matici appellantur. Qui contemplabantur sy∣dera] & ex astrorum cursu, lapsu{que} res huma∣nas arbitrabantur gubernari, & regi, & sup∣putabant menses] dicendo hoc erit isto, vel illo mense vel anno, &c. not a word for, but all against Astrology. Finding this falshood in two Quotations, I thought it not worth the while to look into the other two (being not at hand, when I should have perused them) being loath to fling away my precious time upon flamms. Thus briefly have I touched upon these eight particulars (beside my first intent) least onely the fluency of Sir Christophers Oration should have carried away the minde of them that love not to go down the stream. Now let Will. as Job said to his Objectours, Mock on, and crack. Great is the truth, and it will prevail. To VV. his fifth Sect. of Ch. 39. touching Jer. 10.2.3. I do answer, that in this Section also VVill. hath yet his Spokes-man Sir Christopher to speak for him. Sir Chri∣stopher disputes, and Will. (more suo) railes. But neither of them speak any thing to the Hebrew or Chaldee of the Text; or to the Geneva Notes once, or the Reasons, and deductions from it, against Astrology; all which are to good purpose pressed by the Doctour. See afore VVill. saith, The Astrologers do not in the least attribute fatal necessity to the power of the Starrs. But Sir Christopher asserted (as we heard afore) that their power cannot be al∣tered without a miracle. And Will. all along avoucheth the certainty of Astrology, and with many high epithes of a most divine, most heavenly Art, &c. with severall in∣stances of his Diagrams of Figures. Put all together, and it can spell no less then that (in their opinion) the Stars hold forth a necessity of certainty in the power of the ope∣rations. And though the Astrologers confess the Starrs to be Gods instruments (as the Jews did) yet may they
by confidence in their effects deifie and idolize them, as did the Jews in some of those places alleadged after by Sir Christopher. The Papists confess their images to be in themselves, but creatures; and therefore assert they worship not the images, but God in or through them. But the orthodox Christian World do generally and just∣ly condemn them guilty of Idolatry by the second Com∣mandment, forbidding any Image to be made in relation to divine Worship. The Jews Exod. 32. could not possi∣bly be so stupid as to think that the molten Calf made of their own ear-rings could be a real Deity. They desired Aaron to make it, v. 1. and that Idol to go before them in stead of Moses, who had been long absent, that (as they said) they knew not what was become of him. v. 1. And the Proclamation, vers. 5. of keeping a feast in relation to it, was express thus, To morrow is  i.e. A Solemnity or Feast to Jehovah: yet the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.7. expresly calls their respect to God in, through, or by that image, by the name of Idolatry, saith he, Be ye not Idolaters as were some of them, as it is written: (mean∣ing in Exod. 32.6.) The People sate down to eat and drink and rose up to play. The Doctour in his exercitation upon this place of Jeremy, (presented to the Reader a∣fore did effectually urge that the scope of it was to assert that those that go to the Starrs to fore-know future hu∣mane events do therein make them Gods; in attributing to them thereby, prophesying, which is peculiar to God, either immediately by oracle, or mediately by his extra∣ordinary inspiration in the Prophets. To which as I said, Will. Ram. hath answered nothing. But I will leave Williams triflings, and come to Sir Christopher, who ar∣gues like a Gentleman, and a Scholar (for whose sake this Survey is carried on thus farr; for without him Will. had lain so naked that he would of himself soon have sterved, or beaten himself with striving unto death. All that Sir Christopher saith is but two things. First, that this place
speaketh of things, viz. Starrs, not of persons, viz. Starr-gazers. Secondly, That adoration of Starrs is here forbidden, not Astrological Predictions by them. To the first, my Reply is, Persons, viz. Gazers upon Starrs are here meant: for Sir Christopher confesseth per∣sons adoring or worshipping the Starrs are here repro∣ved; which adoration could not be without gazing or looking on the Starrs. But as the adoration of them that have worshipped the Starrs must needs begin from the be∣holding the glory of them, or else they worshipped they knew not what, so their worship was acted by looking up∣on them: Job 26.27. If I beheeld the Sun when it shi∣ned, or the Moon walking in brightness my heart hath been secretly enticed or my mouth hath kissed mine hand. Secondly, it is at the beginning and ending of this Text of Jeremy, Learn not the way of the heathen, and the customes of the People are vain. Therefore Persons acting in relation to Starrs must necessarily here be understood. To the two particulars of Sir Christopher, that here is forbidden Divine worship of Starrs, &c. not Astrological contemplation and Prediction of and by them; I say that Sir Christophers first Reason that fear is often used to signifie worship, is too weak for his design here: for first, when fear is put with its object, unless the object named be the true God or Idol, it doth not (that I know) signi∣fie worship: as fear not them that kill the body, Matth. 10.28. Give fear to whom fear is due. Rom. 13.7. Ye shall fear every man his Mother: Lev. 19.3. Fear not the People of the Land: Numb. 14.9. with hundreds more of instances; where fear doth not at all signifie di∣vine worship. But secondly, (which is farr more consi∣derable) Sir Christopher is extremely mistaken in the He∣brew word, that in Isay 29.13. signifieth fear, how dif∣ferent it is from the word in Jer. 10.2. Sir Christopher Heydon extremely mistaks the English Text; yea, most inconsiderately runs away with a notion in his own head,
that he regards not the English Text. For this of Jeremy, in both the old Translations is, Be not afraid for the signes of Heaven; the heathen be afraid of such. And in our last English Translation it is, Be not dismayed. All most sutable to the force of the Hebrew word , which (as the Doctour you see afore admonished) signifies to cast down upon the earth with fear, which must intimate ra∣ther a fear of evil significations, then of Adoration. And therefore W.R. is infinitely more to be blamed & shamed, that would not take warning, but own the allegation of Text with so palpable a gross mistake. For was there ever such a phrase extant, or imaginable, that to be afraid or to be dismayed should signifie worship? That consternation & throwing or casting a man down with horror (as rightly Arias renders our word by consternari) should signifie divine adoration? But there is more then that to be consi∣dered, which lies in the phrase, (besides the single word) viz.  A signis coclorum ne con∣sternemini  Quod consterncntur Gen∣tes ab iis. which fully imports that here is meant a passive surprisal or possession with fear (Timor occupat artus) by reason of the direfull aspects of the Stars in the opinion of those that gaze after them; not an active fear (as  in Isay 29.13.) to reverence and worship (as 'tis interpreted Matth. 15.9.) you see then clearly that the Scene and face of Sir Christophers argument is changed, now the vizard is taken away, and the paint rubb'd off. To Sir Christophers second reason, I say, first, he hath well prompted me, to tell his Client Will. that in that fifth verse of this tenth of Jeremy, where idolatrous fear, or worship of images is forbidden the phrase is altered, according to our sense afore, viz.  Fear not with an active fear in a way of worship of them, or set∣ting them up in your hearts for gods; and not  Be not dismayed or amazed; as the phrase is in 2. vers. of fearing the signes of heaven. 2. The Authours of the
Geneva Notes were not engaged in any wrangling (as Sir Christophers phrase is of them that yield not to him) yet you heard afore in the Doctours Exercitation the place presented to you, how those Notes interpret the se∣cond vers. of the Conjunctions and influences of the Stars, and their Ceremonies or Laws to make a judge∣ment by them. Nor was Calvin moved by any, or dispo∣sed to wrangle, when he wrote his Commentary on Jere∣miah; yet he largely (beyond his wont) doth interpret this second vers. of the tenth Chapter of Judicial Astro∣logy, to the value of near one whole leaf. or half sheet in folio, in which he hath some strong and stinging passages against it. Ne metuatis, vel ne expavescatis signis coele∣stibus:The opinion of Caloin against Astrology grounded on Jer. 10.2. with his reasons. hoc est ne fortunam, &c. i. e. Be not afraid, &c. that is, let not men feign to them∣selves good or ill fortune, by the position, or aspect of the Stars. If the Stars do presage to us good or ill fortune, we have cause to be afraid of them. But the Prophet calls them here Signes in an im∣proper sense; because he hath no respect to their true original, but accommodateth his speech to those perverse Errours which then prevailed. And we must remember, what I touched afore that the Egyptians and Chaldeans were given to that Astrology, which at this day we call Judicial, or Judiciary. For the bare name, in it self it may be easily admitted, but long since. By wicked Knaves it was made a prophane thing. For that Art was adulterated among the Chaldeans. That therefore the minde of the Prophet may be certainly clear to us, let that Principle stand fixed, that the Sun and the Moon the rest of the Planets, and the fixed Stars which are in the Firmament, are Signes. But withall here must be noted the relation. Wherefore would then God have the Sun and the Moon to be for Signes. Namely, that the course of the Moon might perfect one moneth, the course of the Sun, one year, &c. Again, the Sun as it
hath respect to the twelve Signes one while it makes Spring, another while Summer, &c. and other things blonging to the Order of Nature. But whosoever will stretch out these Signes beyond that, doth utterly con∣found the order propounded of God. Even as formerly when the Egyptians and Chaldeans would sware higher then reason did bear, they would conjecture by the posi∣tion of the Stars, What should be the events of all Nations. After that they durst descend to all particular men. Hence sprung the Nativity-casters. Therefore they first began to philosophize more subtilly, that the Sun when it was under such a Sign, it portended the ru∣ine of the onely childe; happy events to another. But these things are without the bound of the accustomed course of Nature. For instance, to be Summerand Win∣ter, this is natural and ordinary; but that warr is moved by one Nation against another, this is not of the ac∣customed course of Nature, nor from thence, but from the ambition and covetousness of men. Indeed a secret providence of God over-ruleth; but we speak of cau∣ses which may be weighed and comprehended by us as falling under sense. Albeit this also is to be noted, The course of the Stars of themselves have no matter of moment. For we see how God varieth times; we have not equal Winters or Summers neither is there a constant temper: no year but is unlike to the former; and the third unlike to the second, &c. Sometimes the air will seem temperate, yet the Plague will destroy: Sometimes there cannot be found a reason why the year should bring scarcity, and yet men may be pined. So that God according to his own good pleasure tempers the world otherwise then any the acutest is able to di∣vine by Stars. But they that will transcend the bounds that God hath set will also conjecture by the Stars whe∣ther war should be in that countrey, or peace in another. They therefore that will collect by the Stars the things
that are beside the course of Nature, they surely mingle Heaven and Earth together. Neither is there any doubt, but that the Prophet chastiseth this madness, whiles he forbids the Jews to attend unto the Signes of Heaven, as to be afraid of them. But withall the reason is to be attended why the Prophet so grievously con∣demneth that Fear which reigned among the Heathens, to wit, because where this opinion prevailed, That all events of things depend upon the Stars, the fear of God is taken away faith is extinguished, &c. For all Astro∣logers who falsely usurp that name to themselves, I say, those Knaves,Lat. Ne∣bulones istos di∣co. who for their Impostures pretend the name of Judiciary or Judicial Astrology, do conclude that a Judgement, or determination, or Prognostick, touching the life of man ought to be made by the Ho∣roscope; as if both fortunes depended on the Stars. If therefore any man be born at this hour, according to their opinion, that condition shall abide him; so toge∣ther they feign a fate, to wit, some necessity which may hold a man bound to the rule of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars. For one born when the Sun was in the tail of such a Sign, or when it was in the head of another, this Nativity portends such or such a fortune; this man shall be of a short life, the other of a longer. At length they also gather to themselves more boldness, and will pronounce concerning every day, such an event waits upon this expedition, &c. After that, when or where the Nativity cannot be brought into consideration, they subject all man-kinde to the necessity of the Stars; behold if thou undertake any Expedition, this or that day, it shall be well with thee; but if thou hasten afore noon, ill success attends thee. So therefore they divine of the whole life of man, and each single action; when as God would not have the Conftellations and Stars to be for Signes to this end or use. Now, as I said, hence it follows, God doth not govern as to reign; so faith is
extinguished, and all duties of piety are reduced to no∣thing. For whosoever is perswaded that he is bound by this necessity, that because such is the Horoscope, he must necessarily perish in that hour, and also necessarily perish by this kinde of death, he therefore being thus perswaded, will he call upon God? Will he commend his life to him? Again, if any adversity befall him, will he impute it to his sins? Will he acknowledge that he is called unto judgement by God? Or if it be prospe∣rous with him, will he be excited to sing praises to God? We see therefore how this Divination extin∣guisheth all Godliness; because there will be no faith; and then no acknowledgement of punishments, no ac∣knowledgement of the benefits of God, no industry in praying, If once that diabolical Errour hath possessed or surprized our mindes, that we are subject to the Stars, such is our Nativity, and further that the Stars each single day and moment portend some kinde of death. This therefore we ought chiefly to think upon when the Prophet forbiddeth the Jews to be afraid of the Signes of Heaven. Neither is there any doubt but that the Chaldeans did predict that a new Empire was promised unto them; so terrified the poor Jews, far well to us. For so the Astrologers spake among the Chaldeans. And then on the other part, the Egyptians saw this to be foretold by the position of the Stars: so it was that the Jews sunck as spiritless or unsouled. And so it came not into their mindes that God had so often, and so many years threatened them by his Prophets, whiles they ceased not to provoke his anger against themselves. The judgement then of God they counted as nothing; and yet the mean while this did astonish them that the Chaldeans had discerned by the Stars that there would be some change. By this time we ap∣prehend the minde of the Prophet, where he saith, We must not be afraid of the Stars. I know how many at
this day are foolishly curious, and therefore some way given to Judicial Astrology; and this Dotage hath violently curried away some men otherwise pious, and very learned. But we see what here God pronounceth by his servant. And I wonder that some men are so addicted to the Stars, who too too philosophically speak of free will. Thus Calvin, whom I have represent∣ed largely, and yet have brought you but part of what he saith. So you have heard a most pious and learned man, uningaged from any wrangling, clear this Text to signifie Judicial Astrology. Sir Christophers third Reason, that the Jews worship∣ing of Stars is here meant (not Astrology) because other Scriptures mention such their worshipping of the Stars, comes in just account, to no more but this, that because the Jews are guilty of other sins, reproved in other Scri∣ptures therefore they are admonished of no other sin, but of the very same here, which connexion is as far wide as the Texts alleadged by Sir Christopher are divided in the Bible from this of Jeremiah. All that Sir Christopher hath of any weight to pretend a piecing up of such a co∣herence is (noted with) or this of Jer. 10. v. 3. The customes of the people are vain, for one cutteth down a tree in the forrest, &c. which (saith Sir Christopher) should want sense, if this verse depended not on the former. But the Doctour hath very well anticipated this Objecti∣on in his third Section, in his Paragraph on the fifth Scri∣pture, that all Judicial Astrology includes consequential∣ly an Idolatry, yea, and an internal idolatrous heart∣worship of Stars; as hath been largely cleared by Calvin; Note further that, Learn not the way of the heathen; (v. 2.) is (saith Calvin) Praeceptum generale; the Gene∣ral of the prohibition. The particulars are two. First, the forbidding of Judicial Astrology, containing heart-Ido∣latry; fearing with that fear, that thing and therein; which is due onely to God, v. 2. The second is forbid∣ding
Idolomany, Idoloxoyie, containing outward corpo∣ral worship of Images; v. 3. &c. But how doth that same For in the third vers. come logically in? Answer, First, the Prophet thereby takes them off of the wayes of the heathen in one gross practise, viz. Astrology, by proclaiming and instancing the vanity of the Heathens in another thing that is more gross and palpably vain; viz. in making and corporally worshipping material Images. Secondly, Calvin makes up the matter of the particle For, thus; Videtur propheta abrumpere, &c. i. e. The Prophet seems abruptly to break the sentence, and to reason unaptly. For he had said in the former Verse, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not afraid of the Signes of the Heavens, FOR or BECAƲSE the customes os the people are vain. FOR one cutteth a Tree, &c. The Prophet therefore seems to make his transition to Idols, as if he had forgot himself. But we must mark that the Jews were affected with that ancient perswasion, that, to wit, the Chaldeans and Egyptians boasted that they were the onely wise men; and had procured to themselves that fame among all Nations. For we see also that profane Writers when they speak of the rise of all Sciences, they attribute it to the Chal∣deans and Egyptians. For among them 'tis said, was born or sprang up Astrology, and all Liberal Sciences. There is no doubt therefore but that the Jews would asscribe so much authority to the Chaldeans and Egypti∣ans, that their mindes being seised upon are possest with that prejudice they would see nothing. Therefore the Propher shaketh out of them, this negligence, and de∣monstrateth that they were foolish, notwithstanding they would be the onely wise men and account others in comparison of them to be barbarous and silly. Now therefore we see why the Prophet knitteth on idolatry with that false and adulterate Astrology of which afore. So Calvin.
W. R. his CHAP. IV. Wherein he affirmeth that the Doctours reasons and ar∣guments against Astrology, is particularly examined and condemned, neither to consist with reason or truth. VV. R. his SECT. I. VVherein, as he saith, the Doctours fore-fold reason is convinced. HIs first reason then is, (to prove Astrology is false) that Astrologers themselves confesse, that either the prudence of amortall wise man, or the piety of a god∣ly man, or the tutelarity of Angels, or the providence of God, over-ruling all things, may prevent their predicti∣ons. VVhereupon he concludes that Astrology is false; for saith he, what humane providence cannot do grace can; if not, Angels may; and where all fail, providence doth or∣der according to the mind of God, &c. To answer this his most weak cavil, I shall begin with what he sets down last, viz. The providence of God over-ruling all things, which he saith himself (as well as the other three clau∣ses) is the concession of Astrologers themselves, and if so, I would demand then what advantage he hath here∣by, against Astrology; when he can say no more against it, then what the Practitioners in the Art do confesse themselves? there is certainly none but wretched A∣theists, that will deny, that God hath not an over-ruling, and restraining power over all things, as well celestiall, as terrestriall; but whether his will and pleasure be to alter thēir naturall courses, is a question, but he hath heard that Ptolomy himself, nay and all Astrologers in
generall, do attribute nothing (farther then naturall things, which are in sublunary elementary bodies) to the power and influence of the Stars; He weakly there∣fore inferres the Stars not to have power, because God can alter, or is able to alter their motions, influences and effects. I demand then whether Astrology be Dia∣bolicall, Idolatrous, the Doctrine or Language of the Devils, or wicked, as these two seeming zealous blades, most falsely, maliciously, inconsiderately, and ignorantly traduce it? and then I demand, since as the Philosopher saith, ignorance is the enemy of all good learning, whe∣ther they deserve not exemplary punishment, to condemn so noble, so profitable to the Common-wealth, so excel∣lent, so divine, and so pleasing a study, as Astrology is teaching and traducing their vile ignorance to the world; and truly as one of them most wisely said, if he should make appear what he knoweth of some Astrologers, the Parliament would make a Law against it, as sometimes was done in the Senate of Rome; but would he becon∣tent all Divines should be silenced, because some are Knaves, and prate non-sense, and so consequently con∣clude no verity or truth in Divinity? Truly might I be worthy to advise that High Court; in the stead of con∣demning and prohibiting this most worthy study, they would do well to prohibit all such Pamphleters, which without either fear or wit, undertake to condemn what they are ignorant of; and that none should be suffered to condemn, or falsely undertake to traduce any Art or Science whatsoever, without first before the publishing of their writings, to make appear to the world, that they are throughly verst and read in the Art they undertake to condemn. The verity whereof, as also its legality, I dare undertake to defend, not onely against what they can say against it; but also all the Divines in England (put together to help them) can imagine or contrive to say. But to return to our businesse in hand, Master Homes on
his fore-fold argument, brings this conclusion, that God worketh not by the stars as secundary causes, but Eph. 1.11. he ruleth all things after the counsell of his di∣vine will. If because God ruleth all things after the coun∣sell of his own will; he worketh not by causes: then, to what purpose I pray you are Armies, and the successe sometimes this way, sometimes that, till in conclusion the victory is fully obtained on one side or other? will he say, (notwithstanding the various successe of the busi∣nesse in time of the war) that it was not concluded in the counsell of Gods own will, that the victory should be given on that side? SURVEY. Now what will this youngling do to go on high-lone, Sir Christopher having left him: and what shall I do with this Junior-Sophister, his modera∣tour being gone? For, from hence forward there is no∣thing almost to be found in him alone, but as at first; viz. either Cretensian untruths, or Thrasonicall vapourings, or sophisticall impertinencies, or self-contradictions. For that at (A) is VVils. UNTRUTH. For Doctonr Homes said not Astrologers, but the Friends of Astro∣logy. For such onely were they that spake to the Doctour. That at (B) is also VVill. UNTRUTH, For the Doctours conclusion is there in that Argument, That there is no certrinty in predictions from the starres. That at (C) is VVill. sophisticall IMPERTINENCY. For though Astrologers confesse one thing in words, yet they professe clean another in the practise of their Art (as they call it) as we have heard by comparing VV. R. Epistles and his Book together, and shall see more pre∣sently. That also at (D) is a meer CONTRADI∣CTION of himself. For he confesseth at (C) for him∣self, and all Astrologers that they grant that the provi∣dence of God over-ruling all things, may prevent the pre∣dictions of Starres, &c. of the particulars at (A) and
yet now at (D) makes it a question whether his plea∣sure and will be to alter their naturall courses. That at (E) touching Ptolomy &c. of Astrologers, attributing nothing to the power of Stars farther then naturall things; is VV. R. grosse untruth. For VVill. undertakes by vir∣tue of stars to predict other matters, in his Schemes fi∣gures &c. in this his Pamphlet, and at the end of his dis∣course about the Eclypse. And Ptolomy saith in his Qua∣drip. lib. 1. cap. 1. that by the stars may be foretold mo∣res animi tales, & tales eventus secuturas, &c. id est, the manners of mens minds, and their events; with infinite more to the same tune, if worth the hearing. That also at (F) is VV. R. UNTRUTH and impertinency. For the Doctour confesseth the thing they call naturall Astrology, and therefore the power of stars; who though he asserts that God alters their effects, is far from infer∣ing that therefore they have nopower at all. To clear all this the better, see the Doctours Daemonol. chap. 10. Sect. 4. (which is that VV. R. here would have con∣futed) word for word, Section 4. Conteining reasons or arguments against Astrology. The first is from the concession of the friends of Astrology. They grant that either of these foure may prevent the predictions of Astrology; namely, either the prudence of a mo∣rall wise man, or the piety of a godly mun, or the tu∣tellarity of Angel, or the providence of God, over∣ruling all things; much more all four concurring may anticipate. Now these four swallow up, and gripe within their sphereall things, especiall arbitrary things: what humane prudence cannot do, grace can; if not, Angels may: and where all fail, providence doth order according to the mind of God, who worketh All things according to the counsell of his own will, Ephis. 1.11. Tis said, All things; for, not a Sparrow falls to the ground without his will. And all the hairs of our head are numbred, Math. 10.29, 30. Which our
Saviour speaks to comfort Believers against bodily dangers, and corporall causes of fears. And on the o∣ther side, tis not said in that Ephes. 1.11. He work∣eth all things according to the Stars; which are visible things, and naturall necessary causes; but according to the counsell (which is secret and invisible) of his own will (which is arbitrary and free.) And to expresse it more significantly and emphatically, that God doth not rule by a deputation committed to Stars, especial∣ly in things either humane and arbitrary, or spirituall; tis said he ruleth all things after the counsell of his own Will. Which being set over against the many soar invectives the Lord makes against Astrologicall observers of the Stars demonstrate sufficiently to them that will understand, that there is no certainty in pre∣dictions from the Stars. This argument might be much enlarged to good purpose; but a word to the wise is suf∣ficient. Thus far the Doctour. By which it appears not onely that VV. R. did most falsely report him; but also that VVil. did never rightly apprehend the dint of the Do∣ctours argument from Ephes. 1.11. which was, that see∣ing all humane future events were ordered according to Gods own secret will: that therefore we could not by vision of Stars, or inspection into constellations find visible signs of such humane future events, which before their fulfilling are hidden in the secret counsell of God. And therefore VVilliams quibbles on Ephes. 1. are meer∣ly impertinent, shooting at a Butt the Doctour never set up. As his frequent comparison of Astrology and A∣strologers, with divinity and Divines; is grosse enough of it self, to render it selfe odious without a confutation. Divinity is the Judge of Astrology, therefore the offen∣der at the Barre must not compare with it. And Calvin (we heard afore) called Astrologers KNAVES, that pretended Astrology for their Knavery; but if any Di∣vines
be Knaves, it is not as they are Divines. And there∣fore if VVilliam had his wish, I believe few Astrology-books, much lesse his Fustiano-bumbastico-cretian-ru∣bulisticall would ever attein the honour of the Presse. For VVilliam (poore passionate ignorant young fellow) is an unfit peece, the Lord knows, to write confutations; and more unfit to give counsell to a Parliament, and in a mystery of iniquity wherein he is a party. Tis true he doth  bellow out his high Throsonicall Braggs verbis sesquipedalibus without measure, That he dares to undertake to defend Astrology against all the divines in England put together. But such an expression (if he meant not onely to dare but to do it) never came out of the mouth of one that was a Scholar indeed, and mo∣rally in his sober wits, upon any dispute whatsoever. But if he mean to dare to undertake it, but not to do it. Then I confesse I am brought in part to believe him, by that story of the man, that did dare to undertake to take his flight from the top of Paul's Steeple, and to fly; though he did it not, but fell down and brake his neck, But I may not forget to satisfie the Reader in one thing; how neatly VV. R. calls some of his Astrologicall Bre∣thren (whom he cries up in this Pamphlet) by the name of Knaves. For the Astrologicall misdemeanours deser∣ving a law of the Parliament against that Art, were com∣mitted by his admired Astrologicall friend. To those interrogatories at (G) whether Astrology, be Diabolicall, Idolatrous, Knavery, deserving a law to be enacted in England against it, &c. Master John Mel∣ton shall answer in his book called the Figure Caster, which is as follows.
The intent of the Authour in this Work is first to confute all FIGURE-CASTERS, by the Divine Law, Imperial Law, Canon Law; by Philosophy, Commonsense, and Reason. Secondly, to overthrow the absurd Opinions of many. Philosophers, Astronomers, Geographers, Cosmographers. Thirdly, to unfold the dark and abstruse Answers of the Delphian, rather devilish Oracles. Fourthly, and lastly, to shew the Sympathy and Corre∣spondency that is between the Roguish Conjurers, and Romish Impostours, in their Ceremonies, Superstitious, Deceits, and Cousenages.
MELTONS Figure-Caster. IT was about the Heart of Summer, (when the Celesti∣al Dog belcht from his burning Galls infectious Dis∣eases to poyson frail Mortality) that I walked into a Friends Garden of mine, no far distant from this sumptu∣ous (but sinfull) City, to scent the fresh and cool Air, that did breathe on those sweet-smelling flowers. But I no sooner entred into this Microcosm of sweetness, but the amenity neatness, elegance, and splendour of the Place did so tickle and delight my senses, that I thought it rather a celestial Paradise, then a terrestrial Garden. But, as I was wondering at this Place worthy of won∣der, this extasie of my admiration was broken off by the occasion of a noise I heard not far from me, which at the first was but like the soft breathing of a winde, sighing from the pregnant entrails of the Earth, but by degrees it began to resemble a Tempest, sailing aloft in the Air. When it drew nigher me, I perceived this lowdness to be engendred by the ever-moving Tongues of some twenty Women, that came talking and walking down an Alley (neighbouring very nigh me) and all of them talking to∣gether; so that although I had an itching desire to under∣stand, and an attentive ear to hear the subject of their Discourse, yet it was as possible for me to know what they did talk, as to make them leave talking. In the Rere of these I perceived an ancient Man (on whose head the hand of Age had snowed white hairs) come with a grave pace after them; whom I intreated, if it lay within the reach of his knowledge, to resolve me what the cause was so many people, and most of them Women, should flock together, or what business they should have in such a re∣mote and by place as that was, so early in the Morning?
This old Father without any pievishness (which is a passi∣on incident to Age) first smiled in my face, then took me by the hand, and began to open the mystery of their meeting, and his own being there, in this manner. Son, said he (for so I may properly call thee, because Smoothness and Alacrity, the Characters of Youth, sit on thy unwrinkled forhead) these Women your eyes did lately take notice of, are Creatures so ignorantly obstinate, that neither the milde intreaty of a Friend can perswade them from their Follies, nor the bad report of an Enemy disswade them from their perversness. The party to whom they come, is a Bird, of whose kinde I think there are but few living, for he professeth himself to be a Wise∣man; and the cause of their coming, is to be resolved ei∣ther of Money, Silver-spoons, Rings, Gowns, Plate, or Linnen they have lost; some, to know how many Chil∣dren they shall have; some, how many Husbands, and which shall love them best; others, about other business; but in general, all of them to know something, which in∣deed at last comes to nothing. And I my self (like an Ho∣ly-day Fool) have been there at the least half a score times, onely to give my money away, to be laught at. Yet I have words enough; for he will promise more then twenty Courtiers, talk more for half a Piece then half a score Lawyers, and lie more then twenty Chronologers: yet with some trick or evasion, he will come clearly off, without being suspected for an Impostour, especially if he have some man in hand he thinks he dare work on, as he hath done me for example. For going to the Cross one Sunday morning to hear a Sermon, some Mercurian and nimble-finger'd Pick∣pocket, that had more minde of my Purse then the Prea∣cher, gelt it of sixteen pound; so that I went home light∣er by two Stone then I went out. After I had fretted much, and to no purpose, I used all the means I could to recover my loss, as by feeing the Keepers of Newgate,
who know which of that Law are appointed to filch in every part of the City; yet still I came home a greater looser then I went out: for always being in hope to finde that which I lost, I lost more, by bribring one Knave to discover another. At the last, it was my bad fortune to meet with an old Woman, that put a greater confidence in the Jews Caballs, and Thalmud, the Shepheards Ka∣lendar, and Books of Palmestry, then any part of the Bible; who advised me to repair to Doctour P. C. in Moor-fields, at the upper end of this Alley, and if Art could help me to it again, I should be sure to hear of it. This draught of good News this old Woman gave me, to quench the thirst of my desire, which I drank in at mine ears as greedily as a man sick of a burning Feaver will the coolest Julips: so giving this old Piece of Superstition a Tester for her News, I instantly went to Master Doctour. Who perceiving me to be one that loved Gold well (be∣cause Age most commonly is covetous) thought the bet∣ter to work upon me, as he did; for his Doctourship had the Art to hold me in hand three Weeks; in which time, he made the sixteen pounds I lost, twenty: and when all came to a period, he told me, that he had laboured hard for me, and at the last, by his no small industry and pains, had found out the Thief that had my Money, but he was fled into the Low-countries, because there were many Warrants out to apprehend him for many Thefts and Burglaries he had committed; and if it pleased me to take shipping, and sail thither, I should be sure to finde him at the Labour in vain in Breda. But this comfort went as cold to my heart, as the Sentence of Death to a man that stands arreigned at the Barr; for I had rather go five thousand miles by Land, then five miles by Sea, and if it had been a hundred pounds I had lost, I would rather have given as much more, then hazard my self by Water. Yet howsoever I may doubt, nay truly resolve my self, that he hath palpably cheated me: yet it was im∣possible
to finde him a Lyar, except I meant to take more pains about it, then it was worth. Therefore as patiently as I am able, I am going home again, purposing here∣after to take heed of two Pick-pockets; the one the Diver that met with me in Pauls Church-yard, the other the Doctour in Moor-fields, that robb'd me as well as the first, who in my minde hath deserved, for his artificial Cheating, the Pillory, as well as the other did the Gal∣lows, for Stealing. He no sooner had delivered me this Relation, but he hasted away from me: therefore seeing he was so impor∣tunate to be gone, I onely shewed my self gratefull in thanking him for his kindness; so he went homewards, and I into my Garden. But now my minde was quite transported from the sweetness of that Place, and onely fixt on the subtilty of the Doctour, and his politick an∣swer to the old man about the recovery of his money; so that I could not be at quiet with my self, while I was truly resolved of the Art of this Star-gazer. Therefore on a morning which was as calm as I could wish my thoughts now were, I put on a Sute of course Northern Dozens, with all accoutrements that were most sutable to that homeliness, and with all expeditition went to Master Doctour, and hastily knocking at his Worships door, there came running down the stairs with a nimble dexteri∣ty (the little Mephistopheles) his Boy, demanding with whom I would speak; to whom, in a broad Somersetshire language, I answered, With Master Doctour, upon an earnest business. Upon the delivery of this Message, this young Spirit, like exhaled Dew, nimbly flew away from me, who upon an instant, like a flash of Lightning, was in my bosome again before I could perceive him; and then, without any more Interrogatories, mashalled me up into his Masters Study, who sate in this manner following: Before a square Table, covered with green Carpet, on which lay a huge Book in Folio, wide open, full of strange
Characters, such as the Egyptians and Chaldeans were ne∣ver guilty of; not far from that a silver Wand, a Surplus, a watering Pot, with all the superstitious or rather feigned Instruments of his cousening Art. And to put a fairer co∣lour on his black and foul Science, on his Head he had a four-corner'd Cap, on his Back a fair Gown (but made of a strange fashion) on his right hand he held an Astrolabe, in his left a Mathematical Glass. At the first view, there was no man that came to him (if he were of any fashion) could offer him for his advice less then a Jacobus, and the meanest half a Piece, although he peradventure (rather then have nothing) would be contented with a brace of Two-pences. I no sooner came into his Study, but I did him the reverence belonging to his Doctourship, and stood as long bare to him, as a poor Countrey Client that sues in formâ Pauperis, will to his hungry Lawyer. At the last, with the expence of many a Leg, and May it please your Worship, I told him that the cause of my coming was, that having lately lost at the Kings Bench Bar in Westminster Hall a Chain of Gold of three hun∣dred Links, therefore I came to his Doctourship, having been informed, that his Art could bring it to light again: so putting my hand into my Leather Pouch, I greased his ever-dry Palmes with an Angel; who no sooner had a feeling of my bounty, but he began to be more liberal to me of his Tongue. And while I stood leaning on my Staff, he delivered his Emperick-like Oration. Honest Friend, the loss you have sustained,The Fi∣gure. casters Oration? is so great that I make no doubt, what you now have given, or here∣after shall give, will nor come forced or wrackt from you, but voluntary and free. For it is wisedom in Man to ad∣venture small things to regain greater, where there is a possibility of obtaining. He is not worthy of Money, that will not seek after it, and he cannot truly judge, how to value so precious a Metall as Gold, that is not stung with the loss of it. Therefore Sir, your care deserves a
redress, and this Book (meaning his Ephemerides) with my Art and industry, shall be the instrumental Causes to make you happy in the recovery of that which is worthy both of my Care and your Cost. And to put you in some hope, if that Man that had your Chain lives either with∣in the Horizon of England, France, Spain, Italy, or the Low-countries, I will undertake to shew you him, and in what place, and what company he is in. There is not a Spirit, either of the Fire, Air, Earth, or Water, but I have at my command as readily as any Gallant hath his Page or Foot-boy: I can conjure them all together, and make them trot up and down the City, leaving not a Pick∣pockets, Gilts, Lifts, Decoys, or Divers Hose unsurveyed. Look here Sir, (with that, he advanced his Mathema∣tical Glass) with this Instrument, first devised by that learned Man in our Art, Hermes Tresmegistus, other∣wise called Mercury, I can see all things done in Chri∣stendom. If in the day time I look in it, I will as easily see what is done in the City, as the Sun. There cannot a withered-faced Lady paint her decayed Countenance at her Chamber-window, and set a fair gloss on it with her Fucusses and Italian Tinctures, but I see her as perfectly as her she Secretary her Chamber-maid. There cannot a Counter-book-keeper and a Constable share a poor mans Fees, that the Night before was brought into Pri∣son (because he would not give the blinking Beadle or beg∣ging Watch-man a Tester) but I see it as easily as their Fellow, the Bawd-like Door-keeper. There cannot a Justi∣ces Clerk, that it may be is more Justice then his Master, take a Bribe of a noted Cut-purse, whose name perad∣venture stands at least twenty several times upon record in Newgate Book, but I perceive it as well as the Doxy that brought it him. In the Night-time, if I stand with this Instrument in in my hand, I can see what is done in the City as well as the Man in the Moon. There cannot a Drunkard come reeling out of a Tavern at twelve a clock
at Night, but he is as manifest before me, as the Drawer that beat him out of Doors after he had spent all his Mo∣ney. I can see the commanding Constable and the drowsie Watch fit nodding on a Stall, while a company of Roar∣ing Boys, alias Brothers of the Sword, come by first swearing them awake, then out of their Authority, who in spight of their teeth will crave leave to pass by them. There cannot a Tradesmans Puritanical Wife rise early in a Morning, under the pretence of hearing a Lecture, but I know whether she goes as well as the Fore-man of her Shop that ushers her. Nay Sir, I have seen the Pope go in his Pontificalibus with his whole Heard of Cardi∣nals to S. Peters Church in Rome, as often as any Citi∣zen hath seen the right honourable the Lord Mayor go to Pauls Cross in London. As for Prester Jack, the great Mogul, the Sophy of Persia, and the great Turk I can see them as often as I do my Boy, that is never from my el∣bow. And all this is done by Astrology, by sacred Astro∣logy, divine Astrology, the Art of Arts, the Science of Sciences, for it is the ancient, the most authentick, the most excellent Art in the World. For old father Adam was both an Astronomer and Astrologer; Abraham and all the Patriarks: Nay, I will asture you, the Stu∣dents of our Art have been famous in all Countries; for Porphyrius and Apuleius derive the Original of Magick from the Persians, although Suidas will have it from the Maguseans, and from them he cals them Ma∣gi; the Latins call us Wise-men, the Grecians, Philo∣sophers; the Indians, Gymnosophists; the Egyptians, Priests; the Cabalists, Prophets; the Babylonians and Assyrians, Chaldeans; the Frenchmen, Bards: And many excellent and eminen: men have flourished in this Knowledge; as Zoroaster the son of Aromasius, who laugh'd when he was born, among the Persians; Numa Pompilius, among the Romans; The shion, among the Gymnosophists; Hermes, among the Egyptians; Buda,
among the Babylonians; Zamolxis, among the Thra∣cians; and Abbaris, among the Hyperboreans. A thou∣sand more beside these, were excellent Astrologers; as Ptolomeus, whom some (though very Fools in their Opi∣nion) hold to be the first Astronomer that ever was: then Messahala, Aboafar, Abenragel, Alchibichius, Albu∣mazar, Abraham, Avenezra, Algazel, Hermes Tres∣migistus, Aratus, Higinus, and Thebit; after whom, did arise Maternus, that famous Mathematian: then, Georgius Purbachius; after whom followed Johannes de Monte Regio, Alphonsus King of Castile, as his Tables can testifie. Was not broad-shouldered Atlas, that was bigger then the great Porter, an admirable Astronomer and Astrologer? Was not Erra Pater (whom I had al∣most forgot) a rare Fellow at Astronomy? Yes, as this his Table can testifie. What think you Sir, was not this learned Artist deeply read in the large-leav'd Book of Heaven? Do not you think he could learnedly discourse of the Poles, Spheres, Orbes, Circumferences, Circles, Centres, Diameters, the Zodiack, the Zenith, the Artick, the Antartick Poles, Tropicus Capricorni, and Tropicus Cancri? He was as well acquainted with the Twelve Signes in Heaven, as any Tradesman with those in Cheap∣side, and run over the Nature of the seven Planets as nimbly as the French Vaulter over the Ropes. And I my self, (but that I know this kinde of Learning is out of your Element) could discourse to you what a sullen fel∣low Saturn is, (on whom the permanent continuation of all things depend) what a joviall fellow Jupiter (on whom the fecundity of Agent Causes rely) what a quar∣relling Swash-buckler Mars (on whom the swift expe∣dition of any thing to the effect doth hang) what a hot fellow Sol (whom all Agent Causes follow) what a wan∣ton Wench Venus (on whom the fecundity of all Material Causes look after) what a merry fellow Mercury (in whom a manifold vertue doth flourish) and what a mad
Lass Luna (on whom the increase and decrease of humane things consist.) For know, that the rich and golden Har∣vest that I have gathered out of the sweet and fruitfull Fields of many learned mens Works, and carefully hoord∣ed up in the Garner of my breast, hath made me full and copious in my knowledge; so that there is no Art and Science, but I am as deeply and profoundly read in, as those that have taken the Worshipfull Degree of Do∣ctour. I am so good at Physick, that every morning I have whole Troops of mad men, and others, sick of Sar∣pegoes, Gouts, Epilepsies, Feavers, and many others la∣bouring under as dangerous Diseases as these, send their Urine to me, so that never Doctour was so famous: for when Medicine will not prevail, and that neither Galen, Paracelsus, Avecin, Hyppocrates, nor all the Heirs of Aesculapius can cure them; I have a Spirit that will fright any Disease from the most dangerous and over-spent Patient. My skill in Alchymy is so great, that I can turn any thing that is brought to me into as perfect Gold as ever came out of the Indies. Frier Bacon was an Ass, Doctour Faustus a Fool, Ripley an Emperick, and Kelly a Coxcomb to me; they were not worthy to blow my Bel∣lows, or look to my Stills, while I work for the Philoso∣phers Stone. But for Astrology, I can do that none of my Profession besides my self, could ever reach unto: for there is nothing lost but I can finde again; nothing in hazard of losing but I can preserve safe & sure; I have given Trades∣men Spirits, that have kept their Shops as faithfully, as if they had twenty Journeymen continually in it. There is not a part of the Body, but I can give a Spirit to keep it safe & sound. Therefore Sir, to conclude, assure your self, that if all my Spirits & mine own endeavours can do you a pleasure (as you need not doubt of my Art) you shal not fail of your Chain: so merrily return to your Lodging a∣gain, and repair to me to morrow morning, 30, Minutes after 6. and always remember to admire at the wonderfull power of sacred, divine and heavenly Astrology.
A Table made by the learned Astronomer Erra Pater, shewing, that the Twelve Signes and Seven Planets have as great a Predomination over all Trades, and Callings, which are the Members of the Body of a Common∣wealth, as over the Body of Man.   ♄ Saturn ♃ Jupiter ♂ Mars ☉ Sol ♀ Venus ☿ Mercury ☽ Luna ♈ Aries; Goldsmiths Haberdashers Merchants Mercers Drapers Vininers Horners ♉ Taurus Butchers Graliers Cooks Drudsters Tobacco men Players Fidlers ♊ Gemini Serjeants Bailies High-way men Lifts Cut-puries Gilts Decoys ♋ Cancer Brewers Draymen Porters Tapsters Hostlers Constables Beadles ♌ Leo Roaring Boys Young Gal∣lants Courtiers Cutlers Fencers Armorers Brothers of the Sword ♍ Virgo Sempsters Laundresses Chamber∣maids Tyre-women Waiting Gen∣tlewomen Flax maids Tobacco-women
♎ Libra Grocers Chandlors Cheesmon∣gers Silkmen Apothecaries Pewterers Plummers. ♏ Scorpio Usurers Brokets Informers Promoters Petty-foggers Sumners Jaylors ♐ Sagittarius Fletchers Gunners Scriveners Smiths Brasiers Iremongers Turners ♑ Capricornus Drugsters Milliners Coach-ma∣kers Jewellers Stone-cutters Painters Shoomakers ♒ Aquarius Watermen Water-bearers Cloth-workers Bakers Salters Sadlers Barbers ♓ Pisces Oyster-wives Fishmongers Fruiterers Hosiers Gold-finders Taylors Plasterers
When he had made an end I gave this Answer to the Figure-caster, and the Confutation of it. SIr, if you every day should trouble your self, or ra∣ther those that hear you, with these long-winded Exercises, you had need eat great store of Lycoris: and if you lye so much to every man, as you have done to me, you had best learn of Symonides the Art of Memory; for these two things are most requisite for those that talk and lye so much as you do. You have made a large Astrological discourse, onely to make me a Fool, and prove yourself a Knave; for cunningly in your Exordium you hearten me on to cheat my self: for doth not a man palpably cousen himself, when he gives money to a Knave, that first cheats him before his face, then laughs at him behinde his back; which is the true custome of all Figure-casters, of whose faculty you profess to be. As for your Instruments, as your Mathematical Glass, with which you can do Wonders, your silver Wand, Watering Pot, four-corner'd Cap, are but meer supersti∣tious Ornaments, either borrowed from the Jews or Ro∣mans. And it is a question, whether the Romish Preists had these from the Roguish Conjurers, or the Conjurers from them: for just such Ceremonies and Exorcismes the Conjurers use upon their invocation of Devils, the Papists do in their Invocations; for they exorcise and conjure their Salt, that it may not lose the savour, and their Wa∣ter, which the ignorant people gape for as greedily as a Raven will for cool air in the midst of July, and this they call Holy Water: then they conjure their Oyl, their Balm, their Herbs, and Plants, that they may have the virtue and influence to heal the sick and diseased: they conjure their Candles, that they may not burn blue; and Bees, that they prosper, and not sting any holy or religi∣ous Frier, when he dares adventure his bald Crown nigh
one of their Hives. What is the Christening of Bels, Altars, Pilgrimages, Processions, Images, Holy Ashes, Holy Pace Eggs, Flames, Palmes, and Palm-boughs, Albs, Copes, and Maniples, Vestiments, Miters, Staves, Fools, and Friers Hoods, Shells, and Bells, Paxes, licking of rotten Bones, creeping to wooden Images and Crosses, shaving of Crowns, and a thousand of the like Antick Tricks, but flat Sorcery and Witchcraft? And do not all these Fooleries agree with the Conjurers Rogueries? Who always observe the Time of the Moon before they set their Figure; and when they have set their Figure, and spread their Circle, first exorcise the Wine and Wa∣ter which they sprinkle on their Circle, then mumble in an unknown Language: Do they not cross and exorcise their Surplus, their silver Wand, Gown, Cap, and every In∣strument they use about their black and damnable Art? Nay, they cross the place whereon the stand, because they think the Devil hath no power to come into it, when they have blest it: therefore I cannot be perswaded, but you had your Ceremonies from the Papists, who first had them from the Jews or Pagans, or they from you, for you both cousen the poor blinded people after one manner; first, of their Souls, by drawing them to Superstition. Secondly, of their Estates, by defrauding them of their Money: for which cause, both of you have devised these Ceremonies. Thus much for your Instruments. Now for your Authours you pile up on the neck of each other, I hold not lawfull to be studied to an ill intent; and for most of them, I hold Atheists, and Fellows, whose Works ought rather to be burnt, for being stuft full of Blasphemy, then to be read for our instruction, or know∣ledge, as hereafter I will shew you. As for Adam, Abraham, or any of the twelve Patriarks skill in Con∣juration, Figure-casting, or raising a Spirit, as you say, I am sure they practised none. And for you knowledge in Astronomy, this is my opinion of you, that you have as
much skill of the Poles in Heaven, as you have of the Poles of Pauls Steeple. Your skill in Physick shall by no means make me (if I chance to fall sick) chuse you for my Doctour, except I am weary of my life; for I shall be in more danger of Death by taking your Potions, then I shall be of the Disease. But indeed, for a Man that de∣sires present Cure, I think you are excellent for, because I make no doubt, that you will hold him long in hand: and in this you and all other Medicasters and Dog-leaches are happy, because the Sun doth always behold your good success, and the Earth covers all your igno∣rances. It is a common saying,Plin. l. 29 c, 1. Talis Me∣dicus est Dedecus. Nullum medicum esse pe∣ritum nisi triginta homines ad orcum dimiserit: That it is impossible for any Physician to be skilfull, except he hath killed his thirty men. But for your part I dare swear, if you should kill three hundred (as it may be it comes something nigh that number, because you have been a long Practitioner) you would still remain but a Quack-salving Physician; one, that it may be hath some little faint glimmering of the Practick, but nothing of the Theory of this most learned and deep Art: for being so illiterate as you are, how can you, (neither understand∣ing the Greek or Latin Tongues, in which the grounds of Physick were first writ) be so famous as you report your self to be? Yet there is one thing in your large Oration, that you would make a Man believe you have some skill in Physick, because you say, that whole Troops of mad men come to you; in this a man may believe you; for if men were not mad, and stark out of their wits, they would never come to you for your advice. There is no∣thing you have spoken, that I can perswade my self you have said true, but in this, in professing your self an Al∣chymist: for I dare undertake, that if a man bring you a Cart-load of Brass, Iron, or Pewter, you can, in the time a man will go either into Long-lane, or Hounds-ditch, turn it into as good Gold, as is in the richest Usurers close
shut Pouch in the City. But for the Philosophers Stone, I think you can finde out the Quadrature of the Circle, or a new way to the East Indies, as soon as finde out that: if you can finde it out for others, why cannot you as well for your selves? By this a man may perceive the Roguery of all Alchymists, and the true nature of their Art, which indeed is an Art without Art, whose begin∣ning is, stoutly to lye, and whose end is, miserably to beg. And to conclude, all these Gold engendring Chymists,Libaviue. Erasmus. are Archymists, rather Lechymists, and make all those that follow them, Lachrymists. For your Art in giving men Flyes and Spirits to expell all ill luck from them; I think it as easie to be done, and to as much purpose, as the Licence and Power Pope Paul the third gave to Se∣rona Maria Osorio, and twelve of her Bloud, who by the virtue of a pair of conjured Beads, could be forgiven the third part of their sins, if they said but one Pater noster, although it was said without Devotion. Also your Spirits for all Trades, and to cure all Diseases, and to defend every part of the Body, is as pretty and queint a Deceit, as that of the Romish Religion; who will fell any Vocation a Saint, to keep, defend, and prosper it: For they hold, that S. Hugh and S. Eustace guard Hun∣ters from perils and dangers, that the Stag or Buck may not hit them on the Head with their Horns; S. Martin and S. Ʋrban guard all Ale-knights, Tavern-hunters, and Drunkards from falling into the Kennell, as they go reeling to their Lodgings; S. Chrispine and Chrispinus defend all Shoomakers; S. Arnold preserves Millers; S. Stephen Weavers. It may-be (Sir) at the first you supposed me to be (be∣cause of my plain Countrey Habit) a Woodcock fit for your Sprindge: but to be plain with you Sir, your Wor∣ship is deceived of me, for I can perceive you to be an ar∣rant Knave; for your Tricks are so thin and sleight, that a man of a very dim understanding may see clean through
them. Your Discourse is neither knit together with the Nerves of Understanding, Wit, Art, Judgement, or Dis∣cretion, it hath no reality or essence in it: but you huddle a company of Astronomical words together, wanting both coherence, method, and congruity; you pour out whole Dictionaries of strange words, talk as though you could repeat Dutch Gallobelgicus, or English Hollings∣head without Book, and lye as if you had held Herodo∣tus Pen while he writ the Nine Muses. To tell you true Sir, I came not hither to finde out a Chain (for indeed I have lost none) but first to finde out, then to express your Roguery: therefore I think, if you had been a true Wi∣zard, it were impossible I should put a Trick upon you, that is so excellent at the most cousening, cheating, and conycatching Art of Astrology. I perceive by your swearing, I am very tedious to you: but good Sir be pa∣tient, for I have given your Tongue an uncontroulable li∣berty, to speak in the defence of your Art, that hath been so benesicial to you: therefore I hope you will give me leave (if not, I now will be so bold as to take it) to speak in the dispraise of it, because it hath been so prejudicial to many. If Figure-casting be an Art, or Science, why is it not a Liberal Science as well as all the other? Or why is it not studied as freely and as lawfully as the rest, but that the Professour of it is forced to flie into such by-places, dark corners, and Garden-allies as these? If you are ashamed to shew the Reasons, I will not, but truly re∣veal them; which are, either because the general eye of the World may not take notice of the foolery of those people, and so give them warning, or that the Roguery of you that entice them may not be apparent, and so you come to a deserved punishment: Or that you may be thought more famous in the opinion of the ignorant, who suppose that such melancholly places best suit with such as study these Arts. This may appear by the cunning Man on the Bank-side, Mother Broughton in Chick-lane,
young Master Olive in Turnbole-street, the shag-hair'd Wizard in Pepper Alley, the Chirurgion with the Bag∣pipe Cheek, Doctour Foreman at Lambeth, and you here in Moor-fields, and many such Impostours, that like the Birds of Wonder, flie the light of the City. Again, there is no Art or Science, but the definition shews the excellency of it. Grammar is the Science of speaking and writing truly, the Fountain and Original of all Arts. Logick the Art of Arts, the Science of Sciences, that makes way for the beginning of all Methodes, and an Art that by disputing findes out the Truth. Rhetorick is an Art teaching to speak elegantly, by Tropes and Fi∣gures. Arithmatick is the Doctrine of Numbers. Mu∣sick the harmonious faculty of weighing the differences of Sounds by sense and Reason. Geometry the Discipline of immoveable Greatnesses, and the contemplative descri∣ption of Forms. Astronomy a certain Law and Rule, considering the Motion of superiour Bodies. Philosophy the knowledge of Divine and Humane things, joyned with the study of living well. Physick the Art of curing and healing the sick and diseased. But for your Astrology, your sacred Astrology, your divine Astrology, I never read, that any Divine, Father, or Preacher ever gave any commendable description of it: indeed, some of that wise Sect you profess your self to be of, have endeavoured to illustrate and beautifie, with one of whose Authority I will not allow of, because Divinity (the Queen and Mistress of the Arts) doth de∣ny it. Therefore, because there is no true description of this Art, if the Students of it will think themselves be∣holding to me, I will furnish them with one. A new and true Description of ASTROLOGY. AStrology is an Art, whereby cunning Knaves cheat plain honest men, that teacheth both the Theory and Practick of close Cousenage, a Science instructing all the
Students of it to lie as often as they speak, and to be be∣lieved no oftner then they hold their Tongues; that tells truth as often as Bawds go to Church, Witches or Whores say their Prayers, or never but when the English Nones and the Greek Calends meet together. This is the true Description of your Art. Now the virtue and power of your Art, is to calculate Deaths and Nativities, cast Figures, finde out things that it may be were never lost, gives Fools Flies to win if they can at Ordinaries, and more of the like, which I will not nominate, because it will be troublesome to my self, and tedious to your Doctourship (whom I perceive to be as full of Frets, as a Musician) all which I will prove to be unlawfull, to the disgrace of all the damna∣ble and diabolical Students in that Art: and if I do not artificially confute and confound all those that can raise a Spirit, and cast a Figure, and all other Mountebanks, Em∣perick, and Impostostours, such as you are that pretend to do it; then let them boldly and confidently say, I am but a meer Fresh-man, and no true Master in my Art. Some Principles, conducing to the perfect Science and knowledge of Astrology, handle the Natures and the Parts of the Zodiack; others, the Qualities of the Pla∣nets; some the Dimensions and abstruse significations of the Houses. The Astrologers themselves divide the Zo∣diack into twelve Parts or Signes, having every part con∣sisting of thirty Degrees of Longitude, and twelve of Latitude. In these pretty Inventions they shew themselves Poets as well as Astrologers, in feigning so neatly: for can any of them make me beleive there are twelve Signes to be seen in Heaven as visibly as those on the Earth, or that there are any such Creatures in Heaven, as the crook∣horn'd Ram, the goring Bull, the poyson-spitting Scor∣pion, any lecherous Crab-fish, unconscionable Scales, roar∣ing Lion, or hot-rained Goat? Can any of you make me believe there is such a Wilderness of wilde Beasts as these?
it may be indeed there is Virgo, because she is seldome seen on the Earth; but for the angry Bear, snarling Dog, ve∣nomous Dragon, greedy Vultur, hissing Snake, horrible Hydra, fearfull Hare, or Man-loving Dolphin to be in Heauen, I never will believe it: howsoever I have heard a plain Countrey fellow stand in defence of it, that if there were no such things in Heaven, such wise men as Alma∣nack-makers would never put them forth in Print. But I will laugh at their ignorance, and scoff at all weather∣wise Wizards with Bion the Philosopher, that held those Astronomers and Astrologers ridiculous, that cannot see Fishes swim in the Sea, yet affirm they have seen them in Heaven: Or deride them, as Diogenes did. The same Philosopher hearing a Star-catcher make a long, and (as he thought) a learned Discourse about the Celestial Signes, askt him if he ever were there, he knew them so well, or ever had any hope to come thither, he did lye so much? For is it possible (saith he) that you can truly know what is in Heaven, or what is done there, when in your absence, you cannot see or know what is done at home? But these are onely Jests put upon them, not Arguments to confute them: but I will prove there are no such things in Heaven as these they talk, and shew the Reason why they feign such things to be in Heaven. As the diversities of the Circles described in the Spheres are meerly imaginary: so the division of the Zo∣diack is not material, or of the first Creation, but onely feigned by the will and arbitrement of Astrologers, that thereby they may know the Beginnings and the End of the Heavens motion. And the reason that they divide the Zodiack into twelve Signes, neither more or less, and that every Sign is divided into thirty Degrees, and every Degree into sixty Minutes; is because this Number is most fit for Calculations, as the Astrologers themselves do witness: as Hales Avenradon on the Exposition of Ptolomy, and Abraham Avenozra in his Book of
Astrological Reasons, so that they might, if it had pleased them, have divided the Zodiack into more or fewer parts, but they would not: which Division is clean contrary to the Doctrine of the Caldeans, for they teach, that there are not twelve Signes but eleven Images, so couple Libra and Scorpio together. A man cannot alleadge a stronger Reason not to be∣lieve these Astrologers and artless Empericks, then the strange opinions they hold, and to hear how stoutly most of them will defend the gross absurdities of many Philo∣sophers and Astronomers: For do you not think Eu∣doxus and Aratus were mad when they would boldly affirm,Aug. de Civ. Dei. that they knew how many Stars were in Heaven, and the Names and Operation of them all? Were not the ancient Astronomers out of their wits, that held the Stars were stuck on the Roof of Heaven, no otherwise then artificial Stars on the top of some sumptuous build∣ing? Was it not a foundness in that Epicure, that did cer∣tainly believe, that when the Stars did shine in the Night that then they were but kindled of God, and when they did vanish away, by the approach of the Day, that then they were quencht by him? As if we would say, when we see a man, then he is born; but when he is out of our sight, then he is dead. What an absurdity was it in Ori∣gen, to affirm that the Sun and the Moon, and the rest of the Stars, were living Creatures, being capable both of our Vices and Virtues? grounding his wak argument up∣on the words of Job,Laectant. coufur. hanc opi∣nionem. in lib. 1. Inst. c. 5. who said; That the Stars were not pure in in the sight of God: which was not meant, or spoken, as they were rationable Creatures, but as they were glorious Stars, and of a most excellent and full brightness, who although they were never so tralucent and bright, yet they were but dim in the sight of their Maker. Therefore in my minde, what Astrologers or Astronomers soever they be, that think Stars rationable Creatures, are worthy to be accounted most unreasonable
and sensless themselves. What a vanity was it in that Astronomer, that held, that Stars had their motion from themselves? which is most absurd: for if a Star is moved by it self, then Nature is defective, which never gave any Figure or Organ to any Star for such a Motion. But Nature never was defective in any thing, doth not abound in superfluous things, or doth any thing in vain: Therefore we must conclude, no Star hath the motion from it self, but hath it from God,Motue Stella. rum. that is the true prime Motor all the wise and learned Philosophers have so much talked of. What an Errour is it in some again, that doubt whether the World be Spherical, or round, or not? which doubt is most vain and idle: for this sensible World was made according to the example and simili∣tude of the Intellectual, the Arch Type and Idea of the Divine Minde; in which is neither Beginning nor End,Boetius. de conso∣lat. lib. 3. Plato, & Mercus, rius Tres∣megistus. such as you may perceive in a Spherical Figure. Again, it may be argued mathematically thus, that it is a fit thing for that Body that contains within it all things, should have the most capable Figure, which is is Spherical. Was it not a great oversight in Cicero, Plato, and ma∣ny other Philosophers to believe, that there is a musical consent and sound wrought by the ordinary motion of the Stars and Planets? which cannot be:Ambros. lib. 2. for the celestial and superiour part of Heaven hath no Air in it, without which there can be no sound made; neither do celestial Bodies, while they move in their Spheres, touch any hard or harsh thing, as the Finger doth the Lute or Harp, which is the cause of such musical and harmonious Ra∣ptures. Also to what purpose was it in many Writers, to hold a difference whereabout the middle of the Earth should be? But I fear I have erred too far out of the path I am bound to follow: therefore I will come into it again. There cannot be a greater argument of the falseness of Astrologers, then the leadly Antypathy that is between
them concerning the Art it self; for some of them hold, that the Degrees, Planets, Qualities, Apparances, Ends, Exaltations,Diversita∣tis qual∣tatum & influenti∣arum Coe∣li ab ef∣fectihu cogno∣cuntur. and Fallings, they attribute to the Planets, may be attained to by the diligent observation of the Ef∣fects of the Heavens, who by degrees may come to the knowledge of the Causes: for they think, that in the be∣ginning of the world God gave Men so long Lives, that they might give their Mindes to Speculation, whereby they might finde out Astronomy, Astrology, and such Arts and Sciences, which require a long, large, and exact experience. In this I believe they say true: for some say (it is a sin to bely the Devil) by long observation they may learn many Experiments concerning Astrology; yet, if by meer experience they had attained to the Principles, then not once, but often, they should have observed the same Constellation, which is opposite to the Tenent of most of them, who hold, that the same Constellation can∣not appear wholly again, unless it be after the revolution of many thousand years: and if they could perceive them sooner, yet doth it not suffice to observe the same particular Constellation, because seeing the influence of no Star tends upward, it is decreed by Astrologers, that it is uncertain whether the experimental effect is to be ascribed to this or that Planet, unless by chance it be to the Sun or Moon, which are often proposed to us in operation, when oftentimes they are the influence of a lesser Star, al∣though farther from us. For another Constellation in supe∣riour parts doth vary, hinder, and diminish the operation of Heaven in inferiour parts, the disposition of the mat∣ter. But suppose the influences of Constellations may be understood, yet they are not sufficiently made manifest, as may appear to him that reades the many doubts that arise about Astrology, concerning the Motion of the Stars, the Firmament, and the Planets. Some grant, that there is a Heaven above the Firmament: some late Writers make use of and practise another Heaven; the Chalde∣ans
and Egyptians one Motion, that is to say,Stella∣rum fixa∣rum mo∣tus tri plex. diurnal to the Stars: Ptolomy adds a second, which is from the East to the West; Thebit a third, which is from the North to the South: but they all vary about the time. And won∣der not, if they vary about the fixt Star, seeing they differ about the Motion of the Sun and the Moon, for the pre∣cise knowledge of the Solar Year: and it is needless to re∣port, how much they differ about the declination of the Sun. Therefore, why should any man believe them, when their Writings and Opinions differ so far from one ano∣ther? for it is certain, that if Astrologers be deceived but in one Degree, in taking an hour, they err likewise in the Division of the Houses; for the Degree will change the Sign: then is it necessary that their experiments are deceit∣full. The Chaldeans (the most ancientest Astrologers) differ from the opinion of the Egyptians; for the Egypti∣ans divide the Zodiack into twelve Signes, but the Chal∣deans into eleven Images. Again, some of them disagree in their Degrees: some of them will have this Planet placed in this House, another in the third, fourth, fifth, or fixth. Thus is there such a deadly enmity between these heavenly Doctours, that like so many Masters of the no∣ble Science of Defence, they strive to break the head of each others Reputation, and stand at defiance with each other. For when Ptolomy hath his Jacobs Staff in his hand, he thought himself as skilfull at it as Turner was at his Rapier and Dagger, and was assured, that Hermes Tresmegistus durst not stand up against him. When Alchibicius had got hold of his Astrolabe, he was as safe as Robin the Devil with his Sword and Target, and durst prognosticate, that neither Albumazar nor Abo∣azar durst challenge him. When Abraham Haly, or Thebit, were peeping through their Prospective Glasses, they did believe, that neither Avenozra nor Algazel durst look them in the face. Nay, do but look into the humours of our Modern Calculatours, and you shall
finde them rail one against another as bitterly as Nash against Harvy; and why is all this? but because they condemn each other for lying; when Heaven and Earth, God and Man, know, that he that lyeth the seldomest, doth lie very often. Some of them will prognosticate, that on such a day very infallibly there shall be Rain, when it is a thousand pound to a Farthing token, but all the People dwelling in that Meridian his Almanack was cal∣culated for, but will finde them Lyars. Yet, howsoever they do often miss in their Prediction, when they foretell of the disposition of the weather, of war, of sickness, of the change of Times, and of Laws; yet I cannot deny altogether, but that futures may be seen by the Contem∣plation of Heaven. For there is none can doubt, but that God,Arist. lib. Metere. rum, & de Gene∣ratione. the great Architect of this visible and invisible World, infused a manifold virtue and operation in the Heavens: but that many of these Qualities are secret, and occult, the kingly Prophet David telleth us, saying; God numbreth the multitude of Stars,Corpora inferiora subjiciun∣tur supe∣riorum & influen∣tiis. and imposeth se∣verall Names unto them. Therefore it is manifest, that things are named according to their properties, which none but he that made them, can perfectly and distinctly understand. Yet many Philosophers by their Speculation knew and observed the general influence of Heaven, by their Motion, Heat, and Light: which made Aristotle af∣firm, that this Elementary World is contiguous to Heaven, and that the Sun, under the oblique Circle, or the Zodi∣ack causeth Generations. Which is not absurd to affirm: for certainly, the thick and gross Bodies are governed by the thin, and that the influences of the Stars do rule the differences of Bodies; as in the Suns rising or setting, we see the times of the year do vary, and by the increase and decrease of the Moon, some Creatures are augmented and diminished; as Shell-fish, at the wonderfull flux and re∣flux of the Sea. But to be of the Astrologers opinion, that the Stars have a power over the Will of Man, I ne∣ver
will believe; for the Mind cannot be subject to the Po∣sition of any Star: nor is it at all times true, that the dif∣ferences of Bodies are caused by the influence of Heaven:Sexus di∣versitas. for two Twins of divers Sexes may be conceived in the same instant a Man and a Woman. And though many hold, that there may be a general influence into Bodies, yet not into the faculties of the Soul or Minde; for a cor∣poral substance cannot cause an operation in a spiritual essence. But the Reason that many Astrologers and Prognosticatours err in their opinion (although there be an influence in the Stars concerning the fertility of the year, of pestilence, of war, of thunder, hail, rain, fair or foul weather) is, because they do not keep themselves within the compass of Astrology, but thirsty after vain-glory, go beyond their limits, thinking to presage that by the Stars, which possibly they cannot do. Again, most Astrologers informer Ages held divers opinions concerning the Prin∣ciples of Astrology, and they (though but Pupils in this Art) presume to come in with their opinions, because they would be thought Masters of their Art: and although oftentimes they hit upon the disposition of the weather, and future things, by the observation of the Heavens; yet at all times, concerning the disposition of the Corn especially, they cannot chuse but err, because the four parts of the year are so different in quality, so that it is impos∣sible, but that the excess of the heat in one part of the year, and the excess of cold in the other doth distemper the Soil. Concerning the Predictions of Diseases, they may the easiest tell: for by the corruption of the Air, Physick teacheth us, many Infections may putrifie the Brain. This onely shall suffice for Astrologers. Now I will come to the Art it self, whereby they can calculate Deaths and Nativities, tell Fortunes, either good or bad: which they fetch as far as from the twelve Houses they have built in Heaven.
The signification of the twelve Houses of Heaven. THese twelve Houses are the Tenements most com∣monly such Astrologers as you your self do let out to simple people, whereby they purchase to themselves much Money, and to their Tenants much sorrow. And to tell truth, these twelve Signes, placed in their twelve Houses, are like a Jury that sit upon the life & death of Mortality. By the disposition of the first House, by the Planets and Stars fixt in it, by the natures and divers effects that are wrought by them, many wonders are discovered: as to know of what condition he shall be of, either as liberal as an Aldermans Son and Heir, or as penurious as the Irish Catch-pole, that will feed his Dogs with Rabbets in Lent, while he sits eating a piece of poor John: it can tell of what Vocation or Calling a Man shall be of, either a Stubble-bearded Barrister, and wrangle stoutly and loudly at the Bar; or whether he shall be a Souldier, and fight bravely, if a man do but scorn for to pledge him a deep Health untosome of his White-Frier Mistresses, &c. By the second House you can foretell of the prosperity or adversity of him that is born: whether he shall be a rich Citizen, and break three or four severall times of set purpose, either of set purpose to cousen the World, or out of meer poverty; whether he shall be an Heir, and inhe∣rit his Fathers vices as well as his riches; or whether he shall be a Marchant, and loose his Goods on salt Seas, or have them drown'd in the Canaries of some Tavern. By the third House you can judge of the secresie of the Conscience, whether it be good or bad toward God, or Man. In my Conscience they err from the truth at the least a thousand Dutch Miles, because the Holy Ghost tells us, that No mar knows whether he deserves Hate or Love; so that by this we may perceive that the secrets of the Conscience are onely known to God. Therefore this mad∣ness
of the Astrologers is not onely to be confuted, but burnt for an Heresie. Besides this wickedness, they hold there are two most fortunate Planets above all the rest; which are Venus and Jupiter, and that Venus gives the felicity of this life, and Jupiter of the life to come, which I utterly disallow of: for if a man follow such a wanton Wench as Venus is, he shall in small time lie sweating in some Hospital, or groaning in some Barber Chirurgions house, which I think can be no great felicity; and he that follows the humour of joviall Jupiter, shall finde, and quickly know, that it deserves that place which is contrary to Immortality. So that by the assertion of these Astrologers, whosoever is born when Venus reigns shall live in this World most pleasantly, in spite of ill Fortune: and when Jupiter reigns, he shall live in the World to come, although he live never so wickedly, for you make no exception, but indefinitely say, They shall. Maternus was as mad, or rather as wicked as the rest, who writes and affirms, that when Saturn is placed in Leo, men live long, whose Souls afterward shall go to God. Mark but how considently and arrogantly he speaks this, which I will confute with the words of our Saviour, who saith; Whosoever will enter into the Kingdom of God, must keep his Commandments. And not whosoever will enter into the Kingdom of God must be born when Sa∣turn is in Leo. Albumaezar also is as devilish as the rest, heaping impiety on impiety; affirming that he that prays to God in the hour which the Moon with the Head of the Dragon is joyned to Jupiter, shall obtain whatsoever he asketh. If this sacrilegious Foolery is true, why do not the Astrologers themselves observe this hour, that they may pray that they may never more err, or that they may ob∣tain so much Riches that they never after may be forced to set their Lies to sale, or that they may live no more on the four-penny reward of some Suburb-sinner, for casting her hot water; or the six-penny gratuity of some old Maid
servant that would be loath to die a Virgin: or they may pray that they never more sell their good Fortunes to Oy∣ster-wives and Butter-women for greasie two-pences? But by this Argument that you cannot follow that you prescribe to others, a man may smell your Roguery to be as rank as a Mountain-goat. By the fourth House, you will judge of the essence of the Childe that is born, how long it shall live, and how well; if it shall be as long-lived as a Raven, or Stag, or as short-lived as a Goat, or Cock-Sparrow. By the fifth House, you can judge, how he shall live, and affect his Parents, whether he shall love his Father better then his Mother, or his Mother then his Father. Ptolomy thinks you may judge by the tenth House, but Malleus ab Ascendente. By the sixth House, you will know of what Profession it shall be of, either a Fool or a Physician, a Parasite or a Courtier, a Beggar or an Alchymist, a mad man or a Musician, a Thief or a Tailor. By the seventh House, you will judge what Wife he shall have, either a delicate young plump Helena, that looks as merry as May, and as jocund as June; or an old decrepit Lamia, that is as frosty as February, and as dull as December; whether she shall be as mute as a Fish, or have a Tongue as loud as a Fish-wife. By the eighth House, you will judge how unfortunate∣ly a man will die, either on the water, like a Pyrate, or in the water, like a Fish, or on a Tree like a High-way-man, or on the Bough like a Bird: whether he shall be sterv'd to Death in a Prison, like some Prodigal; or in some Bur∣dello, like a French Monsieur, or a Spanish Don, whose Bones the Neapolitan Dog hath pickt so clean, that they would serve well some Gilder to burnish with. By the ninth House, you can judge, whether he shall be a Traveller, as famous as our English Coriate or out∣landish Peter Columbus; what fortue he shall have in his Travell, what Fashions he shall wear.
By the tenth House, you can judge of the state of the Mother. By the eleventh House, you can judge of what Com∣plexion he shall be Sanguine, Chollerick, Phlegmatick, or Melancholly, or what hair he shall be of, of a brown or Abraham colour, as the English; of a yellow, as the Dane; flaxen, as the Irish; or black, as the Spaniard. The twelfth and last House, where he shall dwell, and what Neighbours he shall have. Thus have I run over the twelve Celestial Houses, whereby you can infallibly foretell of our good or bad Fortunes, according to the nature and influence of that Planet that reigned at our births, in which you are most lamentably deceived: for you say, There is no man born but he is born either under an Auspitious or Malevolent Star, and according to that Planets influence he is born, under, he shall thrive and prosper; also you say, that eve∣ry Planet bath but one influence, either good or bad. Now that this is false I instantly will prove. I have heard of two Bretbren that were Twins; now there is no Astro∣loger will deny, but that these Brethren were born un∣der one Constellation, because they were born within the space of one Minute, and being born under a malevolent Star, they must be both unfortunate; and under a smiling and luckie Star, happy. But not long after the birth of these Twins, there was a Fortune-teller did calculate their Nativities, and told the Parents of these Children that they should both be fortunate, because he perceived they were born under a fortunate Planet, which proved contra∣ry to his predictions: for these wanting means belike to supply their Wants, being come to mens Estates, did a∣gainst some good Time, (although they had no Lands or Tenements of their own) take up other mens Rents either on Newmarket-heath or Salisbury-plain; who for those Facts, to be short, were taken, carried before a Justice, by him committed to Prison, the next Sizes were brought
to their Triall, convicted, condemned, and judged to be hanged. Now all this while their fortunes were equal, but contrary to the prediction of the Astrologer; but belike the Star that reigned at their births had a double influ∣ence, which is contrary to your Writings, for when these Brethren were brought to the place of Execution, and rea∣dy to be turned off, there came a Reprieve for the young∣est, who was carried back again to prison, had his pardon, and afterward became an honest man; but the eldest with the loss of his Life satisfied the Law. There was another Astrologer did divine, that one Donello Forobosco a notorious Thief should be hanged, which did come something nigh his prediction, for he be∣ing a hungry Lazarello de Tormes, robb'd Market-wo∣men, and Countrey people of Chees-cakes, and Butter∣milk, for which Fact he was apprehended and condemned to be hanged; so coming to the Gallows, he studied how he might escape that Destiny; at the last, seeing his time, he flung Ginny-Pepper in the Hangman's eys as he came to put the Nooze over his Neck, lept off the Ladder, and shewed himself a very nimble Foot-man, for he ran a∣way, making toward the Sea, which was nigh the place of Execution, and endeavouring to swim to save himself from those that pursued him, the Cramp took him in the great Toe: and so, whereas by the Law of Nations, and the opinion of the Astrologer he should have been hang∣ed, he was most unfortunately drowned: and thus these learned Astrologers were deceived. It stands to great reason, that these Artists cannot at all times tell other mens fortunes, when they cannot fore∣tell of their own good or bad luck: for there was an Astrologer made a prediction of Henry the sevenths Death, (but some attribute this to Alphonsus King of Arragon) and that should die on such a year. The King hearing of the South-sayer, sent for him, and askt him if he were an Astrologer, and could tell fortunes, to whom
he answered, Yes. The King again askt him, if he never did foresee by his Art that there was imminent Danger, that much about that time should hang over his head, meaning the Astrologers, to whom he answered, No. Then the King replied, Thou art a foolish Figure-caster, for I am more skilfull then thou art; for as soon as I saw thee, I instantly prophesied thou shouldst be in prison before night, which thou shalt finde true: so the King in∣stantly sent him thither. But he had not been long in cu∣stody, but the King sent for him again, to know, if he could cast a figure truly, to know how long he should be in prison; to whom he still answered, No. Then the King said, Thou art an illiterate fellow, that neither can fore∣tell of either good or bad luck that shall befall thy self; therefor I will conclude, thou canst not foretell of mine. So forthwith set him at liberty, giving him many dis∣gracefull words. Yet howsoever these Examples touch the Reputation of those that profess your Art; yet I will not infallibly say, that such things were never done, al∣though it be not ordinary to do them; for it is almost in∣credible to believe, yet I perswade my self that it is true what Zonoras declareth, that the day before Julian the Apostata died, a certain man lying in a solitary place by himself, saw a heap of Stars in the Element, which he said, did express these words, Hodie Julianus in Persia oc∣ciditur. That this day Julian the Apostata is slain in Persia. And the time being afterwards noted, it was per∣fectly known that he died that day. But this I take to be an extraordinary Revelation. Another Astrologer did foretell a Prelate, an Acquain∣tance of his, that he should have a great fall. Therefore the Prelate, that he might be more safe (knowing the Astrologer to be a learned Man) would never go higher then the lowest Room of his House; would never dine, or sup, but sit on the ground; when he went to Bed, would lie on the ground; hoping by this wariness, to change the
position of the Star that did threaten him: but it was in vain for a while after News was brought him, that he was deposed of his Bishoprick: who instantly cried out, Now the Astrologers prediction is come to pass, for indeed I can fall no lower. Byron, Marshall of France, was told by a Wizard, that a Burgundian should be the death of him: upon which prediction he gave express Command, that not a man of that Nation should come nigh him: but all would not help, for he found the prediction true, by the loss of his head, which a Burgundian cut off, that was his Execu∣tioner. These two last seem to savour somewhat of the Devils subtleties, and the Astrologers Amphibologies. There was another Wizard (as it was reported to me by a learned and rare Scholar, as we were discoursing a∣bout Astrology) that some tweuty years before his Death told Cuffe our Countreyman, and a most excellent Gre∣cian, that he should come to an untimely end: at which, Cuffe laughed, and in a scoffing manner intreated the Astrologer to shew him in what manner he should come to his end: who condiscended to him, and calling for Cards, intreated Cuffe to draw out of the Pack three, which pleased him; who did so, and drew three Knaves: who (by the Wizards direction) laid them on the Table again with their faces downwards, and then told him, if he desired to see the summ of his bad fortunes reckoned up, to take up those Cards, one after the other, and look on the inside of them, and he should be truly resolved of his future fortunes. Cuffe did as he was prescribed, and first took up the first Card, and looking on it, he saw the portraiture of himself, Cap à Pe, having men compassing him about with Bills and Halberds: then he took up the second Card, and there saw the Judge that sate upon him: at last, he took up the last Card, and saw Tybourn, the place of his Executiou, and the hangman, at which he then laughed heartily; but many years after, being condemned
for Treason, he rememembred the fatal prediction of the Wizard, and before his death revealed it to some of his friends. If this be true, it was more then Astrology, and no better then flat Sorcery or Conjuring, which is devi∣lish. There was another (with whom I will end) that was told by a Scholar,Anoni∣mus. that he should have his brains beaten out: but he was so wary of himself, that he would not lie in a House for fear the Roof should fall on his Head, re∣solving to lie in a Tent; but that Resolution lasted not long, for he durst not trust himself there, for fear the great pole, that went cross over it, should knock him on the head: then he resolved to lie under some Tree, but then he feared, if he should fall asleep in a windy night, the Tree might fall on him. He durst not go into any Town, least a Tile should crack his Crown: so that what place soever he went into, he still was very wary of himself. At the last, as he was walking in a hot Summers day in the Fields, he was forced to put off his Hat, and having a bald head, a strange bird that was in the Element having an Oister in her Claw, thinking it to be some white Stone, let it fall on his head, and so beat out his brains. Thus for all his care and providence, he came to his untimely end, and fulfilled the prediction of the Astrologer, or rather Conjurer, if the Tale be true, which I scarce believe. Thus Sir, you see, I will not so much disparage your black Art, as to say, that you cannot foretell of things to come, calculate Nativities, or do strange things, though not by it, but by the help of the Devil, who abuseth you: but I say, they ought not to be done,Jerom in Com. super pre-phetam Sophoniam. because as S. Jcrome saith, You lift up your self against the knowledge of God, giving your selves to a feigned Art, imputing every Accident that happens in a Year or an Age,Greg. in Hom. Epiphaniae accepia occasione ab appa∣ritione Stellae quam Mag viderunt in Oriente Nate Domino contra Matheresati∣cos, oratiouem texons. to the rising or setting of Stars, thinking that humane af∣fairs are managed by the course and falling
of the Stars,Ambros. in 4. lib. Hexa. August and while you promise health to others, you are ignor ant of your own punishments. Again he saith, that to seek out the course of the Stars, and the events that fol∣low them, is the scandal of Egypt, and plain Idolatry. S. Ambrose saith. He that thinks to express the severall qualities of Nativities, and will tell what disposition the Childe shall be of as soon as it is born, is both a villanous and vain man, because it is most wicked and impossible to do. S. Augustine saith that these Astrologers and South-sayers hold, that all things good or bad happen by fortune, which is both wicked and heathenish: for the Gentiles cal∣led Fortuna, Dea, or a divine power, not considering any mans merits, but gave Riches to one, and misery to ano∣ther. And the better to express her, they made her Image according to the form of a Woman, sitting in the middle of a Wheel, always turning it, having the right side of her face bright, the left obscure, yet both blinde; shewing, that those she favoured, were merry and jocund, but those she hated, discontent and melancholly. Her blind∣ness shewed the indifference both of the good and bad: by the Wheel, they did shew the prodigious change of this unconstant Goddess, which is impious, and against all Christian Faith: for we ought to consider, that all the ill that happens to us have their original from our sins, and all the benefits and good that come to us, from the mercies of God, and not from this or that malevolent or smiling Star, or from the frown and smile of Fortune. But if you will have these Accidents good, or bad, that happen in the minute of an hour, and sometimes in larger and lesser distances of time to Foxtune, she is very predominant among us, and like one of the most power∣fullest Planets reignes and rules over our Nativities and Affairs. For it is some mens fortune to be Citizens, some again to be Cuckolds; some mens fortune to be Courties, some to be Flatterers; some to be Scholars, some to be Fools; some to be Lawyers, some to be Knaves; some to
be Ʋsurers, some to be Devils; some to be Captains, some to be Cowards; some to be Beggars, some to be Alchymists; some to be Heirs, some to be Fools; some to be younger brothers, and some to be wisemen. Again, it hath been many a Gallants good fortune, to have a brave Sute of Clothes on his back in the morning, yet it hath been his bad fortune to have them in the Lumbard before night. It hath been many honest mens good fortune to have a fair VVife, yet it hath been his bad fortune, not to know truly how many Children he hath had by her of his own getting. It hath been many a roaring Boys good fortune, as they say, to kill his Enemy in the field, yet it hath been his bad fortune to be hanged for it the next Sessions. Thus you see your Goddess Fortune hath a great predo∣minance over this lower world the Earth: yet howsoever I will not believe these things happen by fortune, and the meer influence of the Stars; therefore let all men avoid them, for this opinion causeth many to affirm there is no God. S. Augustine will not allow of your Astrology, but calleth it a meer vanity; and those that profess it,Aug. contia Mathe∣maticos in capitu∣lo quinio & in fine capitis. Ene∣mies of the Truth: he saith, that the Devil first found out this Art, and those that are curious in it are Enemies to God, because it breeds many superstitious Opinions in Men and VVomen, especially the ancientest, which they hold as Canonical, and as lawfull to be observed and followed as any part of Scripture, of which I will reckon up some. S. Augustine calleth your Art, a Sacrilegious Foolery an unlearned Learning,Lab. 2. de doctrina Christi∣ana. and a kinde of Fornication with the Soul. S. Jerome makes mention that Pope Alexan∣der the third, finding a Priest that found out a Thief that had robb'd the Church, by the inspection into his Astro∣lobe, suspended him from his Order for that Fact for a year together, saying, it was a most heynous sin for a man of his Order, to exercise such an unlawfull Study, al∣though it were for the good of the Church. Thus Sir, you see your Art is forbidden concerning
telling of fortunes, or finding out things that are lost, &c. And in forbidding the practise of this Art, is also inclu∣ded all those for whom it is practised; for many people in these days cannot break his Shinnes, have his Nose bleed, lose a Game at Cards, hear a Dog howl, or a Cat wawl, but instantly they will run to the Calculatour, and have him turn over his Ephemerides, and his annual Calendars, flust full of Lies and superstitious Observations. I will ccunsell all those therefore, that would know their for∣tunes,Calenda∣rium ve∣m & perpeiu∣um. to look to that everlasting Calendar, the sacred Bible, for the Astrology they shall learn there, never tels false, but will certifie them, that the cause of their ill for∣tunes is their sins; and the good, the Mercies of God: that will tell them of the nature of Summer, that is of their Resurrection and Salvation, and the true condition of VVinter, that is Death and Damnation. If they study this Book, they will quickly learn to be excellent Calcula∣tours, and learn what will become of them if they do ill, and what if they live well, it will tell them the Causes and the Cures of every Disease that doth infect the Soul. Yet for all this, it is the true condition, rather superstition of the world, to put their confidence rather in Astrologi∣cal fallacies, then in the Holy Ghosts verities, drawing from the Stars the Events of future contingencies, ascri∣bing what good soever befals us to the influence of some lucky Planet, and not to Gods Mercies; and what mis∣chief soever to the position of some malevolent Star, and not to our sins, we put our confidence in Astrologers, Stars̄, and Planets for a few experiences, and never hate for their innumerable fallacies: but this is especially heredita∣ry to Women, because by succession it came from their Mother Eve, who by her vice of curiosity or levity, or admirable facility rather then fatuity, was deceived by the Serpent, in defiring to know future things, which folly de∣scends naturally to Women, who will rather believe a Mathematician then a Divine; so that these Calcula∣tours
if among a hundred Errours they happen but upon one Truth, then without any suspition they may lie a thousand times after, yet these foolish, credulous,Francis. Peirar. and Ap∣ple-eating Women will believe them. Sebastian that writ bitterly against Astrologers, saith, it is an Art against the Law of God, and full of deceit and villany. For, saith he, Go to any Doctour of the Ma∣thematicks, an tell him thou hast had very ill luck all thy life time, and desire him to tell thee under what Planet thou wert born, and no doubt his Answer will be that thou wert born either under malitious Mars; or that Saturn was Apostolical and Retrograde: when you have been with him, then go to another, and tell him that you have had very good fortune, and desire him to tell thee what Star reigned at thy birth, and it will be very strange, if he do not tell thee as the first did, either under Mars or Saturn; who to prove himself an Artist, will turn over huge Volumes, by which he will shew, that it is nocessary that you must have good fortune, being born under those Stars the first said were ill, and in a Circle drawn together in every part, by which he will take divers and sundry oc∣casions to speak any thing. Now if they chance to miss any thing in their predictions, they have a pretty evasion to shun the suspition of Lying, which they draw from the interrogatory part of Astrology. The opinion of Astrologers is, when the minde of Man is spurred to the desire of knowing any thing; that suddenly it cannot be done by election, or consultation, but the influence of the Constellation that hour consisting in Heaven. And when any man consults with an Astrolo∣ger, by a figure in Heaven the hour of interrogation being found out, the Astrologer can answer truly of any thing sought for, or demanded: As whether an absent Friend be alive or dead; if a Legate or Messenger, that is sent into any Countrey, shall return home again safe and well, and whether he will dispatch that matter he went about pro∣sperously
and an innumerable many of other things, that humane curiosity doth doubt of: to which sometimes they may answer truly, although they often lie, and are never found fault with for it; for they have found out a way, whereby they can sufficiently excuse themselves to those that are ignorant and simple in these things. For they say, that if any man, being doubtfull of any thing, doth with a natural motion and radical intention ask them any thing, that then they can resolve them of any Question they ask. Now if they miss, and cannot answer directly and truly to what was propounded to them, then they say, that he that askt that Question, did it not with any natural moti∣on, or any firm or radical intention to be resolved, but onely to try their Art. Thus oftentimes they deceive, and are deceived in their Answers; not by the defect that is in their Art, but by the levity of him that did ask the Questi∣on: and thus they excuse themselves: which are meer Tricks for Evasion, and haue no ground at all from Reason. But I admire what Excuse the Egyptian and Chaldean Astrologers could finde,Chaldaei Astrologi Nobu∣chodonosor somnium dicere nequierunt. when among such an infinite number of them, not one of them could truly answer touching the Dreams of Pharaoh and Nabuchadnezzar, when Joseph and Daniel could answer di∣rectly?Aegyptiaci Divinatores somnium Pharaonis dicere non potuerunt. Do you think this was done by any inspection, or peeping into an Astrolobe, or observing any Constellation? No: for it was done by the revelation of Almighty God; therefore it was past the Rules of your Art. There is another neat Delusion, whereby they bene∣fit themselves very much; which is, by the observations of the Heavens to know, if it be fit or convenient for a man to travell, or do any other business in: which is most su∣perstitious and diabolical. For they will not have a man eat, drink, be merry, take Physick, or travell, marry, joyn friendship, send forth a Messenger, buy, sell, put on new Clothes, begin the Alchymists work, set Boyes to
School, go to Law, hawk, hunt, fish, or go to the Bathe, but they will have them to do it under some Constellation, and will set forth Rules when to do these things, and when not. If they can do these things, I wonder they do not set forth a Rule, and chuse an Hour and Constellation, under which a man may die well, and avoid Hell-fire, and en∣joy the Joys of Heaven: but I think their Art hath no∣thing to do with this. Yet I will not deny, but that the in∣fluences of the Stars have an operation in the differences of Bodies: for what is more belonging to the Body, then to exercise Husbandry, to cut down Timber for Building, while it is not too full of Sap, and to observe the Times and Seasons when they should be done. But those obser∣vers of Time are to be laught at, that will not go out of their house before they have had counsel of their Al∣manack, and will rather have their house fall on their heads, then stir, if they note some natural effect about the motion of the Air, which they suppose will vary the lucky blasts of the Stars, that will not marry, or traffick, or do the like, but under some Constellation. These sure are no Christians: because faithfull men ought not to doubt, that Divine Providence, from any part of the World, or from any time whatsoever, is absent.Canonica inhibitio 26. q. c. 7. Divina Provi∣dentia. There∣fore we should not impute any secular business to the power of the Stars, but to know, that all things are disposed by the arbitrement of the King of Kings. The Christian Faith is violated, when so like a Pagan and Apostata any man doth observe those Days which are called Aegyptiaci, or the Calends of January, or any Moneth, or Day, or Time, or Year, either to travell, marry, or to do any thing in: for whosoever he be that be∣lieves these things, hath erred from the Christian Faith and Baptisme. S. Augustine in his Enchiridion saith, that it is a great offence for any man, to observe the time and course of the Moon, when they plant any Trees or sow any Corn: for he saith, None puts any trust in them, but
they that worship them; thinking, that the position of some Star ought to have an influence in them according to those things they believe concerning the Nativities of men. This me thinks, is most simple and ridiculous; for thus I will argue against them. If this be true which they hold, that it is good to sow Corn under such a tuckie Con∣stellation, what is the reason then, that after the Corn that is scattered on the Earth by the laborious hands of the Husbandman, that after so much Grain is come up toge∣ther, look green together, ripen together, and fit for the Sickle, that some of it is blasted, some quite choak'd up, some devoured by Birds, some by Beasts, some trodden down, and some of the Ears pluck from their stalks by men that come by that Field they grow in? How comes it to pass then I say, that some of this should go safely into Barn, and some of it again be devoured and spoiled? which me thinks, should not be, if the same Constellation under which it was sown had but one influence, which should be good, and not a second, which was bad. But I will now let these things pass (because I make no doubt but I have strongly confuted them) and come to the last, but the wicked part of Astrology; which concerns the making of Astrological Images, and to what purpose they are made: where I will shew, they have no force or virtue from any Star or Constellation, but that the Devil worketh about them, and in them, causing them to be made under a Constellation, that the impiety of their Ido∣latry may the more secretly be hid. The vanity of Astrologers about their Images. THe Fabrick of Astrological images are made under a certain Constellation, either to avoid hurtfull things, or to intice profitable things, for to divers uses they are made. Some are made for the destruction of some things: as if you would remove a Scorpion from a place, you
must carve the Figure of some Scorpion either in Stone, Wood, or Iron, under some convenient Constellation, and inscribe on it an effectual Name, signifying the Name of the thing that is to be avoided, and the Name of the Sign ascending, and of the like in divers parts of the image, with many other Observations, which for brevity sake I will now let pass. For a contrary effect, you must have a contrary Constellation, and a contrary Operation, as in the like images, pertaining to Love, Enmity, Health, or the like. And although there are many Effects caused by these images, as experience teacheth us,Non vir∣ius ima∣ginis sed operatio daemonis producit effectum. yet they are mise∣rably deceived, that think it done by the virtue of any Constellation, when it is done by the meer operation of the Devil: For not the virtue of the image, but the ope∣ration of the Devil, worketh the Effect. And learned Averrois writing against Algazel the Astrologer, saith, that these images have no virtue from the Stars, because artificial things are not capable of any influence, neither are they any cause of a natural operation: for Quality is in the Predicament of Actio. An image therefore made of any earthly substance, is nothing but a massie Effigies, and capable of no Action. And in like manner, those images that are buried in the midst of the place where their Operations are expected, are contrary to natural Reason. And other things that are observed in them, shew as great vanity: as, when some mens Names must be with the left hand, some with the right; some images must be buried with their faces upwards, some with their feet upwards: which are all signes rather of a Compact with the Devil, then any other natural cause; as in the Negro∣mantick images of Angels, or rather of their inscription of Devils, and other unknown Names and Characters. Also, the use of their Suffumigations and invocations are signes of a Compact and League with the Devil. The prodigious impiety of the Dominick Friers in the Fabrick of these images, would make a History bigger
then the Iliads: for they have made by their Magical tricks weeping Statues, by which they wrought many Miracles, which they learnt of the Priests of the Idols of the Gentiles, who have deceived many, as may appear by the Alexandrian Statues, destroyed by the Christi∣ans: for when they overthrew the Phane of Syrapis, there were images found both of Wood and Brass, whose inward parts were made hollow, and with instruments were faste∣ned to the Roofs of their Churches and Temples, from whence they spake. And since the time of Popery, there have been found in Churches images that have had Eyes put in by Art, that would weep, and let Drops of Bloud trickle down their faces, sweat bloud, and would twinckle with their Eyes to the People, by the help of instruments, and would wrythe their heads and Necks backward and forward, according to the will of the Priests that invent∣ed them, to beguile the People, and inrich themselves. These Puppets had no Tongues, but onely moved and stirred, making signes to the People, many of which, the Cardinals erected, adorned, and commended, to instruct the People: which were nothing but Deceits and Tricks of these holy and religious Fathers, still to detain the people in ignorance, and that they should not smell out their Kna∣very. Also, many of these Scab-shin Friers (when any rich man died, that had left their Abbies and Monasteries nothing to feed their fat Guts with) would place some of their Accomplices in a Vault they had made of purpose un∣der the dead mans Tomb; so that when any of his Sons or Kindred came (as the Custome in those Times was) to pray for the soul of their deceased Father, or Kinsman, they should hear a dreadfull voice under the Sepulcher, telling him, it was the Spirit of him that was but lately buried there, and that his Soul could never be at rest, while such (the Friers had most minde to) were given to the Mo∣nastery: so that the blinde people believing this to be the Spirit of their father, or Kinsman, would instantly go
home, and confirm those Lands on their Monastery. Thus poor Souls, they were often deluded by such counterfeit Voices of some subtle Frier, or as knavish a Companion of their Fraternity. Therefore if there be any in these Days (especially old Men and Women) that believe the Souls or Spirits of the Dead walk, let them but reade the Scriptures, and they shall finde it to be most false: for that affirms, that the Souls of the Good instantly go to Heaven, and of the Bad to Hell; therefore their Spirits cannot wander. Again, the Soul that is in Heaven mindes no earthly matter; and it was never known, that any Soul ever returned out of Hell; for the Poets themselves say, Nullus reditnrus ab Orco. But these images and Tricks of the Friers do but re∣semble the statues of Negromancers, made with great toil and labour. For Frier Bacon was many years, before he could make his Head speak. And the image of Alber∣tus Magnus was to be wondered at, which he made in the full and perfect shape of a Man, who with the wheels and other Engines that he had cunningly and artificially wrought in it, made it speak and pronounce words as di∣stinctly, as if they did proceed from a Man indued with Sense and Reason. This Statue, when Thomas Aquinas was sent into his Chamber, where it lay hid. heard it speak very articulately; which when he heard, then looking for it, and finding it, and viewing it very seriously, at last struck it with a Club, and brake it all to pieces. Which when Albertus heard and saw, he cried out, and said; Thomas, thou hast destroyed the Work of thirty years la∣bour and pains. Now can any man judge, that either Ba∣con or Albertus made these under any Constellation, or that it spake by the influence of any Star? if they do, they are wretchedly deceived: for it was either by a material Engine, or the Devil that spake within them, brought into them by their Art. Therefore we may per∣swade our selves, that all these images, made by the Art
either of a Frier or Negromancer, are unlawfull to be made of them, or used of any other. But if we must al∣low any statue or image, they must be those of Pasquil and Morphirius, on whose breasts were no Lie-Bills, as the Popes called them,Phil. Camp. Medita Cent. but True-Bills of their Villanies. statues were of stone, and the Verses carved on their breasts, were bitter and Satyrical, sharply reviling the Sorcery, Sodomitry, Simony, Incest, Murther, Witch∣craft, Poysoning, and Sacriledge of the Popes and Cardi∣nals whereupon the Gentlemen of Rome wittily said, that it was not lawfull for men to speak there vices, the stones did proclaim them. But Pope Adrian would have taken an order, and have them flung into Tyber, if Suessanus the Legate of Charles the Emperour who favoured them, had not prevented him; who said to his Holiness, that if they were flung into Tyber, the Crocodiles and Rats, and other monstrous Serpents would catch them, and sing them. To which Answer some report, the holy Father stood as mute as one of his Cardinals Mules: but some report, that he began to be angry at Suessanus Answer, and in a rage suddenly said, that he would have them burnt, to whom the Legate wittily replied again, saying, If you burn these images, their Ashes will not be blown through the City, but into other Countries, so that the people will take occasion to celebrate and reverence those Ashes for the writing sake, and so it will come to pass, that they being dispersed through the world, the sins of Rome will generally be known to all Nations. At this second Answer, his Holiness was more perplexed then before, and seeing he could do no good, either by Drowning or Burning, he bid them stand in the Devils Name. But I have made too long a Digression, therefore I will return again to our Negromancers, and now I have spoken of their images, I will breifly and plainly lay open the vi∣perous Generation of Negromancy, which are Idolatry, Divination, and vain observation, with all the hellish brood that proceeds from them.
The damnable Offspring of Negromancy. I Dolatry is a divine worship, attributed to idols, which idols are statues or images, which the Gentiles wor∣shipped with divine honour, believing there was some Di∣vinity in them, by reason of their Answers and wonder∣full Effects the Devil wrought in them. Such were the images of Hermes Tresmegistus, otherwise called Mer∣cury, in which they did believe, that by a kinde of Art the Souls of Devils and Angels were included, under a certain Constellation, which Divinity and Natural Phi∣losophy doth reprehend: for they hold that a Spirit cannot possibly be vegitable, or can substantially inform artificial Bodies. For the Soul, as Aristotle saith,De Ani∣ma. is an Act of a natural Body, not artificial: for a man cannot by any mat∣ter, as Herbs, Wood, Stone, Words, or Constellation, expell a good or bad Spirit, or being call'd, that it can come presently, and dwell in an idol; because corporal things cannot by any natural order have any operation in incorporal things. There have been some of the Gentiles that have not onely attributed divine honour to statues and images, but believed them to be Gods, for some vir∣tue, or magnitude of their Acts these statues represented; as to Jupiter, Hercules, Venus, and the rest, and other Monsters of this kinde. Also they did not onely honour corporal, but incorporal things, as intelligences, Angels, and the souls of heavenly bodies, which they call Aeria Animalia, and they did not separate the Souls of men from divine honour, which is most devilish. This kinde of idolatry at these daies is used among our Antagomsis the Papists, for they pray to Iron, Wood Gold, Silver, and wood∣en images, that have neither sight, feeling, sense, life, or ope∣ration in them, & have as small influence in them after they are made, either by the Carver, or Gold-smiths hand, as they had when they first were in a massie lump, either in the Tree or Mine.
The second Daughter of Superstition is Divination, by which our Astrologers miserably labour to know of future things,Lib. 8. Eym. either good or bad. These are they (I sido∣rus saith) report themselves to be full of Divination, who by craft and device foretell of things to come, by the ef∣fects which proceed upon necessity from Causes, unless they are especially hindred of God, certainly proceeding from the cause of Nature: as the Eclipse of the Sun and the Moon, and the Effects which proceed from these Causes may be foretold of by as probable conjecture, as well as a Mariner may foretell of a Storm, that will arise by a dark Cloud, that is either before or behinde him. Have not many old women told by the unhappy conditions of a Boy, that he would be hang'd, and hath it not fallen out right? Have not many grave Matrons foretold, that young wanton Lasses would prowe Wag tails, and hath it not come to pass? Have not many men by the damnable Tricks they have seen in Catchpoles, foretold, that they would prove Knaves, and hath it not been true? Yet these are but meer Conjectures. Again, Astrologers boast they can divine, which is most false; for the Prophets them∣selves foretelling of future things by Revelation of God, did not divine but prophesie; for Divination is always ta∣ken in the worst part, because in it the operation of the Devil doth always come.Lib. 2. For Bonaventure saith, to ask counsel of the Devil is a great mischief. The species of Divination by which they can fortell of future things are many. Sometimes they do it by plain invocation of the Devil,Pr sti∣t zm. who with their execrable Exorcismes, Conjura∣tions, Characters, and Figures, and divers other Ceremo∣nies, and to speak more truly, Sacrifices at divers times do call the Devil to give them Answers, who by divers manners and forms appear to them, who as subtlely and deceitfully doth answer to those Questions propounded to them, as may appear by these Examples. Pope Sylvester the second, that with small Learning had attained to his
Pontificalibus, being greedy long to enjoy that Sea, by this devilish kinde of Conjuration raised up the Devil,Papa Pa∣ter. Polyd. Virg. l. 5. de rerum inven∣tione. and ask this Counsel how long he should live. To whom the Devil answered, that if he did take heed of Jerusalem he should live a long time. Pope Silvester now thought himself long lived, because he determined never to see Jerusalem: but four years after he came to his Pallace of Sanctae Crucis, he lay in a Chamber unknown to himself, called Jerusalem, then instantly being mindfull of the Devils Answer, he said, that he should, as he did not live long after. Also Alexander the sixth,Guic. whom the Devil did help to his Popedome, promising him that he should live Decem & Octo in his Popedome, upon Composition that he should be his after that time was expired. Now these Numbers were over generally expounded of Ale∣xander touching his Years, for he supposed the Devil meant by Nine and Ten, Nineteen Years, when the Devil meant but Nine Years and Ten Moneths, which was much about the time he came to claim his Right of the holy Father. Also Albertus Scotus doubting of his for∣tunes, raised up the Devil, and asked him,Lord of Placeny tia. concerning the security of himself and his state, to whom the Devil thus subtilly and intricately answered, Domine stes secu∣rus, inimici tui suaviter intrabunt terram, & subjicientur Domuitui; which as the words now lie, bear this inter∣pretation in English. Sir, you shall stand secure, thy Ene∣mies shall peaceably enter into thy Kingdom, but shall be subject to thy house. Therefore he did hope well of this Answer, and made no doubt of the Victory; but the De∣vil did not promise him the Victory, but the Overthrow and meant thus, Domi ne stes securus, so did divide the word Domine into Domi ne, again, inimici tui sua vi ter intrabunt terram, subjicient ur, that is, ignem Domui tui; so the Devil did expound it, thus any man else would do the syllables, being so divided and cut a pieces. Thou shalt not stand secure at home, thy Enemies three times
their Forces shall enter upon thy Land, and shall over∣come with fire; and so was Albertus deluded. Also the Oracles of Apollo were but meer Witchcrafts and delusi∣ons of the Devil, giving Answers from a hollow place of the Temple, after the Priests had sacrificed to him, who did most commonly speak nothing but Amphibologias no∣dosas & flexiloqua responsa, deceiving many that came to it, because his Answer did still include a double sense: so that if a man did reade over all Chrysippus Volumes, con∣cerning the Oracle of Apollo, he should not finde one An∣swer but did include a twofold meaning, of which I think it not impertinent to remember two or three of them. Francis Petrach maketh mention in his Morals, that Nero asking counsel of Apollo at Delphos, desiring to know how long he should live; this Answer was made him,Lib. de Mora. that if he did take heed of seventy three years, he should live a long time. When Nero did hear this An∣swer, such a security did rock him a sleep, that fearing no∣thing, he did glut himself in delight, because he thought he should not die before the prefixed time of the Oracle, so that his minde was ravished down the swift Torrent of an insolent vanity and vain insolency, pampering himself with high Diet, Musick, and delights that please his Senses, but being in the Meridian of his happiness, in a minute he was flung down into the Dungeon of Disgrace, for he heard the popular Voice curse the Name of Nero, and celebrate the Name of Galba, by whom he was di∣sceptered, and who at that time was just seventy and three Years of Age. But one of the prettiest Tricks the Devil plaied by his Oracle, Valerius Maximus makes mention of; for he reporteth, that a Sophister to make himself merry, came to laugh at the Oracle of Apollo in Delphos, and askt him if he should finde his Horse he had lost. To whom the Oracle answered, that he should finde his Horse again, but if he did not take heed, he would take him such a kick, that would break his Neck. At this
Answer of the Oracle, the Sophister went away laughing, because it promised him to finde a Horse he never lost. But as he travelled into his own Countrey, he fell into the hands of King Attalus, to whom in former Time he had done some wrong, and was commanded by him to be set upon a Stone, called Equus, a Horse, from whence he was flung headlong down, and brake his Neck; fulfilling the Oracle of Apollo. Thus much for the Devil & his Oracles,Cui no∣men erat Equi. which always were some such cunning Delusions, whose end was commonly mischief. Sometimes you dodiuine by Dreams, and that is called per somnia. Natural Philosophy and Divinity do manifest the cause of Dreams;Somni∣um. Dreams sometime proceed frō the fulness or emptiness of the Belly, sometimes by illusion, sometimes by revelation, and some∣times by cogitation and revelation. Also, the divers ha∣bitudes of the Body doth administer divers causes of Dreams; so that melancholly men often dream of hor∣rible and fearfull shapes and forms of Devils. Chollerick men, of cutting Throats, of Quarrels, of Stratagems, and firing of Cities. Phlegmatick men often dream that they are in fear of drowning, and sometimes dream a sweeter Dream then this, that they are eating Honey, which is caused by the Phlegme which is naturally sweet, distilling to the pallate of the mouth.Incubus morbus noctu qui∣escentes infestans quum sci∣l cet externa quadam vis quiescentes videtur evadera & viluti suo pondere pressos gravare. Nasciiur hoc mor∣bigenus copia vaporum ex∣voraeuaie & cruditate  caput redundantium. The Sanguine Complexion, from the abundance of Bloud causeth men to dream of the Incu∣bus, which Physicians hold is the cause of a future Apoplexy: And that is the reason that many ignorant people that are of Sanguine Complexion, and feed on Flesh, Eggs, Veal, and drink Wine, and such like, which causeth Bloud, that believe that in their Sleeps they often feel the Night-mare, or an Incubus, which is nothing else but a Disease arising of Vapours, disturbing those that are at repose in the night, whose external force doth seem to evade their senses, and to press their Bodies with their ponderous
weight, and this is the reason that Physicians hold that the Incubus is a sign of future Apoplexy, because the Apoplexy is a stupefaction of the Nerves in the whole Body, with a privation of the sense and motion. Again,Apoplexia. stupefactio ner∣vorum totiue corporis cum privatione sensus, & motus, a verbo Graeco, , quod est percutio aitonitum reddo. some hold that the cause of dreams arise from the business and affairs a man is most imploied in the day time, so that the im∣pression of them sticking in the Table of the Fantasie, makes a man dream of those things in the Night which he hath done in the Day. as for example: Men given to drink much, often dream that they are in the bottom of some Noblemans Seller, drinking Healths. And men according to their Employ∣ments dream of their business over Night. Your Lawyer he dreams of Angels, a most blessed dream, and if he chance to talk in his sleep, it is most commonly of De∣murs, Habeas Corpusses, Scisseraries, Writs, Latitats, and Procidendoes. The Physician he dreams of a great Plague, and if he talks, it is of nothing but Purgations, Vomits, Glisters, and Pills. I knew a Player dream'd that his Brains were beaten out with the Cork of a Groat Bottle of Ale, and as he was speaking the Prologue it hist at him, because he spake it so scurvily. The Cutpurse and Catchpole most commonly dream of a Michaelmas Term, for that is their best time to pick Pockets and cheat in; and so of all the rest according to their Employ∣ments: therefore this makes me not of Simonides opinion, who held that all Dreams are sent from God, which all honest men will deny, because they know that God is not Authour of any ill. Again, Dogs and Kine dream, espe∣cially when they have lost their Whelps and Calves, who suddenly will wake out of their sleeps, and howling and lowing into divers places to finde them. Nor must we be∣lieve these Negromancers in their devilish work of work∣ing in our Fantasies by Dreams, that they can do any thing that is true, as when they cause us to dream of Gold,
or Silver, and we chance to finde it instantly, to affirm with many old Women that all Dreams are true, for this is but a Trick of the Devil to bring us into Superstition: which Trick is not much unlike that he hath put upon the Papists, making them believe that at the sight of the Cross he cannot be quiet, but must flie away from it; but there is no true Christian will think that the Devil is a∣fraid of a piece of Wood, Gold, or Silver, but flies from the Cross of purpose to draw them into the Superstition of adoring the Cross, and kneeling to it in stead of ado∣ring him that once hung on the Cross: for although it be a Cross, yet it hath no more virtue and influence in it then when it was a piece of Wood, Stone, or Silver. Thus then you see we must trust to no Dreams, except they come by the inspiration of God and the Holy Ghost; of which God spake in the 12. of Numbers. I will speak to him in a Dream, this was now by a good Angel, that God warned Joseph to flie into Egypt. And oftentimes God suffereth the evil Angel to delude the mindes of men, so that many times they have been banquetting with gallant Ladies, and by the fantastical illusion of the De∣vil, think that they have been in the company of divers Women that rid on the backs of Cats, Dogs, Hogs, or that they have been sailing on the main Sea in Ships no bigger then Egg-shells; and that in the peace of mid∣night they have travelled through many parts of the World. Holy Job prayeth against such illusions, saying, Thou doest terrifie me by dreams, and doest shake me with horrour by visions. There are many Monks as the Golden Legend testifies, that report this of their holy S. Domini∣cus, that his Mother before he was born dream'd that she bare a huge Dog in her womb, holding a burning fire∣brand in his mouth, who entering into the world set it on fire. This Dream the holy Monks did thus expound; that the Vision was not vain, seeing Preachers in the Scriptures are called dogs. But I will give them a truer
Exposition then this, not sparing their holy Order. It was certain that this Dominick was the Authour of one of the four Mendicant Orders, and the first that found out the burning and firing of the Professours of the Gospel. Therefore his imitatours have peculiarly challenged to themselves the Inquisition and many other such places, to exercise their Fire and Sword. And so by this was signifi∣ed the burning Fire-brand Dominicus held in his mouth; by which an infinite company of godly men were consu∣med into Ashes. Thus by this dream did the devil delude Dominicus Mother, and many more that did belive the interpretation of it by the Monks. But in general, dreams are not to be believed, for they are most wicked and odi∣ous in the sight of God, that think so; as may appear in the 19. of Leviticus, Deut. 23. ibid. 18. Ecclesiast. 24. and many other places of the Scripture. Thus much for your divination by dreams. Sometimes they do divine by a Spirit; and that is called Pythonissa. Sometimes they answer to that they are called for by divers Figures, Men or Women set in polish'd stone, Iron, Brass, Steel, Glass, or the Nails of ones hand; and this is called by the gene∣ral Name of Geomancy: And most commonly to such as these, they chuse out Women and Children. And I my self have known many old Women old dog at this kinde of divination; who hold, that if the Nails of the hand grow yellow, it is a great sign of ill luck; and that specks are the true signes of future ill luck. If these Appariti∣ors appear in the Water, then it is called Hydromancy. These I have heard are very incident to Catch-poles, Eum-bailies, and the like, when they are duck'd under Water at a high Tide at one of the Temples. If these Apparitions are in the Air, then it is called Aeromancy. If in the Fire, Pyromancy. If by the Bowels of Beasts, offered up on Altars to the devil, it is called Aruspicium. But if by Incantations, the devil seems to rise and answer to Questions propounded to them, then it is called Ne∣gromancy.
In this worst Superstition, Bloud is also used; and the Reason Isidorus gives, is this because he desireth divine worship; for in the old Law, Bloud was offered up to God. If by the chattering of Birds, or by the voice of any other Creatures, they foretell of things to come, it is called Augury. This kinde of divination is most blas∣phemous, odious, and against the honour of God: For they fain, that with a divine instinct, Birds, and Fowls, with their Motions, Chatterings, Croakings, Winding, or fore-right slying portend either good or bad luck: which the Ethnicks themselves did laugh at, and contemn. For Hector in Homer sharply reproved Polydamantus, who delaied his fight, expecting an Augury; to whom Hector said, Ʋnum esse Augurium optimum, Patriam fortiter de∣fendere: There is one Augury which is the best, stoutly to defend thy Countrey. Also this kinde of divination was very frequent among the Jews, and was laugh'd at, and crost by that learned and couragious Jew, Mossolamus; who being in the Wars, was told by an Astrologer, that he should march no farther, untill he had received an Augury from the next Bird he should see come flying over his Army. But the Jew scorn'd the help of the Bird, and laugh'd at the skill of the South-sayer, instantly taking his Bow in his hand, and as the Bird came croaking over the Army, slew it, then spake these words, Doest thou think thou superstitious South-sayer, that this Bird, ignorant of her own safety, could tell of the event of our Wars? If it could have foretold of things to come, it would never have come nigh this place, to be slain of Mossolanus the Jew. If they foretell of things to come, by the moving of divers Members of Beasts; then it is called Auspicium. Also, when a man speaks any thing to another without any intention, and as it were in jest: as to say, He will be hang'd, drown'd, kill'd, or the like; if this come to pass, then they call it Omen. If they foretell of things that shall happen by signes that they see in the Lines of a mans
hand; then it is called Chyromancy. This Art many old Women are learnedly experienced in, and will tell any Man or Woman, for meat, drink, or money, what shall befall them. If they foretell of any thing that shall hap∣pen by the signes they see in the shoulder-blades of Beasts, then it is called Spatalmancia. There is also another kinde of divination, which is by Lots: which Lots are made, by drawing out points of an uncertain number, with their Faces turned towards the Moon, with other Observations to as little purpose as this. The Dutchmen are very skilfull at this, and have cousened the English of infinite Masses of Money, by their selling of Papers; so that there was not one among forty, though he came ne∣ver so merry to the Lottery, but he should be sure to go away Blank. Thus Sir, have I laid forth the Brood of divination; now I will come to the Observations. It is a disputable Question, whether by words or deeds the De∣vil will be compelled by Negromancers, or whether being called by them, they come, because of some League that is between them? If Devils appear, forced by Negro∣mantick witchcrafts, why do not Negromancers make them come against their wills? which sure they cannot; which is a sign, that there is a League and Covenant con∣cluded between the Devil & Conjurers either manifest or occult, why else do Negromancers dedicate their Books to the chief Devils, whose Name they often use, but onely to make a Covenant with the Devil, that when they call them by those Names, Charmes, Characters, Exor∣cismes, and the like, they may appear themselves, or send some of their inferiour Devils as soon as they hear them. These then are approved signes and marks of a Cove∣nant: and that the Spirits may shew themselves to have a geater power, sometimes they seem very unwilling to come, either because they would make the inchanter more zealous, or that he may delude simple people: for he is a Lyar, and the Father of Lyes. And now I hope it will
not be impertinent to confute the Opinion of many, who will not believe, that there are any devils but those that are in Hell: but I am perswaded, that in every corner there is a Spirit. I proceed a little further, to shew, why under a certain Constellation at certain times. and in cer∣tain terrible places, Apparitions appear rather to Women and Children, rather then to Men. Such matters as Con∣jurers use, do not compell Devils, but rather are signes of a League compacted between them. For as S. Augu∣stine saith, The devils take their habitations in bodies, that God, not themselves, created; and are delighted in seve∣rall bodies for variety sake, not as creatures with Ali∣ment, but as spirits with signes, which signes are delecta∣ble in variety; as sometimes by Stones, Herbs, Wood, li∣ving creatures, Verses, and Rites; and men are often de∣lighted with these things. Which the Devil perceiving, seduce them either by subtle or crafty means, or by Appa∣rances, in fawning and Friend-seeming shews, or beauti∣full and amiable shapes; as they have appeared to some men in the Forms of Lamiae, which are but meer Phan∣tasma's of fair women appearing in that beautious shape, feigning themselves to be in love with young men, who have been so often conversant with them, that at the last they have brought them to destruction. But I think there are few Lamiae in these days appear, except they be sub∣stantial ones, which are Whores, who well may be com∣pared to these midnight delusions; For they will profess love, and never leave a man, while they have brought him to some Hospitall. Neither could the Devil do these things, but that he prieth into the heart of man, and then feeds them with that which most delights them. Thomas of Aquin teacheth, that by these corporal things they can the more easily bring to effect that to which they are called, and they desire this, that their Art might be held more admirable: and for this case, being called under any Constellation, they rather will appear, But why to Vir∣gins,
Children, and such weak Creatures do such Appea∣rances shew themselves more then to others, but that they may bring them into an opinion of their Divinity, and that prestigious Witchcrafts and delusions may soonest tempt them that have the weakest Faith? And to make them afraid, they appear in the Night, as it were in hollow Caves and Caverns of the Earth, Desarts, dark and soli∣tary Chambers, whereby the fear of these melancholly places, and the unseasonable time of the appearance of the Devil, may the more terrifie them. Thus the policy of the Devil still works on the weakest and silliest kinde of people.Avec. 6. de Nat. Avecin shews how the Senses may be deluded. The general means is this; Spirits work nothing extra nos, without us; for it is easie for Spirits to make many bodies of the Air, which earthly bodies may wonder at. For Erasmus reports a pretty piece of Magick performed by a Roman Priest (who had it not out of any place of the Scripture I am sure) that invited a company of La∣dies to a Banquet,In Epi∣cureo. bidding them bring good stomacks with them. The Ladies came, were welcommed by him, entertained by delicate Musick, and were seated at the last at the Table according to their Births. There were such variety of rare and strange Dishes, that they thought that others, not their own Nation, did furnish their Ta∣ble: they eat well, drunk well, and were merry; and which is better then a piece of Cheese, Pippins, or Carro∣ways, to close up the mouth of the stomack after Supper, they were welcome. When this Feast, rather this Fast was ended, and (which is not very usuall with Courtiers) Grace being said, they rendred the Priest hearty Thanks for their Banquet, and went home. But they had not been there at the most half an hour, but their stomacks began to call upon them for meat, for they were all as hungry as if they had eat nothing at the Banquet: therefore did much wonder at themselves, that they should have such a great desire to meat, seeing they did but newly come from
such a royal Entertainment. But this queint delusion the Priest afterward revealed to them: For although he in∣vited them to a Feast, yet they had never a bit of meat; For his Art did delude both the Eye, that thought it saw such things, and the Pallat, that seemed to taste those deli∣cates. I my self have seen a Fellow, that would make people believe, that they saw Orange trees spring out of his Forehead, having Birds sit and sing on the Boughs, which in an instant would vanish away again. This Fel∣low was at Cambridge drinking at the Dolphin, and made a Drawer that fill'd him bad Wine, believe, that he would geld him, if he would not bring him of the best Claret in the Cellar: which the Drawer laugh'd at, and the more to cross him, fetch of the worst he could finde. This Juggler swore he would be even with him before it be long; but the Drawer went away laughing, bidding him do his worst. But the Conceit came at the last, like a Jest in the last Lines of an Epigram; for when the Drawer lest thought of it, as he was running down stairs to fetch Wine, he felt something trickle down his Thighes, at the first thinking it had been some Wine he had spilt on his Breeches, but put∣ting his Hands into his Hose, he pull'd them out bloudy again; so that he came running up stairs, and with a wide mouth came roaring into the Room where we were drink∣ing, crying, the lame man had gelt him, and that he was utterly undone. At the first this Vox exclamantis did beget such a Laughter in us, that we were not able to speak to him; but yet at the last, by giving the Fellow good words, and good Wine, he made him a perfect man again. This was but deceiving of the Senses, and so not done, or if done, the work of the Devil.Lib 9. Rhodoginus makes mention of one Syreneus, that would run his Horse a straws breadth a Mile together, and make him amble, cur∣vet, trot, pace, and gallop within the compass of a Bushel. Martin Berrhaus reports, that he saw a Dancer carry two men on his shoulders, two on his arms, and one upon
his neck, yet would dance and vaunt with such agility, that a Baboon with his drinking-glasse could not tumble nimbler. Rhodoginus and Erasmus makes mention of an Indian, that by a trick he had learnt of a Witch,l. 12. c. 40 would shoot through the narrow circumference of a small Hoop-ring, standing a furlong off. Julius Piscarius reports,Quiuti. l. 2. c. 2. that a Dice-player (who commanded, that after he was dead, his skin should be made a Cafpet for Gamesters to play on, his bones Dice to play with, and Tressels for stooles to sit on) by a Ma∣gicall trick he had, would cheat the most cheatingst Gamester. Therefore, if these that are but Mataotechnia, vain imitations of Art, seem so wonderfull to people beholding them on Stages and Theaters: how lesse miraculous is it, if the devil by Elements can make stranger apparences, or by secret inspirations delude the sense, by framing the Phantasmes of Images, by which he will deceive men running,Phantas. sleeping, or walking? Why may not these Spirits be turned into as many shapes as Diomedes companions were, that were in the Island called Diomede, not far from the mountain Gar∣ganus, that is in Apulea? Why not as well as Ʋlysses companions, that were turned into beasts, and whom Circes the famous Sorceresse inchanted? Why not as well as the Arcadians, that were turned into Wolves? Why may not there be a transmutation in these incorpo∣reall spirits, as in these terrestriall bodies? And why may not there be as strange Metamorphosis in these dayes, as there was in the dayes of Ovid and Varro? nay I will stand to it, that in these dayes there are as marvellous changes and more true, for I have known a Gallant that at the age of fiveteen, hath been a pregnant witty youth, but before twenty he hath been turned into a right Asi∣nego. There have been many Citizens that have been very
handsome personable men in the morning, who before the Exchange hath been done, have been turned into monstrous beasts. There are many tradesmen that at their first setting up have been very honest men, but after the third or fourth breaking, have been turnd into most fearful Sergeants. I have known many that have been accounted wise fellows in the University, that have no sooner peept into the Temples, or one of the Innes of Court, but have been transformed in∣to monstrous Asses. Then seeing there is such a transmu∣tation in earthly bodies, why should we think it so strange and rare in incorporeall spirits? Yet these and the like are not recited as if they were true, but to shew how the senses may be deluded. and the like may appear by those women that oftentimes are perswaded that they are riding on the backs of beasts. Yet for all this, I will not grant there is any virtue in the words or charms of a Negromancer to raise up these forms. Also there is no virtue in those cere∣moniall Exorcisms, with which Priests exorcise Wine, Salt, Water, and the like, which I will manifestly shew you. First, in respect of the Matter, for the Matter is but Aire, or Water, or Ink; which can have no virtue in them, for by that reason, every substance of the like kind should have the same virtue. Secondly, in respect of the Accidentall Form, which is nothing else but a configuration of divers Characters, either in writing or speaking, for Phylosophy teacheth that Accidentall forms have no Action of them∣selves. Thirdly, in respect of the thing signified, as the word fire to burn this paper, or the word Death to kill this Man, or the word God, to save this Soul, or to raise up any dead body; which cannot be: for the name of God cannot do it. But God must be invocated by true Faith, whereby he is often pleased to grant our requests. But Conjurers and Astrologers use the name of God in another kind, and other Ceremonies, which rather drive away divine Grace and Virtue then procure it, and so much the more they sin, by how much the more they take
the name of God in vain, and to the worship of the De∣vill. Therefore to conclude this Treatise of Divination, I will prove both by the Divine, Imperiall, and Canon Law, that it is not lawfull to be used. The Divine Law saith: Thou shalt not suffer such Ma∣lefactours to live. A man or a woman in whom the Spi∣rit of Divination is found, let them dye the death: Let them be stoned to death, and let their bloods be upon their own heads. Also the Holy Ghost in another place saith: Let that Soul that is inclined to Southsayers be slain in the midst of the people. The Imperiall Law commands, that they should be beheaded, or be put to any kind of punish∣ment the Judge shall think most convenient and fitting. The third daughter of Superstition is vain Observati∣tion, which teacheth to know future things either good or bad, as to tell whether a man condemned to be hanged, shall dye that death or no, which is but a meer roguery and cheating. For this notorious Art, is nothing but a vain superstition,Canen exira de sortilegiis partosum. Ars no∣toria. nay indeed a most notorious piece of Rogue∣ry, working by Figures, Characters, and unknown names also containing many speeches, concluding in them strange and unknown significations, which a man must learn and repeate, alwayes observing a continency in his Diet, and sometimes to punish and macerate himself, would not do amisse, if he mean to attain to the perfect knowledge of this science,Quest. 96. Art. 1. which Thomas Aquinas quaest. 96. art. I doth utterly deny: For, he saith, he that doth use this, can attain to no such kind of knowledge, and that the De∣vil invoked by it, cannot infuse any knowledge, or illumi∣nate the intellect, although he is able to deliver the rudi∣ments of some kind of Art; for the devil doth onely work to infatuate and befoole them that exercise or study it. Nor is it available for any Doctour in this Art, to pro∣duce the Examples of Daniel and his fellows, who ab∣staining from meat and drink, came to such a perfect know∣ledge; for they did not abstain from those meats by the
vain observation of this notorious Art, but least that they should be defiled with the meat of the Gentiles, which was forbidden them by God: therefore not without de∣sert they were indued with knowledge above the rest. And Solomon begging knowledge of God to govern his people, did obtain it of the Holy Ghost. Other vain Ob∣servations of this Art, divine Augustine hath learnedly confuted. Lib. 2. de Doctrina Christiana. Thus farr Milton. W. R. his SECT. II. of CHAP. IV. wherein he saith, the Doctours Objection touching the di∣versity of Twins, is refelled. As also some other quirks against Astrology examined and convinced. HIs second Argument or Reason against Astrology is, saith he, from clear experience in Twins conceived at the same instant, and born in the same hour or less. Now M. Homes had done well to have made this his clear experience, as clear to his Reader, by demonstration or example, and not to content himself with his bare word, this is but one Doctours opinion; but will he say, that all Twins are conceived at the very same instant of time? Sure he will not; but admit some are, yet will he not affirm they are therefore born in the same instant of time; I will appeal to any one of discretion and under∣standing in such matters, if it hold with reason, that two Children should be born both together; and to make it more clear, that all Twins are not conceived at one and the same instant of time, I refer him to the perusal of Aristotle, Pliny, Cardanus, Dodoneus, &c. But let me ask him what he thinketh of the Story of Proconesia, who as the story goes, lying with her Master, and his Man her Fellow∣servant, both in one day; conceived by both, and brought forth one Childe like the Master, and the other like the
Man. Wherefore the first part of his Argument is not a∣vailable; neither (upon good consideration) will his fol∣lowing words;  for he confesses himself that the nearest time of their Birth is, in the same hour or less, when all that knows any thing in Astrology, knows that four mi∣nutes of time in the Birth, gives near upon a years time in directions;  wherefore certainly when he made such clear experience in the Birth of Twins, they were not born in the same instant, but at least four and four and four mi∣nutes difference, for the nearest time he confesses, may be somewhat less then an hour; which certainly must breed very much difference indeed; wherefore except he could have proved that they were born both at an instant, or give us an example of any such that he hath made clear experience of, his Argument and Reason is a meer sophi∣stical Cavil. And whereas he alleadgeth, that Pharez and Zara did put forth themselves interchangeably in one hour; but how he can prove it was in one hour, is I be∣lieve too hard a Task for him to do, he having no War∣rant therefore, from the Word of God. But all this is no∣thing to the point, for though Zarah put forth his hand first, and for distinction had a red Thread tied about it, yet he plucked it back again, and Pharez was born before him, Gen. 38. v. 29. He brings the Example of Jacob and Esau to condemn Astrology, which is far weaker: For all that is acquainted with that story in the Scripture, knows that Esau was born first, and after him came his Brother Jacob; and that this is clear, the Scripture fur∣ther saith, The Younger shall serve the Elder, Ergo, they were not born at one instant of time, and therefore I may very well conclude, that this Cavil serveth no whit to the condemnation of Astrology; since for ought he can prove to the contrary, (or any one can tell) they were born ma∣ny hours distant, and so consequently they must needs have severall Significatours at their Birth, which will cause ve∣ry much diversity of manners, fortunes, form, and shape,
&c. But if he will tell me there was so small difference in the time, as that Jacob had hold on his Brothers heel; I say, that yet notwithstanding, doth this prove them to be born at one and the same time; but that there was so much time betwixt their Births, as may cause much difference in most matters of their Lives: but admit this Objection, any understanding man knows it could no wise stand ei∣ther with the safety of the Mother or Childe, that he should be thus born with one hand before all the body. And again, since it is no wise possible in nature, that Twins should be born both at the same instant of time; this his frivolous Cavil is of no use, unfitly brought for the mat∣ter in question; and altogether inconsistent with reason. But this by the way; we come to his example of Jacob and Esau, which he saith, by reason of their Differences, confuteth Astrology: but if he could prove all the dif∣ference that possibly could be imagined, yet is not this a sufficient ground for him to condemn Astrology, sith it hath nothing to do with Divine providence, or matters be∣yond the common course of Nature; which may evidently appear, that this Birth of Jacob and Esau is, by the story of their Conception, which you may see was absolutely a thing beyond the power of Nature; for their Mother Rebecca (the Scripture telleth us) was barren: where∣fore this being so, this I say alone, is enough to silence all that he can say against Astrology, by this Example of Jacob and Esau. But sure, notwithstanding, if one should particularly examine their lives, one should hardly finde such great difference between them as could justly be al∣lead ged to condemn Astrology;  for if we look to their qualities, they were both Princes, if to the number of their Wives and Children, look into the Antiquities of the Jews, viz. Philo, and you will finde their Children were alike in number within one, and we know that Jacob had Leah, Rachel, Billa, and Zilpah, to his Wives, four: and Esan, Bathshemah, Mahalah, Adah, and Aholiba∣mach,
four: also, if we again look to their Riches or Wealth, they were both so abundantly wealthy, as that one Country was not able to contain them both: but if any one say, they differed in the matter of their birth-right: I answer, that this simple Objection is of no validity; for, Astrology is not to decide or premonstrate, or foreknow the cause of Divine matters, neither the secret will of God, which that this was Gods secret will, there is none but knows;  for, as he was chosen to be the root or founda∣tion of God's people; so by the obtaining of the birth-right of his Brother, did clearly premonstrate, both this his Election, and the power of his Seed, to exceed the power of the others Seed, being the Elder: And here I may also add, they were both roots and foundations of two great Nations: but as this maketh neither for, nor against Astrology, It may be (saith he) they will reade us a Lecture of difference from magnitudes and motions, which Answer I must confess sutes just well enough with the Question, neither of them both being fully to any purpose; but to be farther satisfied herein, let him look Ptolomy, lib. 3. cap. 7. of his Quadripartite, where he shall be clearly taught the Reasons of Differences in Twins, and convinced of his erroneous Cavil, that they are born at the same instant of time; it is not from magnitudes or motions, though somewhat might be said thereon, and that so much, as that I believe would trouble him to answer;  but let that pass, and hear how he questi∣ons and answers for and against Astrology, if so (saith he) if the ☽ be less then the Earth according to Kecker∣man at least twenty times, and the rest of the Planets be∣low the ☉, as ♀ twenty seven times less then the Earth, and ☿ twenty two times, how then shall these at any po∣sture, at one and the same time effect or signifie any thing to all the world? It is the opinion indeed (and with very much reason) of all the Mathematicians and Astrolo∣gers that ever writ, that these three Planets under the Sun
are less then the Earth, but amongst the most learned of them there is much dispute of the certain magnitude there∣of; but how equivalent this Quirk is against Astrology is wonderfull! A Candle is not able to give light to a Bowl, or any thing as big as a Peck, because it is so much bigger then the Candle; when we know and commonly see that it will give light to a great spacious Room, a thou∣sand times bigger then it self; we know and see, that the influence of a Planet extends it self ten thousand times be∣yond its visible light to our sight; but to come closer to the matter, hath not the ☽, ☿ and ♀, their ✶, □, △ dexter and sinister, and ☌, to all and every part or ut∣most parts of the Heavens (that are millions of times bigger then both them and the Earth) according to their severall motions? And hath not these Aspects as much power and influence, as a perpendicular ☌? and whereas he asketh, what is the difference of Natures in Twins? when the superiour Planets are proportionably bigger then the Earth, but sure he never read that part of Ptolomy, which I before cited, concerning the severall Significatours in Twins, which is the onely cause and reason that can be given for his frivolous Quirk: but as he questions to bring his bald Arguments about, so he answers his own Questi∣ons in hopes to confirm them; If (saith he) this is because of the swift external violent motion of the Stars; why then I again demand how the Stars can have time to make any distinct impression by any particular influence on one born, especially on one who perhaps may lie in the mouth of the womb partly born, partly unborn; for a quarter or half an hour, or many hours; when the motion of the Zodiack is sixty times sixty miles in an hour, which is sixty miles compleat in one minute. But to answer to this weak Cavil, I shall say no more, but that though the Heavens be so swift, yet in compari∣son of us it is not so much as an inch is to ten thousand Miles; for we see by daily experience, that the ☉ (who is
also by the same violence (contrary to his own natural course) carried in like manner) doth not as to us move at all in two or three hours;  for mark how small a thing in a Diall gives this sixty Miles in a minute; so that this doth no whit at all hinder the influence of the Stars, if they should be hurried ten times swifter; for this great course is in relation to the circumference of the Heavens, not of the Earth: besides we know that those Signes that are of longer ascensions, as are ♋, ♌, ♍, ♎, ♏, ♐, are some∣times an hour and a half, nay, perhaps two hours ascend∣ing or in the first House, and so consequently may be in any House. And for his long continuance of the Infant in the mouth of the womb,VV this may somewhat refell, but there is no Astrologer that will take that part of a Birth, or the be∣ginning of the Mothers Travell, to be the Ground or Radix of the Infants Nativity; but that instant in which He or She is perfectly seperated from the womb, and entred the elementary world, since no man can pro∣perly call that a Birth, which is but half expelled, or but half perfected, when also sometimes the Infant may draw back again. Saith he, If Astrologers will plead any thing to help themselves herein from the slowness of other motions of the Stars, that are natural to them, viz. that the fixed Stars, move with so slow a motion from North to South back a∣gain, as that their courses are not finished in less then seven thousand years; Now I would very fain know of any ra∣tional man, how this Answer of his in the behalf of Astro∣logers, is able to avail them a rush, or himself in his pur∣pose, since they are also hurried with the like violence a∣foresaid, every twenty four hours once about the Earth? But as all these his Quirks are brought into his advantage (as he thinks,) so the advantage he strives to gain hereby, he may brag of, as much as of the former; for all this his gain is but the opportunity of this Question, viz. How
then can any age since the beginning of the world have experience, what the conjunction of the Stars may pro∣duce? This is a great Conquest indeed, but how slender an Artist he herein renders himself, let the judicious judge, since it is most certain that these stars we call fixed, move not at all; Ergo, are nominated fixed, for they move unanimously together in their sphere, which is about seven thousand years finishing its course, not the Stars; but suppose they do move, yet they move not by several motions, as the one being slower or swifter then another, for they are all alike distant each from other continually, and if these come not to aspect nor conjunction of the Pla∣nets; yet the Planets come to configuration with them, as Saturn commeth in configuration of them once in 29. years some odd moneths and dayes; Jupiter in twelve years, Mars in three years, Sol in one year or twelve moneths, Venus and Mercury in the like time or there abouts, the Moon in twenty eight dayes and some odd houres. I hope then this experience may be learned in a far shorter time then seven or eight thousand years; and since these is so apparently and vulgarly known, it is suf∣ficient ground for any one to take the exact position of the heavens, either in Twinns births or any others, with∣out the errour that these motions he speaketh of can cause, which indeed is none at all. SURVEY. The annexing of the Doctours second Argument will be a sufficient reply to these extravagan∣cies of Will. Ramsey. The Doctours second Argument was word for word, thus. The second Argument is from cleer experience of Twins conceived at the same instant, and born in the same houre, or lesse, and it may be, put forth themselves in part, at the womb interchangeably in that houre, (as Pharez. and Zara did, Gen. 38.) yet before God put any diffe∣rence by any inward change by grace, the Twinns may be
of an apparent vast difference of complexion as we see in Jacob and Esau. And experience knowes of other Twins, either both naturall or both spirituall, that far different events in the world have befallen them. Where then is the certainty of Star-predictions? Where is the verity of Astrology? It may be they will reade us a lecture of dif∣ference from magnitudes and motions of Stars; that some are bigger then the earth some lesser; again, that some fi∣nish some motions in 24. hours; others not other moti∣ons in so many scores of years, or more. But if this be their defence, the matter of predicting Astrology is there∣by made to be more incredible. For if (as they say with Keckerman) the Moon be lesse then the earth, at least twenty times, and the rest of the Planets below the Sunne proportionably, as Venus twenty seven times lesse then the earth, and Mercury twenty two; how then shall these at any posture, at any one and the same time, effect or si∣gnifie any thing to all the world? For all the Astrologers in the World will undertake to prognosticate from these Planets upon all men on Earth, born at one and the same houre. If the Sunne as they confesse, be about an hun∣dred and sixty times bigger then the Earth; and all the Planets above the Sun proportionably; as that Saturn is fourscore and eleven times bigger then the Earth; Jupiter fourscore and fifteen times; Mars one time bigger, with one third; how then is it that there is difference of na∣tures and events in thousands born at the same hour, and especially n Twins, as we said afore. If they say that this is because of the swift externall violent motion of all the Stars Planets, and Fixed; that they are hurryed round the Earth by the first moveable from East to West, &c. in twenty four hours; which is to run sixty times sixty miles in every houre, then we demand how can the Stars have time to make any distinct impression by any particular in∣fluence on one houre, cspecially on one who perhaps may lie in the mouth of the womb, partly born, partly un∣born,
sometimes in the head and foreparts, sometimes in the hinder parts, for a quarter or half an houre, or many hours. Or what Astrologer upon the swiftnesse of those motions, and the slownesse of the birth, which cannot be born in an instant, but at best gradually, shall be able to prognosticate punctually that such Stars, with such in∣flnence, did so complexionate such an Infant at such a Mi∣nute of time? For by the computation aforesaid, the Stars run in the said motion, in every minute of the houre sixty Miles. If Astrologers will plead any thing to help themselves herein, from the slownesse of other motions of the Stars, that are naturall, and internall to them; as that all the fixed Stars (which are known by their twinck∣ling to our sight) move from North to South (as they say, so Alsted) in three thousand five hundred years, and back again in three thousand five hundred years, so that they finish not that motion under seven thousand years; how then can any Age since the beginning of the World have experience what the Conjunction of the Stars may produce? So for the motions of the seven Pla∣nets: If they say (as Keckerman, &c. affirm) that the Sun hath three Orbs: First, that in which the Sun it self is fixed, and is the middle Orb, and is excentricall to the World; that is, The World, or Earth is not just in the middle of it; by reason whereof the Sun is sometimes in the Perige, namely nearer the Earth for some moneths; and sometimes in the Apoge, to wit, more remote from the Earth, for other moneths. And in this Eccentrick Orb the Sun moves, as they say, according to the succes∣sion of the twelve Signs from West to East, not finishing that motion under three hundred sixty five dayes, and a∣bout six hours. And withall as they assert, that by rea∣son of this Orb the Sun moves as in relation to the centre of the earth, one while swifter, another while slower; that is to say, it moves slower whiles it is on the Northern part of the World, lingering there an hundred eighty six
dayes, eight hours, and twelve minutes; but runs swift∣er on the Southern part of the World, dispatching its race in an hundred seventy eight dayes, one and twenty hours, and twelve minutes; and so stay es longer with some of the Signs (as they say) and lesse while with others. And that secondly, The Sun hath, as they say, a supreme Orb contiguously adjoyned above to the aforesaid Orb. Thirdly, an inferiour Orb, in like manner adjoyned be∣neath to the said middle Orb, both partly Concentrick, partly Eccentrick (the use of which two Orbs, as held forth by Astronomers, I shall not here stay to relate.) And the motion of those two extreme Orbs, is, as they confesse, very slow, so that they finish not their course, which is like some motion of the eighth Sphear, under fourty nine thousand of years (as Keckerman affirms.) All which makes me again demand, how any men could ever attain to a certain experience of Conjunctions of Stars, seeing this number of fourty nine thousand extends it self to an age above seven times older then the creation of the Stars. It would be two tedious to recite all the severall Orbs and motions of all the other Planets, according to the common opinion; as, that the Moon hath five Orbs, some of which move swifter then those of the Sun, put∣ting her twice every moneth in her Apoge or exaltation, and twice in her Perige or descention, with differences in both, that in the same Apoge it is sometimes higher and sometimes lower, and so in the same Perige; and hath one motion that is not finished under eighteen years, seven moneths, and about twelve hours. That Saturn hath a motion whose course takes up thir∣ty years; Jupiter one of twelve, Mars one of two, Ve∣nus of one. And Mercuries motion (as Ceckerman af∣firms) Est admodum varius imo magna parte adhuc in∣cognitus; that is, It is wonderfull various, yea for the most part yet unknown. Now lay all these varieties and
uncertainties together, and then judge what certainty of experience there can be had of the conjunctions of Stars, just so long and so much, as to make such a sure impressi∣on of such influences and efficacies on men in the birth, as may duly and truly prognosticate, that so shall such a man be, and do; but so another, especially in Twinnes. Thus the Doctours second Argument. By which it is apparent that Will. Ramsey did neither rightly take, nor truly report the dint of the Doctours Argument, but runnes out into many extravagancies; which notwith∣standing, for the better clearing the coasts round about the Argument, we will a little take into consideration. To that at (A) about the Doctours not bringing of an Example touching Twins; we say, that the Doctour did bring examples; See the Doctour second Argument (afore inserted) at the mark (**); which if need be might be named; though he then forbare in civility to the persons and their generations. To that he adds of one Doctours opinion; it is sufficient for me to shew Will. false tongue, by minding the Reader that Doctour Homes did shew Doctour Austins opinion touching Twinns, that the consideration of the diversity of them, born so near at the same time is a great Argu∣ment against Astrology; as is to be seen in the Doctours Demonology Chap. 10. Sect. 5. At the end of that Section, in answer to the Ob∣jection, that Austin should say Astrologia perscrutanda est, &c. inserted after in this Treatise. See also in this Chapter following. And if it hath not been enough to give Will. Ramsey Austin by retale, yet by this time in this Reply he is given him in whole-sale, with his large discourse upon that Argument of Twinns, against Astro∣logy, (in answer to Will. Ramsey Sect. 3. of chap. 2.) the said Will. Ramsey will have his belly full of two Do∣ctours opinions, jumping in the same truth. In that at (B) in asserting that Twinns are not con∣ceived
at the same instant of time, and his Ʋtopian Quo∣tations of Aristotle, Pliny, Cardan, Dodon at (D.) in tending to make us believe what he could not shew, Will. Ramsey shews his ignorance, though he pretends to be a Physician (a sucking one). For in reason the formative part of the womb must needs be most tenaciously shut up for cherishing the conception as soon as the semen is clasp∣ed within it. And ancient experienced Physicians have demonstrated it to the eye by corporeall diagrammes. Add the authority of that universall great Scholar in all Arts, Sciences, and Divinity, Augustine, and the learned whome he quotes. Possidonius a Stoick (saith Austin de Civit. Dei cap. 2.) and one much affected to Astrology, laboureth to prove that the two Brethren whom Hippo∣crates supposed to be twinns, by the samenesse of their diseases, at the same time, were both not onely born, but also conceived under one and the same constellation, which must needs be in the same moment, or else the con∣stellation is altered, in regard of the swift motion of the heavens, running (as the Astrologers confesse) sixty miles in a minute of an houre. And Austin in his sixth cha∣pter saith expressly and peremptorily, That it is mani∣fest, that in conception there is but one generative act con∣current. For natures power is such, that a woman ha∣ving once conceived, cannot Second any conception, untill she be delivered of the child. And therefore it is necessa∣ry that the Twinns conception fall both in one moment. To that at (C) and (K) of Will. Ramsey contend∣ing that Twinns are not born together, or at the same in∣stant; it will be sufficient to say, no man did affirm it, and therefore Will. Ramsey doth but fight with his own phantasie. For Will. Ramsey his Legend of Proconesia, at (E) it comes to nothing, if we dare believe Learned pious Au∣stin, afore Will. Ram. his ignorance. Austins very words are these, de Civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 2. Twins cannot pos∣sibly
have diversitie of Fathers. And learned Lemnius a Physician, shews other reasons of the different faces of children of the same Father, To that at (F. G. H.) of the difference of a few minutes, and the impossibility of the same instant to fi∣nish the birth of Twinns, as if the Doctour had forgot that all Locomotive motion is in time; Austin shall an∣swer; Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 2, & 3. whose very words are these Neither Possidonius, nor any Patron of this Fate in the Stars, can tell what to say in this case of Twinns, if he will not illude the simple, and ignorant, with a discourse of that they know not. For, that they talk of the Space of Time, between that point they call the Horoscope in both the Twins Nativities; it is either not so significant, as the diversity of will, acts, manners and fortunes of the Twinns born do require; or else it is more significant then their difference of honours, state, nobility, or meannesse will permit; both which diversities they place onely in the figure of Nativities. And if they should be both born ere the Horoscope were fully varied, then would I require a Ʋnity in each particular of their fortunes, which cannot be found in any two Twinns that ever yet were born. But if the Horoscope be changed, ere both be born, then for this diversitie I will require a difference of Fathers, which Twinns cannot possibly have. Frustrate therefore is that notable fiction of the Potters wheel, which Nigidius (they say) answered one that plunged him in this con∣troversie, whereupon he was called the Potter. Turn∣ing a Potters wheel twise, or thrise about as fast as he could, he took ink, and in the turning made two marks (as it seemed) in one place of the wheels edge, and then staying the wheel, the marks were found far asun∣der one from another upon the edge of the wheel: Even so (saith he) in the swift course of heaven, though one child be born after another in as short a time as I gave
these two marks; yet in the heavens will be passed a great space, And that (quoth he) is the cause of the di∣versity of conditions, and fortunes betwixt two Twins. here is a figment now farr more brittle then the pots that were made by the wheel. For if there be thus much power in heaven (and yet cannot be comprehnnded by the constellations) that one of the Twins may be an heir, and inherit, and not the other; how dare those Astro∣logians give such presages unto others that are not Twins, when, as they are included in those secret points in Nativities, which none can comprehend? But if they say they do prognosticate this to others, because they know it belongeth unto the known, and discerned spaces that passe in Nativities, and that those moments that may come between the births of two Twins, do but con∣cern slight things, and such as the Astrologian useth not to be troubled with: For no man will ask the calcula∣tour, when he shonld sit, walk, or dine? how can this be said, when we shew such diversity, in the manners, states, actions, and fortunes of two Twins. To that at [I] touching Pharez and Zara, the reply is easy and home: that what space soever was between their births, and which soever was born first; yet being they did in part interchangeably put forth themselves at the womb, which was the exposing of themselves to the influence of the heavens according to the Astrologers doctrin, (putting so much weight upon mens births) as likewise Jacobs continued successive birth after Esau; Jacobs hand holding Esau's heel; so that the first is not wholly born, till the other be born in part, is argument enough, to prove that the Aspect of Constellations upon the birth of such Twinnes, is exceeding uncertain; and so the Astrologicall prediction as groundless. Which Austin doth notably argue out, (which may serve for a full answer to W. Ram. his frabble about Jacob and Esau) thus:Aug. de Civi. at. Der lib. 4. In the ancient memory of our forefathers (to
speak of them of note) were two Twinnes born, so near together, that the second held the first by the heel; yet in their lives, manners, and actions, was such disparitie, that that very difference made them enemies, one to another. I mean not this, that the one sat when the other stood; nor that the one slept, when the other waked; these belong to those first marks and moments, which they cannot comprehend, who erect those figures of nativi∣ty for the Astrologers to judge upon. One of them bound himsef to serve for wages, the other served not at all: the one was loved by his mother, so was not the o∣ther: the one lost his honour, and inheritance (a matter of great moment among them) the other obtained it. And how great a difference was there in their marriag∣es, wives, children, and goods? Exceeding much. Thus Austin, whom we have reason to believe farr before false tongu'd W. Ram. [at L. M. N. O. P. R.] or his Forged Philo (as the learned call him) whom W.R. there quotes; or his Ptolomy quoted at [S] At [T] Wil. Ram. consuteth himself. For if as a Candie being lesse then a Bowl, cannot shine light round about that Bowl, so the Planets that are less then the Earth, cannot shine round it; how then, can they pour down any influence at the same minute on the whole round of the Earth, in which many thousands of infants are born, whose nativities all Astro∣logers will cast, and from them all, undertake to predict? And for his intimation that the dexter and sinister, that is, the oblique and indirect Aspects of Starrs have as much power and influence, as those that are direct and perpen∣dicular; it is contrary to plain sence. For the sun doth not so enlighten or heat with its oblique aspect, as when it is perpe ndicular over us. And the Moon comes to her loss of light, and to be of less operation, by the oblique aspect of the sun on it, and of it on the Sunne; in comparison of the Moon at full; ut which time (as Wil. confest afore) the powerof the Moon is greater on things below,
But because there hath been such oft mention of Astra∣logical influences:The dan∣gerous∣ness of Astrogi∣call do∣ctrins and in∣fluences. let us enquire of the Astrologers them∣selves, what these influences are. For by their vote, they seem to be no less then a part of Magic and Incarnation, or the appertenance thereof. Agrippa in his book of Oc∣cult Philosophy tels us, that Omnia inferiora esse Idea∣ta a superioribus Ideis &c. that is,H. Cor. Agri. Oc. Phil. I. 1. c. 11. That all inferiour bodies are Ideated or exemplified with inferiour Idea's, by the superiour idea's. An Idea is a form above bodies, souls, minds, and to be but one simple, part immutable, indivisible, incorporeal, and incorporeal, and eternal. And that the nature of all Idea's is the same. They say that Idea's are first in God himself, by way of cause, and that they are distinguished among themselves, by some relative considerations onely, lest whatsoever is in the world, should be one thing without any variety; and that they agree in essence, lest God should be a compound essence. In the second place, they place them in the very Intelligible it self, that is, in the Soul of the world, differing the one from the other by absolute formes. So that all the Idea's in God indeed are but one forme; but in the soul of the wold, they are many. They are placed in the minds of all other things: whe∣ther they be joyned to the body, or separated from the body, by a cetain participation, and now by degrees are distinguished more and more. They are placed in nature, as certain small seeds of formes infused by the I∣dea's. And lastly they place them in matter as sha∣dowes. Hereunto may be added, that in the soul of the world, there be as many Scienciall Formes of things, as Idca's in the mind of God, by which Formes she did in the Heavens, above the Starrs, frame to her self shapes also, and stamped upon all these some properties; Therefore, on these starres, shaps, and properties, all vir∣tues of inferiour species, as also their properties do depend: so that every; species hath it's celestiall shape or figure
that is sutable to it, from which also proceeds a wonderful power of operating, which proper gift it receives fromit's own Idea, through the seminal formes of the soul of the world. &c. The same Agrippa in the same book, cap. 13. hath these words Provenit ergo virtus primò ab Ideis &c. i.e. The form therfore and virtue of things come's first from the Idea's, then from the ruling and governing Intelligences, then from the Aspects of the Heavens disposing, and Lastly from the tempers of the Elements disposed, answering the influences of the hea∣vens, by which the elements themselves are ordered, or disposed. These kinds of operations therefore are per∣formed in these inferiour things, by express formes, and in the heavens by disposing virtues, in Intelligencies, by mediating rules, in the originall cause by Idea's, and ex∣emplary formes, all which must of necessity agree in the execution of the effect, and virtue of every thing. And the same Agroppa in the same Treatise lib. 2. cap. 53. (whose title is, That no divination without Astrology is perfect) writes thus. We have spoken (saith Agrippa) in the foregoing Chapters, of diverse kinds of divinati∣ons, but this is to be noted, that all these require the use, and rules of Astrology, as a key most necessary for the knowledge of all Secrets, and That all kinde of divinati∣ons whatsoever, have their root and foundation in Astro∣logy, so as without it they are of little or no use. There∣fore whether the Physiognomists look upon the body, or countenance, or forehead, or head, or the Southsayer serch∣eth by Dreams or Auspicy, that the judgement may be right the figure of heaven is also to be enquired into &c. And in his next chapter, he sheweth how Astrology con∣curs to help divination by lotts. He that will have more of this, let him read Cornelius Agrippa his occult philosophy, of which we have here given you a tast: by which you may evidently perceive the diabolicalness of Judiciall Astrolo∣gy and the abominable meaning of Judiciall Astrologicall
influencies. And therfore we had little need affore to be∣stow the pains to answer W. Ram. about the signification of the words, Augurate, inchant, witchcraft, &c. when Cornelius Agrippa one of Wil. Ram. Astrologicall tribe openly confesseth that Astrology concurs to All Divinati∣ons of what Sort soever. But to go on with W. R. silly discourse at [T] whereas (saith Wil.) the Doctour asketh what is the difference of natures in Twinnes, when the superiour places are propor∣tionably bigger then the earth, but sure he never read that part of Ptolomy, concerning the several significato rs in Twins which is the cause of his frivolous Quirck. Now Reader, is this an answer to the Doctous. I pray thee read afore, that marked with {inverted ⁂} (where the Do∣ctours words do fitlyer put the question that W. Ram. here reports) and then judge. Surely thou mayest easily con∣clude that as W. Ram. cause is astrologicall Inchaut∣ment; so his defence is base jugling. He tels us the Do∣ctour hath not read Ptolomy; and before, at [S] he tels us that Ptolomy l. 3. cap. 7. of his Quadripartit. shews us the reasons of the differences of Twins. But nor here nor there doth he produce a line out of Ptolomy to convince the Doctour, or to clear the mind of the Reader. He tels the Doctour afore quoting the words of Keckerman and &c, he should have made good the matter of those quota∣tions: But W. Ram. here neither gives us the words of his quotations, nor his own applications, that we might have an hint to what to give an answer. And therefore I must pass from this, leaving onely a story with William; but I think I must be fain to apply it for him. One Mr. F. C. of H. in Hartford-shier, a rich Gentleman, and a Schollar of much reading, but greatly affected with a re∣tired life, was wont to say unto me; I might (said he) have been a Justice of Peace, and have had offenders brought afore me, and when I had wanted wit, what to do with them, I might have bound them over to the
Quarter-Sessions. So W. Ram. undertakes to be a judge in this great Question of Judiciall Astrology, (too heavy for his infant shoulders) and when he finds he wants wit what to answer to many objections, then he referres the Reader to Ptolomy, or to Sir Christopher Heyden. To that at [V] Will. shall answer Will. here he saith, though the heavens be so swift, yet in comparison of us it is not so much as an inch to ten thousand Miles: and backs it with a lie apparently against sense, viz. we may see (saith W. R.) that the Sun doth as to us move at all in two or three hours. And but a little afore at [F] quite contrary he hath these words, All that know any thing in Astrology, know that four minutes of time in the Birth, gives near up∣on a years time in directions. Let them reconcile this with that, who can. 'Tis no help for Will. to talk of Quo∣ad nos, as to us, when he is to answer quoad rem to the nature of the thing. Romae Tybur amat, vento sus Tybure Romam. He shoggles in the socket of his principles: when he is non-plussed with the swifnesse of the heavens: then to us their motion is but slow, viz. not so much as an inch to ten thousand miles: (which is a grosse untruth. For according to our ordinary sun-dials on walls, and towres, the sun runnes a degree, that is three thousand six hundred miles in an hour, which is an inch upon the Dial.) And when Ill-Will is confounded with the slowness of the mo∣tion of others of the heavens, then four minutes difference of time, gives near a years time in direction: Which is also a gross untruth quoad veritatem rei, if we speak ac∣cording to the truth of the thing, and not according to the Diabolicall traditions, received by Judiciall Astrolo∣gers. For not any of the Planets, much less the fixed Starrs, do finish their daily motions in four or four hund∣red minutes, as we heard but now; but in each hour con∣teyning sixty minutes, run three thousand six hundred miles. And none but the Moon wholly finisheth any other
motion, in a Moneth. And in every minute, the whole constellation of all the Starres, is quite different, the hea∣vens running in their daily motion in each minute, sixty miles. Therefore strong must the principles of Judiciall Astrology be, that lay the stress of their certainty of their Astrologicall predictions upon the Aspect of the heavens; yet will now (suppose at this pre sent minute) prognosticate from an aspect that is passed three minutes after, that is, is gone ninescore miles off; for W. Ram. (if we follow his words) takes in four minutes, into one and the same consideration. And who can truly tell the exact time of his Birth so near as four, or fourteen minutes? And though the great swiftness of the Heavens were (as Will. Ram. saith) in relation to the circumference of the Hea∣vens, and not of the Earth: why then doth Will. and his Fellow Astrologers consider their motion such as it is in re∣lation to earthly Bodies here below? Why do they distin∣guish of their Motions by minutes? Do they not confess (that which they cannot deny) that every half, yea quarter of a minute, by the Conjunction of other Stars (how slow soever the Ascensions of some may be) there is a new, specifically different beam of influence, radiated up∣on the Earth, all taking their circular turns to dart their efficacy, though upon the same Centre-point, if the Earth aad its Bodies were so small? So that let the Heavens be never so swift, their varieties of influences doth touch by turn the things below. Onely here is the Knot (which the Doctour put) not yet solved; how such suddain touches of influences, coming on, and going off, as in a moment, should make any change on the Complexions of men on Earth, so as to specificate them to such a temper by pro∣portion to the temper of the Heavens at such a minute, if the temper of the Constellation of the Heavens at that minute could possibly be known? To VVill. Ram. [instant] of seperation of the Infant from the Womb, to be the Radix of the Infants Nativi∣ty;
we need say no more: but 1. That locomotive moti∣on is the time, not in an instant, Tempus est mensura mo∣tus. Arist. 2. That if a minute is in reason (as hath been argued) too short, by reason of the swift motions of the Heavens, to make, or make known any specifical different impression upon the Infant, how then shall an instant (that is too small to be any part of time) be long enough to be the Radix of a Prognostication from the Nativity. To VVill. Ram. his [I would fain know, the non-mo∣ving of the fixed Stars, and the Planets consiguration with them] noted with [X, Y, Z] a few words will serve. He needed not have been so fain to know, if he had ob∣served the Doctours Argument afore; or to have put the Quere, he would fain know, if like an Artist he had given the Doctour a Logical distinct Answer. His poor sug∣gestion of the fixed Stars motion, once round the Earth. every four and twenty hours, adds nothing but confusion to the solution of the Argument, to Astrological Predicti∣ons, and to William his own words. For presently at [Y] he saith, that the Stars we call fixed, move not at all, &c. Surly Will. Ram. would fain tell us some News if he could: but we cannot gather up any thing but Contra∣dictions. For 1. do not the Planets as well move in and together with their Spheres, as well as the fixed in theirs. 2. If the eighth Sphere be about seven thousand years fi∣nishing its course, then of necessity so long are the Stars fixed in that Sphere, finishing their course. 3. That if some Planets and some fixed Stars should come into con∣figuration in less then seven thousand years, yet perpetual∣ly in every minute many other Stars successively inter∣mingle themselves so, that a distinct and certain Progno∣stick, or experience touching humane Events cannot be ga∣thered from any posture of the Heavens.
W. R. his SECT. III. of CHAP. IV. Wherein the Doctour indeavours to prove Astrology of no truth or certainty, as also its Rules and principles, are themselves of less truth, or ground, nay and indeed sensless. HIs third Argument against Astrology is, to prove the Maximes, Theorems, Axiomes, and Canons of the Art, inconsistent with truth or foundation; but first he denieth absolutely any such (viz. Ground or Princi∣ples) at all to be in the Rules of Astrology, but with what apparent falsehood, that is done, shall appear to the World by these Examples following, being some few Questions and Resolutions, which by my own experience I can against all malicious Adversaries affirm to be most punctually true; wherefore I have thought good here to divulge them to the World, that such envious Carpers at this most true Art, may be for ever silenced, or at least that their perversness may be apparently and vulgarly known in their colours; but see how in veterately they tra∣duce it, notwithstanding millions of the like Examples, which they know not otherwise what to say for them∣selves, unanimously (this surpassing the natural capacities of their profound judgements, when they so clearly see themselves by experience convinced) they presently say, It is impossible this should be true! Sure this is very strange? Nay, I am confident this could not be done by Art! this is a plain dealing with the Devil! It is Witchcraft! and the like simple and malicious Censures, or rather Scandals hereon, but to the business intended. Where Will. Ram. draws three Schemes or Figures. One to shew a Gentle∣man, whether he should receive some Money from his Ʋn∣cle which he expected. The second, to resolve a Gentle∣woman (that said no Astrologer would undertake to re∣solve
an unbelieving Quaerent) whether she should receive any Money from the Parliament? The third, to resolve an incredulous Gentlewoman also: viz. Where her Hus∣band was, and when he would return? And in all these Will. Ram. saith the Prognostications proved true. And he brings them to confure the Doctour's third Argument. For besides these, all the rest in this his third Section, hath no shew of an Answer; and therefore not worthy the transcribing, or reprinting. SURVEY. We will give you in Answer to this Section. 1. The Doctour's third Argument word for word. 2. We will shew you Will. Ram. juggling in the said Schemes or Figures. 3. We will give you Proofs that under Astrology is couched the Assistance of the Devil; and the Quaerents or Consultours confidence in that diabolical Art, as ne∣cessarily concarring to have a true Prediction. 4. The summ, or main Heads of M. Perkins Resolu∣tion to the Countryman; shewing the wickedness of Astro∣logy. 1. The Doctonr's third Argument. The third Argument. All Rules of Sciences & Arts (by the fundamental Position of Artists) are Axiomes, Maxims, Theorems, Canons, &c. that is, Most worthy, and most special Principles, I experiments, or Rules, for their verity and certainty. But such are not the Rules of Astrology. First, because of the for said various varieties and uncer∣tainties of Stars, both in their own motions, and in comparison with others, Secondly, because no man knoweth the particular qualities or essicacies of all the Stars. No Artist yet ever undertook to speak of more then the seven Planets, and some few nominated Fixed Stars of some few several magmtudes; leaving out milli∣ons that are neither named nor knewn. Yea Thirdly, thou∣sands of Stars cannot be so much as seen a minute toge∣ther;
as the Philosophers confess in their Discourse of Via lactea, the Milkie way in the Heavens, to be seen in a most starry Night, especiall in Winter. Fourthly, because all the Stars do shine upon the Earth at once, joyntly and promiscuously; so that they that are under them cannot by any Rule from Nature know what influences shall be predominant in their Effects. Fifthly, they have more time to alter the Complexions of young People from the Cradle to Manhood, carried and walking abroad. I say, to alter their Complexion by radiation and influence; then to stamp an unchangeable impression up∣on them in the secret Chamber of their Birth; as we see many natural Men and Women, not differenced by grace, much altered from Melancholly to chearfulness &c. So that if some Stars in one Position, in an instant at Birth have a power to imprint; other Stars, and perhaps more prevalent, have likewise a power to blot out that in many years, and to instill a new one. Sixthly, there are many Causes below between us and the Stars to alter the influ∣ence of the Stars, or interrupt their native operation; as the various Complexion of the Air, diversity of Windes, the different postures and situations of men, as sometimes under a direct, sometimes under an oblique radiation, &c. Seventhly, Astrologers depend on Clocks and Dials, to know the posture of the Heavens at the hour of their prognosticating; which Dials and Clocks often are false, which may make a wide difference in a minute, in which, as we heard, some motions of the Heavens run sixty Miles. Eighthly the Astrologer cannot be able to allow exactly for the exaltation in the Apoge and descension in the Perige of the Planets, with their swifter motion in the one then in the other, so as o determine justly how much po∣wer of prevalence they may be in their influences at such changes. Ninthly, man can never certainly conclude of a particular Event from a Cause that is most universal, most remote, and o but a partial Cause of the thing pre∣dicted.
But the Stars are no other but such a kinde of cause of mens Complexions and Actions; and theresore are no sure Grounds of Prediction concerning the future affairs of men. The Parents Complexion, divine Dispensa∣tions, occasions, and opportunities among men, and a mans own obedience or disobedience to God, have far more influence into man to dispose him to be, or do this or that, then all the myriads of Stars. Tenthly, Astrology contending for such a power of Stars over the Soul of man (which is the Principle of all Actions) infers as if the Soul of Man were ex traduce, generated by the Pa∣rents. First, contrary to many Scriptures, Psal. 102.18. The people that shall be Created shall praise the Lord. Eccles. 12.7. The spirit returns to God that gave it, whiles the Body returns to Earth. Hebr. 12.9. VVe have had Fa∣thers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits? Secondly, contrary to the Rules of Art. Reason, and Experience, Coelum non agit in animam, &c. The Hea∣vens cannot act directly upon the Soul; nor can a mans Body complexionate, alter, or master his natural spirit. So that the , intelligere, and , velle, the Acts of Reason and Will do not depend on Sense. For in sleep, we have strong Actings of Reason: and when awake, in the time of deepest rational meditations, the Senses are useless, and their Acts suspended, as if we did neither see nor hear. 2. Will. Ram. his juggling in his Figures. It is well worth our observation to see VVill. Ramsey juggling in these his Schemes or Figures, compared with his Epistle to the Reader, and some Passages in his Book. In that Epistle he hath these particulars: 1. That Astrology doth not meddle with Contingences. 2. Mans will is not subject to the influence of Stars. 3. Neither doth Astrology meddle with the providence of God. In his
first Chapter, Section, he defines Astrology to be that which teacheth to prognosticate by the Stars of Natural Effects, &c. But here by his Figures in this Section, he un∣dertakes to tell of Events purely humane, and altogether depending on God's providence in the acting of Man's will; viz. whether the Gentleman should receive his Money from his Ʋncle; the Gentlewoman receive hers from the Parliament; & the other woman know where her Husband was, and when she should see him again? Now let all the World judge whether Astrologers do not juggle with us; professing one thing, but practising another, in the way of their pretended Art? 3. Proofs of the concurrence of wicked Magick, or In∣chantment, and of mans confidence or desire, and conse∣quently of the Devils assistance with and in Judicial Astro∣logical predictions. H.C. Agrippa an Astrologer, in his second Book of Occult Philosophy: cap. 60. hath these words, Non ab aliâ causâ, quàm à coelesti, terrem orbis virtutes prove∣munt. Hinc Magus, &c. that is, The virtues of the terrene Orb. proceed from no other cause then celestial. Hence the Magician that will work by them useth a cunning Invocation of the Superiours, with mysterious words, and a certain kinde of witty Expression, drawing the one to the other, &c. Hence saith Aristotle, in the sixth Book of his Mistical Philosophy, that when any one by binding or bewitching, doth call upon the Sun, or other Stars, praying them to be helpfull to the thing de∣sired, the Sun, and other Stars do not hear his words, but are moved after a certain manner by a certain Con∣junction, and mutual series, whereby the parts of the World are mutually subordinate the one to the other, &c. And though the said Agrippa did in some shew re∣tract some of his devilish Inchamments, or Superstitions; yet in that Retraction he retracteth not this, but there af∣firmeth it, viz. Magna cum Astrologia sic conjuncta,
atque cognita est, &c. that is, That Magick and Astrolo∣gy are so conjoyned, and of near kin, that he that pro∣fesseth Magick without Astrology, doth nothing, but wholly errs from the way. The Book named the Centiloquy asserteth, that No Astrologer is able by meer Art, without the help of a fa∣miliar Spirit, to foretell any particular Event. Ficinus proveth, that Judicial Astrological predictions are managed not by Art, but by instinct. Jamblicus boldly affirmeth, (Lib. de Myst.) Est im∣possibile judicare certos, &c. that is, It is impossible to judge of certain Events, when as we cannot comprehend the concurrence of all Causes, unless we attain it by inspi∣ration, &c. and disputing against Porphyry, saith, that The Lord of the Figure is a Devil. Philostratus writing the life of Apollonius lib. 3. c. 13. (the most famous Magician and Astrologer) saith, that Arcanas libationes per quas Astrologicam facultatem, &c. that is, Jarchas (the chief of the Indian Wizards called Brachmanae) did privately communicate to Apollo∣nius the secret sacrificings by which they did finde out the Astrological faculty, and skill of divining. Touching elevation of minde (either in confidence or desire) hear Cornelius Agrippa in his second Book of Oc∣cult Philosophy. and his 22. Chapter, Nihil materiales, &c. that is, Material Numbers and Figures can do no∣thing in the Mysteries of hid things, but representatively, by formal Numbers and Figures, as they are governed, and informed, by Intelligences, and divine Numerations, which unite the extremes of the matter, and spirit to the will of the Elevated Soul, receiving through great affecti∣on by the celestial power of the Operatour, a Power from God applied through the Soul of the Universe, and obser∣vation of celestial Constellations, to a matter fit for a Form, the mediums being disposed by the skill and indu∣stry of Magicians. And in the same Book, Chapter 54.
the same Agrippa hath these words, Now, that there is in Man's Soul a sufficient power and virtue to direct such kindes of Lots (of Divination) it is hence manifest, be∣cause there is in our Soul a divine virtue, and similitude, and apprehension, and power of all things, and all things have a natural obedience to it, and of necessity have a mo∣tion and efficacy to that which the Soul desires with a strong desire; and all the virtues, and operations of the natural, and artificial things, obey it when it is carried forth into the Excess of Desire, and then all Lots of what kinde soever are assisting to the appetite of such a minde, and acquire to themselves wonderfull virtues of passages, as from that, so from the Celestial Opportunity in that hour in which the excess of such a like Appetite doth most of all exceed in it. And this is that ground and foundation of all Astrological Questions, wherefore the minde being elevated into the excess of any desire, taketh of it self an hour and opportunity most convenient and efficacious, on which the figure of Heaven being made, the Astrologer may then judge in it, and plainly know concerning that which any one desires, and is inquisitive to know. Thus you see how the Mathematicians themselves cast great Blots and Blurrs upon Judicial Astrology; and that in relation to the particulars afore mentioned, viz. of the concurrence of Magick, of the desires and confidence of Clients and Actours, and of the Devil himself. And therefore well may all ingenious men for ever be ashamed to speak in the behalf of Judicial Astrology. 4. Hear what Master Perkins saith, concerning the un∣lawfulness of Astrology in his Book intituled his Resolu∣tion to the Countryman.
A Resolution to the Countrey-man, proving it unlawfull for him to buy or use our yearly Pro∣gnostications by W.P. Not conve∣nient to have Pro∣gnosticati∣ons Rea∣sons: 1. Concern∣ing the buy∣er. 1. Immoderate care, joyn∣ed with distrust in God. 2. Contempt of the provi∣dence of God, in not reverently regarding it. 2. Con∣cerning the ma∣ker 1. His unabi∣lity in Pro∣gnosticating proved 1. By the true end of the hea∣vens. 2. By want of good experi∣ence. 3. By ignorance of particular causes. 2. His manifold untruths. 3. His impieties and profane speeches, and actions, not seeming a Christian. 4. His tricks of deceit.
GOod Reader, I have thought it convenient (for some speciall causes) in this short Treatise, to disclose a part of my mind unto thee, concerning the making of Prognostications, and if it might be, to perswade thee, not to spend thy money in buying any of them. I have long studied this Art, and was never quiet untill I had seen all the secrets of the same: but at the length, it pleased God to lay before me, the profanenesse of it, nay, I dare boldly say Idolatry although it be covered with fair and golden shews. Wherefore, that which I will speak with grief, the same I would desire thee to mark with some attention. My reason shall partly con∣cern thee, partly the Prognosticatour himself. 1. First on thy behalf. I reason thus. 1. As a man doth see the blessings of God upon him, so he must also labour with a carefull diligence to main∣tain the store of this life. But because the affection of man is caryed headlong unto a greedy covetousnesse; this de∣fire of overmuch carping and careing, must be bridled with two strong bitts. First, all our care must extend it self no further, then the present day. Secondly, in care∣ing we must not trust unto our selves, but six all our con∣fidence in the mercy and providence of God who blesseth all, and without whose goodnesse, nothing can come to passe, do what we will. 1. As touching the first, we have the direction of our Saviour Christ: who teacheth us to pray on this wise. Matth. 6.11. Give us this day our daily bread, where∣by we are given to understand, that we are onely to seek for the present time, resting with this perswasion, that he which hath blessed us this day, will also to morrow, and the next day shew his like goodnesse unto us. Again, in the same place, our Saviour Christ speaketh on this wise. Matth. chap. 6. v. 34. Care not then for the morrow: for the morrow shall care for it self: the day
hath enough with his own grief. By this welearn, that God will provide for every day all things necessary, though we do not encrease the present grief, with caring and casting in our heads how we shall live in the time to come. Now tell me what is the cause that thou year∣ly dost buy a Prognostication, and one of those, which tell the strangest things: Is it because thou hast a de∣light to reade the style of Prognostications? Or because thou wouldest learn to Prognosticate? Or because the pictures and Characters which they make, delight thy mind? it were folly to be perswaded of this, seeing the very cause it self is manifest. Thy whole desire is to fill thy coffers, and to heap up wealth, thou art afraid lest thou shalt become poor, therefore thou greedily buyest thee Prognostications, and continually searchest all the cor∣ners of them, to see the state of the year to come, even thus in mind reasoning with thy self. I can never be qui∣et, nor take my sleep, untill such time as I have known the state of the year ensuing, that I may frame my busi∣nesse accordingly: This next year there will be much rain, it will rot corn upon the ground, it will be spoiled, I will keep my corn untill the next year following: I find that corn will be dear about half a year hence, I will not sell my corn now, but keep it, that I may have plenty of money for it, and sufficient beside, to maintain my house: the sea and land is calm and quiet this year, the next year many shipwracks and troubles in many coun∣treys will fall, now I will fraught my ships that then I may be quiet. These imaginations are lively arguments of thy diffidence, and despair in the goodnesse and loving kindnesse of God. If thou fear God, love God, put thy whole trust in God, thou art content to refer thy whole preservation unto the hands of God: now, these proling and ranging conceits of the time to come, argue that either thou never thinkest on God, or at the least perswadest thy self, that either he will not, or cannot help thee. Wherefore
seeing the having of Prognostications, cometh of so wicked causes, as is the greedy desire of prosperity, and wealth, and argueth some kind of diffidence in God: when thou readest these my words, examine thine own heart, if thou find my sayings true (as certainly thou shalt) never here∣after desire to know the state of the year before-hand, ex∣cept it be for the seasons of the year, which I am perswa∣ded, thou mayst in some part, without any skill, even by thine own experience. 2. Concerning the contempt of Gods providence, thus much I say. The Prognosticatour, if he be asked whe∣ther he confesse the providence of God, he will with all his heart confesse it: but by his deeds he doth deny it, for all the things whatsoever, which can happen in a whole year, he attributeth them to the stars, and so he publisheth his predictions, alwayes mentioning stars, never, or very slen∣derly, making any signification of the power, and justice, mercy, and everlasting wisdome of God. And surely, even for the very paring of thy nails, for the cutting of thy hair, for the putting on of thy shooes, for taking a journey two or three miles from thine house, for obtaining at Gods hands thy request, for making thy bargain with thy neigh∣bour, for all thine actions be they never so small: these wise men (if thou wilt ask their advise) will give thee coun∣sell from the stars. Now when these their irreligious predi∣ctions shall be had in thy bosome, and read of thee daily, thou being a man unlearned and worldly given, never hea∣ring any mention of the speciall providence, and hand of God in every thing, but long discourses of the virtues of Planets, and signs, doest never think upon the wonderfull and most infinite power of God, working after a speciall manner in every matter, but are drawn straight wayes in∣to an admiration of the Astrologer, and a great fear of the constellations of heaven. An experience of this I found in thee, about two years ago. A learned man (yet in this case far deceived) wrote an Astrologicall discourse of the
conjunction between Jupiter and Saturn, wherein he shewed of great alteration in every thing to fall. At this thou wast sore agast, thy mind was incumbred with fett∣ling thy goods to set them in order against that day: thy song for half a year was nothing else, but, the conjunction the conjunction: the day being come, what staring was there and gazing into heaven, to see the meeting of those two Planets: Now all this while, where was Gods pro∣vidence? where was that trust and rejoycing in him? Wherefore me thinketh that in a Christian Common∣wealth, those onely books should be published for thy use, which might beat into thy head, and make thee every houre and moment to think on the providence of God: Contrarywise, to tell thee the means which God doth use, to thunder out the aspects and constellations of stars, and seldome to mention of his providence, maketh thee to fear, and admire, and love the means, quite forgetting the work of God in the means. This fault was very rife a∣mongst the Israelites, who came yearly unto Astrologers and wise men: Wherefore that which is spoken by Jere∣my chap. 10. v. 12. unto them, is also spoken unto thee. Hear ye the word of the Lord, that he speaketh unto you, O house of Israel: Thus saith the Lord, learn not the way of the heathen, and be not afraid for the signs of hea∣ven, though the heathen be afraid of such: In like sort, God forbiddeth his people of England to give credit, or fear the constellations and conjunctions of Stars and Pla∣nets which have no power of themselves, but are governed by him, and their secret motions and influences are not known to man, and therefore there can be no certain judge∣ment thereof. If thou wilt not hear and follow this which I say, see what will ensue. Thou seest that the greatest matters which these Diviners and Prognosticatours fore∣tell, fall out flat otherwise then they say, to their perpetuall shame. Truely I am perswaded, that it is the judgement of God upon them (although they cannot see it) who
maketh them, when they think they are most wise, to be most fools. For so the Lord used the wise men and Astro∣logers of Chaldea, as he speaketh by his Prophet Esay, chap. 44. v. 24. I am the Lord that made all things, that spread out the heavens alone and stretch out the earth by my self, I destroy the tokens of Soothsayers, and make them that conjecture fools, and turn their wise men back∣ward, and make their knowledge foolishnesse. Dost thou then O carelesse and miserable man, think to escape the same, or greater punishment being a cause of this fault, for if none desired to know what is to come, none would busie themselves in that vanity. Wherefore reade the word of God in the 18. of Deut. verse 9. When thou shalt come (saith the spirit of God) into the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the a∣bominations of those nations. In the words following Moses numbreth nine abominations. As 1. To make his child go through the fire. 2. To use witchcraft. 3. To regard times, this is thy fault. 4. To mark the flying of fouls. 5. To be a Sorcerer. 6. To be a Charmer. 7. To counsell with Spirits. 8. To be a Soothsayer. 9. To ask counsell at the dead. All these horrible abominations being rehearsed, mark what followeth. Deut. 18.9. For all that do such things are an abomination unto the Lord, and because of their a∣bominations, the Lord thy God doth cast them out be∣fore thee: now seeing most of these abominations, and e∣specially the third is used of us, why should we not fear the like judgements upon us, unlesse we will repent, and that with speed.
2. The reasons which concern the Prognosticatour, and may avail to the perswading of thee, not to buy any more of their unprofitable books, as these which follow, First, their unability in Prognosticating: Secondly, their manifest untruths: Thirdly, their impieties: Fourthly, their tricks of deceit. What? can they not foretell that which is to come? can they not make conjectures of that which is like to ensue? No surely. And I will use argu∣ments to confirm it unto thee. The true use of the heavens consisteth in many points. 1. To declare the glory of God. The heavens (saith Da∣vid, Psal. 19.2.) declare the glory of God, and the fir∣mament sheweth the work of his hands. It is an Alphabet written in great Letters, in which is described the maje∣stie of God, and that by these four speciall points: First, the Majesty of the work it self. 2. The infinite multitude of Stars. 3. By the wonderfull variety of Stars. 4. By the greatnesse of the Stars. 2. Secondly, it maketh sinners and wicked men inexcu∣sable before the judgement seat of God. Rom. 1.20. For the invisible things of him (saith Paul) that is, his eternall power, and God-head are seen by the creation of the world being consiaered in his works, to the intent that they should be without excuse. 3. Thirdly, they serve to the appointment of times, as day, night, moneth, year, which are both measured and described by the course of the Sun, and Moon, and other Stars. Gen. 1.14. And so the feast of the Israelites, and the computation of the yeare in our Church, dependeth thereupon, and without them there would be great confu∣sion both in the common wealth and Church. 4. Fourthly, they serve to be signs, that is to foretell things to come. And they are signs either of extraordi∣nary things, or things which be ordinary. When they are signs of extraordinary things, then there is and appeareth in them some extraordinary work of God: as appeareth
in these examples which follow. At the suffering of Christ, not onely the vail of the temple rent, and the dead rose forth of their graves, Matth. 27. but also the Sun was wholly eclipsed, the Moon being in the full. At which sight, Dyonisius Areopagita, a good Astronomer spake these words: Either the frame of the world is destroyed, or the God of nature suffereth. The Prophet Ezek. cha. 32. v. 78. being commanded to prophecy the destruction of Egypt. he first putteth down such extraordinary signs: Be∣fore the second coming of our Saviour Christ, there shall be signs in the Sun and Moon, and in the Stars. Lastly, the extraordinary going back of the Sun signified the length∣ning of the life of King Ezekias. Secondly, the Stars are signs of generall things, which happen ordinarily every year in nature among us. As of 1. Approching and de∣clining of 1. The Spring. 2. Summer. 3. Harvest. 4. Winter. 2. Ordinary weather in these quarters. 3. Ebbing and flowing of the Sea. 4. Seasons of 5. Plowing. 6. Sowing. 7. Setting. 8. Planting. 9. Cutting. 10. Felling. 11. Reaping. I say generall, because the particular estate and affairs of men can in no wise be fore-signified by the stars. I say ordinary, because the things which fall out seldome, and are besides the common course of nature, as plenty of all things, famine, plague, war; eversions of King∣domes, &c. Do not depend upon the Stars. For the
confirming of this, I have three reasons: First, in the 1. of Genesis v. 14, 15. God saith, that he made the lights to be signs, and yet the same God in the 47. of E∣say v. 13.14. saith, he will destroy the signs of them which divine: flatly forbidding us to use Stars, as means to judge of any thing to come, saving onely of those, of which they are expresly made signs of God in the creati∣on: all which are put down before. Secondly, this is manifest by the order of the creation: Gen. 1.12.14. The third day God created upon the earth hearbs and trees, and the earth brought forth fruits and was fertile: the fourth day God commanded lights to be made in the fir∣mament of heaven, to separate the day and the night, and to be for signs and for seasons, and dayes, and moneths, and then it was so, and then God saw it was good. Out of which I gather that it cannot be a sign causing famine, or plenty and fertilenesse, because fertility went before the creation of the host of heaven. Also of warres, and plagues, and the particular estates of men, they can be no signs, because man was not yet created, and yet even then they were signs. Some will say they were no signs of those matters in the creation, but now they may be, and are: No, for the works which God created, he now preser∣veth, neither increasing, nor diminishing any thing in them. Philo Judaeus in his book de opificio mundi, saith, he was perswaded that God foreseeing the minds of men, given to search strange matters to come, did in this order create the heavens, to confute and disprove their imagina∣tions. Thirdly the Heavens and Stars were made for the use of man, and man is their end, so that it is absurd to imagine they have any force in the affairs of man. Now then Prognosticatours if they will foreshew of strange things to come: they must undo the work of their Creatour, and give unto it new uses, otherwise they shall not be able to Prognosticate as they yearly do.
The providence of God is his decree by which he ap∣pointeth how every thing shall come to pass. The conti∣nuall execution of this decree is ordinarily by meanes, but often without meanes, The means which God useth are either generall or speciall. Generall are these by which he governeth all the whole world, and every particular thing, which concerneth this life: unto this kind are referred spi∣rituall creatures, called Angels, by whom the Philoso∣phers say the heavens are governed, and we see that whole Kingdomes, Provinces, and Citties have been kept and defended by them, as also consumed and destroyed. A∣gain, the starrs and heavenly bodies are used of God to govern and order things here below, as it is the 19. Psal. Nothing is hid from the beat of the sunne. And by the Pro∣phet Hosea. the Lord speaketh thus I will hear the hea∣vens, the heavens shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear the corn, the corn shall hear Israel, But this instrument is onely a generall instrument, and hath his work in ordi∣nary matters of nature. Beside these means, there be many other by which God ruleth the world. In the beginning he set man over the whole world, that he might have rule over fishes, fouls, and beasts, and al things els. He apointed hus∣bands to govern their wives, he set the first-born before their brethren, as Cain before Abel: Princes over Ci∣ties, Kingdomes, Common-wealths, and therefore by reason of their dignity calleth them Gods. There be Governours of Families, Fathers over their Children, Masters over their Servants. Yet God hath more near care in preserving and governing his chosen, as ap∣peareth in the 43. of Esay. Thus saith the Lord God that created thee. O Jacob: and he that formed thee O Israel: fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by my name. thou art mine: when thou pas∣sest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the flouds, that they do not overflow thee, When thou walkest thorough the very fire, thou shalt not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of I srael thy Saviour. This is also ma∣nifest by that Sympathy which is in the Lord, when his children are afflicted as appeareth by the 11. of Zechariah He which toucheth you, toucheth the appleof mine eye, And in the 9. of the Acts, Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me, that is, my elect. Wherefore therebe also speciall means by which he more carefully governeth the elact. As be Angels whom Paul to the Hebrews calleth Ministring spirits: it is certain they defend every one of the elect particularly. Hitherto may be referred the preaching of the Word of God, the ministring of the Sacraments. All these means God's provid ence useth, first that he might shew his goodnesse towards us: secondly, that he might be known to be the Lord over all, thirdly, that we might be thankfull, because he not onely himself governeth us, but also maketh his creatures to serve our turns. But this must be noted (as I said before) that in all these secon∣dary causes, beside their naturall work, which God hath given them, there is also the speciall work of God his speciall hand shewed. God worketh not by second causes, as Magistrates govern their Common Wealths by their inferiour officers. For they so govern by them, that they do nothing or very little themselves; and peradventure, never know what is done. God governeth not the world so, but in every particular work, he hath his particular stroke. That the thunder burneth, moveth, hurteth, it is the generall providence of God: but that it burneth, or hurteth this or that man, on this or that part, in this or that manner, it is the special providence of the same God. The Lord hath shewed his speciall providence in one ex∣cellent example. If the hatchet (saith God) fall forth of the hand of him which loppeth the tree, and kill a man in the way, I the Lord have killed him, God also governeth the world immediately, and his providence worketh without means, and many things he bringeth to pass a∣gainst
all means, which is manifest by that of Matthew, Man liveth not by bread onely, but by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Now to come to our Prognosticatours, and Moon-pro∣phets, how shall they be able to know what will come to pass hereafter? For first, the Heavens being onely one particular Instrument of Gods providence, amongst many, they cannot certainly and truly say, this thing or that thing proceedeth from the Heavens. Secondly, they can∣not determine whether God in extraordinary matters, as Plague, Famine, Barrenness, distempered Weather, Earthquakes, Wars, &c. Doth work immediately, or with means: if with means, they cannot determine, whe∣ther the Heavens, or Angels, or men, or any other things be the means of his providence. Thirdly, if they were able to know what the Heaven worketh naturally, yet they were never the better; for God beside the power of the Heavens hath in all things his particular working provi∣dence, altering, and framing, and bending as Wax his In∣struments to his good will. The third Reason the want of experience. If our Prognosticators have any means to foretell things to come, they have those means either without experience, or with experience: if they have them without experience, then must thou account all which they do to be foolish Dreams, and deceit. For all kinde of humane Learning which is profitable, and hath use in the Life of Man, is taken from often observations, and experience. If it be said, that they have their Directions in prognosticating from experience, and that of all times; I will convince them thus: True experience of the Causes of Things is an often observing of the Effects of the same Causes, with this Ground, that they can proceed from no other thing. The Physician saith Rheubarde, doth purge Choller. Well, how knoweth he this? he hath often tried this, and that in old men, young men, children: and hath found,
that in the Bodies of all Men, the Cause of purging this Humour, could be ascribed to nothing else. Wherefore he may peremptorily conclude, Rheubarde purgeth Choller. Our Prognosticatours, in the Heavens can have no such experience. For they cannot observe often the same positi∣on of Stars in the Heaven. The order and cause of the fixed Stars and Planets, which we finde in the Heavens this day, the next day will be changed, and never the like again. They will say, in deed, although the same position of the whole Heaven never happen, yet the same Con∣junctions of notable Stars, the same Risings and Settings, and the same Constellations of the chiefest Stars are marked often. I say again, that when these Eclipses and great Conjunctions happen the rest of the Stars being o∣therwise affected then they were before, and having new Positions, may either increase or diminish their Effects, or else hinder them, and quite take them away. As we see when the Sun casting his beams into a Chamber, the light of Candles, and Torches, and Fires do make it shine dim, yet these being absent it will shine bright. Again, they are not able to say, that Constellations, which they have marked, are Causes of those Effects which follow, as Wars, Diseases, distempered Weather, Earthquakes, Fa∣mine, &c. For in those things which happen together, the one is not the cause of the other. When Nero played up∣on his Harp, Rome was on fire; yet Nero's playing on the Harp was no Cause of the burning of Rome. Also these Effects may have other Causes in the Heaven, then those which they mark, and they may come immediately from God, they may come onely from the will of man: where∣fore seeing that they cannot assure themselves that those Eclipses, and Conjunctions are the Works of such Effects upon Earth, and they cannot have often Observations of the course of Heaven, their Rules of Predictions are feign∣ed and supposed, and not built upon true experience. Let a man which knoweth not one Herb, take all kindes of
Herbs, and put them into a great Vessel, yet so, that there be more of some Herbs, and less of other some; let him beat them all together, and make a compound virtue of all their virtues; Can he now tell the nature and ope∣ration of every particular Herb? Can he divide and sever by any help the virtue of one Herb from another? No indeed. The same thing may be said of the Stars of Hea∣ven; all their Lights, and all their influences (as they term it) are in the lower Bodies: more plainly, every earthly Body hath in it all the secret powers, and working of every particular Star: so that they make (as it were) a compound operation rising of all, or of the most of their virtues joyned together? for the Astrologers hold, that although the Light may be hindred by the thickness of the Body, yet the heavenly influence pierceth through all. Therefore they are not able to sever, and learn the nature of these Stars, except they can stop the influence of what Stars they list, and bring them into what compass they will. Yet thus much I will grant them, that they may have a little knowledge of the virtue of the Sun, and Moon, and some other Stars: as we see those Herbs in the former composition, whose virtues be the chiefest, though not fully, yet somewhat do represent their nature, and shew themselves above the rest. But what is this to the purpose? If I confess the operations of the Sun and Moon. If I shall grant that Saturn is in nature cold and dry, Jupiter warm and moist, Mars hot and dry, Venus cold and moist, Mercury in nature mixt, the notable fixed Stars in the Zodiack to be of the nature of the Planets, and to have manifest operations, as the rising of the Dog to make heat and tempestuous Seas, the rising of Ar∣cturus to make rain and showres, Pleiades to be of the na∣ture of Mars, and the Moon, &c. what will all this suf∣fice to make a Prognostication? for seeing all stars have their own powers, and peradventure also the least stars, which we make no account of, have great Effects amongst
us (as one Grain of Musk in the Apothecaries shop ma∣keth a greater smel then all other Powders, be they never so many) nothing will the knowledg of the operation of some stars prevail, the rest being not known and never regarded. They wil say, they have some experience, but yet imperfect. I have shewed how they have no true experience at all: and their imperfect experience maketh them perfect Liars. The fourth Reason, the ignorance of Causes. A man which will judge rightly of any matter by the Causes, must not onely consider the common Causes, but he must also with them confer the particular Causes of all things which happen amongst us, so he shall judge aright. In Heaven the stars be common Causes of all things a∣mongst us, because they shew their virtue on every matter, one way or other. The same things have their peculiar efficients, and matters, and forms, by which, and not by the Heavens, they are made that, whatsoever they are. These proper Causes, because their natures be unknown unto us, I cannot see how the Prognosticatour is able to foretell any thing to come, in good and convenient man∣ner, laying aside all deceiving, and forging of untruths. To make this more plain, I will use this similitude, Sup∣pose an Hen to sit upon many Eggs, some of her own, some of divers other Fowls; she impartoth her heat e∣qually unto them; at the length she hatcheth, and some of her Chickens are Cocks, some Hens, some Crows, some Partridges, some Doves, some black, some white. some like and live, some die, some are killed of the Kite, some are rosted. No man (I think) will profess so much skill, as to say, that he by the considering of the Hen and her heat which is a common Cause of the Chickens, and all that befalleth them, is able to tell, why of this Egg came a Patridge, of that a Crow, why this Egg had no Chicken, why that had a dead Chicken, &c. except he do therewith all adjoyn the consideration of the particular Effects. The Heaven is as it were a Hen, fostring under
her Wings all earthly things, imparting his virtue and heat unto all. Can our Prognosticatour, by the erecting of Figures, by considering the Disposition of every Planet in their Houses, and the significations of every thing, judge, why this man is wealthy, that man a Begger, why this Noble-man dieth this Year, none the next Year, why it is naught to travell this way good to travell that way, why these Diseases abound, and not other why Corn shall be dear this Quarter, not the next, why this Week is fair and temperate, that Week, that Moneth unseasonable and tempestuous. Tiuly, it is a thing flat impossible. They must hereun to adjoyn the particular nature of the Coun∣trey, the particular Causes both in mens mindes and bo∣dies, as, education, place, honesty, birth, bloud, sickness, health, strength, weakness, meat, drink, liberty of minde, learning, &c. and all other speciall circumstances; which they never do, as we may see in their Prognostications: and if they would do it, yet they could not. Wherefore I must needs say this, that their folly is great in publishing their Prognostications: and thou also greatly to be bla∣med, which by thy greedy desire givest them great occasion to be unprofitably occupied. To shew more briefly and plainly of their unability in prognosticating, Hos. 2. although I grant the Stars have great force, yet I say they cannot judge of things to come. And there be six Impediments. The first Impediment is, imbecility of wit, for as mans eye from the Earth beholding the Heavens and the Stars, perceiveth them not in their just quantity, but as very smal Lights: for indeed the Sun is a hundred and threescore and six times bigger then the Earth, Saturn ninety times, Ju∣piter ninety and five, Mars one and an half, the Moon is the thirty and ninth part of the Earth: the biggest fixed Stars contain the Earth an hundred and seven times, the Stars of the second magnitude ninety, the third seventy times, the fourth magnitude fifty and four times, the fifth
magnitude thirty and five times, the sixth magnitude eighteen times. So the weakness of mans understanding is not able to conceive and learn the things which the Hea∣vens do bring to pass on Earth. The 2d Impediment, the infinite number of Stars, which no doubtall have great power, although we do not finde it. For the Prognosticatour onely maketh one thousand twenty and eight Stars, and of these he taketh onely heed unto a very few: which is as though a man should judge the power of an Army, by the power of one or two Souldiers and Captains, not by the power of the whole company. The third Impediment, is the infinite varieties of the vir∣tues of Stars, and the parts of Heaven, which Astrolo∣gers grant to be: yet they do not know them. As touching the nature of the Fixed Stars, they know no∣thing but by colour, which is red, leady, white, pale, &c. resembling some Planet. And because they know not the virtue of all Stars, and every part of Heaven, they are not able to judge any thing but to their own shame, no more then the Physician is able to know the nature of the compound Medicine without the knowing of every Sim∣ple. The fourth Impediment, the manifold and daily change of the Motions, Positions, and Configurations of the Stars: for if a man could tell both the number and nature of Stars, yet the variety of Positions breedeth Trouble, and hindreth right judgement: because by this means the powers of Stars are increased, diminished, and changed. And these Rules which served for ancient times to foretell things, will not serve us, because all the Fixed Stars have changed their places, and the reft are daily changed. The fifth Impediment, the infinite variety of inferiour things, which do hinder, pervert, change, receive, or not receive the virtue and Predictions of Stars as the nature of the Soil, the disposition natural of Air, orders and
Constitutions of the Common-wealth, occasions, educa∣tion, institution, kindes of meat and drink, &c. The sixth Impediment, the will of man, which freely in common matters chuseth this and refuseth that. There are many things which are caused without any work of Stars, onely by the will of man, and study, as we see in Socrates, Demosthenes, and other, &c. Thus much shall suffice to shew that they cannot prognosticate of things insuing; now follow their ma∣nifold untruths, and most false Rules. In disclosing them I will keep the same order they use in their Alma∣nacks. In the first or second leaf of their Books thou shalt finde a Picture of Man's Body with the twelve Signes round about it they call it the Anatomy of Man's Body, shew∣ing how the twelve Signes have Government of the same, for the Moon or any other Significatour of any thing be∣ing in the Sign, they say, that it is dangerous to box, to sear that part, or to let bloud in it, which is subject to the dominion of that Sign, All these are nothing but vain Fa∣bles, as I will manifestly prove. 1. Whereas they call it an Anatomy, me thinks, it is a butcherly Anatomy; nay, that of the Butchers is far bet∣ter, for they joyn Head and Appurtenance together; these men being sparing give Aries the Head, Leo and Cancer the Heart and Lungs, As for the Liver, I know not which Sign hath it, peradventure in old time men had no Livers. At the Anatomy of a Carrian, Crows deal friendly, for every one hath somewhat; but in the division of Man's Body, Signes play foul play, for Capricorn hath got no∣thing but a pair of Knees. It is like that the Signes scram∣bling for their portions, Capricorn being slow got no∣thing, hereupon compassion being had, there was a ga∣thering made, and Sagittarius gave the lower part of the Thigh, Aquarius the higher part of the Legg which both together make the Knee. But to deliver thee without all
doubt, mark these reasons which follow. I. The signs cannot have any such dominion over mans body: I make it manifest thus. There is no corporall heaven in deed above the firmament, yet because the firmament or eighth Sphear hath many motions, to give reasons to those moti∣ons, the Astronomers have feigned two heavens above the firmament, the Christaline heaven, and the first move∣able or tenth Sphear, which they divide into twelve parts, which parts they call signs. Now, I pray you tell me,The 12. Signs feigned. is it possible to conceive that an imagined part of any imagined heaven void of all stars, shall either have in it self, or give unto other Stars power to govern the parts of mans body? More reasonable was that man, who be∣ing asked what was the cause of the sands in Sandwitch haven, he answered the building up of Tenterton Steeple. Secondly the government of the Signs in the body is not taken from experience in nature, but feigned long ago by some drowsie pate, and now because it hath a cloak of an∣tiquity, it is allowed. More naturall was this kinde of way, that hot signs should govern hot parts, cold signs cold parts, earthly signs earthly parts. So Aries should govern the heart and the vitall bloud, not the head, and the rest of the signs those parts which are of their nature and disposition. Thirdly great experience of many men daily confuteth this rule. For many learned Physicians, and ex∣pert Chirurgians have by infinite examples found, that if a man be let bloud in the sign, or lanched, or boxed, or seared, no harm ensueth, nay they have given testimony that the patients have found even then great comfort. Wherefore let not these things trouble thy mind any more, but let them be numbred even amongst vain and unprofi∣table fables. 2. Next after followeth Elections of dayes and hours, necessary for all matters as followeth.
Speciall dayes to Prepare humours. Let bloud. Purge with Vomit. Purge with Electuaries. Purge with Potions. Purge with Pills. Cut hair. Comfort the virtue Attractive. Comfort the virtue Digestive. Comfort the virtue Retentive. Comfort the virtue Expulsive. Bathe. Put children to School. Travell. Marry. Hunt, Hauke, Fish. Plant. Geld Cattell. Lay foundations. Here, I pray thee, mark their naughty dealings, how they abuse thy ignorance, to make themselves skilfull, and to do more then they can do. For, if the judgements of the best Astrologers may be taken, certainly most of these elections cannot be prescribed to thee, unlesse they know before hand the figure of thy Nativity. For all Ele∣ction, which concern thy person, must be moderated (to speak as plainly as their toyes will suffer me) by the di∣rection of the root of thy Nativity, and by the monethly and diurnall progressions of thy present Revolution. If any of these pretend some evill, the particular election may be a means to increase, and to bring it to passe. For example, suppose thou being a man toward marriage, in the Almanack thou findest a good day noted by the Pro∣gnosticatour
to marry in: thou takest thy opportunity: after a while, thou art weary of thy life: the first day of thy marriage was the last day of thy joy. What is the cause of this? All the Planets which were signifiers of thy marriage in thy nativity, were then evilly affe∣cted, and peradventure also, at the first thou wast born, they received some disgrace. So then thou mayest lay all blame, partly upon thy self for believing and partly upon the Prognasticatour, who deceived thee. But to come unto particulars, the elections of dayes to purge the body with any kind of purgation, and to comfort the same, are most rediculous. Why do they not also prescribe hours of eating meat? Why do they not ap∣point the kinds of meats and drinks, which we must eat and use daily? If thou see that God doth daily blesse the enterprises of those Physicians, which never regard those elections in ministring to their patients: never esteem of them, let them go as lyes to the Devil from whence they came. Concerning the elections of dayes to sowe, to sett, to plant, to lop, they are also foolish: the gene∣rall observation of the season of the year, in which these things are to be done is sufficient. And S. Augustine in his book de civitate Dei laugheth at the folly of them, which choose particular dayes to do their husbandry, as though some certain positions of stars had some speciall influence to the things which are sown then. His reason is, because many grains of corn being cast into the ground to∣gether, springing up together, and riping all at one time: yet some of them are blasted, some are eaten of birds, some are trodden down under foot, some stand and are never touched. The rest of the elections, and especially that of laying foundations is most absurd. They say, that if an house, a city, a town have his foundation when the stars be well affected, the inhabitants shall have pro∣sperous and quiet living: if when the starres be evil disposed, then trouble and disquietnesse. They have no ex∣perience
of this, but that onely which is most false, for they know not the foundations of cities and towns, nei∣ther the positions of the Stars when they were built. Let Rome and Venice be examples, because these are most al∣ledged of Astrologers, the time in which they were built is uncertain, and the Planets are falsly set in the figure of the foundation of Rome, because Mercury is contrary to the Sun, a thing flat impossible. Again the folly of this is thus manifest, that an house, or city, or common-wealth may remain, the people being gone, as it is in the time of plague, and banishment, and conquests of Princes: And the inhabitants also may be safe and remain, the building quite ransumed, and beaten down, as we may see in Car∣thage, the people and common-wealth remained, the Citie quite defaced. That all elections are unlawfull, Saint Augustine wrighting unto Januarius, proveth it forth of the fourth to the Galathians, by these words: Ye observe moneths and times and years (Therefore saith he) let us not observe dayes, and years, and moneths, and times, lest we hear this of the Apostles: I am afraid lest I have taken labour in vain with you: for he rebuketh them which say, I will not go, because the Moon is thus or thus moved, or I will take my journey that I may have good successe, because there is such a position of Stars: I will not do my businesse this moneth, because such a Star governeth this moneth: or I will do my businesse this moneth because such a Star ruleth. How then shall a man do, not to break the word of God? Art thou a man that desirest to lead a Christian life? Then take the example of Paul, Rom. 1.10. as a pattern to govern all the actions of thy life: without ceasing (saith he) I make mention of you in my prayers: beseeching that by some means, one time or other I might have proserous journey by the will of God to come unto you. So thou if thou hast any businesse in hand, any journey to take, any thing to buy or sell, or any other matter: never
regard the constellations of Heaven, commit thy self to the onely providence of God, in whom thou hast thy life, and motion, and being, who directeth all thy steps: pray unto him privately with thy self to blesse thee and all thy actions, that they may tend to his glory, thy wel∣fare: thou shalt find that all thy enterprises will have bet∣ter successe, then if the whole hoast of heaven, and all the Prognosticatours of England had promised never so much prosperity. Now let us shew their absurd folly in Pro∣gnosticating of the state of the yeare: of which their pre∣dictions are either generall for the whole yeare, or speciall for every day. In their generall predictions are considered either the grounds of them or the matters which they fore∣tell. Their grounds are especially two. 1. The figure of the revolution of the yeare, erected when the Sun entreth the first minute of Aries. 2. The figure celestiall for the time of the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon: for upon these twain, say they, dependeth the whole state of the yeare. In their celestiall figures they consider the erecting of them, and the finding of the Lord of the figure. The erecting of the figure, containeth very many absurdities. 1. They follow that way, which Regiomontanus did invent, never as yet proved by any experience, and flatly differing from those wayes which of ancient Astrologers were used: and were invented by Gazulus and Campa∣nus. Nay oftentimes it maketh the Planet or fixed Star to signifie a flat contrary thing to that which these two o∣ther do. 2. The casting of the heavens into twelve parts, signi∣fying twelve distinct kind of matters is ridiculous, because it being imagined, and void of stars, can have no force. Yet (some will say) other stars being in those places may have and signifie such or such effects. I answer, that if Starres of divers natures coming to such an house al∣wayes signifying some one kind of thing, then the house must of necessity give some force unto the Planet: and
so it shall have not onely an augmenting, but also an ef∣fectually working power, which Astrologers deny, and no reason can prove. 3. They make the twelfth and eleventh houses being higher above the horizon then the first, to be of lesse force then it: and the fourth house to be of greater power then any above the Horizon not Cardivall: and the end of the ninth to be more in power then the beginning of the eleventh house: all which are against reason, because a Planet the more perpendicular his beams are, the more is his force. They answer, although the force of the light be greater, yet the secret influence is lesse, and the first house hath more forcible influence then the twelfth or ele∣venth. If the influence be secret how can they know it? again, they can by no good experience shew that those houses have more influence then the rest: this influence maketh against them. I say they cannot prognosticate because they know not one stars virtue. For whereas they say, that the Sunne, and Moon and Planets have most force. I answer that it is by reason of their light, not their influence, which is small, and there is far greater in the smallest fixed Stars. So that the fixed Stars al∣though they have no light, or very small light per∣ceived, yet they have most influence. And so these men must needs dream because they judge by wrong causes. Well, their figure being framed and distinguished with fair characters, then go they on to find the Lord of the figure, that is, that Planet which hath most dignitie in the figure.
The dignities of the Planets, are found out by these means especially 1. Houses of Planets. 2. Exaltation. 3. Triplicity. 4. Terms. 5. Stars. 6. Houses. 7. Freenesse from Combustion. 8. Directions. 9. Velocity of course. 10. Sazimi. 11. Some aspects of other Pla∣nets, These toyes be so foolish that a reasonable man would not vouchsafe to refute them: yet a word or twain. If the houses of the Planets shall be batter∣ed and puld down, all the rest of their worship and di∣gnity will lye in the dust. Aries and Scorpius are ap∣pointed the houses of Mars, Taurus and Libra the houses of Venus, Gemini and Virgo the houses of Mercury: Cancer the house of the Moon, Leo the house of the Sunne, Sagittarius and Pisces the houses of Jupiter, Aquarius and Capricornus the houses of Saturn. What reason do they give of this? Leo and Cancer, say they, are the houses of the Sun and Moon, because they resemble the nature of these Planets, and because they come most near our heads: such reason they give of the rest. What feeble grounds are these: As in the North part of the World Cancer and Leo resemble the nature of the Sunne: so in the South part, in the con∣trary Climats, Capricornus and Aquarius do resemble their natures. Also in every countrey some divers signs be either verticall, or else come near the top of the countrey; and so all signs shall be the houses of the Sun and Moon. Now then, the Sun being displaced, I cannot find how the rest of the Planets can keep their hold. To
go further, the exaltations of Planets in like manner are the very dreams. They suppose Exaltations be those degrees in which the Planets were in the beginning of the world. But why should those places give more force then any o∣ther? And if they could give more force, yet they have falsly assigned them. For the Sun was not in Aries when it was created of God, but was placed in Libra, which I prove by this reason. God created Man and Beast in per∣fect age, giving unto them all kinds of fruits being then ripe, so that in the beginning was the time of the year, which we call Harvest. Now, because God never after∣ward changed the Seasons, and we find that in the time of ripenesse the Sunne is alwayes in Libra, we must needs also say that his place in the creation was in Libra. In the 23. of Exodus God commandeth that the Feast of Tabernacles should be celebrated in the end of the year when the Israelites had gathered their fruits out of the fields. Wherefore it must needs be that Harvest was in the beginning of the yeare (the beginning and ending being both together) and so by count∣ing backwards we shall finde that the Sunne was in Libra in the beginning of the World. To this agre∣eth Josephus de antiquitate Lib. 1. cap. 3. Rabbi Eleazar upon Genesis and Rabbi, Abraham; Aben, Esra upon the 7. of Daniel. The rest of the dignities of the Planets consist of prin∣ciples more weak then water. First, what is more un∣reasonable to a reasonable man then this, that swift moti∣on should give unto a Planet two dignities, and slow mo∣tion two debilities,: it seemeth to be plain contrary. For a swift course hindereth the force of the Planet, a flow course helpeth the same: and the stations of any Planet make an effectuall and sensible operation. A cole of fire in a mans hand if it be shaken about very much, it heateth very little, if it be shaken more slowly, it heateth more: but if it ly still, it burneth violently. Beside this, also
experience confirmeth my Assertion. In the year of our Lord 1513. the Sun entering into Pisces was almost in Trine Aspect with Saturn stationary, a little while after, there was a great Frost and Snow continuing many dayes: and when Saturn began again to be direct, the Weather was indifferent warm. In the year 1518. In April Jupiter almost in secunda statione beholding Saturn in statione prima caused a great heat, considering the time of the year. In the year 1520. Saturn (as I said before) being stationary made such a cold, that spoiled the Grapes, and made Wine dear. Upon these Examples, and many other I may conclude, that the work and influence of Pla∣nets, is most felt when they are stationary; because their virtue is fixed (as it were) in one place by reason of the slow motion. Combustion is in like sort a feigned thing, What reason can Astrologers give, why it should give unto a star 5 debi∣lities? They talk how that experience teacheth them, that Planets being under the beams of the Sun do lose a great, nay (some say) all their force. It is a manifest untruth. For, Mercury being of the nature of that Planet with which he is conjoyned, if he go from conjunction with Saturn unto the Sun, he getteth no debilities thereby, but rather losing the feeble and unfortunate nature of Saturn, recei∣veth a more strong and fortunate nature of the Sun. If any man say against me that Mercury combust hath no force, he deceiveth himself. For if he be not hindered, he naturally will cause Windes, being combust he not onely engendreth Windes, but causeth tempestuous Windes and foul Weather. In Aries, Taurus, Cancer, he maketh Tempests; in Virgo, and Scorpius, raging Seas; in Sagittari∣us, Capricornus, Aquarius and Pisces, Rain and Snow. Again, when many days together there hath been fair wea∣ther, the Sun if it come to be in conjunction or any other Aspect with Saturn maketh very foul Weather, and therefore the Aspects of the Sun and Jupiter are called,
Apertiones portarum per pluvia. This could not come to pass if Saturn had his force diminished by the beams of the Sun. A Planet also being in Cazimi, that is, being within sixteen minutes of the Sun's middle hath thereby five Dignities, which cannot well be, if that Combustion give five Debilities. For the Planet is in the middle of his Combustion, and the Sun casteth his beams and force very vehemently upon it. These Suns shew how absurd a dream Combustion is: yet if it were a good and sound principle of Astrology, and gave unto every Planet five Debilities, yet it could not be proved, that liberty from Combustion should give five Dignities, being onely a meer absence and privation of the other. Magnes at the presence of the Adamant, is hindred from drawing Iron: yet if the Adamant be away, the attractive virtue of the Magnes is not increased. Here I might with ease confute the tripli∣cities of Planets, Directions, Aspects, Applications, Pre∣ventions, Refrenations, with many such like; but my in∣tent at this time is onely to shew thee some untruths of our Prognosticatours. Thus much of the Grounds of their Predictions, now follow the matters of which they prognosticate, and they are very many: nay, there is no matter almost, of which they will not give their verdict: but how they do this I will briefly make it manifest unto thee, that their Lies and their unchristian dealing may be more loathed of thee. 1. They foretell of Comets, Earthquakes, Famines, and Plagues, &c. but they do it as the blinde man which casteth his staff he knoweth not where. No man as yet ever knew the true Causes of these. As for Comets and Blazing stars, they do not rise of the influence of any stars, neither are they any earthly things, but are in Hea∣ven, most commonly far above the Moon as by Geome∣trical and Astronomical Demonstrations may be proved: how this cometh to pass the Lord onely knoweth. And surely they do thee great injury, that when as no doubt,
God doth lighten them, and send the rest extraordinarily, as threatning tokens of his sore displeasure, yet they will rock thee asleep in the Cradle of security, by telling that such tokens came from the ordinary course of the Hea∣vens. 2. They foretell all things which happen in civil affairs amongst men, as these which follow: As, Love and hatred of Kinsfolk. Marriages. Increase of Farmes and Livings. Injuries and Quarrels. Raising of Rents. Exacting of Subsidies by Officers. False Rumours. Imprisonments. Hard intreating of Ecclesiastical Persons. Buying selling, undermining. The studying of Sciences. Friends fall out for Trisles. Solemn progresses. Favour of Noblemen. Men shall fall, Body, and Goods into the Princes hands. Merchandise unprofitable, &c. These and such like proceed onely from the will of man: the Constellations of stars are neither signes nor Causes of them. Some will say Non imponere necessitatem, sed incli∣nare Stellas, that is, That stars do not constrain, but onely incline the mindes of men: a most wicked saying, al∣though most commonly spoken of, and defended. For the inclining of the will of man is onely the work of God, as the holy Scriptures do teach us, The heart of man (saith Solomon) purposeth his ways, but the Lord directeth his steps: Prov. 1.6, 9. O Lord (saith Jeremy the Prophet) that the way of man, is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk, and direct his steps: Jer. 10.23. He speaketh this, because that Nebuchadnezzar purposed to have made
war against the Moabites and Amonites, but hearing of Zedekiahs Rebellion he turned his power to go against Jerusalem, therefore the Prophet saith, that whereas he had otherwise purposed, yet this was the Lords inclination and direction. Again, in the Proverbs we reade this; that the heart of the King is in the hands of the Lord, as the Rivers of water he directeth it whether he will. Prov. 21.1 It will be said, that although God properly and immedi∣ately inclineth the will of man: yet also some small inclina∣tion must be given unto the Stars, and that immediately. For say some, Constellations work upon the Elements by the four first qualities. Elements work upon, and alter the compound Bodies and humours. Compound Bodies by their qualities change the Senses. The Senses being altered, the understanding is altered. The understanding lastly altereth, and inclineth the will of man. Therefore Constellations incline the will. This Reason is not much unlike that which the drunk∣en man maketh, serving as well for the defence of his Vice, as the former for approving of truth in Divination. He which drinketh well, sleepeth well: He which sleepeth well, thinketh no harm: He which thinketh no harm is a good man: Therefore he which drinketh well is a good man. The deceits and untruths which be in their Reasons, are very many. 1. The stars work upon mens bodies, yet so that the na∣ture of the Countrey and Soil, the Meats and Drinks have most commonly greater force. Why are the bodies of Gentlemen of England and poor labouring men of di∣vers dispositions? Are they not both in one Countrey? Do not the Stars shew their force in them alike? Yes truly, but the kinde of life and diet prevaileth. In the same Re∣gion
why are they, which dwell upon hills, of other temperatures then they, which dwell upon plain and cham∣pion ground? why do not the same influences of Starrs make them of like natures? is it not because the nature of the soil prevaileth: So then, when as there be many causes effectuall, and differing in altering mens bodies, to build an argument upon one cause is most unreasonable. 2. The starrs work upon the Elements earth, water, air, by making heat, cold, moisture, driness. The ele∣ments, how work they on mens bodies: They will also say by making heat, cold, moisture, drinesse: which is most untrue: for the hotter and dryer the Elements be, the colder and moisture by nature are mens bodies. Ac∣cording to the saying of Empedocles: Nature placed a hot Body in a cold Countrey, and a cold Body in a hot Countrey. 3. The Philosophers say that all causes are either per se or per accidens, Now the heavens being causes of the al∣teration of the senses per accidens, they must not be causes of the inclination of the will, either per se or per accidens, but per accidentis, accidens, which is most ridiculous, 4. This long chain by which they link the will of man to the starrs, if it shall be applied unto particulars it must needs break: for the actions of the will is buying, selling, travailing, lying, heaping up wealth, murdering, spreading of fals ruomrs, offering of discourtesies, hating of kinsfolks, and such like, which our Heaven-gazers foretell, have no coherent with the first qualities, heat, cold, moisture, dri∣nesse: neither can they any way proceed from them, and therefore the stars cannot be causes of them, for they work onely by these qualities. 5. This reason is nothing to their purpose: for because they grant that a man may freely resist the inclination of the starrs, and he may hinder that, unto which the starrs bend his will, how dare they presume to say this or that will come to pass. The heathen men gave up themselves to
their own lusts and vanities and followed every little and vain inclination: and of them, in this order, did ancient Astrologers among them divine that this or that time, such actions, such vices, such enterprises, such affaires should be among them. In like manner our English wise men, speak of us as though we were beasts, not reasonable men, as though we never heard the blessed Gospel of God, never tasted of the grace of God, never learned what is good and what is bad, never laboured to subdue our lusts and affections, alwayes turned too and fro with the blast of any influence, working very slenderly in us. Thus much of Civil Affaires. They make mention also yearly of the diseases which shall reign: but the way which they follow, is taken forth of the barren and uncertain rules of the old Astrologers, who do so ascribe unto every Planet certain Diseases, that if need shall re∣quite, they may referre the same disease unto any signi∣catours, as in the Plague, the putrefaction of humours is attributed unto Jupiter; the sharp Feaver unto Mars, the madnesse which followeth unto Mercury, the whole Plague unto Mars. In the Plurisie the inflammation of the bloud between the skin called Pluritis, and the ribbs is attributed unto Jupiter, the suppuration of the Bloud unto Saturn, and the whole Plurisie unto Jupiter, In the Jaundies the inflammation and corruption of hu∣mours, unto Jupiter, the yelow humour in the gaul, unto Mars, the obstruction of the parts unto Saturn the whole Jaundies being white, unto Mars, blak, unto Saturn. And so in every disease, they use this inconstancy and ambigu∣ity in Prognosticating. It is a rule among the Astrologers that if the Planets signifiers of diseases be well affected, then there shall be no diseases but health: if they be evilly affected, then diseases follow. Our Prognosticatours never mark this rule but howsoever the Planets be affected they straightwayes pronounce that such diseases shall reign. For example the last winter quarter, it was said by one of
them, that the diseases which should afflict mens bodies were rheums, coughs, cold lasks, swelling of the face and throat, falling of the Colmel, sore eyes, deafness, the stone, gout, dropsie, green-sickness. madness, quartern feavers. &c. And all the Planets, signifiers of diseases in the quar∣ter were indifferent well affected: wherfore thou hast not one cause to fear their threatnings, but rather to be sorry for their continuall deceits, wishing them minds that they may one day see their own folly. Concerning the time when the constellations take their effects, our Prognosticatours say that some take their ef∣fects, the same year, some not the same year but long after, as great Conjunctions and Eclipses, for they say if the Moon be eclipsed one hour, she worketh her effect a moneth after, if two hours, two moneths after: and the Sunn for every hour it is eclipsed taketh his effect an whole year after. Truely this rule which they follow, must needs be against all reason. For why should not all con∣junctions and oppositions of the Sunne and Moon dis∣serre their effects as well as those conjuctions and oppo∣sitions in which the Sunne and Moon is eclipsed? if they show forth their power immediatly after, why should not these also do the same? Moreover the Epignosticall Astrologers who have conferred the course of the heavens, with Histories, shew very manifestly, that Eclipses do not deferr the time of working their spite upon the Earth. In the year of our Lord 1419, the Sunne was Ecli∣psed in Aries, and presently after shewed all his force. There was a great sedition in Prague that year: In Paris an uprore between them of the Citty and the University, and two thousand Schollars were slain, then also Wenze∣slaus King of Bohemia being in a great Palsie dyed. In the year 1524. There was a conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Scorpius and also a great eclipse of the Sunne in June, which took their effects the same year: Charles King of France driven forth of his Countrey: warre be∣tween
Danes and the men of Sleswick. There was a great plague in Germany, Civil dissention amongst the Princes of the Empire, and them which took the part of John Husse. 1452. An eclipse of the Sunne in Sagit∣tarius, his effects began presently, and lasted a great while: Even then Constantinople was taken by the Turke. The Hungarians and Bohemians besieged Frederick the Em∣perour. 1473. the 27. of April: the Sunne was eclipsed in Taurus Mars being in Aries and Jupiter in Sagittari∣us. The same year in Summer was such heat and driness of weather, that woods even withered, and one might wade over deep rivers. In the years of our Lord. 1476. 1460. 1469. 1486. 1502. 1518. And many years after their were both great conjunctions, and strange ecli∣pses, which took their effects presently, not one, or two, or three years after (as our heaven-gazers bear them in hard). All these examples which I bring against them, I have not feigned, but taken forth of those books which they have in greatest estimation, and could, if need should serve, bring an hundred more, all to shew their lies when as they commonly say thus, There shall be an Eclipse this year, marry I will not here determine his effects, but reserve them to be declared in my Pro∣gnostication one year or two years hence, when it will take place. To know where the effects of the starrs shall take place, they have appointed unto every signe certain coun∣tryes, as over Europe they have set the fiery Triplicitie, o∣ver the Orientall and North parts of the Asia the airy Triplicity: the watery Triplicity over Africa, over the South parts of the Asia the earthy Triplicity: and so every peculiar signe hath his dominion over some parts of those. Now therefore, when a conjunction or eclipse is in any of these signes the Cities and Countryes subject unto them feel the force of that constellation especially. This is a most manifest untruth and may be confuted by many rea∣sons.
1. The nature of the signs is not the same now as it was in times past and by the confession of the best learn∣ed have other effects. now, then they had in the days of King Ptolomy: yet we see the nature of Countryes and people to remain the same still, as may be seen by read∣ing Tacitus, Plime, Casar, Strabo. 2. America which is half the world, hath no signs appointed over it: why? it was found out of late. True it is, but this is an argu∣ment that the Rules of Astrology, are absurd, and were the bare inventions and imaginations of idle brains, For, there is no doubt, but that America his parts and I lands as Bresilea, Peru, Pari, Terra Florida, Java Major, Java Minor, Puloana, Pavilonga, Subath, Massana, Mattan, Juvacana, Cozumella Jamaica &c. have felt the force of these Constellations, which they attribute to some parts of the old world. Because these Countreys be a∣bout the middle Zone, and have both Planets and signs full over them, and therefore if the Starrs threaten any strange thing to come, they must especially feel it. 3. Experience the cause of all acts is against them, as is manifest in these examples. 47. years before the Nati∣vity of our Saviour Christ there was a Conjunction of the higher Planets in Scorpius. and then was civil warre between Caesar and Pompey: And the change of the Empire was in Europe. But according to the institution of Astrologers all these troubles should have been in A∣frick, because Scorpius hath his dominion there. In the year of our Lord. 34. there was a great Conjunction of Planets in Leo, and then (faith one very prophanely) was the Gospel preached through the world, But if he make this Conjunction to be a sign of the preaching of the Gospel, then it should more have been preached in the parts of Europe then Asia, which is not true. In the years of our Lord. 331. and 1127. There were great Conjunctions in Virgo, and yet the Countryes sub∣ject to this signselt no harm, but Italy was troubled with
the Popes superstitions, and Arrius his heresie broach∣ed. There was a meeting of Planets in Sagittarius. 73. years after Christ, when as Otho, Galba, vitel∣lius, and Vespasian troubled the Romane Empire, yet there was no where more grievous warres then in Pa∣lestine, and no greater slaughter then of the Jews, who are subject unto Scorpius and not unto Sagittarius, In the year 1464. a Conjunction of higher Planers was in Pis∣ces, under whose dominion, although Europe be not plac∣ed, yet it most felt the smart by troubles and civil warrs. So 1576. and 1577. Two eclipses of the Sun, the one in Leo, the other in Capricorn, took their effects in Ger∣many: when as Leo and Capricorn do not rule that Countrey. It is vain to shew the absurdity of this rule by more examples, these shall be sufficient. This shall suffice to have spoken of their generall Pre∣dictions, now follow their speciall determinations of the state and temperance of the weather, wherein I will set forth first of all a most manifest and absurd contradicti∣on, which most of them make, and that is this. They use (as I have said) to set down their judgements of the whole quarter, that it should be either moist, hot, cold, or dry: afterward judging particularly they disprove by par∣ticular dayes that which they said before. In the year of our Lord. 1581. one said that in the Autumn quarter should be a great drought, yet I perusing his particular judements upon the dayes of the quarter, I find it should have plenty of rain. In the year last past another said, the summer should be so hot and dry that wells and rivers should be dried up, and fishes be scarce, and Cattel dy for want of water: yea the same party in his particular judgement of the weather, maketh 20. dayes of the same quarter, at the least rain and misling, and 30. other either temperate or very cold. In one word, the judgements which are set down, of the weather, they are more tolerable then the rest: yet as long as the wold endureth, no man shall be able to
prognosticate truely what weather shall be in every day of the year. The causes of this I have set down before, and need not now to repeat. Wherefore they might leave of any longer to busie themselves in this kind. And it shall be sufficient for thee, leading a christian life, to know the generall and ordinary estate of the parts and seasons of the year. The third Reason Impieties. Besides all this the impious speeches and ungodly pra∣ctises. which these men use, might move a christian man to loath ther Predictions. First, yearly some of them do foretell whether men shall study and imbrace, or forget and neglect true Religion. What a filthie and divelish thing is this, not to be suffered in a Common-wealth where the Gospel of Christ is preached. Every man na∣turally is the child of wrath, the unprositable servant, dead in all kind of sinne, his understanding is enmity a∣gainst God, his affections are tebellious against his will: none doeth good, no not one: not one hath any facul∣ty to receive or keep true Religion: we are as saws in the hands of God, as the Propher Esay speaketh: how then become we religious? by the onely work of God. No man can come to me (saith Christ) except the Father draw him. And as God draweth us first unto true Rehgi∣on, so he also maketh us continue in the professing of the same, as S. Paul saith, he which hath begun a good work in you, will finish the same &c. By what means doth God do this? by the outward preaching of the law and the Gospel, and by the inward working of his holy spirit: o∣ther means the Scripture never mentioneth. On the contra∣ry part, if any man refuse the Grace of God, and will not imbrace the true Religion, it proceedeth from the hardness of his own heart, and wilfull rebllion. Seing therefore the rebellion of man cometh from his own will, and the imbracing of true godliness from God alone 2. Corinth. 4.34. Why date they presume without great impietie
to adjoyn the Constellations as Adjuvants either unto Man or God in this divine work. Again, these Predicti∣ons are very perillous, for if a man be wickedly given, they hinder him from the acknowledging of his sin, be∣cause they make him lay par: of his faults upon the stars, when as all indeed come from his own soul: and if a man be a penitent sinner, and feel the Grace of God; yet be∣ing weak in faith and conscience, they make him not to put his whole trust in God, and to love him with all his soul, with all his strength, but allure him in some part to attri∣bute that unto the stars which is the onely work of God, and not of any Creature. 2 They use to foretell what Vices shall reign, as in these Examples: As, There shall be much unlawfull and secret whoredome. Great robbing by High-ways sides. Wanton and young women shall sit in their Ladies laps, by reason of their Goddesses well placing. Many shall use deceit and cousening. By these and such like, lewd and dissolute people, take occasions, and are stirred up to live profanely, and to fol∣low those vices unto which, the lusts of their nature carry them. The fourth reason tricks of deceit. A Juggler which taketh upon him to do strange things must use many slights, least if the stander by shall see his Tricks of legerdemain he be descried, and all his former cunning turn to his shame. Our Prognosticatours under∣standing this, have thought it convenient to use in their kinde some tricks of deceiving Juglers, I can call them by no better name, for so they are indeed. First, publish∣ing their Predictions in thy behalf, they use such absurd, unknown, and insolent words, as (I think) never the like were read or heard amongst us in England: as are these which follow:
1 A Prognostication Astrologically calculated for the Pole Artick for such a City whose longitude and latitude is thus. 2 Quartil Revolution. 3 Rectified for the motions and Aspects of the Me∣ridian and Elevation. 4 Capricorn in quality cold and dry, melancholly, in taste bitter, nocturnal, feminine, meridional, of the earth∣ly Trigon. 5 Mercurialists, Jovialists, Martialists. Hiema Solstice Aestival, Verval, Autumnal. 6 Pars torturae coupled with the Dragons tail. 7 Taurus a Sign of the earthly Trigonisme, naturally cold in the Sign Horoscope; and Virgo of the same stamp the sign of the prevention preceding. 8 A sign of the same triangularity Jupiter Lord of this Revolution resident with Venus in domicilio deorsum ab Angulo cadente. 9 Planets retrograge. 10 Cardivalor a succedent position. 11 Lunary defect. In his Dodecatimorian. 12 Names of strange Authours; Proclus, Alchin∣dus, Messahala, Zael, Albohazen Haly, Albumacer, Al∣bubater, Guido, Bonetus, Hispaleusis, Firmius, Abra∣ham, Avenezra, Trismegistus; with many other wondrous Doctours, having a great deal of small learning, and be∣ing far born, as in Caldea, Persia, Arabia, Jury. 1 Thou wilt say, What means all this? Here is great Learning no doubt, it passeth my capacity: who would not have an Almanack, if it were for nothing but for this, to see and hear how profound our Prognosticatours are? Thou far deceivest thy self; for they perceiving well, that their Deceits and Lies may be soon espied, have invented strange terms to colour them, and to cast a myste before thine eyes, that thou maist not see their naughty dealing.
For any man the more true and honest he thinketh his matter, the more desirous is he to speak plainly to the un∣derstanding of all. 2 It was a point of the Knavery of the Devil, other∣wise called Apollo, as the Heathen men asked his counsel, to answer doubtfully, because when as he was ignorant of the Event, yet would not, but seem to know, as in this Answer. I tell thee Pyrrhus the Romans may conquer. It is understood two ways, either that Aeacides might vanquish the Romans, or the Romans Aeacides. Our Prognosticatours have chosen a very good Patern to fol∣low, their dealing with thee is the like: when they doubt and cannot tell what to prognosticate, then they use two ways of foretelling, either to speak that which is true eve∣ry way, or that which is true every year. For the first, a∣mongst many Examples, I will put one or two that thou maist see their dealing in true, not forged Examples. 1 The conjunction of Mars and Saturn threaten Wars, but Jupiter will mitigate the same; as a man should say, the Prognosticatour telleth true, except he tell a Lie. 2 1585 We shall have a very dry Winter, if perad∣venture any flouds and store of Rain do fall, they shall proceed of former Causes. 3 This Summer quarter is like to be for the greatest part dry and hot, yet it is neither to be too hot, nor too cold, but indifferent. 4 Neither fair, nor foul, both together. 5 Fair and calm, but little misling. 6 Clouds portending Rain and Snow. Examples of those Predictions, which may agree to every year are common with them as these. 1 This year Artificers must take heed of too much straining their Backs. 2 Take heed of venturing in slippery places boldly in building.
3 Old men shall die. 4 Death of Sheep and other Cattel, this year shall be. 5 Sundry Diseases are like to reign amongst many which will sweep away many. 6 False Rumours, Imprisonments, Tortures. 7 Brethren and Sisters shall love one another. 8 Sundry men and women shall be trouble with pains in the Eyes. 9 Much strife amongst men and women. 10 Small love amongst Kinsfolks. 11 Much unlawfull Lust, this year, and secret Forni∣cation. 12 Some Ecclesiastical Person shall be in trouble, and some Nobleman shall die, this is ever at one place or other. 13 Many ship-wrecks, and other stirs on the Seas. 14 Many shall addict themselves to the study of Ne∣cromancy. Thus far M. Perkins. SECT. IV. of CHAP. IV. Wherein the Doctour thinketh the ground of the Art whol∣ly shaken and overthrown, by affirming it meerly imagi∣nary, viz. the ninth and tenth Sphere, and in them the Zodiack, therein proveth and sheweth his own ignor ance the more apparently manifest. BUt what doth this so phistical Cavil avail him, to the subversion of the verity or certainty of Astrology, when the motions and Effects of the stars are known? but even as well may he condemn the Rules, and Precepts of all Arts, which are also gathered by experience and Reason, as Astrology, because the signes of the Zodiack are devised by men; but the reason they attribute these Names, as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and the like, to the
Constellations of the Heaven, is by reason of their forms and particular virtues, expressed under these figures; for Ptolomy hath delivered the nature of the particular stars in them by themselves, as also their particular Complexi∣ons and efficacies, as also the Houses, exaltations, triplici∣ties, terms, and faces, and other Dignities, of the signes, as they follow the nature of the Planets: and since these are known, to what end are all these his Cavils, whether there be a ninth or tenth Sphere? for let there be none at all (as he saith) nor any think called a Zodiack (as he would fain perswade the World) yet since clear experi∣ence and practice evinceth him, as also demonstration that there are such Constellations (call them what you will) his sophistical weak Argument will no wise serve his turn; for I may as well deny there is a Dog a Bear, both lesser and bigger, a Swan, a Crown, a Waggoner, and the like; as he denieth there is not a Bull, a Ram or a Lion in the Heavens, when it is not desired literally (by any Astrolo∣ger) to be understood: {inverted ⁂} that not proved. SURVEY. First, that men may see whether Will. Ram. hath not been impertinent in his Answer, we will in∣sert the Doctours third Argument. The fourth and last Argument (saith the Doctour) a∣gainst Astrology that I shall urge, passing by innumerable others, is, that a main part of the Basis, and bot∣tome, on which Astrologers build the structure of their Art of Prediction is but meet imagination: for there is no such thing as the tenth or ninth Sphere: and therefore the Zodiack placed by Astrologers in them is but a dreamed Fiction. Yea, and one of the quondam great Astrologers (M. P.) will dare to say, that the twelve Signes, bound∣ed (as they suppose) within the dimensions of such a thing as a Zodiack; namely, the signes of Aries, Tau∣rus, Gemini, &c. that is, a Ram, a Bull, &c. (feigned to have power over the twelve parts of Man's Body) are onely twelve imaginary Signes; for in the Heavens
(saith he) there is no such matter as a Ram, a Bull, &c. And how (saith he) can it stand with reason, that in a Firmament, feigned by Poets, and Philosophers, a for∣ged Sign (which indeed is nothing) should have any power and operation in the Bodies of men. Again, the very order of Government of these Signes in Man's bo∣dy, is found and without shew of reason: for according to this Platform, when the Moon cometh into the first Sign Aries, she ruleth in the head; and when she com∣eth into the second Sign Taurus, she ruleth in the Neck; and so descends down from part to part, ruling two, in some three dayes, &c. Where observe (saith he) that the Moon is made to rule in the cold and moist parts, when she is in the hot and dry Signes; whereas in rea∣son, a more consonant order were this, that when the Moon were in hot and dry Signes, as in Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, she should rule in hot and dry parts of the body; and when she is in cold and moist Signes, she should rule in the cold and moist parts of the Body; and so still govern those parts which in temperature come nearest to the Signes wherein the Moon is. Beside this, some learned Physicians have upon experience con∣fessed, that the observation of the Sign is nothing mate∣rial and that there is no danger in it, for gelding of Cat∣tell, or letting of bloud. And the vanity of the old con∣ceit and imagination of them that have put much in the Signes, appears in the common practice of men, who commonly upon Stevens day use to let bloud, be the Sign where it will. The truth is (saith he) the Sign in its own nature is neither way available, being but a phan∣tasie, grounded upon supposed premises, and therefore ought to be rejected as meer Vanity. Thus far he. Now let me add some particulars suiting to what he hath said to illustrate the same; and so I shall not onely confirm him, but also what I affirmed my self in the be∣ginning of this Argument.
First, touching those feigned Firmaments, or Heavens, called the ninth and tenth Heavens; besides that the an∣cient famous Astronomers, Plato, Aristotle Hipparchus, and many others, knew no such thing; sense also doth e∣vince that we can be sure of no more but eight: For we see distinctly the seven Planets, Sun, Moon, &c. and their several motions in twenty four hours, &c. And we can perceive the eighth Heaven of the fixed stars (known by their twinkling) to move in one motion, round the Earth in 24. hours; because we can see the heels of the lesser Northern Bear; adjacent to the North Pole, to be down∣ward towards the Earth in the Evening, and to be upward in the Morning. But we have no sure ground to conclude that there are more Heavens, either the Chrystall Ninth, or the first moving Tenth. The grand reason brought to prove them from the two other motions of the eighth Hea∣ven of fixed stars beside that from East to West in twenty four hours, as that the eighth Heaven of fixed stars moves from West to East, coming to be in the same posture as when they began that motion, by the end of forty nine thousand years: and that the same eighth Heaven hath another motion from South to North, and thence to South again, which process and recess is a finishing seven thou∣sand years; and therefore that that motion of the eighth Heaven, from East to West in 24. hours, must needs be violent, as forced from some tenth Heaven, naturally so moving; and that from West to East in forty nine thou∣sand years, must be also violent, as forced from some ninth Heaven, naturally so moving; and the last motion of the eighth Heaven, viz. From South to North, and back a∣gain in seven thousand years to be the natural, peculiar, in∣nate motion of that eighth Heaven; seeing that (as they forme the Argument) one simple single moveable body can have but one natural motion; I say; this Argument doth not evince my reason in the least, to believe the exi∣stence and being of the ninth and tenth Heaven: for God
that by his Word at the beginning said to the Earth, Stand thou still, and to the Sea, Move thou continually, with severall motions, as of flowing and reflowing, twice every twenty four hours, and they obey his voice to this day; the same God commanding the eighth Heaven to run from East to West every twenty four hours; and with∣all to linger and slinck back every day a little from West to East (as suppose with the Astronomer) as much as comes to one Degree, or sixty miles in an hundred years (which is about three quarters of a mile in one year and half a quarter) and also to roul forward from South to North, and back again from North to South, so gradually till in seven hundred years it is as it was, cannot chuse but obey the voice of God; and so move without ceasing. And (to throw away Traditions in Philosophy as well as in Divi∣nity) 'tis a readier way and surer, to say, God command∣ed the Heavens so to move at first Creation, and they o∣bey; then to say, Primus motor God moves the Angels, or Intelligences, they move a tenth Heaven, and a tenth Heaven moves the other Heavens. And to the clause of one natural body, we say, that there is hardly any natural motion, without some violent, as the Philosophers calls violent: for if Fire ascends, no more of the flame ascends in a pure natural motion, but that which ascends in the Mathematical indivisible Line in the point of the Pyra∣mis, pointing at the Centre-point of the Earth, to its cor∣respondent point in the Sphere of the lowest Heaven. In∣deed if the Pyramical form of the flame were turned up∣side down, then all the flakes of flame might seem to take their natural order proportionable from one Centre-point in the Earth, to their several correspondent points in the Sphere of the lowest Heaven. So of any heavy Body, Stone, or Bowl, &c. falling down from some high places to the Earth, no more of it moves naturally, then the very middle of it tending down∣ward in a Mathematical strait Line to the Centre-point of
the Earth; the corners of such a stone, or the circumfe∣rence of that Bowl, falling not with the like natural mo∣tion, because there is but one universal Centre-point in the middle of the Earth, to answer to all downward motions; which is the Physical demonstrative reason why naturally the Earth is round, the heavy parts more pressing to the general Centre-point, the lighter lesser. So the Water in its motion in a River, it naturally tends downward, yet desires not to be so low as the Centre of the Earth: and the mean while it tends progreffively forward; and in this progressive motion, no more is pre∣cisely natural, but what proceeds in a strait Line: for the Water hath no minde of it self to go out of its Line; that being out of its way, and besides its design. So that either we must say, one man may have many natural mo∣tions, or we must no more feign more Heavens then eight, to move the rest, in their several motions, then we dare feign more Elements then four, to manage the several mo∣tions that are in each one of them. Secondly, touching the imaginary Sphere the Zodiack, this must needs be an infallible Conclusion, so far as the Heaven or Firmament of the Zodiack is feigned, so far of necessity must the Zodiack supposed in that Heaven or Firmament be a meer feigned thing. (We heard afore, that most learned Philosopher and Astronomer Kecker∣man lay it down for a sure Rule; that Astronomers may make, and use Hypotheses, that is, Suppositions, but Astrologers may not.) But the ninth or tenth Sphere or Heaven are feigned, therefore the Zodiack imagined in them is also seigned. 'Tis worth the while to hear Alsted (which is to our purpose) what he saith concerning the Zodiack, the Zodiack (saith he) of the first Mover (that is the tenth Heaven) is imaginary, of the eighth Sphere real. The imaginary is primarily and originally in the Mover, or tenth Heaven, in the inferiour Spheres it is se∣condarily conceited. The Real changeth its situation; the
imaginary doth not. The signes also of the real Zodiack, are wonderfull unequal, but in the imaginary equal. In Accounts the imaginary Zodiack is more commodious; but not so in Predictions. Thus you see how much fiction there is about the Zodiack; and more honour ascribed to the feigned then to the real. Thirdly, touching the twelve imaginary Signes; there is no such formes of stars, as of themselves seem such. Compare Taurus and Aries; and Aries lying under Ba∣laena. Tradition and Globes tell us such things, but the stars of themselves could never make us so imagine. See the Celestial Globe. Fourthly, touching the disorderly placing of the hot dry Signes in parts that are not hot and dry: Nore that Alsted a learned Philosopher, and was also an Astrologer, (at least in opinion) affirms in his System, or Treatise of Astrology, that the twelve Signes are divided into four Trigonos, that is Ternions. or Three. In primo trigono sunt signaignea, videlicet, Aries, Leo, & Sagittarius: In his dominantur calor & siccitas, quae dominantur cholerae & sapori amaro: that is, In the first Ternion are the fiery Signes. Aries the Ram, Leo the Lion, and Sagittarius the Archer. In these Signes are predominant heat and dri∣ness, which have dominion and rule over Choller, and bit∣terness: so Alsted, Vranosc. Par. 4. Cap. 4. Now that these Signes are thus affigned to have dominion; Aries on the head, and Leo on the heart, and Sagittarius on the Reins and Loyns, your Astrologers shew you in your ordinary and common Almanacks. But your Philosophers and Physicians will assure us upon strong reason, that a man hath the coldest Brain, and moistest Heart, and humid'st Reins. Fifthly, touching the imagined Signes, and their sup∣posed dominion over the parts of Man's Body, this would be taken into consideration, that the Traditions about them is such a Fiction in the eyes of some Astrologers, that
some of them omit them in their Almanacks, others ex∣presly deride them. So that which goes under the name of Master Pond: Should I but dare to omit the Anatomy, Which long enough hath gull'd my Countrey Friend: He with contempt would straight refuse to buy This Book; and 'tis no Almanack contend: Ask him its use, hee'll say he cannot tell; No more can I; yet since he love'st so well, I le let it stand, because my Book shall sell. And for my part, I have of purpose tried the experiment of letting Bloud in that part where the Sign hath been (as the Almanacks prescribe) with good success. Thus the Doctour, which Will. Ram. hath in no measure answered, neither in quantity nor quality, either to M. Perkins, or Alsted, nor to the Doctour. Will Ram. saith, Let there be no ninth or tenth Sphere. Then we ask what becomes of the Basis of Astrology, seeing the Zodiack (supposed in them originally unchangeably, and equally) is thereby ta∣ken away. ret saith Will. Ram. the said twelve Signes or Constellations are there, call them (saith he) what you will. But we have shewed Will. Ram. that they are not there; there is no such Configurations. And therefore the Effects of such Constellations as such must needs be non∣ens, as the Effects of any stars for the most are in∣cognita, and Will. Ram. hath not demonstrated to the contrary; but onely Verba dare. And play'd the Dictator not Confutor; or as if he had been rather Jester on the Stage at Technogamia, then a Juridical Advocate at the diyorce of Astrology.
W. R. his CHAP. V. Wherein the Doctours confutation of the objections that are brought for Astrology is (he saith) examined and refuted. THere remains nothing more to be answered of Master Homes his discourse but his confutations of the ob∣jections that are brought for Astrology, which indeed is already refelled in what hath been already said; having consideration to the definition of Astrology, and the Te∣nents of Astrologers: but because I wil not give him occasi∣on to carp or brag of my leaving him here, I shall go along with him in every particular of his remaining cavils; that so the Reader may see on what small grounds he builds up his tower of opposition against Astrology, and what small reason he hath to carp thereat. First he saith Melancthon standeth not for Astrology; but you have heard before how he also thus falsely abu∣sed S. Augustine and Galen; but admit neither of all these were one jot for it, but positively against it; yet wil not this (if granted) make a whit against Astrology; since he will not deny but these are men, and humanum est errare, man is subject to frailty and errour, and there∣fore is not Astrology absolutely condemned hereby; since already you have heard it no wise condemned by the word of God, but the effects of the Stars clearly thereby manifested; yet for the answer of this his delusive quirk. I shall onely send him to Melancthon to be better perused (which here to clear would be too too tedious) and then he will not thus inconsiderately wrong him, as the other two S. Augustin and Galen, the reason whereof was al∣so a negligent perusall of them. Secondly, ro gain-say (as he thinks) Astrology, he saith, that some make a great matter of the Star that
was seen at the birth of Christ: But I answer, that this appearance of this Starre maketh neither for nor against Astrology. But to come to the objections Logicall, which he saith are brought in defence of Astrology and his answers, the first is, that God made the Stars to be signs, Gen. 1.14. therefore the knowledge of the signification of these signs are lawfull: his answer is, God made them to be signs of naturall effects or events, not of arbitrary and morall, that depend on mans will. Wherefore here first the Rea∣der may take notice that M. Homes doth now (contrary to what he hath all this while denyed) consesse the Stars to be signs of naturall effects and events, and whereas he denies them to be signs of arbitrary and morall events de∣pending on the will, he gaineth little of the Astrologer, who (as you have already heard) acknowledgeth the same. To handle here every particular objection and his an∣swers hereon, would be too tedious, and indeed but vain, and to little purpose, since he can say no more then what hath been already (if rightly understood) answered: for to insist upon every vain quillet were an Herculean la∣bour, and to render my self more weak then the propoun∣ders or authours thereof; wherefore I conclude. SURVEY. A full answer to this fifth Chapter will be to shew you The Doctours SECT. V. Confuting the Objections that are brought in the be∣half of Astrology. I will not be so severe (unprovoked) as to take publick cognizance of, and to name to the world, the Authours Books, Predictions, or Practises that have apologized for,
and acted in Astrology; because of other good learn∣ing in them (which I reverence); though in their Astro∣logicalls, I know they have exceedingly erred. If any will be violently impertinent, Viis & modis, by all means to lay low others persons or parts, thereby to advance their mistakes, the Defendent then is bound to tell All the Truth, which can be made good by substantiall witnesses, and testimony. That which I have in my eye to do, is onely to give a light touch, and pointing with the finger upon some few things that are most speciously pretended to be Patronages of Astrology. And because some are more Oratorious, others more Logicall. I shall suit my language to theirs. And to the first I must say, it appears by what hath been said in the precedent Treatise, that The Heavens yet never spake the Language of Astrology, so as the most learned in the World (afore named) could ever understand. And to rhetoricate high in the behalf of Astronomy; or to kick down low them that slight it, is wide from the businesse in hand touching Astrology, whose vast difference from the other was afore sufficiently, though briefly, intima∣ted: And though he should own it, that Pleyades, Ar∣cturus, Orion, and other Stars (mentioned in Scripture, and allowed therein to be lawfully mentioned by us) have stampt in them by creation a power of Influences, where∣by accordingly they Operate on sublunary Bodies; men knowing in some measure those influences, so that they lawfully Predict according to the known nature and qua∣lity of those influences; yet will it not thence follow that there is any such thing allowed as Judiciary Astrology, to predict and foretell what shall befall men, and Cities, and Common-wealths, in relation to humane affairs, ar∣bitrary actings, and Spontaneous voluntary transactions that depend immediately upon the movings of the will of man. All that would naturally follow from those indefi∣nite premises (if granted) would be onely a particular
conclusion, that therefore in some things men may be able in a lawfull way probably to predict some kinds of events, as that whether there shall be, or perhaps whether it will be an healthy or sickly time for men or beasts, or such like naturall effects of the naturall influences of Stars. Which if men can attain at times of the year to see distinctly in their just positions, exaltations and conjunctions, &c. and have had experience of the operations of their influences; they may perhaps sometimes blunder right, that so wea∣ther, health, or sicknesse, &c. may follow as they conje∣ctured. But all this, and if we could name an hundred more naturall effects, would not satisfie the Astrologer, or his Clients; nor keep up the reputation of the one, or answer the expectation of the other. They ordinarily come to the Astrologer with these Queries? Such a time I was born, after what manner shall my life and death be? Thither I intend to go, and so and so to do, what shall be the successe? Such a night I was robbed, what manner of person was the Thief, and where, or how may I find him? Such a thing I lost at such a time, how may I get it again? I am loved and do love severall persons in a way of marriage which may I take as luckie, which refuse as unluckie? with infinite the like Questions, and many more stranger then these. To which if the A∣strologer make no answer, the reforters despise him. If he doth not undertake to give a positive answer to such inte∣rogatories, then I must ask him what Scripture, or reason doth teach, or allow such a kind of Astrology? The Hea∣then Romane Senate (without direction from Moses, Deut. 18. whom they knew not, or acknowledged not) made laws against Vaticinatores; that is, Those that would foretell things (as Ʋlpian in his seventh Book, De officio proconsulis, tells us) And if Gellius doth think that the common people understood by that name the Chaldae∣ans (A. Gell. lib. 2. Noct. Art.) this doth not conclude that the learned Legislators so understood it. And if they
did, the suspition is yet unremoved, whether all Astrologi∣call Predictours of humane events and arbitrary transa∣ctions are not of the same bran with the Chaldean Fore∣tellers? And therefore Moses and the Prophers, &c. con∣demning Astrology, condemn all without limitation, or di∣stinction: so that we have no warrant to take mans word against Gods word; but to refuse their distinction of law∣full and unlawfull Astrology. For all Astrology, that is properly Astrology in the opinion of Astrologers (and not Astronomy, Physiology or Meteorology &c.) that is, to predict the effects aforesaid, is unlawfull, superstitious, false, abominable, &c. And so are we to understand those Epithites or aditionall titles of Astrology, in divine, and humane pious Writers. For they do no more intimare a lawful Astrology then in the common expression, Turpe vitium filthy or uncomely vice doth intimate that any vice is not filthy but comely. So that Astrology was not here∣tofore before the time of Ptolomy and An. Pius, unlawfull, onely because then the Art was imperfect, and its pro∣gnostication uncertain; but because for many other and greater reasons (as we heard afore) did God condemn it in his word the imperfection and uncertainty also still essenti∣ally adhearing to it, as learned Astrologicall Alsted, but of the other day, and others more assert; before mentioned sufficiently. Melancthon, they say, teacheth us, how neces∣sary Astrology is. Could I have found it by perusall of all his works, I should have thought so too; but with the same labour sinding the contrary, I must rather believe what I see, then what I hear. He speaks against Astrology in his Commentary on Gen. c. 1. upon the words, Videre quod sit bonum, &c. it is in the beginning of his Works (and therefore one would think he would not afterwards so grosly contradict himself: His words against Astrolo∣gy in that place are, Primum hic observabis, vanum esse Commentum Philosophorum, quod de ordine causarum. & de fluxu syderum prodiderunt. Nam ante astra conduntur
plantae, quas potissimum nasci, et servari virtute syderum existimaverunt. That is, First thou shalt observe here that the Fiction which the Philosophers have set forth concern∣ing the order of causes and the Influence of Stars is Vain. For the Plants which they have imagined to be created and nourished by the virtue of the Stars, were created a∣fore the Stars: so Melancthon. And I much suspect that the originall pretenders of Melancthon for A∣strology, mistook by a negligent view of his words on the Epistle to the Colossians, c. 2, which are these, Medicina comprehendit Physiologiam & Astronomiam. Sunt enim in mendendo, temporum discrimina quaedam servanda. Est autem & alia Astronomiae utilitas, quòd oportet habere civilium negotiorum causâ certam anni et mensium de∣scriptionem, &c, Necessaria est et altera philosophiae pars quae Morum Praecepta Tradit, & quae Leges Regenda∣rum Civium Peperit. In which words Melancthon speaks something of the usefulnesse of Astronomy; of Physiology (or Physicks; that is, Naturall Phylosophy:) of Ethicks; that is, Morall Phylosophy, to teach men externall good manners; and of Politicks; that is, touching the civill government of cities, and Common-wealths: But not a word of the name or thing of Astrology; and therefore I thought it not worth while to translate this last place. Tis sufficient for us, that Melancthon doth appear ra∣ther against Astrology. We have confest afore, that many strange things have, and may be done by the Opticks (the Art of see∣ing) and severall other Arts; as the same may be grant∣ed to Staticks (of Ponderations) &c, So that Ignoramus would think them to be Juggling, or &c. We honour all true Art and Artifices, of which the Artist (at least) can give from nature, justissimam rationem, a due account and cause. But this doth not countenance, in the least, the Astrology, and Astrologicall Feits we speak of. A friend of Astrology, to patronage it, makes great use
of that place in Job, chap. 38. v. 31. which our English Translatours thus render, Canst thou refrain, or bind the sweet influence of the Pleiades, &c. And from this one word Influences, draws forth great conclusions for Astro∣logicall predictions. But first note, that in the Hebrew (the sole judge of the right reading of the Text) there is no such word as Influences or Sweet, but onely  that is, The Pleasures, Delights, or Delicacies;  of Virgiliae, or Pleiades, In the Syriack and Arabick, there is lesse; mentioning onely the Face of Pleiades. And in Hieroms Latine translation as little, namely, The shi∣ning Stars Pleiades. In the Chaldee lesse yet, for it nei∣ther names Pleiades, nor influence, nor any effect of any virtue upon the sublunary bodies, but mentions onely the motions of Stars, thus, Wilt thou bind Orion with Chains, and loose the Cords that draw Arcturus? And to the same tune the Greek Translation of the Septua∣gint, , &c. That is, Hast thou compo∣sed the bond of Pleiades, and hast thou opened the fence, or enclosure of Orion. Secondly note, that whatever intimation of influence any Astrologer can draw from this Text, it will prove but a naturall influence upon Plants, and naturall bodies, to further their naturall ef∣fects, nothing tending to Predictions of voluntary act∣ings, and humane events of men, as men, as that same friend of Astrology hath ingeniously confessed enough to this purpose. Although (saith he) All things are governed by the influence of the Heavens, yet Many eminent things do Happen in the Aire, and in the Body of man, whose Originall cause is from the virtue of the Heavens. As sometimes the influence is helped for∣ward through Diabolicall and wicked inchantments, so oftentimes God is pleased to hinder the influentiall virtues of the Heavens at the prayers of the Faithfull. It is sure that so much credit is not to be given to such Signs as the vulgar and credulous Astrologer doth ima∣gine;
neither is there virtue and power altogether to be rejected. Influences though they descend on man, &c. yet they do not Compell, through any necessity: For the free mind of man is not subjected, and as it were, enslaved to any Position of the Starres; For Sapiens dominabitur Astris; that is, A wise man shall rule over the Stars. Thus farre the great Friend of Astrology, if not an Astrologer. In which, I much commend him for his ingenuous and candid dealing. For according to this declaration, there can be no due, true, and lawfull prediction of humane things by the Starres: Though we grant Meteorologicall effects; yet this inferrs nothing for rationall events. But our lover of Astrology afore quoted, allows not in his glosse on Luke chap. 12. vers. 54. a certainty of effects of Starres in Meteorologicals; How then shall we in Arbitraries? Nor will the distinctions that some make, help up the credit of judiciary, or divinatory predicting Astrology. They say there is a threefold Prognostication, or Divi∣nation; namely, Superstitious, Supernaturall, natural: And Superstitious is either Heathenish, or Oraculous. Not to spend time about the form of these distincti∣ons, either to note the low debasing, Scripturelesse, and unworthy phrases of Supernaturall Prognostication, or Divination, whereby to signifie the wonderfull Predi∣ctions of the extraordinarily inspired Prophets; or to shew that the terms of the distinctions, Coincidere, are not distinct; Superstitious, and Supernaturall being both above nature. God so acting in the Supernaturall, and Satan in the superstitious, and Heathenish and Oracu∣lous all one; those Oracles they mention of Apollo &c. belonging to the Heathen. I say not to spend time about words; I shall briefly speak to the thing; namely, That by the Arguments, the Scriptures use and urge against Astrology in generall, without the least distinguishing in favour of any kind of Astrology, properly so called; it
appears that all Astrology is Superstitious, Heathenish, &c. To tell us of the effects of Starres in Meteors, Ele∣ments, Plants, &c. is onely to Physiology, or Meteoro∣logy. To discourse further, as to say the effect of the Stars is a voluntary action, by which the principall effi∣cient God, is Helped, Assisted, and Furthered, in pro∣ducing the effect, as the Master Builder is helped by his servants to build an House, is not onely an unwar∣rantable, but a most sinfull, I had almost said, a blas∣phemous speech. That God that can do all things immedi∣ately of himself (as we see in the Creation, and miracu∣lous operations) when he useth any of the Creatures in producing any effects, He Assisteth them, not they Him. And we find not in the Scriptures that he u∣sed any Creatures to predict Voluntary actions, but his Prophers. Those that will defend Astrologicall predictions, by a distinction between Non illicitium, and Licitum, that though Astrologicall predictions are not lawfull; yet they are not unlawfull, do not consider that lawfull and unlawfull are immediate contraries; so that whatsoever cannot be truly asserted to be lawfull, is unlawfull. And as weak is their defence to presume to say that Astrologi∣call predictions are no where in the Word of God for∣bidden; either explicitely or implicitely: For not with∣standing their superficiall glosses (not worth a particular answer) on two or three Scriptures that are against them, whereby to abate their edge, and to save the head of A∣strology from wounding; it hath been abundantly afore demonstrated out of many Scriptures, that Astrology, in∣definitely, without exception is condemned by the Word of God. To whiffle off the dint of any Scripture, ex∣presly disliking Astrology (as Isa. 47.13. &c.) with the distinction that their superstitious, or Heathenish A∣strology is forbidden, not lawfull Astrology; hath been already answered: That all Astrology, properly so called,
is condemned in the Word of God, by such and the like Epithites, of superstitious, heathenish, &c. as all vice is condemned by the names of filthy, uncomely, (&c.) vice. And those terms added to Astrology, of superstitious, heathenish, &c. are of the very dint of the Arguments in many places of Scripture, whereby the holy Ghost intends to render all Astrology odious. For the great matter that some would make of the mention of a Starre (Matth. 2.2.) appearing at Christs birth, &c. whereby to countenance Astrology; I shall answer briefly (because the Presse calls upon me to shut up.) Either we must consider this Starre singly, or conjunctively: If singly, then if this was a reall Starre, it was either ordinary, or extraordinary: If ordinary, namely, made and settled in its being in the first creation, and ever since common in appearance, how should it of its self signifie Christs birth an effect, once onely to be, from the beginning to the end of the World? It is unpos∣sible that a common cause, or sign, of it self can be a sure demonstration of a new single singular effect, never to be but once. If it was an extraordinary starre, then ei∣ther so it being newly created; which inferrs that God did not create all things in the beginning, no not all kinds of things; for the Starrs, say the Philosophers upon the ground of their different natures, do Differre specie. dif∣fer in kind. If extraordinary onely in appearance, now, and not afore appearing, how should it of it self teach any Astrologer the said event, who mainly pretends expe∣rience? If it were a seeming starre; that is, a Comet, or Blazing star: First, that rather presageth death, then birth, by reason of the noysome and filthy fumes and exhalations of which it is compounded, and being on fire diffuseth them into the air in which the Sons of men are enwrapped. Secondly, Then, this starre belongs ra∣ther to Metereologie (a part of naturall Philosophy) then to Astrology. If we consider this Starre conjunctively;
namely, together with propheticall explanations upon it (as the starres in Joel 2. And Matth. 24.) then the consideration of this starre was more Theologicall then Astrologicall. And this is supposed by the Learned, both ancient and modern, that the wise men of the East took into consideration the signification of this starre by the help of Scriptures, either immediately coming to their view (being Eastern neighbours of the Jews) or medi∣ately by the hands of them that had their glosses (of such a thing to come) out of the Scriptures. Tis put upon Chry∣sostome, that he affirms that in the East in a City called Seth, near the Ocean there was a society of men, twelve in number, studients in Astrology; who learning out of Balaams prophecy, Numb. 24.17. that such a starre was to appear, gave themselves from yeare to yeare to observe the heavens, and to wait for the appearing of it: and for continuation of that observation throughout ma∣ny ages till it did appear, did at the death of any of the twelve, choose another in his room; by which at last they saw this starre. Calcidius likewise a Platonick Philosopher flourishing in the time of Christs birth, wri∣ting upon Plato his Timeus, concerning divers Stars and their wonderfull effects, faith thus, There is a more holy and divine history (meaning the Scriptures) which re∣ports that by the appearing of a certain extraordinary Starre, not diseases and death were foreshown, but the venerable descent of God for mans salvation; which Starre was observed by the Chaldaeans, who worshiped God, new born and become man, and offered him gifts. So far Calcidius. And whereas in Hebrew, that prophecie of Balaam runnes thus. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Plant or Branch shall rise out of Israel (ac∣cording to which Isaiah and Jeremiah Prophecy, Isay 11.1. Jer. 23.5. and 3.15.) the Greek of the Septu∣agint (who wrote about 300. years afore Christ) tran∣slates Star by  a Star, but Plant or Branch (which our
Translatours render Scepter (the Septuagint translate by , Man; which the vulgar latine followes. So that the learned Eastern people, by their knowledge of the Hebrew, and of so ancient a Greek Translation, might compound a due sense out of these two, that a starr should arise to signifie the birth of a most eminent man to be born of the bloud of Jacob or Israel. Lastly, the Ancient Sibills (who wrote long before Christ; Some as anciently as the Babilonian captivitie; some men∣tioned by Virgil, who flourished above fourtie years afore the Birth of Christ, &c.) do in their way, fore∣tell of Christ, and sometimes in an Astrologicall Phrase, Jam redit & virgo redeunt Saturnia regna: Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto. These Sibylls were so well known in the Eastern world, that from them (how ever they came by it) they might have some hints of this Sarr and it's pointing at Christ. These things being so; 'tis plain, not the Starr of it selfe Astrologically, but the Theologicall pre-expositi∣ons of that Starr did cause men to understand, at the ap∣pearance thereof that Christ was to be born. 'Tis well confest by some, whom they cry up to be for their Astrolo∣gicall way, That both Nature and Art may beat a stand in spirituall things, especially concerning Christ, which as the Apostle witnesseth are very mysterious, Ephes. 3.4. 1 Tim. 3.16. The wisemen hoping well of the Jews, as Gods peculiar people, go to Jerusalem, and consult with them. These wise men came to Christ by a guidance of a Starr, which may justly blame the unwise, who ascribe their not coming to Christ to fatal necessitie, or the influ∣ences of Starrs; as Tertullian hath it, Deonerant seipsos, & malae mentis impetus vel fato vel astris imputant. As Austine hath to one same purpose, Falso ds stellarum influxu conqueruntur mortales, quod peccatum adeo vo∣untarum; est quod si non voluntarium non est peccatum;
that is, mortall men falsly complain of the influence of the starrs; that sinne is so voluntary, for if it be not vo∣luntary, it is not sin. Did we resist by grace our corru∣ptions, we should deceive the Astrologers, by ruling over the Starrs. The highest God can, and doth oft cross the course of Nature, and often produceth that which could not be foretold by the observation of the Starrs. And therefore men should , not to think beyond that we may wisely think, to be wise to sobriety. Certainly to foretell contingences is the property of God himself. Thus farr for answer to the Oratours for Astrology. Next we will give a short reply to them that are more Logicall. Ob. God made the stars to be signs Gen. 1.14. therefore the knowledge of the signification of those signs is lawfull. Answ. God made them to be signes of naturall effects or events; not of arbitrary and morall, that depend on mans will, on which the starrs have no power. Corpus non agit in animam. A body cannot act upon the spirit of a man, no more then a materiall sword can wound an An∣gel. Again the starrs are not signes to us of all naturall e∣vents, as to wit, not of naturall contingences (to us con∣tingent) as the lighting of a Crow near us, or, &c. but of all naturall necessaries known by apparent common ex∣perience. As that of Solomon; when they cause a North wind; it drives away rain, &c. And that of our Savi∣our Mat. 16.3. speaking according to the common ex∣perience men had. when the skie is red in the Evening, ye say it will be fair weather. But when the skie is red and lowring in the Morning, it will be foul weather. Further, The starrs may be signs in regard of their motions, be∣longing meerly to pure Astronomy, as when there will be an eclipse; though they should never be signs of any events in regard of their influences or qualitative Virtues. Obj. The Starrs are causes of many things here be∣low.
But it cannot be unlawfull to observe Causes how they produce their effects, Scire est per causas scire. All true knowledge is by the Causes. And therefore, Felix qui poterit rerum cognoscere causas, He is happy that knows the Causes of Things. Answ. 1. We said but now, the motions of the Stars cause Eclipses; sometimes of the Moon by the interpositi∣on of the Earth exactly between it and the Sun; some∣times of the Sun by the direct interposition of the Moon between us and the Body of the Sun, which the Astrono∣mer (though he never knew the least of the inward influ∣ential qualities of any of the Stars) can predict. And therefore all this doth add nothing at all to countenance Astrology. Secondly, we demand what Causes are the Stars? Not particular Causes of particular Events, but general com∣mon Causes that work in common, and alike upon all things. Now no man can divine of a particular Event by a general Cause, unless he know the particular Causes sub∣ordinate and their particular virtues. Some give this in∣stance, that a man cannot, by setting many sorts of Eggs under a Hen, foretell what will be hatch'd, by the meer sitting of the Hen in common upon them all; unless also he know the particular qualities of those Eggs; so from the stars, being common Causes no man can foretell Events, unless he knew the kindes and qualities of Causes and Things subordinate to them. Object. Experience shews that Astrologers sometimes hit right. Answ. To this M. Perkins, and other pious learn∣ed men, and with appeal to many others, and of those of as great Antiquity as the Times of the Apostles; gives this Answer, and with great confidence; that in this there is a secret Magick at least; if not an open Covenant with the Devil; he making sup∣ply what is wanting in the virtue of stars, and Rules
of Astrology. And say they, this is the judgement of those that have known this Art. So farr they. Conso∣nant to which we referr the Reader to what before was confest by Master Bridges, S. Astin and others, he makes mention of. Which is the more confirmed; because if the Astrologers client comes tempting him and not con∣fiding in him; that is, in his skill, he can do nothing, but if he can admire the Artist, and rely upon his skill, then he can answer his desires. And this is confest by them that have been great Astrologers but now repenting have left it, whom if need be, I can name. Obj. Moses and Daniel were greatly skild in this Art. For of Moses 'tis said, Acts 7.22. That he was learned in all the Wisdome of the Fgyptians. And of Daniel, cap. 1.17.20. That he had skill in all Learning and wisdome of the Chaldeans. Ans. If they had practised it in their yonger years, it doth neither follow nor appear in the Bible, that they continued to practise it. For we are sure at mans estate they were precious Godly men. Secondly, It is said, they had skill, not, that they practised it. They might have skill, and to use it as S. Austin Master Perkins, and Ma∣ster Bridges &c. to abhor and testifie againstche evil of it. Thirdly, It is plain that Moyses was opposite to the Egyptian Magicians, &c. and by his skill conquered and shamed them, and convinced them, that the finger of God was in what Moyses did. And of Daniel it is said, that he was in skill ten times Better then all the Astrologers or Magicians that were in all Nebuchadnezzars Realm, Dan, 1.20. Therfor his skill must needs be divine, and a∣bove Astrology. Obj. We see and feel that the Sun and Moon and other Stars have great powe on the air, and so by it on the bodies of men, as appears even by this, that in some weathers we are more chearfull, in some more Melancholy; in some more healthy, in others more sickly.
Ans. All this is nothing at all to Astrologicall predi∣ction of naturall contingents; much lesse of voluntary moralls. Nor can we tell so much in many naturall things, as to which Starr to attribute which effect seeing they all at once co-operate: As a man in a juce, extracted mixtly out of severall hearbs pounded together, and strained, cannot by all his senses distinguish the virtues of these acu∣ratly, much lesse foretell which (being medicinably ap∣plyed) shall operate most, and what peculiar effect it shall produce; least of all if this compound juice must be mingled with some other liquors, as the operative qualities of the Starrs are mingled with the qualities of the Elements; of them above, in their radiation afore they reach to us; and of them beneath by exhalation of them, and reflection of the beams of the Stars, which is a second mixture, and so a further confounding of hu∣mane understanding how to judge of them what they will effect. Obj. Sol & Luna, post Deum omnium viventium vita sunt: Herm. Trism. The Sun and the Moon, next under God are the life of all living creatures. Ans. If they be the life of all living creatures, then no more of men then of Beasts, or plants. What is this then to the acting of their understandings and wills where∣in they are distinguished from, and sublimated above all corporall things, whose formes are (materiales) mate∣riall, not spirituall. Food is the cause of mans life, yet that hath no influence upon the soul. The soul of man acts pure, yea purest reason when the body is as dead by deep sleep, Therefore all this objection makes nothing so Astrology. Obj. . &c.  Phil. Jud. de Mund. Opif. Movings and Earthquakes proceed from the concussions of the Heavens. &c. because the Starrs are made for Signse.
This objection out of Forged Philo (as learned Broughton calls him) is nothing for the praise of Astro∣logy. In Meteorology are handled Earthquakes. They are passions of the Earth, not of men, the Earth hath a fit of the Wind, and makes it in part, to tumble for ease, till it belcheth it up again. If the attractive Starrs, that at lest, draw light things upward, are become depulsive to make the Air descend; I wonder 'tis not so said in all the body of Philosophy? And if any thing be ascribed to the Starrs in the ascent of that Earthquake-ayre, 'tis needlesse; for it would as surely ascend of its own levi∣tating qualitie (as soon as the Earth gives way) with∣out the help of the Starrs, as without them, water des∣cend. If Starrs be said mediately to cause Earthquakes (I know not how;) their Hosts and Myriads, bespangled over the Heavens, surrounding the Earth, operate in common, as well as constantly; and the Earthquakes are so seldome in time, and so particular to petty places, in comparison of the Ʋniverse, that no just reason can pre∣dict this event by them. to say, that because the Starrs are signes of some things; as of Day and Night, Heat and Cold, &c. which are naturall; therefore they are signes of all or most things, even of Contingences, Arbitra∣ries, and Moralities, and to a ground of prediction, of such; is such a grosse Non-sequitur, that no man that hath and useth reason, will, or can beleeve it. Obj. , &c. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.6. Demtcritus fore∣told many things, by the observation of things above; and it was called Wisdome. Answ. By what things above? For there are some Elements above, and in them many ayrie, fieri, and wa∣tery Meteors as well as Starrs. If by the Starrs, then what things did he foretell? If that in Clemens Alex∣andrinus, That Starrs are Instrumetts of Time: Or
that of Thales Milesius, to foretell Eclipses of the Sun, &c. or finde out Ʋrsa minor, or the like stars, to direct the Mariner in Navigation; these belong not to Astro∣logy, but to Physiology, and Astronomy. Nor do they conduce to Predictions of humane Actings. If he fore∣told any thing (being a Heathen) which is not clearly pre∣visible by Nature or Reason, his , wisedom, was falsely so called. But to do him lawfull right, as far as we can know; He was (saith the Story) an Astronomer, which produceth nothing for the honour of Astro∣logy. Object. Augustine saith, Astrologia perscrutanda est ad cognoscendum proprietates istorum syderum, ut hunc locum intelligere possimus, that is, Astrology is to be searched into, to know the properties of those stars, that we may be able to understand this place: therefore in the judgement of Augustin, there is a lawfull use of Astro∣logy. Answ. This place in Augustin can import no more but this, that some place of Scripture, speaking of some stars; the knowledge of the qualities of those stars would further the fuller understanding of that place of Scrip∣ture: but what makes this to predicting Astrology, more then Meal, Leaven, &c. (Matth. 13.) or the precious Stones, a Jasper, and Sardine, and Emerald, (Revel. 4.) whose properties well understood, help more fully to know the meaning of those Scriptures? Surely, Augu∣stine never intended in that Expression if any such be in his Works, to advance Astrology or Astronomy, or the Consideration of stars and Constellations for understand∣ing of the Scriptures, or any other good use: for in his Works, Edit. Basil per Frob. Anno Domini 1569. he hath these Expressions, opposite to any such intent. Astronomia parùm aui nihil commodat Scripturae, Aug. Tom. 3. Col. 38. that is, Astronomy little profits or lends to the Scripture.
Syderum cognitio parùm utilis Scripturae, Aug. Tom. 3. cap. 38. that is, The knowledge of the Stars, or Con∣stellations is little profit to the Scripture. Augustine in his tom. 1. cap. 761. tom. 8. cap. 197. speaks against, Astrologos & eorum curiositates, Astro∣logers and their Curiosities. In his 1. tom. cap. 90,100,102,126,418. He detests the vanity of Astrology. In his 4. tom.cap. 742. He pronounceth that, Astrologi veritat is inimici Astrologers are Enemies of the Truth. In his 5. tom.cap. 279, &c. he abundantly disputes of the uncertainty of Astrology. And in his 5. tom.cap. 291. Augustin hath this terri∣ble speech against Astrologers; namely, Astrologorum responsa ex malis esse spiritibus; that is, That the Answers of Astrologers are from or by evil Spirits. And in his 8. tom.cap. 165. Augustine affirmeth, that Astrology is not necessary to this life, Astrologia huic vitae non est necessaria. Augustine in his 10. tom. cap. 525. sheweth the vani∣ty of Astrologers. And in his 8. tom.cap. 197. is his Invective against the new Astrologers. Augustine in his fifth Book, De civitate Dei, Cap. 1. (to which some give this Title, Contra Astrologorum in∣eptias, idest, Against the Fooleries of Astrologers, Jo. Crisp. hath these words, Illi verò qui positionem stellarum quodammodo decernentium qualis quisque sit, & quid ei proveniat boni, quid ve mali accidat, ex Dei voluntate suspendunt, si easdem stellas putant habere hanc potesta∣tem traditam sibi à summa illius potestate, &c. id est, As for those that make these operations of the stars in good or bad, to depend upon God's will, if they say, that they have this power given them from him, to use according to their own wills, they do Heaven much wrong; in imagining that any wicked Acts or Injuries
are decreed in so glorious a Senate, and such as if any earthly City had but instituted, the whole generation of man would have conspired the subversion of it. And what part hath God left him in this disposing of hu∣mane affairs, if they be swayed by a necessity from the stars, whereas he is the Lord of stars, and of men? If they do not say that the stars are Causes of these wicked Acts, through a power that God hath given them, bu that they effect them by his express command, is this fit to be imagined for true of God, that is unworthy to be held true of the stars? But if the stars be said to portend this onely, and not procure it, and that their Positions be but signes, not Causes of such Effects (for so hold ma∣ny learned men;) Truly the Astrologians use not to say, Mars in such a House signifieth this or that; no but ma∣kech the childe born an Homicide. But to grant them this errour of speech &c. how cometh it to pass, that they could never shew the reason of that diversity of life, actions, state, profession, art honour, and such humane accidents, that have befallen two Twins? Nor of such a great difference both in the things aforesaid, and in their death, that in this case many strangers have come nearer them in their course of life, then the one hath done to the other, &c. Upon which words at * Erasmus of himself, and out of Firmicus, saith, Mars is a star bloudy, fiery, and violent: Being in the seventh House saith Firmicus, lib. 3.) in a Partile aspect with the Horoscope (that is in the West) doth presage; that is, maketh men Murtherers, wicked, and heinous. Augustine in the same Book, Cap. 7. hath to this pur∣pose, Jam illud quis ferat quod in eligendis diebus, novae quaedam suis actibus fata moliuntur? Non erat videlicet ille ita natus, ut haberet admirabilem filium, sed it a po∣tius ut contemtibilem gigneret, & ideo vir doctus elegit horam quà misceretur uxori. Fecit ergo fatum quod non habebat, sed ex ipsi fato cepit esse fatale, quod in ejus
nativitate non fuerat. O stultitiam singularem! Eligitur dies ut ducatur uxor, credo propterea, quia potest in diem non bonum, nisi elegatur incurri & infeliciter duci. Ʋbi est ergo quod nascenti jam sydera decreverunt? An potest homo quod ei jam constitutum est, diei electione mutare, & quod ipse in eligendo die constituerit non poterit ab alia potestate mutari? &c. that is, But who can indure this Foolery of theirs, to invent a new destiny for every acti∣on that a man undertaketh? That wise man aforesaid, it seems, was not born to have an admirable Son, but ra∣ther a contemptible one; and therefore elected he his hour wherein to beget a worthy one: so thus did he work himself a destiny more then his stars portended, and made that a part of his Fate, which was not signi∣fied in his Nativity. O singular fondness! A day must not be chosen for Marriage, because otherwise one might light on an unlucky day, and so make an ill Marriage. But where then is the destiny of your Nativity? Can a man change what his fate hath appointed, by chusing this day or that, and cannot the Fate of that day which he chuseth be altered by another Fate? Again, if men alone of all the Creatures on Earth, be under the starry power, why do they chuse days to plant, and days to sow, and so forth; days to tame Cattle, days to put to Males for increase of Oxen, or Horses, and such like? If the election of those days be good, because the stars have dominion in all earthly Bodies living, Creatures and Plants, according as the times do change; let them but consider how many Creatures have original from one and the same instant, and yet have such divers ends, as he that but noteth, will deaide those Observations, as Childrens Toyes. For what Sot will say, that all Herbs, Trees, Beasts, Birds, Serpents, Worms, and Fishes, have each one a particular moment of time to be brought forth in? Yet men do use for trying of the Ma∣thematicians skill, to bring them the figures of the Births
of Beasts, which they have for this end diligently ob∣observed at home; and him they hold the most skillfull Mathematician that can say by the figure, this portend∣eth the Birth of a Beast, and not of a Man, &c. Thus far Augustine, out of whom I might have quoted much more; but they that list, may in his Works easily finde it of themselves. Thus you see evidently, even by this of the Doctour, that Will. Ramsey hath given no real Answer to him, where he seems to give an Answer, as 1. Touching Me∣lancton. 2. Touching Austin. 3. Touching the Doctours deniall of the natural Effects of the stars, &c. there VVill. Ramsey tells us notorious untruths, as hath been most evidently demonstrated by the precedent Treatise. Of the same brain are those passages of VVill. Ramsey, touching the star that appeared at Christ's Birth; and of his yielding that stars are not signes of arbitrary Events, &c. For his Crew do mightily cry up that Book as the Friend of their Astrology, wherein that star is handled. And VVilliam in this his Lux hath stood for arbitrary Effects of stars, and hath by figures shew'd his practise therein, as hath been abundantly demonstrated. And therefore VVill. Ram. doth plainly juggle with his Read∣er, and play Legerdemain (as they say) or Bo-peep (as Children speak) For in the beginning of his Book he lays down a definition of Astrology, by the natural Effects of Stars; with some Glosses to the same effect in his Epistle to the Reader, (to which if he had adhered, there had been no Controversie between us) but when he comes up∣on the Stage of Dispute in his Book, he changeth his Ha∣bit; untill again he be quite stript by his Opponent; and then he runs to his definition again. And when he is fer∣retted, that he cannot tell where to be, he puts Queries, that when he cannot fairly win, he may fouly beg the Question. But that will not be granted. FINIS.
