R321 45789389 172700
For G. P. Or the Author of a little Book, entituled, Just Measures, in an Epistle, &c. and to all the Approvers thereof; with a Postscript and a few Words to the Yearly Meeting in London. Friend G. P. IF I had known as certainly where to find thee, as I may suppose who thou art, then I would not have appeared to seek after thee in this manner, for I am persuaded I may conclude, Thou art one of those very Persons that knoweth better Things than thou practisest; and it is contrary to thy Knowledg, to busie thy self about such Fallible Things, as are of late Days crept into the Church, among many of which I shall at this Time take notice of what thou hast given me an occasion to consider, in a little Book, subscribed as by an Author, G. P. and entituled, Just Measures, in an Epistle of Peace and Love, to such Professors of Truth as are under any Dissatisfaction about the Present Order practised in the Church of Christ. I cannot better begin than with one of the Scriptures thou dost in Page 19. recommend, To Read and Mark the Bent and Force of the Apostle's Spirit, as in Romans, in many Places, so in Chapter xvi. Verse 17, and 18. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offences, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own Bellies, and by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple. Consider this, and do as in Pages 18, 19, 20. Upon a Serious Consideration of what thou hast pressed us unto, thou hast taken such Measures as are not for Peace, as too many others do, which are like-minded with thee against us: For we are conscienciously concerned to shew our Dissatisfaction against your so earnestly pressing us, for a Conformity to such unscriptural Orders, as we have no Faith in, to be subject to in your Way and Manner of imposing upon Peoples Consci∣ences, contrary to their Faith; for we look upon them as Innovations, and are certainly persuaded, they will, in a little Time, appear to be but the Inventions of Men. It is a good Saying that's mentioned Colloss. 3. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called, in one body, and be you thankful. Thou hadst been a happy Person, and the Aprovers of thy Work, if they had so walked among their Brethren. Though we are bid in Page 20. "Lay down every Mark or Ensign of Difference or Separation. Now let G. P. and all his Approvers consider, What are the proper Marks or Ensigns of Difference or Separation. Next, let us find out the Parties who practise or give the Marks or Ensigns of Difference for a Separation. And to the first, we have sufficiently in our Account from Wickham made it known: And it is also in most Meetings when we appear as Persons concerned, in a Publick Testimony, where some of you are present, then it is very apparent what those Marks or Ensigns of Difference are, which tend to a Separation, viz. Your unbecoming Striving in Meetings, to keep us from having any Liberty, or Time to offer our Gifts, and to clear our Conscience in the Things of God, whererein we are concerned. Also your Unchristian Behaviour towards us, by sitting in an uncomly Man∣ner, when we are upon our Knees to the Lord, in that holy Duty. As for the Second Thing: Concerning the Persons that practise these Marks and Ensigns of Difference, which lead to a Separation, thou and many of you know in your own Consciences, It is them that talk so much of Good Orders, and practise so little. And whereas we are bid to dispose our Minds to a returning State, and frighten not our selves, as in Page 20. &c. Now we certainly know thou, and them thou callest thy Brethren, have and would impose upon us the Observation of a Woman's Meeting, distinct from the Men: But a distinct Woman's Meeting on a Religious account or Business, as about the Government of the Church, concerning Order or Discipline, separate from the Men, as it is practised about Marriages, we look upon as an Innovation, and imposing upon our Consciences that which we have no Faith to receive. And here, as in other Things, thou dost not take Just Measures, where thou bidst us, as in Page 11. take Notice of our own Concessions where we allow Meetings of Care in general, and do not deny the Women absolutely their Share among the Men. It is very true, we do allow Meetings of Care in general, where Men and Women being met together, as Things offer, and as Occasions do require, we take Care to do those Things which are for the well-being of our Societies, and that every thing may be done according to Truth, and in the Fear of God; and as we have published in our Account from Wickham, so we practise. But all this maketh nothing; for such a distinct Woman's Meeting from the Men, where you would have all Marriages first proposed, &c. And here again thou dost not make Just Measure, when in so many Pages thou dost mak it thy Business, as it were, to insinuate the Necessity and Useful∣ness of a distinct Woman's Meeting, as Pages 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And yet, notwithstanding all thou hast said about it, thou tells us, among other Things, in Pages 5, and 7. There is no need of an Act of Faith or other Exercises of Conscience, than to be ready to every good Word and Work: And further, when thou hast used many Words about the Matter before-mentioned, thou tells us again, it can be no Imposition, as before is expressed, because, as thou sayest, It is no Matter of Faith nor Practice of Worship, as in Page 7, &c. Although it be no Matter of Faith to thee and them that set it up, and press others to it: Yet it is a matter of Faith to us, you would impose upon, contrary to our Conscience: For, as the Apostle saith, Rom. 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. And to make short, when thou givest thy Sense upon the whole Matter, as in Page 9 and 10. Thy Measures are very unjust concerning us, where thousayest, "Our Dissent tended to the breach of Brotherly Love and Unity in the Church; but it is well known your Unchristian Behaviour was the cause of our Dissent. And for further Answer to G. P. and to all the Approvers of his Work, I return what W. P. hath written in his Book, called, An Ad∣dress to Protestants; and it is desired that G. P. and all others concerned, would consider what he hath said against Imposition, as from Page the 140. to Page the 150. and in many other Places; but especially in Page 144. are these Words. But an Imposing Church bears Witness of herself, and will be both Party and Judg; it requires Assent without Evidence, and Faith without Proof, therefore false. Christian Religion ought to be carried on only by that way by which it was introduced; which was, Persuasion; If any Man will be my Disciple, let him take up his Cross and follow me: And this is the Glory of it, that it doth not destroy, but fairly conquers the Understanding. And now for a Conclu∣sion, let G. P. and all his Approvers consider, what W. P. hath pubished for Truth, and openly declared as his Faith and Judgment: Then I hope G. P. and his Brethren, will not be unwilling to do as W. P. hath written in the Book and Pages before mentioned. POSTSCRIPT, by way of Queries to G. P. and others concerned. If according to the Ancient Doctrin of Truth, all People ought to be mindful in Matters relating to God, of the Conviction by the Light and Spirit of Christ in every Conscience: Then no Man ought to impose any Religion or other Matter upon his Brother's Conscience, contrary to his Faith; For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, to him that doth it doubtingly: He that doubteth, is damned if he eat, because not of Faith, Rom. 14. 23. And as thy Words seem to imply, it hath been and is most sincerely declared by the Brethren, That they have no Thoughts or Design of Impo∣sing any thing upon the Conscience of Friends; so hereby thou givest occasion to ask, Who those Brethren are among you? And also where I may find them, that do as thou hast said? Such are none of those busie-Bodies or talkative Preachers, who run before they are sent, and speak of Things they do not understand; which have too much Incouragement from you, either by your Silence, in not reproving of them, or else by your Pra∣ctice, as an ill Example unto them. And further, I desire to know, what is the Reason you break all Union, Friendship, Charity and Christian Fellowship, with us; and behave your selves so towards us in Publick Meetings, and where-ever you meet us, before any sort of People, as if we were Out-casts and Reprobates, and you set a Mark upon us, for all that are like-minded with you, to shoot their Arrows of Envy and blind Zeal against us, &c. A few Words to the Yearly Meeting in London. Friends, consider well among your selves, what some of you have been doing this many years: And remember your Paper of Judgment, you gave against J. S. and J. W. Signed by above sixty such Persons, as belonged to, or were owned by the Yearly Meeting in that Day. Also let your Eyes and Ears be opened, that you may see, hear and consider, the evil Works that Paper hath brought forth; and too many of you by your Silence (if not Practice) have encouraged that evil Work for many years, to the grief and trouble of many Righteous Souls. And it is greatly desired it may come to your Remembrance, how some Persons among you carry or bring false Reports, and tell you that which hath not been really true; and from you it hath been sent abroad as Truth: When as many know, too much of what you say is not true, but as it was said of old, Report and we will Report it. Oh now no more! Let the Cry of the Oppressed Innocent, by you any longer be neglected; for your Eyes have seen, and your Ears have heard, our Tryals, and our patient Sufferings have been before many of your Faces; and unto you have some of us called for Justice and true Judgment, in Righteousness and Truth: But as yet, you have taken little notice of our great Exercise and Patience, with which we have born and suffered for Truth and Righteousness sake; your business hath been rather to make our Afflictions greater, our Burdens heavier, and our Troubles more on every side, so did our old Persecutors: And so that you have given us just occasion to take up against you, the Prophet's Complaint, viz. Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off; for Truth is falling in the Street, and Equity cannot enter: Yea Truth faileth, and he that departeth from Evil, maketh himself a Prey, &c. The Lord beholdeth your Works, and is displeased with much of your Doings; and if there be not Repentance, and an Amendment of all that s wrong and hath been done amiss; then know this is the Word of the Lord to you, and unto all that are concerned, The Almighty God is near at Hand, to visit all Backsliders, and all who hold the Truth in Ʋnrighteousness, and keep not the Commandments of God; but are smiting their Fellow-Servants, aking pleasure in Ʋnrighteousness, and are found in riotous Practices in the day time. Woe, Woe, for the Lord Almighty as an angry God, will with sore and vere Judgments come suddenly upon an unworthy and an unthankful People, for whomhe hath done so great Things. Therefore Oh Friends, prepare to meet e Lord! And let us be at Peace among our selves. John Rance. Wickham the 5th of the 3d. Month, 1692. Printed for the Author the 10th Day of the 3d Month, in the Year 1692.
