S4038 E409_9 99873310 161189
A GREAT FIGHT In the Kingdome of IRELAND BETWIXT The Protestant Forces under the Command of Major Generall Jones, and the Irish Forces under Command of that Arch-Rebell Generall PRESTON. With the number that wre slaine on both sides, and the names of the Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captaines, and other Of∣ficers and Souldiers, taken priso∣ners. Also the manner of Prestons marching towards Dublin, with 9000. Foot, and 1600. Horse, to besiege the said City. Printed at London by B. A. Anno Dom. 1647.
A Famous VICTORY Obtained in IRELAND SIR, I Have seen the Diuiall book, entituled, the Moderate Intelligencer, with the distinct re∣lation of the late happy Victory. But our former intelligencer makes the Rebels army of 7300 Foot, 1047 Horse, which in all makes 8347, killed of them 5470, taken prisoners 325 Officers and Souldiers, so that the num∣ber
of the slain and taken amounts to 5793. which if you abate of 8347. the remainder will be 2552 how then says he, that 500. only escaped of the Rebels; it seemes that he is no good Arithmetician, for hee hath not yet learned substraction. Hee sayes that we have taken Armes of the Rebels for 6000, we have not taken so much, for the Armes of the killed and prisoners will make up 5795 onely, and so we want 215 of the armes, if we divide not the 4 Pieces of Brasse amongst so many: and if so, the 4 Pieces must not be counted by themselves again. He writes that there was no quarter but for Officers or men of quality: why then the 322. that were ta∣ken prisoners, whereof 228 were common souldiers, 22 Sergeants, and 13. Troopers were killed, and so the number of the killed should be 5720 and our priso∣ners 68. in all. Prsston was conceived to be hurt, and why? because he was see with 3 troopers, a goodly consequece, 3 troopers in his company; ergo, he was wounded: in this our Intelligence was mistake, for he took Major▪ Dungan to be Preston, for it was he that escaped, not with 3 troopers, but with 25. & Preston was not there at all. Further, again to the number of the killed and taken according to his account they were 5795. if we exa∣mine the businesse well, the businesse we shall finde that in all that party of the Rebels that met our force there was not the tenth part of the number of the  and prisoners, for they were in all but 4 troops under command of the aforesaid Major Dungan, and 200. Dragoones under command of one Major Lllor, who was taken prisoners.
This was that great army that fell upon our Forces consisting of 7 troopes, and 800. musquetiers, under the command of Sir Thomas Armstrong, Major Dillon and Lieutennt Savill, who were sent by Colonel Iones to make good a passage before the Rebels comming, which they performed gallantly; for when the Irish 4 troopes and Dragoones came upon them, our seven troopes left the Passe, and saved themselves, onely 12. and the 4 troope chased them halfe a mile, and then retired to charge our Foot, who behaved themselves very well for they resisted them in plain field, untill 12 troopes came from our Camp, to reieve our mus∣ketiers, which  Foot perving, got betweene the Irish Forces, and their troopes, and let the troopes on both sides to dispute the matter, and in this dispute all the 4 troopes, and 200 Dragoones were either ta∣ken or killed, saving Major Dungan, and the 25 above mentioned▪ The Officers of the Irish taken prisoners, Captaine Barwell of Horse, and all his Officers, together with the arl of Westmeans troop Officers. Thus have you an exact  of the late Fight in Ireland, for the publishing whereof, you will ob∣lige me to rein Your ever Servant. G. SMITH. Dublin 10. Septemb.
BY Eetters from Ireland, it is further inti∣mated, that there hath bin a late discove∣ry of a treacherous design against the Parlia∣ment, Generall. Lieutenant Generall, Com∣missary Generall Ireton, and the rest of the Officers and Souldiers, under the power and command of the said Generall, which plot, as it was intimated to both houses of Par∣lirment, were acting and contriving by some disaffected Scottish spirits, with a resolution to combine and conspire against the Parlia∣ment of England, and to work and use means for a sudden Engagement in another unna∣turall and most horrid warre, against the most worthy and renowned Heroes of these times; the manner of this most great and machavi∣lian Conspiracy, I shall here briefly recite for generall satisfaction to all Free-born English men, viz. Major Generall Starling, a Scottish-man, Com∣mander in chiefe, under the Lord Inchiqueet, of the Protestant Forces in Ireland in the Province of Munster, having a designe against the Par∣liament of England, for an Engagement, both a∣gainst them, and their Army, which for the better effecting thereof, dispatched everall Letters to
divers eminent Commanders in that Kingdome, (but intercepted) viz. the first to Sir Patrick Weimes, a Scotchman, but a most faithfull, and heroick souldier having an excellent Regiment of Foot, and in actuall service with collonell Jones against the Rebels in Lemster: the second to Maior Generall Manroe, Major Generall of the Scottish Army in the Province of Ulster: the third to the Kingdome of Scotland, with Letters to Generall Leven, Generall of the Scottish Ar∣my, and others. All which Letters were intercepted, and many things (in them) discovered of very high nature, and concernment towards this Kingdome, the De∣signe being to engage all in a warre against the Parliament and Army in England. But now it is hoped their Designes will be frustrated for col. Jones hath discovered the chiefe Actors therein, and hath taken some of them, and committed them to safe custody. The Parliament having received information of these under-hand workings, and trecherou dea∣lings, Ordered that a Letter e sent to the Lord I∣chiqueen, desiring him to send in safe custody the aid Colonel Starling to the Parliamet of Eng∣land,
The Rebels arch Generall Preston is mar∣ched towards Dublin with a great army, con∣sisting of nine thousand Foot, and sixteene hundred, Horse, and I fear he will take it, for our forces marched towards Dredath about Trim, when the Rebels tooke the place, we have  Officers, for in one Sir Lk Fitz  house are prisoners 7 Captain 4 Colonels, two Lieutenant Colonels, the La∣dy Tichburn was there, but Preston sent he back, and caused her baggage to bee given to her, they report Sir Henry Tich is  of a wound which he had, his son is prisoner in the aforesaid house. FINIS.
