T3171 669.f.6[52] 99871041 160913
July the 12th. 1642. Truths from York, Hull, and other places. ON Sunday night last His Majesty had a Poste come unto him, that the Ship Providence was driven a ground neere Hull, by a Ship imployed by the Parliament; and that the Lo: Digbie with other Cavaliers were in the Ship. It so pleased the Court, that an Alarum was struck, every man crying, Horse, Horse, Arme, Arme. Sir Thomas Metham received command to raise his Regiment; Sir Robert Strictlands Regiment was commanded to march; the Lord Mayor in person ran like a mad man to drive horses in the field, to hasten away the baggage; the King went away in all haste towards Beverley on Munday morning. Sir Fra: Wortley and Metham were designed to cut the fresh water River; but the great prejudice the Inhabitants, neere their quarters, were like to have by that designe, diver∣ted them from going on. The Arch-Bishop of Yorke gloried much in the arrivall of this Ship and Ordnance. Sir Ralph Hopton, and Sir Christopher Hatton, with some other Members of the House of Commons, went in person this week to the Leagre, which at this time is within a mile and a quarter of Hull, where they entrench themselves: and as I understand from a good hand, some twenty of the common souldiers were enforced by some of the Cavaliers to make an attempt upon the stone Sluce, within three quarters of a mile of the towne; but Sir John Hotham discharged his Canon on each side them, and they were glad to depart, some of them being struck dead for a time with the wafte of the bullets. It is an admiration unto us, how the Commanders in Ireland, (who are imployed by the Parliament, to reduce those bloud∣thirsty Rebels) could have such private intelligence, to come over at this instant of time. We are sorry they have so little conscience, to leave their killing Rebels and Traitors to the King and all his Kingdomes, and come hither to engage themselves against the Kings owne subjects in this Kingdome, as at this time divers of them are. I heare a good report of Captaine Lloyd, (the Enginier and Quarter-master for the whole Armie in Ireland, and imployed by the Parliament) he had good fortune to come in this nicke of time; His Majesty received him with such great joy, that he would not suf∣fer him to salute his wife, but took him to the siege against Hull, with divers chiefe Commanders more that are come out of Ireland, (we all thinke) to advise the gaining of Hull, especially because the proclaimed Traitor, Lord Digbie, is their Comraig; though by advice to his Majesty (lest the countenancing of his Lordship should lose his Majesty in the affe∣ctions of his people) he is kept very privately at Court. It is strange, that this Designe should be so well known to those of our Nation in Spaine, France, Holland, and Ireland, of the surprisall of Hull, and yet that Sir John Hotham must be in a lost condition, before there be a sense of his danger amongst our selves. On Wednesday his Majestie returned from Beverley to view the great appearance of horse on the North moore; many hundreds were expected, I cannot say one hundred appeared, only nine listed themselves. The Gentry desire not to divide the King and Parliament, and the Yeomanry sweare they will not, and believe when any attempt is made upon Hull, the trained bands will be cold in that service: it must be a select number of the damme blades of Cava∣liers and common souldiers that must doe it; and men of undaunted courage in that towne will finde them work: the onely difficulty we conceive will be the untowardnesse of some of the Townsmen, that will endeavour to make a fra∣ction by reason of want of trade and victuals, which the Parliament must with speed supplie, and declare, they shall re∣ceive satisfaction for their sufferings, and send them in men and provisions; which may come in safe enough by Sea, notwithstanding the Ordnance planted on the mouth of Humber. Our ancient Esquires doe take it in great indignation, that persons of so base a condition as Duncombe and some others are of, should be honoured with Knighthood, yea and a Barronetship too, in so much as at this time it is accounted a dishonour to be made a Knight. In a word, the late Arri∣vall of these Armes and Ammunition out of Holland, have much unsetled the affections of this Countie, calling to minde His Majesties Protestations and Invocations, and the Declarations of the Lords against any preparation for war; the full visage whereof appeares now to the contrary amongst us. Very many Papists resort hither daily, which encreases our fears: It is given out that his Majesty intends next for Lin∣colneshire, and so for Leicestershire to enforce the Commission of Array. Here are severall Popish Commanders come out of Flanders, who (that they might gaine the freer passage hither) confesse they had a Dispensation from the Pope, to take any Oath that should be tendred to them. In Warwickshire the Ordinance for the Militia is most cheerfully obeyed. In which Countie, besides the Trained Band, there appeared at the Generall Muster, 2850. Voluntiers. And in regard of some combustions that have lately been in Leicestershire, stirred up by M. Hastings, they have sent a proffer to Leicestershire to assist them with horse and men, and Northamptonshire hath done the like. Also in one of the Hundreds of Lancashire, there appeared at Manchester, in obedience to the said Ordinance, about 10000. men in Armes, crying for about halfe an houre together, For the King and Parliament, For the King & Parliament. The Lord of Warwick hath taken the Kings Ship called the Lyon, in its comming from Holland. The Lord Mayor of London for many misdemeanours was committed to the Tower, July 11. by the House of Peers. Printed in the yeere, M DC XLII.
