W1008 E128_30 99873123 156255
A Most Worthy Speech, poken by the Right Honourable ROBERT Earle of WARWICKE; In the Head of his Army, November, 22. when he tooke his leave of them, and delivered them under the Command of his Excellence the Earle of ESSEX. VVherein is contained all the duties of a Christian Souldier, both toward God and Man, with many religious advertisements, to deterre them from swearing, and taking the Name of the Lord in vaine. Whereunto is annexed a Caveat for the Cavaliers, being a true example of Gods Iudgement against one of that Crew, which rooke a pride in blasphe∣ming against God, and cursing the Roundheads. London, Printed by T. Fawcet. Novem. 29. 1642.
A Caveat for the Cavaliers, or the Earle of Warwicks Caution to his ARMY Being the truth of a Speech spoken by the said Earle, on the two and twen∣titeh day of November, when he delivered them under the Command of the Earle of ESSEX. NOble Countrymen, you that are to fight in this just cause, to preserve your Kings Rights, the Priviledge of Parliament, and the whole Kingdoms safety, I have taken some paines to write this my desire for you to follow, and then you must needs be fortunate and happy, forbeare this vaine use of swearing, and blaspheming against his Name, whose power is above mans power, set your mindes on it and it will come alone, for use bereedeth facillitie, facillitie engendereth familiari∣ty,
familiarity maketh readinesse, readinesse fra∣meth perfectnesse, perfectnesse breedeth custome, custome forceth continuance, continuance convei∣eth us to sencelesnesse, sencelesnesse lulleth us a sleepe in the Cradle of security, so that we feare not, not feele not, our desperate fall in the painfull Pit of Perjury, the unhappy reward whereof is perpetuall infelicity. Let us take heed then of swea∣ring, or of the rash naming of God, without reve∣rence due unto his most glorious Name What mockery and derision is this against Christ in the Church when his name is sounded, to bend in token of reverence, and all the weeke after to sweare by him, as though he were worthy of no ho∣nour at all. The very Iewes used to teare their gar∣ments, when they supposed they heard any blasphe∣my; The Turkes so esteemed of their Mahomet, that they never vainely sweare by his name, neither doe they admit unto Office of Government any Swearer, of what birth soever he be, or though he be for any other quality never so notable. Among the Heathen people (a shame to Christians) one Regulus a worthy Roman, being taken prisoner by the Carthagenians, when they of Carthage desired ra∣ther to have their owne prisoners from the Romans they sent this Regulus to Rome without any gage or pledge, save his faith onely, when he was at Rome, he perswaded his Countrymen that his mes∣sage was not profitable for his Country, and for his oath sake, uncompelled, he returned as a priso∣ner
to Carthage alone without guard, where after the most cruellest manner, that mischiefe of the most bloody minds could invent, after such a sort that I never read the like. They put him to death most terribly in this man∣ner, they compassed him round about with plankes which weare driven round with prickes, of Jron, the poynts whereof were made exceeding sharpe, so that he could not bow himselfe any way with∣out grievous wounds, whereof his flesh ranckling the longer he lived; the more grivous would be his payne, waking or sleeping his feet must beare the burthen of his whole body, he might truly say I live, and so full well I dye, so the Saguntinians, rather then they would breake there faith, made unto the Romanes they indured willingly, all the punish∣ments, that hunger, sword, and fire could doe un∣to them. Livius remembreth two Roman soldiers taken prisoners, dismissed by Hanyball upon there oathes, to returne againe to his campe, the first subtily he left his sword behind him, and when he was gone a good way from the campe he returned again to fetch his sword, meaning by this subtill returning to save his oath, and niver more returne, but when this cause came to be disputed at Rome, the heathen Romans sent him back againe, as a perjured person, averting that an oath ought so to be performed, as he unto whom the oath was made did understand the promise.
The Law of the Egyptians was, that no Swearing should be used, but in lawfull cause, if any were proved perjured he lost his Head. The Scythians had a Law likewise, that whosoever was proved perjured, he should be throwne downe the high Rocke Tarperos, and therefore when they did sweare, they held a Stone in their hand, and protested, in this manner, if I lye, or sweare ought but truth, cast me violently from the Rocke, as I ling this Stone from me. What a shame is this to Christians, that the hea∣then people that knew no God, would not sweare rashly, and if they did, what punishments they they suffered, but we that professe Christ, sweare rashly, and unreverently, and so we be trusted when we sweare, we care not after though we breake our faith. Deere Countrymen, and fellow souldiers, thinke but upon this, thinke what you have undertooke of the Cause you are to fight in, thinke against whome, the bloudy and inhumane Papists, they that keepe your deare Anointed King from you; those blaspheming and tiranous Cavaliers, that de∣stroyes and brings to utter ruine every place where they come. Therefore deare Countrymen follow not their evill Examples, to ravish Wives and Virgins, to fire mens Barnes, and to destroy the Graine, for this they dayly doe, with Oathes on Oathes that still they will go on in their most divellish and most de∣testable
practizes, but doe you take thy counsell, and be but ruled by me, and keepe this in your thoughts we will quickly quell their valiant voyces, & fetch our King (spight of their Oathes) home to his roy∣all Throne. A true Relation of the iust iudge∣ment of God against a deboyst Ca∣valier, which tooke a pride in blasphe∣ming against God, and cursing the Round-Heads. ONe of my Lord Moones Cavaliers, this last weeke within six Miles of Lanceston, having been making merry, and after din∣ner riding to his Rndevouze, he overtooke some honest Countrymen, that had been at Lanceston, at Market, who rode together, being in number neare twenty Horsemen, among whom this lusty Cava∣lier upon his prancing Horse, daubed with gold Lace, with his losty Plume, in his Montero, and riding up to them, saluted them in the manner fol∣lowing, Damme-me where have all these Round∣heads been to day, no Roundheads replyed one of them, but faithfull Subjects to the King and Par∣liament.
Hang you said e, you have been all at an exercise, to heare a Sermon in a Tub, a pox take you all, and swore most terribly; unto whom one of the company, not able to abide such blaspheming abomination, in gentle wordes said unto him, that he should answer for every idle word, the Cavalier in a scornefull manner rapt out another Oath, and said, take not thou care for me, but take care for thy winding sheet, well sayd the other amend, for Death giveth no warning, as soone cometh a Lambe-skin to the market, as an old Sheepe, with that the Cavalier rapt out oath afer oath, biding him take no care for him, thus he continued, till at length in their Iourney they were to ride over a great Bridge that went over an Arme of the Sea, upon which the gentleman swearing, spurred his Horse, so that he leapt over the Bridge with the Cavalier on his backe, who as he was going cryed aloud, Horse and man, and all to the Divell. FINIS.
