W1172 R204135 99895813 153741
portrait 'Tis not he that possesseth most, but he that wanteth least, that is the richest Man. To be content is to be rich, and these Riches any Man that will, may give himself. Content is all we aim at with our Store, If that be had with little, what needs more?
THE Way to Save Wealth; Shewing how a Man may Live plentifully for Two-pence a Day. Likewise how to make A hundred Noble Dishes of Meat, without either Flesh, Fish, or Fowl. To make Bread of Roots, Herbs, and Leafs of Trees. To brew good cheap Liquor, without Malt or Hops. To make Shoes last long. To make Coals last long. To save Soap in Washing. To save Cloth in cutting out a Shirt. To make Coffee of Horse-beans To feed Cattel well, without Hay, Grass, or Corn. To save Candles. To know any one's Mind by Signs; if there be Twenty in Company, they cannot apprehend it. To order Bees aright. To settle your Estate with Christian Prudence. To know Scripture-Weights and Measures. Of Dreams. To cure Wounds by Sympa∣thy. The Way to Live long. To make Spring-Potage. To cure all sorts of Cattle for 12 d. Charge. To improve Land, order and cure all Deseases in singing Birds. To kill Vermin. To brew Pale Ales. To make Wines, and all sorts of Liquor, and an easy Way to fine, and order them. With divers other curious MATTERS, Adorn'd with Cuts. LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by G. Conyers, at the Ring in Little Britain. Price 1 s. 6 d.
THE Way to Live for Two-pence a Day. EXperience teacheth us, that Nature is sa∣tisfied with a little; and that little is also easily to be obtain'd; such as Corn-food, Spring-water, Herbs, Roots, Fruit, Milk, Cheese, &c. And for my own part, seriously when I feed upon Bread and Water, and sometimes more splendidly, upon Bread and Cheese, and if I have but brown Bread, Hasty-pudding, Wheat, or Barley-broth, I think my Table so well furnish'd, that I dare dispute Felicity with any Person. By this way of living I am made superiour to the frowns of Fortune; for, what Estate is there in this Life, that can reduce a Man to a lower ebb than Bread and Water? Whereas many that ac∣custom themselves to live deliciously, frequently commit Robberies, Murder, and other detestable Villanies, to gratifie their Luxury and Profuse∣ness. And I do affirm, that a Halfpennyworth of Flower, made into Pap or Hasty-pudding, with Water, or with Water, Milk, and Flower, and a Halfpennyworth of Bread to eat with it, and a lit∣tle Salt, will make People as strong as they that eat Flesh, Fish, and Fowl. And farther: Living on Corn-food, you have small occasion to drink; and a little Bread, Cheese, and a Pennyworth of Ale, exhilerates a Man three times as much as Flesh, Fish, or Fowl, with the same quantity of Drink.
1. Bread and Water takes place of all Foods, and are the foundation of dry and moist Nutriment; 'tis a good Food, and of an opening and cleansing nature, and now and then will make a good Meal. 2. Take two spoonfuls of Wheat-flower or Oat∣meal, put it into cold Water, and mix 'em well to∣gether, stir this into two Quarts of Water over a quick Fire till it boil up, putting a little Salt and some Bread; or instead of Bread, an Onion boil'd in it will do. This will not cost above a Farthing, and makes a noble exhilerating meal: You may make it thick or thin, as you like best; thick is best for healthy People. 3. Take a quart of Water made boiling hot, a spoonful of ground Oatmeal, and temper it with cold Water, then brew it into your Water, set it on the Fire till it boil up, then brew it again and it's done, put some Bread and a little Salt into it, then eat it; and this makes as good a meal as the World affords: If you make a meal of this alone, you may boil in it some Pot-herbs and Onions, and it's done. 4. Take four quarts of Water, and put a pint of Pease therein, then set 'em in the Pot on a gentle Fire, let 'em boil slowly for 3 or 4 hours, while they are soft and incorporated into Potage, add a little dry Sage rub'd into powder, and shred an Onion into it; you may put in a little Mint if you please, or any of these Herbs will serve. After your Herbs are boil'd, put two spoonfuls of Wheat-flower made into Batter with cold Water, and when your Potage boils up, 'tis done. This will make about two quarts, and will serve a labouring Man a Day, costing not above three half-pence. 5. Take a quart of Water and set it on the Fire till it boils up, then put a spoonful of Oatmeal well mixt in 2 or 3 spoonfuls of cold Water, mix an Egg well in it, and put it to your boiling Water; put a
little Salt and Bread if you please to it, and this makes a noble meal. 6. Take Flower a sufficient quantity, then add Water sufficient to make it into a Paste, put a little Salt and Ginger to it, and a little Yest; make your Dumplins as large as a Crown piece, and boil 'em; this is wholsom, nourishing, and pleasant Food. 7. Take an equal quantity of Milk and Water, and when it begins to boil put in Flower, the usual way of making Hasty-pudding, and eat it with Butter or with Milk: This is hearty and strength∣ning Nourishment. 8. Or Water and Flower, with a little Ginger, made into Hasty-pudding, and eat with Milk or Butter, is hearty Victuals. In many Countries you may have two quarts of Milk for a Penny, to which add a pint of Water, and not half a Penny worth of Flower, and make it into flower'd Milk, according to our Directions, and you will have a fine Dish sufficient for 4 Peo∣ple, and stands but in three half-pence: Eat some Bread with it, and there's nothing affords better nourishment, and that to all Ages, especially young People. If every one observes his time of eating, and his weight and measure of Food, great trouble and waste may thereby be avoided. As to quantity of other Foods, we suppose sixteen ounces of solid, (to wit) Bread, Cheese, Butter and Eggs, may be sufficient 24 hours for a labouring Man: And the best time for eating (we suppose) to be about 8 in the Morning and 4 in the Afternoon. If the Food be flower'd Milk, then a pint of it, and 4 ounces of Bread and Butter, or Cheese, is sufficient; if Wa∣ter-gruel or Potage, a pint, and 4 ounces of Bread and Cheese; if raw Milk, the same; but, if flower'd Milk, with an Egg in it, three ounces of Bread and Butter, or of Cheese, will be sufficient.
Divers other Dishes, not more healthful, but more toothsom, and very wholsom. 9. Bread and Butter eaten with our thin Gruel, wherein is nothing but Salt, is the most approved way of eating Water gruel; and the best way of eating it, is to bite and sip, as you do raw Milk and Bread. This is a most curious and sweet Food for the Stomach, of easie digestion, creates rare Blood and causes it to circulate freely. 10. Milk made boiling hot, and thickned with Eggs, is a brave substantial Food, of a friendly mild nature and operation. 11. Bread and Butter, or Bread and Cheese eat alone with wash'd Sallads, with or without Salt, Oyl, or Vinegar, makes a dainty Food, of a clean∣sing quality, and light of digestion; the frequent eating of which sweetens and creates rare Blood and fine Spirits; it prevents the generation of sour Humors, and keeps the Body open: And all Herbs thus eaten are to be prefer'd before those eat with Salt, Oyl, or Vinegar, be the Food what it will, especially for Women, and all that are subject to generate muddy Diseases. 12. Eggs broken and butter'd over the Fire, is excellent Victuals, being eat with store of Bread; or Eggs roasted or boil'd in their Shells, (roasted being the best) eaten with Bread, Butter and Salt, or Bread and Salt, is very substantial. 13. Eggs, Sorrel, and Parsly mixt and stirr'd to∣gether, and fry'd in a Pan with Butter and a little Salt, and when fry'd, put on 'em some Butter and Vinegar; 'tis a most excellent Dish, and affords great Nutriment; but remember, there must not be a great many Herbs, for that will render it more heavy and dull.
14. Parsly boll'd and cut small, mixt with some Butter and Vinegar melted, and poach'd Eggs, makes a curious Dish, gives great satisfaction to the Stomach, supplying Nature with Nutriment in the highest degree, and is pleasant to the Palate. 15. Eggs beaten together and fry'd with Butter, and when fry'd melt some Butter and Vinegar and put over 'em, is a most curious and dainty Dish, being much better than the usual way of frying Eggs, they being lighter and more tender, and ea∣sier of digestion. 16. An Egg broke into a pint of Ale, and brew'd well together, and eaten with bread, make a brave meal, and hath a vigorous and quick Operation in the Stomach; in the Winter warm it, but in the Summer you may drink it cold. 17. Poach'd Eggs eaten with a Dish of boil'd Spinage butter'd, is a curious Food, being eaten with plenty of bread, affords agreeable Nutriment. 18. Eggs mix'd with divers sorts of Fruits, with Butter and Bread, made into Pies, is a kind and pleasant Food, that a Man may eat now and then with great satisfaction to himself, and no less to Nature, provided it be not often. 19. Raw Eggs broke into Water-gruel that is thin, and brew'd well together, with a little Salt in it, and then eaten with Bread, or Bread and But∣ter, makes a most delicate Food, and is very fit for all young People, being of a warming quality, and agreeable to the Stomach, creates fine Blood and brisk Spirits; for the often using this, and other Spoon-meats, do naturally sweeten all the Humors, and prevents the generating of sowre Juices, frees the passage from Windiness and griping pains. 20. Artichokes boiled, and eaten with Bread, Butter and Salt, are an excellent Food, and create a substantial Nutriment; a Man may make a fine meal of them.
21. Take one or two Eggs, beat them with a lit∣tle Water, and take a pint of good Ale or Beer, sweeten it with Sugar, then put it on the Fire, ma∣king it boiling hot, but not boil, then brew them well together; this is a comfortable Food, or ra∣ther a rich Cordial, which mightily replenishes Nature both with dry and moist Nutriment. 22. Asparagus boiled, and eaten with bread, butter, and salt, is a most dainty Food, and affords a clean Nutriment; it is friendly to the Stomach, loosens the belly, powerfully purges by Urine, and opens Obstructions. 23. Rice and Water boiled and buttered, is a friendly Dish, and easie of digestion, and affords a good Nutriment. 24. Boiled Coleworts, Collyflowers, and Cab∣bage eaten with Bread, Butter, Vinegar and Salt, the first of the three being the best, for they purge by Urine, loosen the Belly, and are easie of digesti∣on; but remember that you boil them in plenty of Water, over a quick Fire, and not too much; which must be observ'd in all the Preparations of Herbs and Grains. 25. Rice and Milk is also a dainty Food, affor∣ding a substantial Nutriment, especially if you put Sugar in it. 26. Green Beans boiled, and eaten with Salt, Butter, and Bread, is a most delicate Food. Let all People subject to windy Diseases eat them spa∣ringly. 27. The young buds of Coleworts and Spinage, boiled in plenty of Water, with a quick brisk Fire, and eaten only with Bread, Butter and Salt, is a fine delicate delightful Food, affording a clean Nutriment. 28. French Beans boiled in plenty of Water, with a brisk Fire, and eaten with Bread, Butter and Salt, makes a most curious and pleasant Food, be∣ing
of a cleansing and opening nature, affording a good Nutriment, gently opens the belly, and pur∣ges by Urine. 29. Endive, young Parsly, and Spinage, boiled and eaten with Bread, Butter, and Salt, is a curi∣ous friendly exhilerating Dish, makes rare Blood, and cleanseth the passages. 30. Bread, Butter, and Sorrel makes a brisk Food, easie and quick of digestion, cleanseth the Stomach, and creates a brisk Spirit. 31. Spinage boiled with the tops of Balm and Mint, season'd with Salt and Butter, and eaten with Bread, makes a curious Dish, affords excel∣lent Nutriment, and is of a warming quality. 32. Carrots boiled, seasoned with Butter and Salt, and eaten with Bread, is a curious Dish, very pleasant, wholsome, and easily digested. 33. Smallage makes a Potage or Gruel of a cleansing quality, being eaten twice a day, is an effectual Remedy against all Consumptive Hu∣mors, it cleanseth the Blood, and opens Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen. 34. Boiled Wheat buttered is a curious Dish, affording a sweet, friendly, and most agreeable Nu∣triment, being easie of digestion, it creates fine thin blood. 35. Green Pease boiled, seasoned with Salt and Butter, and eaten with Bread, makes a most deli∣cate Dish; but if not sparingly eaten, are windy. Their Nutriment is not strong. 36. Bread, Butter, and Radishes is very accepta∣ble Food, affording substantial Nutriment; now and then a Man may make an indifferent meal thereof. 37. Boiled Turnips seasoned with Salt and But∣ter, and eaten with Bread, makes a very good Dish of Food, especially for all young People. They are easie of digestion, open and purifie the passages,
consequently may with safety be eaten plenti∣fully. 38. Sweet Charwell makes an excellent Potage, being eat with Bread, Butter, and Salt, is not only very agreeable, but the frequent use thereof puri∣ties the Blood; 'tis a friend to the Lungs. 39. Parsnips boiled in plenty of Water, season'd with Salt, Butter, Vinegar, and Mustard, makes a curious hearty Dish, and are agreeable to most Constitutions. 40. Light Puddings made of Bread and eat with Butter and Sugar, are very pleasant to the Pa∣late, and not ungrateful to the stomach, if sparing∣ly eaten. 41. Watercresses made into Potage, eaten with Bread, Butter, and Salt, is not only a good Food, but often eating thereof purifies the Blood, and prevents Fumes and Vapours from flying into the Head. 42. Boil'd or roasted Potatoes eaten with But∣ter, Salt, and Vinegar, makes a pleasant Dish, are easie of concoction, very grateful to the stomach; now and then a meal may do well. 43. Rice Puddings, both plain and made with Fruit, are for the most part a pleasant sort of Food, easie of Digestion, and may be freely eaten. 44. Take Currans, boil them in Water, when almost done, mix a little small Oatmeal with two spoonfuls of cold Water, stir it in, and let it boil a little; when done, season it with Salt, and put some Sugar to it; this eaten with Bread, makes a good meal. You may put in Butter, as most Housewifes do; but I must tell 'em, that makes it heavy on the stomach, and apt to send Fumes into the Head. 45. Apple-Dumplins eaten with Butter, or But∣ter and Sugar, is the best of all Dumplins, afford∣ing a friendly Nourishment, and are easie of Di∣gestion.
46. Mint makes a noble exhilerating Potage, frequent eating thereof not only prevents windy Humors in the Passages, but mightily strengthens the retentive faculty of the stomach. 47. Pears, being full ripe, make an excellent Pye, and are a fine, gentle, friendly Food, easie of concoction. 48. Steep your Pease eighteen hours, then boil them in a pot with some sweet Herbs, and an Oni∣on stuck with Cloves. This is a pleasant whol∣som Food. 49. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Bete, Purslain, and a bundle of Herbs, boil them together with Salt, Butter, and the crust of a Loaf soakt: This is an excellent Potage. 50. Potage of Colewort-sprouts is made thus: boil them in Water, Salt, Pease-broth, Butter, Onion sliced, and a little Pepper, then soak your Bread, garnish it with Sprouts, and fill your Dish therewith. 51. Potage of French-barley is made by putting your Barley (being cleans'd from Dust) in boiling Milk; being boiled down, put in it large Mace, Cream, Sugar, and a little Salt, boil it indifferent thick, and it's eatable. 52. Bread, Butter, and Sage affords great Nou∣rishment, expels Wind, and warms the stomach. 53. Garlick-potage is chiefly good for corpulent People, and such as are troubled with Coughs, the Stone or Gravel. 54. Take your Sallad-herbs, such as you most like, and put some Vinegar, Mustard, and Oyl well beaten together to your Herbs; it is an excellent Sallad eaten with Bread only, or with Flesh, if you must needs eat Flesh. 55. A piece of Bread and a few Raisins in the Sun make an excellent meal, a pint of Ale or Beer being drank after it.
56. Clary shred and Eggs, beat well together and fry'd with Butter, is an excellent Dish, espe∣cially for ancient People. 57. Take a Cabbage-leaf, shred it very small, put a little Vinegar Pepper and Oyl to it; this is as pleasant as Cucumbers to Flesh-eaters. 58. The young tops of Asparagus boil'd, makes an excellent meal, eaten with Bread and Butter. 59. A Root that grows, call'd Mercury, if the tops (which something resemble Asparagus) be boil'd, and eaten with Butter and Bread, 'tis an excellent Food, being of a cleansing quality. 60. Shadown or Holy-thistle boil'd, with Butter and Vinegar put to it, makes an excellent meal, eaten with Bread. 61. Pumpkin fry'd, with Vinegar and Butter put to it, makes a good meal, eaten with Bread only. 62. Whole Oatmeal boil'd in a Pot or Pipkin, but first let the Water boil; being boil'd tender, put in Milk or Cream, with Salt and fresh Butter, eat it with Bread. 63. Alixander and Oatmeal together, pickt and washt, when it boils put in your Herbs, Oatmeal and Salt; boil it on a soft Fire, make it not too thick; being almost enough, put in some Butter: Eat this with Bread, and it makes an excellent meal. 64. Pease put into boiling Milk or Cream, with two or three sprigs of Mint; being tender, salt 'em and thicken 'em with a little Milk and Flower: This makes an excellent Food. 65. Green Corn taken as it grows, or a little parch'd or dry'd against the Fire, or steept or boil'd in Wine, affords in hard Times a reasonable subsistence. 66. Bread and Milk, as it comes from the Cow, or raw, is very good, sweetning the Blood.
67. Eggs boil'd in the Shells or roasted, eaten with Bread and Salt, and sometimes Butter, is nourishing Food. 68. Eggs with Flower and Water made into a Pap on the Fire, is a noble Food, affording brave clean Nourishment. 69. An Egg or two beaten and brew'd in a pint of raw Milk, is a noble substantial Food; if the weather be cold, you may warm the Milk. 70. There are several Foods made with Milk, as Custards, Cheese-cakes and Whitepots; these nou∣rish much, but are not to be eaten too frequently. 71. Boil'd Puddings made with Flower, Milk, Eggs, Raisins, and Currans, being well butter'd, 'tis pleasant Food. 72. Wheat boil'd and butter'd, is a noble Dish; with this alone a Man may make a better meal than with Princely Varieties, and it affords good Nourishment. 73. Smallage, Sallary, Leek or Onion Potages or Gruels, nourish the body, and purify the blood. 74. To make an Apple or Pear-Tart. Furnish your Tart-pan with a Coffin of Paste, and lay a bed of Sugar into it, filling it up with the mellow of Ap∣ples or Pears pared and shred small, or cut in sli∣ces, the seeds and cores being taken out, mingle Pine-Apple-kernels therewith, as also Currans and the peel of preserv'd Lemon; if you please, pow∣der the whole with a little beaten Cinnamon, put thereto some Sugar at discretion, and a little fresh Butter, about the bigness of a Walnut, or there∣abouts, for an indifferent Tart: Cover this Tart in the same manner as you do other Fruit-Tarts, and put it into the Oven after you have varnish'd it; and after it is baked, you may scrape a little Loaf-sugar upon it, and sprinkle some Rose-water on it, and so keep it for use.
75. To poach Eggs. You must put some Poached Eggs into a Dish, a few or many, add a little Salt to them, and pouder them also with Sugar, and sprin∣kle them with a little Rose-water, or Verjuice, or Lemon-juice, or Orange juice, unto which you may add a little beaten Cinamon or Cinamon-water, which will give them a good relish. 76. How to dress a Dish of Eggs without any But∣ter. Beat as many Eggs as you please into a good large Silver-dish, Whites and Yolks together, after which, set your said Dish over a Chasing-dish of hot Charcoal thoroughly lighted, putting nothing to them, but stir them continually with a Silver-spoon; so that they may not be hard, nor stick to the Dish, and when they are Poached enough to your Fancy, take them off from the said Chasing-dish, and put to them a good quantity of Orange-juice, and season∣ing them well with Salt, and if you please, pouder them with good store of Sugar and Cinamon, not forgetting to put grated Nutmeg into them, as you are a straining of them; and before your Orange∣juice is poured upon 'em, this kind of moistening or poaching of Eggs is least offensive to the Palate, and less nauseous to the Stomach, which is very often overcharg'd by putting Butter to 'em. 77. To make an Omcelet stufft with Herbs. Mince all kind of sweet Herbs, and the Yolks of Eggs hard together, season the whole with Salt: You may also add some Mushrooms half boil'd, and some Currans, put these minc'd Ingredients on a Plate or Dish, and cover 'em over with a flabby or limber Omcelet, and strow Sugar and Cinamon upon it, if you please. 78. A Pippin Tart. Take eighty Pippins, pare 'em and quarter 'em, and then your Paste being rai∣sed, lay in your Quarters as thick as you can, then put to 'em a little whole Cinamon and Ginger, and a few Cloves, with a pound and half of Sugar, and so, bake 'em. When you have closed your Tart, sugar it at the top, and so serve it.
79. A Potatoe Pye. Boil your Potatoes tender, then peel 'em, let 'em be cold, season 'em with beaten Cinamon, Nutmegs, and a little Pepper; let the pieces of your Potatoes be cut indifferent, and fill up your Pye, and then put the Marrow of 2 or 3 Bones to 'em, and some Dates cut in half, a little Mace, some Barberries, or Grapes, or Lemons, some Citron-Suckets; then put in half a pound of Butter, and close it, and bake it. moisten it with the Liquor you do a Chicken-pye with. 80. An Artichoke Pye. Take Artichokes and cut away the green Leafs from the bottom, till the Bones look white, then boil the bottoms as much as if they were to be eaten; take out the Core, and sea∣son the Bottoms, (being cut in four parts, as you did the Potatoes) put all things into that Pye, and bake it, and liquor it as the other. 81. To make Hasty-pudding. Take a pint of Cream and set it over the Fire, with a blade of Mace, when it boils put in a spoonful of Flower, but not let it knob; then take the Yolks of 3 Eggs and beat them with some Sugar; so stir them, and let them boil till you perceive the Butter round the edges of the Skil∣let: pour it into the Dish, set it over Coals, and cover it; you must keep it stirring in the Skillet. 82. To make Gooseberry-fool without Milk. Take a pint of Gooseberries, scald them, break them very small in some of the Water that scalded 'em, then beat the Yolks of two or three Eggs with a spoonful of Rose-water; stir in a good piece of Butter to melt; then put in your Eggs. Sweeten it to your mind, and put it over the Fire to thicken, and dish it to eat hot or cold. 83. To make a Papist Pudding. Take a quart of Milk, a quarter of a pound of Rice, a little Spice, half a pound of Currans, mingle all well together, butter your Dish, so bake it. 84. Panadoes. Boil Water in a Skillet, put to it
grated Bread or Cakes, good store of Currans, Mace and whole Cinamon: being almost boil'd, and indif∣ferent thick, put in some Sack or Whitewine, Sugar, strained Yolks of Eggs; otherways, with Bread, Water, Currans, and Mace; being well boil'd, put to it some Sugar, Whitewine, and Butter. 85. Posset of Herbs. Take a fair scowr'd Skillet, put some Milk into it, and some Rosemary; the Rosemary being well boil'd in it, take it out, and have some Ale or Beer in a Pot, put to it the Milk or Su∣gar, or none. Thus of Thyme, Carduus, Camomil, Mint, or Marigold flowers. 86. Potatoes cleans'd and boil'd, with a little But∣ter put to them, and eat with Bread, or without, make a good meal. 87. Colliflowers well boil'd, and a little Salt put to 'em, and dish'd up with Sippets round 'em, and a little Butter and Water. or Juice of Lemon or O∣range, makes a noble Dish. 88. Gourds, Pumpions, Cucumbers, or Muskme∣lons, cut in pieces, par'd, cleans'd, and put into boiling Water; when it boils put in the Pumpion, or other things, which you think fit, with some Salt; being boil'd, drain 'em well from the Water, but∣ter 'em, and serve 'em on Sippets. Otherwise, bake them in an Oven, and take out the Seed at the top, fill them with Onions, slie'd Apples, Butter and Salt; butter them, and serve 'em with Sippets, as before. 89. To dress French Beans or Lupins. First take away the tops of the Cods, and the Strings, then have a Pan or Skillet of fair Water boiling on the Fire; when it boils, put them in with some Salt▪ and boil them up quick: being boil'd, serve 'em up with some Butter, in a Dish with some Salt round it. 90. To dress Garden Beans. Being shell'd and cleans'd, put 'em into boiling Liquor with some Salt; boil 'em up quick, and when so done, drain
away the Liquor and butter 'em; put 'em in the Dish cross-wise, and serve 'em up with Pepper and Salt on the brim of the Dish. Thus also green Peas, Haslers, Broom-buds, or any kind of Pulse. 91. Cut the tops of Beans when they have codded, boil and butter e'm, and they make an excellent Dish eaten with Bread. Of SALLADS. 92. Take Sorrel, Parsly and Spinage, Lettice, and some few Onions; then add Salt, Vinegar and Oil, a good quantity: If you cannot get Oil, good Butter melted may serve as well, for it is scarce dis∣cernable from Oil; but let the Salt predominate. Eat Bread only with the Sallad, which is better than if you eat Bread and Meat, or Bread and Butter, or Cheese. 93. Another. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Pepper, Grass, Spinage, Tops of Mints, and Onions, seasoned as before. 94. Another. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Cellery, Spi∣nage, Onions, and Endive, seasoned as before. 95. Another. Sage, Mint, Penniroyal, Balm, and some Lettice and Sorrel; eat them as before: This is brave Sallad. 96. Another. Young green Buds of Coleworts with Onions, is a good Sallad, seasoned as before. 97. Another. Taragan, Nettle-tops, Penniroyal, Mint, Parsly, Sorrel, Lettice, and leaves of Cole∣worts eat as before, is an excellent Sallad, if sea∣soned to the highest degree. A SALLAD for Winter. 98. Parsly, old Onions, Endive, Cellery, Lettice, Sorrel and Colewort-plants, seasoned with Salt, Oil and Vinegar, is an excellent warming and cherishing Sallad. 99. Another. Take Cellery, Endive, Spinage and Lettice, and half a head of Garlick in it, seasoned with Salt, Vinegar and Oil; this is a brave Sallad.
Sallads are good at all times, but most proper from the end of January to the first of July: Then again from September till December; and indeed all Win∣ter, if the Weather be open. In SPRING. 100. Spinage, Corn-sallad, Nettle-tops, and the buds of young Cabbage, and others of like nature, being boil'd, is an excellent corrective to them that eat Fesh-meat; they loosen the Belly, and open Ob∣structions. In April, May and June, eat Spinage, Parsly, Lettice, Mint-tops, Borage, Scurvy, Danda∣lion, Cornfry, and the like, boil'd in plenty of Water over a brisk Fire; add to them Butter melted, and some Salt; then eat with Bread, or Bread and Flesh, is good Food. 101. Sallads to be had, especially in Spring, that costs nothing but the labour, fit to boil and eat with or with∣out Flesh-meat; all very wholsom. Young Nettle∣tops are very wholsom and well-tasted, Dandalion is the same, very wholsom and well-tasted, only you must let it lie 20 or 24 Hours in Water, that takes away its bitterness: This is much eat by French Peo∣ple. Comfry is excellent Food, it grows in Marsh∣ground generally. Goats-beard, or Tragopogan grows in Marshes; its an excellent boil'd Sallad. Turnip-tops, Radish-tops, tops of young green Pease, or tops of Beans. Turnip-tops running to Seed, boil'd, eats like Asperagus, Ladies Thisle, call'd by some Shadown, is very wholsom; tops of Mallows, young, eat well, Watercresses, Smallages and Clivers make Spring-pottage, or eat well boil'd, Garlike, Mer∣cury, or Blite eats like Asperagus boil'd; Hop-buds eat very well, Redshanks, Alixander Leaves and Stalks. Roots of Arum boil'd eat well, so does Ashwood Jump about; Corn-sallad, Redbeet Roots eat as well as Car∣rots, Wheat in the blade 5 or 6 inches high, cut the rank part and boil it, eats well; tie it in Bundles as you do Nosegays: young Dasy Roots are generally
eaten by Spaniards and Italians all the Spring, till June. Alixander are of the nature of Parsly, the Sprouts, Buds and Tops are best eat in Spring. All kind of Docks, Cole says, has this property, That Meat boil'd therewith, tho' never so tough, will be tender and fit to eat; and, that Calamint laid among stinking Meat, when it is raw, will recover it: And Evelyn says, That the sharp pointed Dock brew'd in Ale or Beer, are excellent for the Scorbute or Scurvy. Jackly-the-Hedge, or All-Sauce, is a good Sallad, it grows under Hedges and Banks. Mushrooms boil'd and pick'd, stew'd with a little Vinegar, Peper, But∣ter and Spice, eats very well; and so they do well pickled. Vine-Clapers, or Tendrels, whilst young, may be eat alone, or with other Sallads; and Evelyn says, That the common Burdock about April, when young, before the Burrs and Clotts appear, being stript and the bitterness soaked out and then boil'd, or eat raw, is a good Sallad. The best way to make Herb-Pottage. 102. Smallage, Clivers, Watercresses, Elder-buds and Nettle-tops; put Water to them proportionable to your Herbs; then add Oatmeal, as much as you think fit to leave it in thick: When the Water is ready to boil, put your Herbs in, cut, or uncut; then when it is again ready to boil, take a Spoon or Ladle, and lade it, so that you keep it from boiling; do this 8 or 9 Mornings, then take it off, and eat it blood∣warm with the Herbs in it, or strained; adding a lit∣tle butter, salt and bread. This is an admirable cleansing Pottage. 103. Another. Spinage, Corn-sallad, the tops of Penniroyal and Mint, ordered and eat as before. 104. Another. Take the young and tender Stalks of Turnips and of Cabbages, when they first run up in the Spring, boil them and peel them, and put but∣ter, vinegar and pepper to them, and eat them with bread.
A cheap way to Live in Case of great Scarcity or Famine. To take away the Unsavory Rank Taste of Pease, Beans, Beech-mast, Acorns, Chesnuts, Vetches, and such like. BOil your Beans, Pease, &c. in clean Water, and if they are not pleasing enough, change the Water again, and at the second or third time, you will find a great alteration in Taste, then dry them, and if you please, you may hull them, or grind them unhull'd; if you please, you may put a third part or a fourth (of Wheat-flower) to it, and make bread thereof: Or you may make good bread without any wheat added to them. Or for better Expedition, you may take the ground-meal of them, and infuse warm Water thereon, and as it begins to cool, drain it away, and put on fresh warm Water, till the taste please you; then dry up the meal, and make bread thereof, either simply of it self, or compounded as before, Probatum est. But if you are not content with this Preparation, you may work it into Paste, with a Liquor first strengthned with some bruised Aniseeds, Liquorice or sweet Fennel Seeds, or with the Seeds themselves incorporated in the Paste; or to save charge, with Peperwort, Time, Winter-savory, Penniroyal, &c. and this is hearty, and wholsom, and nourishing. What is here spoken of Pease, Beans, &c. may be generally understood of all other Grain, Plants, Seeds, Pulse, Roots, &c. and that that is serviceable in Meat, will be much more tollerable in Drink. It's said, that Allom rowl'd five or six times a day in the mouth, has kept alive fifteen or twenty days.
Wheat Straw chopt into short pieces, and ground with some proportion of Wheat into Meal, has been made good Bread; but you must grind it well in a Steel or Hand-mill. Some say, a small quantity of Liquorice-Roots chowed, will satisfie both Hunger and Thirst. To make Bread of the Root of Aron, called Cuckoo∣pit, or Starch-Root. The Roots that are large must be cleansed from the Skin and Filth, then cut into slices small, then seeth them in boiling Water so long as you find the Water hot and biting, and till the Root begins to wax sweet; then change your Water, and pour fresh upon them, and so continue doing till the Water becomes sweet, and the Roots have lost their Acri∣mony. Take them out, and lay them abroad upon Canvas supported with Frames; and being dry, grind them, and they make a very white meal, which of it self, or by mixing of a third with Wheat-meal, makes savory bread, and the best Starch: gather it in March or April be sure; Turnips will do the like. Pompions mixed with a little meal, makes savory bread; and if you put Sugar or other Sauce on it, it is a delicate Dish. Take your great and sweet Parsnip Roots, and cut them in thin slices, and having washed and scra∣ped them clean, dry them, and beat them into Pow∣der, or grind them, sifting them through a fine Sieve; put two parts of Flower to one of this Pow∣der, and make it into Cakes, and these taste daintily. Query, Whether Turnips, Carrots, and the like Roots, will not do as well? All manner of Pulse, as Beans, Vetches, Lentils, and such like, first rub'd over in Lee, and then hull'd, and after ground, will yield fair meal, and better bread.
A Poultice made of Flower or Meal, sodden among Pears, Apples, Plumbs, or the like Fruit, or of some Bread and Water, or Broth of Flesh, or Milk, well∣boil'd together, fills the Stomach to content. Suchlike Composition made of Bisquet, dry, hard, or stale, make Bread, affords good Food. Cheese mixed, and wrought up with meal, make a glutting sort of Food. Meal and Oil of Olives, or other Fruit or Seeds mixed together, may be made into Bread. Dough kneaded with Ale-wort or Wine, is hearty Food. You may make bread of the powdred or ground leaves of the Pear-Tree, Apple-Tree, Beech, Oak, and so likewise Drink. So likewise, white Poplar being cut off close by the ground, and water'd with warm Water, well season'd with Leven, in four days space will bring forth ex∣cellent Mushrooms. A bread may be made of the Rape, or Navew, be∣ing first scorched after sodden, then baked. Bread is made of Panick or of Millet, whose Seed even in a small quantity, arises greatly in Substance. Bread and Drink may be made of Lentils. Bread made of Flower of dry Beans, is strong in Nourishment, and may be corrected of his Taste, by adding Cummin-seed. Of DRINKS. 1. Water it self is an excellent Drink; or take a Spoonful of ground Oatmeal, and incorporate it into a quart of clear Water, pouring it out of one Vessel or Pot into another, fifteen or twenty times, and its excellent against Gravel, Stone, Scurvy, or most other Distempers whatever. In Winter, make it blood-warm, or I think it better if just boiled in∣to a thin Gruel.
2. Another. Gather the tops of Heath, whereof the usual Brushes are made, and dry them, and keep them from moulding, then you may at all times brew a cheap Drink, which is very wholsom for the Liver and Spleen; if you put a little Liquorice into it, it will be much pleasanter; and also a little Treacle. 3. Another. Water and Vinegar is a pleasant Drink; or a quart of Water, and five or six Spoon∣fuls of Aqua Composita, a small quantity of Sugar, a little Borrage, or a branch of Rosemary, all brew'd together. 4. How to Brew good and wholsom Beer without any Hops at all. Take Wormword that is either cut down in the Leaf before it is Seeded, or being Seed∣ed, that is cut into short pieces, whereby there may be an equal mixture of the whole bulk together; for you must note, that the Seeded tops are much strong∣er and more oily than the rest of the leaves or stalks: Make first a Decoction of four ounces of Hops with nine gallons of Water, which is the proportion that some Brewers (in some sort of Drink) do use, and when you have gotten out by Ebullition, the full strength and virtue of them, keep the same apart, and begin likewise with some small proportion of Wormwood to the like quantity of Water as before; and when you have bestow'd as much time and fire herein, as you did about the Hops; you may taste each of them by it self, and if you find it to exceed the first in bitterness, then begin with a less pro∣portion of Wormwood, and so reiterate your work, until you have equally matched the one with the other; then you may safely proceed by the Rule of Proportion, to a Barrel, and so to a Tunn, and on to a whole Brewing. Many Persons put Broom into Beer instead of Hops. Some say, that Centaury, Artichoke leaves, or Aloes Hipatique, will perform the same. Platt's Jewel-house, pag. 1, 3.
5. To Brew without Hops. Take Sage, Tamarisk, tops of Pine or Firr; Bartholine commends it to Brew withal, as much better than Hops; for it is reckon'd excellent against the Scurvy, boil'd in your Liquor. 6. Herbs that will serve in Brewing, as well as Hops, and for many Constitutions much better. As Balm and Penniroyal, Mint, Tansie, Broom, Worm∣wood, Centaury Carduus, Eye-bright, Sage, Betony, Dandalion, and good Hay. Note, That you gather these Herbs in their proper Seasons, and dry, for they are not near so good if used Green: if you infuse Broom, Wormwood, Carduus, or any other that ex∣ceeds in bitterness, let them not lie in your Wort a∣bove half an hour, but a quarter of an hour is enough, if you put in a good quantity. 7. Instead of Malt, the Liquor of Beech is com∣mended, for making an excellent wholsom Drink. 8. Potatoes rightly ordered, makes good Beer or Bread. 9. Take a quart of fair Water, a spoonful of Vinegar, or Aqua Composita, and a spoonful of Su∣gar, and add (if have it) some Borage or Rosemary, and brew them well together. 10. Another. Take a bushel and a half of good Wheat-bran, and a gallon of Molossus, and some Ginger; add Water to it, and it will make a barrel of good Table-beer. Houghton's Collect. No. 94. Vol. 4. Another excellent Drink. Take a quart, or 2, or 3 of Water, and some white Sugar and Nutmeg; brew them well together, and it makes a pleasant and wholsom Drink: A spoonful of Treacle and a quart of Water mix'd, is excellent tasted Drink, and is good against Coughs.
To restore to Health Consumptive People. COnsumptions are a Decay of the Radical Moi∣sture, whereby the natural heat of the Stomach is so weakned, that it cannot make a due Separation of Meats and Drink received, which causes from thence to arise abundance of bad Juices or Phlegm; so that no good Nourishment can be bred, let the Food be never so Rich, nor the Drink so Cordial, which all People afflicted find by Experience. But these Distempers proceed likewise from various Causes. As, 1. From over-charging Nature with too great quantities of rich Food; or in others, by drinking much Brandy, Wine and strong Drinks, which weak∣ens the natural Heat, and destroys the Action of the Stomach. In others, an idle, sedentary course of Life, or want of proper Exercises; lying in Bed too long, too warm Cloathing, and too soft Feather or Down Beds, which proves always prejudicial to the Health of all Persons. It is caused sometimes by too much frequenting the School of Venus, provoking Nature beyond her Ability, and oft-times corrupts her in her very Radix. Young marryed People, as well as the most Lewd, are oft caught in this Snare, and let this be a caution. Others by excessive Heats or Colds, Surfeits, and the like Accidents: Some by Fevers and long Fits of Sickness; some through Melancholy, Grief, or Trouble of Mind, or Despair and Envy. Some have Consumptions Hereditary, which is the hardest of all to cure. Now, when thou findest thy self indisposed, and thy stomach to grow weak, and a general Disorder to  through thy whole Body, and that thy strength decays; consider what it was that caused it, whether Temperance, or Intemperance in Meats or Drinks, n respect of the Quantity or Quality, as also thy
Exercises, and all other Extreams thou hast inured thy self to Consider further, what Air thou hast lived in, where the Disease was bred, and by this means thou mayest guess at the cause of thy Distemper. And when this is done, thou oughtest gradually to alter for the better, the whole Course of thy Life; not in the nature and quality of the Meats and Drinks only, but in their quantity: As also thy Exercises, and the Air, as far as the Condition of thy Life will ad∣mit thereof. For change of Food, Exercises and Airs, work Wonders, if withal you betake your selves to meer simple Meats and Drinks, that are easy of Concoction, and generate a freer and firmer Sub∣stance. I shall now set down what Food, Drink and Pre∣parations are agreeable to the Stomachs of sick and languishing Persons: And first, Of MILK. Which is an incomparable Food, and the best way for weak Consumptive People to eat it, is raw. Take what quantity of Milk you please, let it stand open to the Air one Hour or two, then skin off the top of it, and eat it with well-bak'd Bread; neither toast your Bread, nor warm your Milk; except the Weather be cold, and then you may take it blood∣warm, but then do not toast your Bread. You may, if you please, eat Bisquet with your Milk, but do not eat too great a quantity at once; sometimes you may mix a little Water with the Milk, and sweeteen it with good white Sugar: You may eat this three times a day, if you make it your sole Food. Continue this six or eight months at least, and you will find great benefit by it: For Distempers that have been many years generating, cannot be cured in a moment. To prepare Milk with Wheat-flower, an Excellent way. Take a quart of new Milk, after it has stood five or six Hours from the time it was milk'd, put to it a third part of River or Spring-water, set it on a clear
Fire; then take some Wheat-flower, and temper it with either Water or Milk into a Batter, and when the Milk is ready to boil, put in your Thickning, and stir it a while; and when it is ready to boil again, take it off, then put as much Salt and Bread to it as you please, then let it cool without stirring it, and it will eat much sweeter. Two spoonfuls of Flower is enough for a quart of Milk and Water, make it a∣bout the thickness of ordinary Milk-poage. This keeps your Body in excellent temper, neither binds nor loosens too much, and it never tires nor clogs the Stomach. Another way. Take a quart of Milk and a Pint of Water, add to it as much Oatmeal as you please to have it in thickness, thin is best. Set it on a clear Fire, and when it begins to boil, take it off, and brew it in two Porringers eleven or twelve times, then set it on the Fire again; and when it begins to boil, take it off, and let it stand a little, and the large Oatmeal will settle to the bottom; then add Bread and Salt to it, and eat it when it is blood-warm. This is an ex∣cellent Food, agrees well with weak Natures, and affords firm Nourishment. And if you add at any time to this a new laid Egg or two, beaten with your thickning, and put it in as aforesaid, it will make a rich Dish. If you would add Eggs to Milk-potage, first put your Milk and Water into your Sauce-pan, take a spoonful of ground Oatmeal, and beat it up with your Egg or Eggs, with either a little Milk or Water, and when it is ready to boil, stir it in, as in flower'd Milk, and then you need not brew it; put a little Bread and Salt to all your Milk-meats, but no Sugar be sure. This is a substantial and friendly Food. Observe, That Milk is best the first half year after the Cow hath Calv'd, but not so good after taking Bull, or Conception. Milk boil'd by it self is not so good as when mixt with Oatmeal, Flower, or Water as afore∣said,
being not of so cleansing a quality. The best time to begin Milk-diet, I think, is about March or April. Of BONICLABBER. Boniclabber is made by letting your Milk stand till it sowres, whch will be in Twenty-four Hours, if the Weaer be very hot. It has a pleasant sowrish Taste and must be eaten only with Bread, especially by Consumptive People. It is excellent against Stop∣page, and it's esie of Concoction, and digests all hard or sweet Food; it cools and cleanseth the whole Body, and quencheth Thrist to a wonder: It is the best spoon-meat for Consumptive People that I know. And tho' it may not be so agreeable to the Palate at first, yet a little Custom will make it fami∣liar and pleasant. Of WATERGRUEL. This is good for Consumptive People, and is made as followeth: Take a quart of Spring or River-wa∣ter, put to it two spoonfuls of Oatmeal, then stir it well together, set it on the Fire; and when it is ready to boil, take it off, and brew it out of one thing into another; then let it stand, and the greatest Oat∣meal will ink to the bottom: Then pour it off, and add Bread and Salt to it, and Butter, if you please, then eat it when it has stood till it is blood-warm. Observe, That Milk boiled, is nothing so good as either raw or scalded. An excellent Gruel of various Ingredients. Take 2 pints of Water, and put half a quarter of a pound of Currans well wash'd, let it stand on the Fire till ready to boil, then move it to a less heat for 4 or 5 Minutes, then take another Ves∣sel with a quart of the like Water in it made to  boiling then have your tempered spoonful of Oat∣meal ready, brew your Oatmeal and Water together very well, then take your infused Currans out of the hot Water, and put them into your brewed Gruel, with some Butter, Sugar and Salt, throwing away
the Water that your Currans were infused in; then brew it as before, the Currans, Salt, Butter and Bread all together: If you have a mind to put Spice to it, then put it into the Water you make your Gruel of, when you set it on the Fire. A Purging Gruel. Take as much Water as you please, make it boiling hot, then put in these Herbs, or any other you shall like best, as Corn-sallad, Spring-parsly, Scurvy-grass, Smallage, Elder-buds, take off your Water from the Fire, cover it, and let them infuse about half an Hour, then take the Liquor from your Herbs, and brew it with some tempered Oatmeal, you may put in Salt if you please, and drink a pint or quart, two or three in a Morning, and fast till Dinner, this Gruel will give you a Stool, and cleanse the Stomach from all superfluous matter, makes good Blood, opens the Passages, by which the Humours will freely circulate; this is good in Spring, and all Seasons of the Year, when you can get the Herbs. To make all sorts of Herb-Gruel, first of Elder-buds. Take what quantity of Water you please, make it boiling hot, then have your Oatmeal tempered with cold Water, and the Elder-buds, and put them both into the boiling Water, and keep it lading or stirring, besure, let it be  it were on the boil, but not boil up, a little while, take it from the Fire, and let it stand three or four Minutes, then take the Herbs out, strain it, and put into it a little Salt; when cold, you may drink a quart more or less as your Stomach serves, this cleanseth and opens all Obstructions of the Breast and Passages, and gives a gentle Stool; its very good for Fat People, especially if they join Exercise with it. Balm Gruel is made the same way as Elder bud-Gruel, and is a notable Cleanser, good both for Old and Young, it expels Wind and Vapours, is good for Fat, Gouty or Dropsical People, it cleanseth the
Passages and cheers the Spirits; drink it in March, April and May. Scurvy-grass Gruel is a most excellent refiner of the Blood, begets a Stomach, purges by Urine, sometimes by Stool: the excellency of this Herb would be too tedious to mention. Smallage-Gruel cleanseth the Blood, opens Ob∣structions, gets a good Stomach, and is good against Shortness of Breath. Ground-Ivy, or Ale-hoof-Gruel, is a great Clean∣ser of the Bowels and Stomach, wholsom for all People, the sick, and those that are well. Sage-Gruel is excellent against most Distempers, so is Gruel made of Penniroyal or Spinage. An excellent Food for all sorts of People, but more espe∣cially for Children and sick People. Take a quart of Water, two spoonfuls of Wheat∣flower, and two or three Eggs; beat the Flower and Eggs together with a little Water, and when the Wa∣ter begins to boil, stir in your thickning, and keep it stirring till it is ready to boil; then take it off, and put Bread and Salt to it, when it has stood till it is blood-warm, eat it: You may put some Butter to it, or an Egg, if you like it best. This is an incompa∣rable Food for all sorts of People, it breeds good Blood, opens the Passages, sweetens the Blood, pre∣vents windy Distempers and griping Pains; it is next to Breast-milk for Children, and it is excellent for Consumptive People, if they keep to it four or five Months, or more, and eat nothing else, and drinking three or four Glasses of good Ale; let them use gen∣tle Exercise, and moderate Cloathing, and good sweet hard Beds. This, and all other Spoon-meats made thin, are best. Of FLUMERY. It is thus made: Take three spoonfuls of Oatmeal more or less, and put to it a convenient quantity of Water, then let it stand till it begins to be sowerish,
then take this Water and Oatmeal, and put it into a Vessel, stirring it, and making it boiling hot, with a quick Fire, and when it does begin to rise, brew it to and fro with your Ladle, to keep it from boiling; this do about four or five Minutes, then take it off the Fire, and it's prepared. Some eat it with Ale, others with Cream, Milk, and the like, but I think it most beneficial to be eaten with Bread only. It re∣moves Obstructions, strengthens the Stomach, cools the Body, openeth the Passages, and is excellent good for Breakfast in all hot Climates. This is good, more especially for weak-stomach'd People, and those whose Breast and Passages are obstructed by tough phlegmy Matter. Of BREAD. The best sort for sick People, is that which is made of Wheat flower, but not too fine dressed; for then it will be dry and husky; and your leaven'd Bread is much better than that made with Yest; you may make it after this manner: Take what Flower you please, make a hole in the middle of it, break then your Leven in; take as much blood-warm Water as will wet about half your Flower, mix the Flower and Leven well together, cover it with the remaining Flower close; this do in the Evening, and by Mor∣ning the whole will be levened. Then add as much blood-warm Water as is sufficient, and knead it up very stiff and firm, the more pains you take, the better. When you have so done, let it lie warm by some Fire near two Hours, till the Oven is ready, then bake it, but let not the Oven-mouth be close stopp'd, that the Air may have more or less Egress or Regress. But the best way, is to make it into thin Cakes, and bake th on a Stone, with a Wood-fire under. Of Rye, Barley, Oats, &c. you may make Cakes after the same manner; put no Salt into your Bread.
Of BUTTER. Butter affords good Nourishment; the best that is for the Stomach, is made from May to August it's very wholsom, if eaten moderately with Bread or with Herbs, Roots, or the like. Take good Butter and melt it thick, and put it to your Hrbs, as you do Oil, and it eats as well and pleasant, and can scarce be di∣stinguish'd from Oil: This (I believe) a great many may have cause to thank me for: All Butter ought to be well seasoned with Salt. Of CHEESE. Cheese affords good Nourishment for healthy working People, if eaten with good store of Bread, and a Cup of good Drink be not wanting. It is al∣together as nourishing as Flesh; it is clean, and of a stronger, firmer Substance, and digests a Cup of Drink better: And he that lives on Bread and Cheese, intermix'd now and then with Flower'd-milk, Wa∣ter-gruel, Milk-potage, and raw Sallads, seasoned with Vinegar, Salt and Oil, and drinks a Cup of good sound Ale or Beer, not over strong, shall exceed in Health and Strength him that lives on Bread and Flesh, and drinks the same Liquor. Of EGGS, and their best way of Dressing. They are an excellent Food, friendly and innocent in Operation. Dress them as followeth: Let your Eggs be boiled soft, then break the Shell, and put them into a Dish, and let them stand till they are Blood warm; then with Bread and Salt only eat them. A strong Stomach may eat them with Bread and Butter spread upon it, not melted. Or you may boil them hard, then peel, off the Shell, and eat them with Salt, Bread and Vinegar. Poaching is a very good way. Take an Egg, a spoonful of Wheat∣flower, and beat it well together then put it into a pint of Water boiling hot, stir it together; then take it off, and eat it with a little Bread, Salt and Butter, and it will make an excellent meal. Eggs in a Mor∣ning
supp'd off raw, and Bread eaten after them, is very wholsom. Of PYES. Pear and Apple-pyes are wholsom and healthy Food, if the Fruit be torough ripe, and made as they ought to be▪ Th bst way is thus: Take good Weat-flower, make it into a Paste with a little Leven or Yeast, with Milk and Water, or a bloo-warm Water only, then put in yo Apples or Pears, and if you please, add some Carrway or Fennel-seeds. In baking, let the Oven stand almost open, that some Air may come in. When baked, draw them, and cut holes in the top, that the sulphurous Atoms, and the fiery Vapours may pass away; eat them not hot, for they are much better cold. Apples raw and ripe, eaten with Bread sometimes, are wholsom; and so are Peaches, Plumbs, Gooseberries, Currans, Apricocks, and the like, very good Food eaten with Bread sometimes. And observe by the way, that hot Bread ought not to be eaten, for it is very injurious to the Health; and your Bread ought to stand two days before you eat it. Of OIL. It is of a brave nourishing clean Nature, and friend∣ly to most Constitutions: It is very proper to be eat∣en with Herbs and Fruit. Bread and Oil makes a delicate Breakfast or Supper; for it cleanseth the Passages, breeds good Blood, and is easie of Con∣coction. With Fish it is very good, more especially with Salt-fish; for it allays the fierce keen property of the Salt, and sweetens the lean Body of the Fish; for these purposes it is better than Butter. Observe, That toasted Bread is not so good as cold Bread. Olives are not so good as Oil, nor ought to be fre∣quently eat, for then they obstruct the Stomach and Passages. The best way of eating them, is with Bread only; but we might as well be without them.
Of SUGARS. Sugar is an excellent rich thing, but in my opinion, fit only to be taken Physically, and not at every turn to be mixt with our common Food and Drinks; the use whereof makes it of evil consequence, particular∣ly all sweetned Drinks and Food forward the gene∣ration of the Gout, and other Diseases of the Body, which simple innocent Food would prevent, if Tem∣perance be but observ'd. But if Sugar be used in Milk-meats for old People, it may prove beneficial, but I think to none else. Of SUGAR-CANDY. It is made thus: First, they boil it as high as other Sugars, then out of the Pans they take this Syrup, and put it in an earthen Pot; then they set it in a hot Stow, there to stand 9 or 10 days; in that time the fierceness of the sulphurous Heat coagulates it into an hard tough substance, then you take it out from the Syrup, and put the Candy or hard Lumps into the Stow again, but made about 2 or 3 degrees hot∣ter, where it must remain 9 or 10 days longer, and then 'tis done. There are two sorts of it, one White, the other Brown, but they are both of one nature and opera∣tion; they are much made use of for Coughs, Colds and Stoppages, but in my opinion there is nothing more contrary and burthensom to Nature in such cases than this very thing, and therefore ought to be aban∣doned; for, in truth, the best Food for those that are invaded with these Colds, &c. are thin brik Gruels and Potages, made as I have taught before; also good raw Sallads with Bread and Oil, but eat Oil sparingly: Likewise Bread and Butter, and all sorts of lean Food, light of digestion; and for Drinks, Water and Rhenish-wine, two parts Water, and one Wine, or good small Ale, with moderate exercise and cloathing, walking in the open Air sometimes, which will gradually remove these Distempers.
Of the Occasion of Colds and Coughs, and of their Cure. Coughs and Colds are produced by intemperance in Meats, Drinks, Exercises and Habits, or by eating or drinking too much in quantity, and things of a con∣trary quality, or improperly prepar'd, and not from thin Cloathing, as many imagine; for if the inside be sound and clean, there is little danger of outward In∣conveniences. The best way to prevent outward Colds, and the Evils that happen through thick and thin Cloathing, and by Heats, Sweatings, and the like, is to change your Cloaths often. As for Ex∣ample: Put on, when you stay at home, in a Morn∣ing, one sort of Cloaths, and when you go out, put off your Cloaths to your Shirt, and put on fresh and cold Cloaths, and again at Night, pull off them to the Shirt, and put on the other. And for those that sweat much by their Labour, let them pull off all their Cloaths, Shirt and all, and put on fresh Shirts, and cold Cloathing; and for those that over-travel them∣selves, let them do the like; but observe that both fit still a while, before they either eat or drink. Observe farther by the bye, That Prunes, Figs, Nuts, and Almonds, and many other suchlike things, ought not to be eaten at all, except only with com∣mon Bread, or in a Physical way, in opening Drinks. Also Candied Gingers, all sorts of Conserves and Pre∣serves, and all Confections, Hodge-podge, Cakes, Bunns, are very prejudicial for it, and obstruct the Passages, generate Crudities, spoil the Stomach, and prepare Matter for a multitude of Diseases. Of CANARY. Canary is an excellent Cordial Liquor; eat a good piece of Bread, and drink a Glass of Canary after it, and it will make a rich meat. It is, in my opinion, the best Cordial an Apothecary has in his Shop, for any Man in time of Disorder and Sickness.
Of SHERRY. It is a fine Cordial Wine, as Food for common Drinks as Canary; being mixt with Water, it begets Appetite, cleanseth the Passages, and helps Con∣coction; it purges by Urine more than Canary. But this, as all other Liquors, must be drank with discre∣tion and temperance, and not too frequent. Of WHITEWINE. Whitewine is an excellent cleansing Liquor, it be∣gets Appetite, and purges by Urine; but let it not be too frequently drank, left it indispose the Body, by putting it into an unnatural Flame. Of RHENISH-WINE. Rhenish-Wine is an excellent Cleanser of the Sto∣mach, somewhat a-kin to Whitewine, it begets Ap∣petite, and helps Concoction. As for Old Hock, esteem'd by some, it is the most prejudicial of any Liquor, and therefore ought to be forborn. Of CLARET. Claret is a good Stomach-Wine, moderately drank; it helps Concoction, and begets Appetite, it is the best of Wines for those that eat abundance of Fat-flesh, and Succulent Foods: But it purges not by Urine so much as White. Take Notice, that this (as all other Liquors) are not to be frequently used, for then they are prejudicial; but a Glass of Claret, or a dram of Brandy, or the like, are good Cordials, when you have eaten too much in quantity of any Foods too foul or gross in quality. Of CYDER. Cyder (if well made and fermented) is a fine brisk Liquor, and altogether as good as Claret or White∣wine, and perhaps better for English Bodies, if drank temperately. Note, That no Cyder ought to be kept above one year, if you regard your Health.
Of MUM. Mum (if temperately drank) is very wholsom for Melancholy Flegmatical People, and for those whose Food is coarse Bread and Cheese, Flower'd-milk, Herbs, and lean Potages; but I think it not near so wholsom as well-brewed Ale. Of COFFEE. Coffee ought to be used only in a Physical way, by them that are troubled with Fumes and dulling Va∣pours that fly into their Heads: It is likewise good after hard Drinking, Weariness. Labour and Fast∣ing; but for others, I think it best to forbear it: Yet a Dish will do no Man harm. Of TEA. Tea is an innocent harmless Liquor, that purges by Urine, and is of an opening Quality; but it is not comparable to an Herb called Dandalion; which being infused in boiling hot Water about half an hour, and then pour the Liquor from the Herbs, and sweet∣ned with white Sugar, is a much better Drink. It purgeth by Urine, and cleanseth the Stomach. Sage, Penniroyal, Thyme and Mint, dryed in their proper season, and kept in Bags, make as good Liquor as Tea. An excellent Drink against Stone, Gravel, and other Obstructions. Take Scurvy-grass Leaves, Seeds of Daucus, some Horse-Radishes cropt, put them in an earthen Ves∣sel, and then add as much Whitewine as will cover he Herbs, Seeds and Roots; let them stand five days and nights, then pour it off, and keep it in Glass-Bottles; it will continue good four or five weeks: Take a Sack-glass of this, and a like quantity of Wa∣ter every morning, fast two hours, and then drink at east a quart of our thin Water-gruel, either of the cold or hot. The constant use of this, is not only a prevention and cure, but it moves most sorts of Ob∣structions of the Stomach, begets Appetite, generates good Blood, causing it to circulate freely.
How to Purge by Herbs and Foods. When you are minded to purge your self with both ease and safety, and to preserve your Health, then ob∣serve the following method, viz. In the Morning drink a quart of our thin Water-gruel, either the cold or hot, eat a small piece of Bread with it; at Dinner take Spinage, Lettice, Onions, Parsly and Sage; wash them, and eat plentifully of them with your Food, be it what it will; at Night drink a like quan∣tity of Gruel, and eat some good Bread, as you did in the Morning. This you must do for four or five, or six days together, more or less, as you see occasion. The like method you are to observe, if you would purge your self wi Carrots, Turnips and Parsnips, as you did wih Hbs, with this variation, viz. drink your Gruel, and ea your Bread Mornings and Nights, and at Dinner at only Carrots, Parsnips or Turnips, boiled only in good Water, and eat them freely with no other thing, but a little Salt and Bread, during these several days. You may purge your self to what degree you please. Another way to Purge by Foods and Drinks. Drink in the Morning at several times, three pints or two quarts of thin Water-gruel, at Dinner drink a pint or a quart, at Night drink a quart more, and eat some Bread. This method will purge, or at least will keep your Body open; let your Food at Dinner be what it will, the Body being kept open and cool, doth prevent and cure various Diseases in hot costive Constitutions. To make the best Herb Diet-drink. Supposing your Herbs well gather'd, and dry, and kept in Bags; take what Herb you think fit, put it in a Linnen Bag, and steep it 7 or 8 hours in Beer, Ale or Wine, or other Liquor, and then take it out, and it is done: Let not your Wormwood be steep'd above three or four hours; observe, that one sort of Herb by it self, is much better than Compounds.
To prevent the SCURVY. Eat not Meat and Drinks too strong for Nature, for Nature ought to be stronger than the Food. Meat and Drink ought not to be eaten that are of a contrary Quality to the Constitution. Have a care of eating to Fulness, or to Excess. Take care that your Victuals be (in all respects) properly prepared; for some will but half do it, others over-do it. Advice to Flesh-eaters. Let all sorts of Flesh and gross Food be boiled in plenty of Water, and over a brisk Fire. Forbear eat∣ing too much Flesh. It is most unwholsom in July, August, September, October. Forbear eating too much Fish. Remember you eat not before the former Food be digested. Drink moderately; let your ordinary Drink not be hard, stale, nor sour, nor too new. Let your Cloathing be moderate. Let your Houses be airy, your Beds hard, clean and sweet; use proper Exer∣cise and Labour in open airy places; take Walks of∣ten by River-sides, or on Plains and Downs; observe the Rules of Chastity, avoid all compounded Foods; avoid carking Cares, Hates, Revenge, Envy, Violence, Oppression, keep a good Conscience, for that's a con∣tinual Feast. Hearken to the Voice of Wisdom, and the Dictates of Reason and Nature, and that will bring thee to endless Felicity. Notable Things; How to Cure all sorts of Wounds by Poultices only. AN excellent Poultice, which cures scalded Limbs, Burns, Biles, Felons, Tumors proceeding from Choler, Phlegm or Melancholy. It also cues all Contusions, Inflammations or Bruises, either with or without a Wound; old Wounds, Ulcers, or running
Sores▪ Excellent also against the Gout, and Inflam∣mation of the Eyes; admirable against sore Breasts, and Bites of Dogs, or any other hurt of what kind or nature soever. Which is thus: Take two pints of Water, River, Rain or Spring; then take as much ground Oatmeal as will make it thick, fit for a Poultice; add to it two ounces of good Sugar, a handful of Dandalion cut small, then place it over the Fire in an open and convenient Ves∣sel, keep it stirring till it is boiling-hot, and then it is made. Another. Take about a quart of Water, then take as much Houshold-bread as will make it thick, and three ounces of beaten Raisins of the Sun, and one ounce of Sugar, and about half a pint of new Ale; stir all together, and make them boiling-hot over a clear Fire, and it's done. Another. Take one quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it thick, five ounces of Raisins of the Sun, and one ounce of Coriander-seeds, beaten with a Glass of Ale, made boiling-hot, and then it is prepared. Another. Take one quart of Water and Bread, to make it as thick as a Poultice; of Sugar two ounces, a Glass of Sack, or for want of that, other Wine, make it boiling-hot. Apply these Medicines to the part af∣flicted, by spreading the Poultice pretty thick on a Linnen-Cloth, that will cover the whole part, some∣what warmer than Milk from the Cow: But let it not be so hot as is usual, for Extreams prove generally prejudicial. Apply these Poultices every two hours at least in the day, and three or four times in the night, if the Wound be dangerous; otherwise, ten times in a day and a night will do. When you take the Poultice off, put that away, and put a fresh one on every time, and keep, a constant Repetition for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 or 11 days, if occasion be; but it will cure most Distempers in less time, if you observe this method. But besure wash your Sores 'twixt whiles, with Water
and Sugar, and sometimes with Water & fresh Butter beaten together, which will keep it clean and pliant. A Rare Poultice against the HEAD-ACH. Take a quart of Rain or River-water, an ounce of white Sugar, as much Malt-flower new ground as will make it thick enough; add to it half a pint of good Ale, making it boiling-hot, and stirring it all the time that it is made: Spread this on a Linnen-Cloth pretty thick; apply it Milk-warm every hour. Con∣tinue the Application as long as occasion serves. An excellent Poultice against SPRAINS of all sorts. Take clean Water two quarts, make it boil, then put green Sage in, as much as the Water will cover; then boil it, then let it stand off the Fire half an hour, then strain the Water off, and put to this Sage-Li∣quor, as much Bread as will thicken it; then take double-refin'd Sugar three ounces, a quarter of a pint of Claret, and Spirit of Wine, Sugar or Malt, five spoonfuls; stir them well together, making them boiling-hot; besure stir it all the time. Spread this on a Linnen-Cloth, apply it blood-warm every two hours, resting all the time. A Poultice, excellent to cure a sore BREAST. Take a quart of River-water, then cut some Sorrel small, of Coriander-seed beaten to powder half an ounce, of good brown Sugar 2 ounces, and as much Bread as will make it into a Poultice, make it boil∣ing-hot, stirring it all the time that it is made: Ap∣ply this every 2 hours blood-warm; do it 3 or 4 days as you have occasion. Be sure, every time you apply this Poultice, to wash your Breast with Water and fresh Butter beaten together. This is an excellent thing. A Poultice to cure a SPRAIN. Take 2 quarts of fair Water, and of good-strong Beer a quart, refin'd Sugar four ounces; boil it up, then add to it fresh-gather'd Thyme as much as the Liquor will cover, then boil it up again, then strain
it from the Herbs, and put of brown Bread as much as will thicken it; stir this over the Fire till boiling∣hot, and it's done. Put to this 3 ounces of Spirit of Wine, stirring all well together: Apply this spread thick on a Linnen-Cloth every 3 hours blood-warm. Another. When you have strain'd any part, pre∣sently put it into cold Water, wherein some Wood and Ashes are put. Do this about an hour, and it gives Ease. To cure GAULS, or SKIN rub'd off. Wash your Sore every hour for a day or two, with Spirit of Wine and Vinegar mixt well together, lay∣ing on a Diaculum Plaster. This cures in a small time. Against a STAB or CUTT, or any other WOUND. Take double-refin'd Sugar and Spirit of Wine mixt with it, and with this Wash or Syringe your Wound well, then put a small quantity of refin'd Sugar pou∣der'd into your Wound, and immediately sow it up with Silk and a fine Needle. This will do wonders. To cure old ULCERS. Take of the best double Spirit of Wine one pint, beaten Aloes half an ounce, double-refin'd Sugar 3 ounces, Myrrh half an ounce, mix them well toge∣ther. Use it thus: First wash your Ulcer with very clean Rain-water, dropping some of the fore-mention∣ed Spirits into your Ulcer. Then apply this Poultice following: Rain-water a quart, Balm, two ounces of good Sugar, Parsly and Mint cut small, of each a like quantity; as much Bread as will make it of a fit consistency for a Poultice; make it boiling-hot, stir∣ring it all the time; then put a Glass of good Beer or Ale, Syder or Wine, into it. Lay this Poultice on every three hours, always washing it with the Rain∣water and Spirits.
A new Way for the right Ordering of Cattel. A Horse is an excellent and useful Creature, but thro' ill Management, often abused; to pre∣vent which, the Drivers ought to observe, First, That in the Morning, they drive them moderately. Secondly, When they have done Labour, rub them well down, then tie them to the Rack for an hour or two, during which time give them no Meat, but be∣tween whiles keep them rubbing, till their tired Spi∣rits be refreshed, then give them a moderate quantity of Meat and Drink. Thirdly, Let the Stables be open to the Air, and keep them clean: Let not your Horses in the Stable, especially your Saddle-horses, have constantly Hay in the Rack, nor Provender in your Manger, but tie them from their Racks, five, six or seven hours together; let not your Cattel have too much Meat at a time, but such a quantity as they may eat up clean: When your Horse has been hard Rid, or Worked much, you may conveniently give him a little Water about two hours before you give him Meat. Rubbing down Horses is better than walk∣ing them, when hot. Those that give their other Cat∣tel Grains, as the People about London do, let them put a little Salt into them, which prevents the Rot, and watry and windy Diseases. Let your Mares with Foal, and their Colts, run in the Fields for a Year. Observe but these Rules, and your Horses will seldom want Drenching or Bleeding; but if you find they prove too fast, the best way to cool their Blood, and keep them from Diseases, is to give them mode∣rate Labour, and alter the quality of their Food. The best Food for Horses, is good Rick-Hay, that is about three quarters of a year old, which is much better than Hay out of the Barn. And Corn in the Straw is much better than that that is only thresht, or that that is both thresht and cleansed from its Chaff.
And Beans, Fitches, Pease, Barly, and Oats in the Straw, is not only the most hearty Food, but clean∣seth the Stomach from all Superfluities; but threshed Corn of any sort, is good Food for working Horses that go to Grass, especially in Winter, giving it them Morning and Night. Put your Stable-horses to Grass from May to July, which will cleanse their Bodies, and cure their Feet and Legs of Diseases contracted by standing in the Stable all Winter: Rain, River, and Spring-water, are best for Horses and other Cattel, much better than Pond-water. As for Sheep, any disorder wounds their Health, if they are driven too hard, or coursed with a Dog, or the like, if they be suffered to lie down whilst hot, and this be done often, they will break out with the Scab or Mange; when about Michaelmas you put them into fresh Pastures, if they are close folded it will do the same: If in hot Weather they be often re∣moved from place to place, it will hinder them from Thriving, and make them Scabby, much wet likewise makes them Rot. In the Morning betimes drive your Sheep into fallow Fields, or Downs, where Grass is scarce, and take notice of the Situation of the Field; then walk your Sheep gently on the driest and highest parts; if there be Corn-fields, let them feed about two or three hours by the Hedges. About 11 a-Clock, turn them from the edges of the Corn∣fields or Pasturage, into the lowest Clay-ground or Valleys you have, and let them lie at ease, and as scattering as you can: Use them at all times tender∣ly, and less Food will serve; observ this method from May till August, if the Weather continue warm, and it will prevent Scab and Mange, when they come in∣to fresh Pasture. In May or June, I think is the best time for Shearing. If the Summer proves wet about June or July, let your Sheep continue in the Fold till eight in the Morning, if the Morning be moist; and again, let them be folded before the Dew falls: Ob∣serve
these Rules, and you will prevent many Disea∣ses, as Choler, Flegm, Stoppages, Red-water, Coughs, Pains in the Joints, Lameness, and the like: You ought to be most careful of Sheep from Midsummer till Mi∣chaelmas. Therefore keep your Sheep till 9 a-Clock, or till the Sun have dried up the moist Vapours and Humidity from the Earth, and then let them out, and keep them on the high and dry Grounds; if the day prove dry, feed them three Hours in lower Grounds, and about Evening put them in higher places and besure Fold them before the Dew falls, and Fold them on dry Ground; from July to September, Sheep are most subject to Rot, and is occasioned chiefly by too much moisture at the Season, and not from licking up Snails, &c. which I omit for Brevity. If wet Weather happen about July, August or Sep∣tember, or when it is generally a wet Summer, and continues till Michaelmas, a Rot is greatly to be feared. In wet Weather, give your Sheep Hay at Night and Morning, or give them three times a Week Oats, or other Grain, mixing a little Salt with it, and this will prevent the Rot: Low wide Houses like Barns, open on all sides to house Sheep in wet Weather, preserves them from Rot; this is a General Rule in Flanders. Those that live, where the Rot is often, ought to change their Sheep for Hill-Country Sheep, which will thrive, and prove less subject to this Disease. Divers other Notable Things. How to harden LEATHER, that it shall last much longer than it doth unprepared. THis Secret is so necessary for the whole Land, that I shall discover it. Lay such Leather as is well taw'd to soak in Water, wherein there hath been store of Filings of Iron a long time, or else in Water
that hath lain a long time under a Grindstone, where Iron hath from time to time fallen, and there settled. To beautifie SHOES, and keep them dry and beau∣tiful, and to preserve them. Take two ounces of Bees-wax, a penny worth of Lamb-black, twelve or thirteen drops of Neats Oil, or a little Grease; let them boil, and stir them well together, then take it off, and when cold, make it into a Roll, and rub a little of it upon a hard Brush, then heat your Brush, and rub your Shoes; observe that your Shoes must be rub'd from Dirt clean, before you rub your Wax, and likewise dry; and this will keep out wet, and set a Gloss, and preserve your Shoes. To make COALS last much longer than usual. Take your smallest Sea-Coals, and mix them well with large pieces of Clay, as big as large Balls, and lay them upon your Fire. To save SOAP in washing Linnen. Infuse Spring or River-water, two or three days in open Vessels in the Air, a quantity of Chalk, and it will save a great deal of Soap. It purges, being drank by Urine, brings away Gravel, and slimy offensive Matter. Put Chalk into stale Beer, and it immediate∣ly takes away the eagerness of it: Drink it with Water, and it cures the Heart-burn; it is good to brew-withal. Directions to Dress HATS. Smear a little Soap upon the places of your Hat that is filthy, and then with some hot Water, and a hard Brush, rub your Hat, then scrape it with the back of a Knife, what filth sticks, and it will bring both Grease and Scap out. Another. Some take the Grounds of Beer, and boil it, and with a Brush rub their Hats, and so clean it. To make Powder INK, or White Powder INK. Take of Gum Sandrach two ounces, and beat it well to a Powder, then sift it thro' a fine Sieve, take as much Calaminthus, which the Druggists sell, mix them well, beaten to Powder, and a quarter of an
ounce of this will turn a pint of Water or Vinegar in∣to good Ink presently. To make COFFEE of Horse-Beans. Take Horse-Beans and roast them, then grind them as you do Coffee-Berries, and put a small quantity of Coffee to them, then take a little sweet Malt tyed in a Rag, and put into your Water, and boil it as you usually do Coffee; I am told, it will answer the end for Colour, Taste, and Virtue. Another. Take 12 ounces of Horse-Beans unhusk't and roasted, 2 ounces of Coffee, 2 ounces of Wheat parched or roasted, and pouder'd in your Liquor; you may boil some sweet Malt tyed in a Bag, and make your Coffee with that Liquor. This I had from a Friend. I am told, that Pease does the same thing. If you cast Salt into a Lamp of Oil, it makes the Oil last twice as long as it will without it. A pleasant, wholsom, and cheap Way to make Wine of Cherries, Gooseberries, Apricocks and Plumbs. Take Gooseberries, Cherries and Plumbs, or any o∣ther such like Fruit, bruise them, then put them into a Tub, such as is used to mash Malt in, with a Tap in it, then put in it as much good Water as you think fit, either to make it small or strong, let these infuse 11, 13, 17, or 20 hours, then you must draw it; if you would keep it, put some bitter Herb or Seed 3 or 4 hours in it; for present use, Balm, or any good Herb; then to every Gallon put two pound and a half, or three pound of Honey, Sugar or Treacle, the more sweetning, the stronger it will be, then put some Yeast to it, and let it work. Grease the edge of new Shoes, or new-soled Shoes, then with a hot Iron seer them well on the edge, and round the heel, it preserves your Shoes from spungi∣ness, and makes them last much longer. How a Man may Advance his Corn 5 d. or 7 d. in a Bushel; and that is by cutting down his Corn be∣fore it be over-ripe, for if it is over-ripe, the Straw
becomes so brittle, that it hardly supports the Ears, by that means it sheds more than was sowed, but especially Barly; it likewise makes the Bread eat husky, therefore take care it stand not too long, nor you cut it over-soon, but observe a Medium. How to Brew Ale. Take your Water as hot as you can, without boil∣ing, then put it into the Mash-tub, or other Vessel, let it stand a small time before your Malt be put into it; for if you put your Malt into the Water hot, it will make the Wort of a red colour; but the cooler the Water is, the paler will your Wort look. You may put into the Ale a small quantity of Hops, but they must not be boiled; but you may do thus, fill your Vessel or Copper that you use with your Wort, make it boiling-hot, then what quantity of Hops you will you may take, infuse them nigh half an hour, when that is done strain them out, not letting it boil at all, then you have all the vertues of Hops that are necessary for the Body; you must likewise let your Ale be thoroughly wrought or fermented, that it may be well cleansed from its Yeasty substance, for if not, it quickly grows sour; likewise you must take care that you don't set it working whilst too hot, for that weakens the original heat, and if your Ale work too furiously, it will not keep, but turn sour sooner than the other that is set a working in such a degree of heat; neither let your Wort be set a working too cold, for that makes the spirituous quality become dead or flat. You may Brew as wholsom Ale, or wholsomer, and not boil it at all; try before you judge, and speak as you find. Read an excellent Book, call'd, The Way to Health, Long-Life and Hap∣piness, pag. 154, 155, 156, 157, &c. To take Ink out of Paper. Take Aquafortis, and dip a little of it upon the blot or writing you would take out, and immediately it will disappear; then take a little Water steeped in
Alom, and wash it over with it, and when dry, it will make it look as clear and white as at first; otherwise the Aquafortis alone will make a yellow Stain. How to cure Chilblains. Take some Beef Brine, and heat it as hot as you can endure it, and rub your Feet with it, holding them to the Fire: This do Morning and Night, or wash your Feet in your own Water Morning and Night. Chops. Anoint with Capon and Goose-Grease. Dimness of the Eyes, or sore. Wash your Eye-lids with your own warm Urine Morning and Night. Teeth Hollow. Stop them with burnt Alom and Bees-wax, mixt. Canker in the Mouth. Mix Alom, Honey and Vine∣gar together, and wash your Mouth often with it. For the Scurvy or Dropsie. Drink your own Water Morning and Evening. Of Water. The first sort in goodness, either to drink, or dress Meat, or Wash withal, or for other uses, is Rin-water; the best Season to receive it, is March, April, May, June and July, put it into Glass-Bottles, and in Airy places, and let it stand unstopped, that the Air may have a free influence. The next in goodness is River-water, whose original is Fountain or Spring-water, and is generally better in the River, than at the Fountain-head. Thames Water is an ex∣cellent Water too. The next is Spring or Fountain-water, and the best is that that proceeds from a Chalky Earth. Pump or Well-waters are of a cold hungry nature generally, and not so good as the others. Pond or Standing-waters are worst of all Waters, for either Man or Beast. Pump or Well-water, so much used of late, whose Purgative qualities proceed from Coldness and Weight, and the not being accustomed to Drink Water, I look upon them to be dangerous, especially when drank in such great quantities. The first Fin∣ders and Drinkers did use them more temperately and regularly, which by degrees most have degene∣rated
from all sober Methods, into the highest degrees of all kind of Debauchery. For the Gout. ake a quart of Rain-water, half a pint of Ale, a little Mnt, Parsly and Balm, of each a like quantity cut small, and as much good Bread as will thicken it, add to this two ounces of white Su∣gar, mix them well together, then just boil it up, stirring it all the while well together, and it is done; spread this pretty thick on a Linnen-Cloth, and ap∣ply it every two or three hours, as warm as Milk from the Cow: This do three or four days. In several Shires they put a cold Iron-bar upon Barrels which preserves Beer from souring by Thun∣der. To hinder the Night-mare from Riding Horses. Take a Flint and make a hole in it, and put a String thro' it, and hang it by the Manger, or about the Beast's Neck, and it will prevent the Night-mare. 'Tis said, That a Horse being Bewitched, they filled a Bottle with the Horses Urine, stop'd it well with a Cork, and bound it fast in, and then Buried it under Ground, and the party fell ill that was suspected to be the Witch, and could not make Water, of which she died. To cure an Ague. Write these following Words in Parchment, it must be writ triangularly, and wear it about your Neck; 'tis said one Cured above 100 with it. Abracadabra Abracadabr Abracadab Abracada Abracad Abraca Abrac Abra Abr Ab A
To cure the Biting of a Mad Dog. Write in a piece of paper these words, Rebus, Rubus, Epitepscum; give it to the Party or Beast bitten, to eat, in Bread. This never fails. To make the best Spirit of Scurvy-grass. Take Scurvy-grass Leaves, and some Horse-Radish Roots scrap't small, put them into an earthen Vessel or Glass, then put as much strong double Spirit of Wine as will cover it, then stop the Vessel close, and let it stand 3 days and 3 nights; then you must pour it off into Bottles; when it is settled, you may pour it off into other Glass-bottles, and then it's fit for to use. You may take of the Spirit in a Morning, from 60 to 70, 80, or 90 drops in Beer, Ale, Wine or Water, fasting two hours after it, then eat some Water-gruel with Bread. How to make this Plain Spirit into a Purging Spirit. You must take a quart of the Plain Spirit, and put to it Rosin of Scammony one ounce, and of Rosin of Jallop half an ounce, both beaten to pouder, then let it stand 6 days, and it's done. Take 50, 60, 70, or 80 drops of this in Ale, Beer, or Wine; then drink a great quantity of Water-gruel after it, and stay within. It will purge you very well. Wormwood smoakt in Pipes, if it is well dried in the Sun and put into Paper-bags for use, is much bet∣ter than Tobacco, for any Diseases. To make Wormwood supply the place of Hops, to all In∣tents and Purposes, and please the Drinker's Palate. Let your Wormwood be well dryed in the Sun, then take as much of it as you please, and put it into your hot Water in your Mash-tub, (put a quantity in, as you have occasion to keep your Drink a longer or shorter time) then presently put your Malt in, and stir it together as usual; when it has stood the common time, draw it off, then take the Wormwood out, and add fresh to your Liquor that you put up the second time, do so again when you put up
the third Liquor, if you mash more than twice; this is much better than Hop'd-drink, and will keep five year good; the same we shall observe in any other Herbs. If tis makes the Grains unfit for Cattel, by reason of bitterness, get a thin Canvas-bag, and put your Wormwood into it, and when your Drink is working in the Tun, hang this Bag in your Work∣ing-drink 3 hours; then take it out, and it's done. This Drink refines the Blood, strengthens the Sto∣mach, and purges by Urine; and moderately drank, is good for the Head and Eyes. Take a peck of Meal, and divide it into two parts, and in the one part put a pennyworth of Turnips boiled, and work it and knead it by it self; the 2d par∣cel being baked, that Meal that had the Turnips in it proved the better Bread by far, and whiter, and more toothsom, and it's the Opinion of Physicians it's very healthful; besides, it cuts better, and will con∣tinue moist as long again: The parcel of Bread that had the Turnips in it, was 5 pounds in weight more than the other; this must needs be of great Advan∣tage to the Public; when Cattel, Swine, and Poultry may be fed with little Charge. Hackney Turnips are the best for Bread, a Paste may be made with Tur∣nips to continue long, which all sorts of Poultry would like well of, and excellent Horse-bread may be made of it: All sorts of Cattel and Poultry will take it suf∣ficient without farther trouble; the Paste is excel∣lent Food for Rabbits. With Turnip-tops and Rape-cakes, or Linseed-cakes and Grains, you may make Potage and wholsom Food for your Cows, which be∣ing warm, they'l eat greedily, and give Milk in abun∣dance. Holland Merchants have bought up our Rapeseed after the Oil was prest out, and made it in∣to great Cakes, which is a great Commodity in Hol∣land. The Roots and Leaves made clean and stamped together, then boiled in Water and given to Cows, make them give much Milk, and grow fat, if all the year you keep them up.
Turnips, with small addition, makes very good Cyder, and an excellent Oil hath been made thereof, Probat. est. Boil Barley-chaff in Turnip-liquor, toge∣ther with the Turnips and the Leaves, which make it as fatning as any Food: You may keep Rabbits with Turnip-bread all the year; the Roots and Leaves will feed Sheep and Calves very fat. The like benefit, as with Turnips, may be made of Potatoes; they make good Food, and very good Bread, Cakes, Paste and Pyes, and are both Crust without, and Food within: The like benefit you may make of Jerusalem Arti∣chokes, for Poultry and Swine. To make Clay burn as clear as any other Fire, and as useful. Take of Sea-coal, or small Pit-coal, one third part, and mingle them together as you do Mortar; make them up in Balls less than your Head, and lay them to dry; then put them on the Fire one upon another, and observe the conclusion. There is a sort of Loam, which is combustible of it self, and will, with a few Charcoals added, burn very clear, and prove very useful. Probat. est. To make very large Crops of Corn to Admiration. Sow Bay-Salt on the Corn-ground. To prevent Blasting of Corn, under God, change the Seed; or by soaking it in the best Muck-water, or mixing Lime and Water with it as before, and the Corn being steept seasonably, add to it the Lime, or Ashes, or both, and being thereby fix'd into them, and so sown, hath been an excellent Remedy. To encrease Corn. Put into quick unslacked Lime-water, as much as sufficeth to make it swim 4 inches above the Lime, and then pour it off; and unto 10 pound of the Wa∣ter mix one pound of Aquavitae, and in that Liquor steep Wheat or other Grain 24 hours, which being dry'd in the Sun, or Air, steep it again in the same Li∣quor
24 hours more; then do the same a third time, afterwards sow them at a great distance the one from the other, about a foot 'twixt each Grain, and one Grain will prove 30 or 40, or 50 Ears, and the Stalk will be as tall as any Man. Take Pumpions and boil them, and use them as you do Turnips, and they'l feed Cattel, Swine, and Poul∣try: Cabbages and Coleworts will do the same. To get Smut from Wheat. Lay first a layer of Barly-chaff, then a layer of smut∣ty Wheat, and then a layer of Chaff again, then thrash it, and it will break very fair. Choice OBSERVATIONS. OF Perilous Days, and most dangerous in the Year, in which if any Person be let Blood of Vein or Wound, they shall die within 21 days follow∣ing; or whosoever falleth Sick on any of these days, shall die; or whosoever taketh a Journey, shall die e're he comes home again: Or whosoever Weddeth, shall soon be parted, or live in Sorrow; and who be∣ginneth any great Work, it shall not come to a happy End; they are in. January 7 Days. 4, 5, 10, 15, 17, 19, 27. February 3 Days. 8. 9, 17. March 3 Days. 15, 16, 21. April 2 Days. 15, 21. May 3 Days. 7, 15, 21. June 2 Days. 4, 7. July 2 Days. 15, 20. August 2 Days. 19, 20. Septemb 2 Days. 6, 7. October 1 Day. 6. Novemb. 2 Days 15, 19. Decemb. 3 Days. 6, 7, 11.
Dog-days begin the 19 Day of July, and continue to the 28th Day of August: In which it is dangerous to all Sick to Purge, or let Blood; but if need be, let it be before the midst of the Day. To sow Wheat in less quantity, and more encrease. Take Wheat, and put it into Water and Salt a Day and a Night, then before you sow it throw it into new slacked-Lime, then sow it as you do other Wheat, and the encrease, God willing, will be much more, and the less Seed may be sowed. A good Rule for Blood-letting, and proved True. Whoso letteth Blood upon the right Arm the 10th Day of March, and the 11th Day of April in the left Arm, shall never lose his sight; and if you let Blood on the right Arm or left the 4th or 5th, and so to the latter-end of May, shall have no Fever that Year; but whoso letteth Blood on St. Lambert's Day, from hence he shall not have the running Gout, nor Palsie; and who letteth him Blood in the same Month, and the 3d Day before the end of the same Month, he needeth not let himself Blood on the 11th Day of April, in the which Day to let himself Blood on the left Arm, is good for the Palsie. Also these 3 Mon∣days, if any let Blood of wound or vein, he shall die within 3 Days; and who is born in these 3 Days, he shall be incumbred through a strange Death, viz. the first Monday in August, the Monday next the end of the same Month, and the last Monday of December. To make Flumery. Take half a peck of white Bran, not over-much boulted or sifted, let it soak three or four days in two gallons of Water, strain out the Liquid part, pressing it hard, boil it till consumed a third part, so that, when cool, is like a Jelly, and will keep long; when you eat y of it, season it with Sugar, Rose, or O∣range-Flower-water; put a little Cream or Milk to it, and its pleasant and wholsom nourishment.
To make Milk-potage. Put two quarts of Water to four quarts of new Milk, and two handfuls of fine Flower, let them seeth gently, keeping it stirring to prevent burning too, and this sweetned is very cooling and wholsom. To make abundance of Cream. Take a Skimming-dish full of the top of the Milk, add to it four Spoonfuls of scraped Sugar, and a drop of good Runnet, then stir them together, that they may thicken a little, then set it in a warm place, and a great deal of Cream will rise in an hours time. Silent Language, or to speak by Signs. A for Arm, stretch it forth. B for Brow, Eye-brow, touching it with the fore-Finger of your right Hand. C for Chin, touching it with your fore-Finger. D for Dimple, thrusting your fore-Finger against your Cheek. E for Ear, touching it with the fore-Finger. F for Forehead, touching it with the fore-Finger. G for Gullet or Throat, touching it with the fore-Finger. H for Hair. I for your Eye. K for Knockle. L for Lip. M for Mouth. N for Nose. O make a Circle or O with the fore-Finger of the right Hand, on the Palm of the left Hand. P for Pap or Dug Q for quivering or shaking your fore-Finger of the right Hand. R for Rib. S for Shoulder. T for Tongue, putting it out of the Mouth. U for Vein, pointing the Finger where you let Blood, in the middle of the Arm.
W for Wrist, grasping the left Wrist with your right Hand. X Cross your fore-Fingers. Y two Fingers of the right Hand, cross the first of your left Hand. Z three Fingers of the right Hand, cross the first of your left Hand. The Use. Would you signify to your Friend pri∣vately, such a Man is a Sot, you point or touch with your fore-Finger, the top of your right Shoulder, that is S, then make an O, or round Circle on the Palm of your left Hand, with the fore Finger of your right Hand, then put forth your Tongue which is T; and thus you may discover your Mind to any Friend by the help of the Alphabet: This must be understood by you both, which may be learnt in half an hour or less, and all other By-standers ignorant of what you do. Rules for Blood-letting. January. These days following are perilous to let Blood on, except the Sign be right good for Blood letting; let not Blood on the 1. 2 5. 10 15. 19. 20. nor 25. A Glass of Whitewine fasting, is wholsom and good to Drink. February. Bleed not on thy Wrist nor Arm if thou hast need, the 4. 6. 8. 16. nor 18 day, except the Sign be very good. March. Eat Raisins or Figs, or sweet Meats, and Drink and Eat hot Meats, and let Blood on the right Arm, the 5. 12. or 17 day to prevent Fevers; but the 1. 15. 16. 19. nor 28 day, except the Sign be good. April. Bleed on the left Arm the 3. 11. or 15. it pre∣vents the Head-ach, and loss of Sight, Eat hot Meat, and fresh. Bleed not the 7. 8. 10. nor 20 day.
May. Let Blood the 1. or 10 day, 27. or 28 day, it helps all Evil, but beware of the 3. 6 and 25 day. Rise early and eat betimes, but eat neither Head nor Feet this Month. June. If need be, Bleed the 28th day, but forbear the 7. 10. 15. 16. and 20 day; drink cold Water fasting, and eat temperately. July. Keep from Venery, and Bleed not this Month, ex∣cept thou hast great need, but beware of Bleeding the 13 and 15 day, it being dangerous. August. Bleed not the 1 day, nor the 20. 29. nor 30. the rest of the days; Bleed if need require, forbear all manner of Worts, Meats, and Drink with Spices. September. Bleed not the 3. 4. 16. 21. nor 22. Bleed in the 17 or 18. for Frenzy, Dropsie, Palsie, or Falling Evil, and it preserves thee that Year, ripe Fruit not in∣fected is good to eat. October. Bleed not, except great need, and beware of the 3. 6. 14. good Wine is wholsom, if moderately drank. November. This Month all the Blood is gathered upon the Head Vein; therefore Bleed not but for great need, Bath not, but vent a little of Grafing, for then the Humours of the Body are over-quick to Bleed, but beware if thou must Bleed, of the 5. 6. 15. 19. 28. and 29 day. December. Bleed not except great need, but beware of 5. 7. 16. 17. and 22 day. Bleed the 26 day, that is not hurtful. Sleep from the Fire-side. To Cure the Hickup immediately. Drink a Glass of fair Water.
For the Heart-burn, scrape a little Chalk into some Water, and drink it. To know what Years shall be plenteous. Sunday. That Year that January enters on Sunday, there will be abundance of Flesh, great News shall be spoken of Kings and Bishops, and of great Princes, great Wars and Robberies shall happen, and many young People will dye, the Winter will be Cold and Moist, the Summer Hot and Rainy; abundance of Corn, Wine and other Grain, Garden Fruit and Herbs, and but little Oil. Monday. If January enters on Monday, many Ships shall perish, divers Sicknesses shall reign, Changes of great Lords shall be made, many Women will dye in Child-bed: The Winter will be peaceable, and the Summer very temperate, and great Floods shall happen. Tuesday. If January enters on Tuesday, Summer will be dry and hot that Garden-Herbs cannot come forth, many Men shall dye of a Bloody Flux, all things but Corn will be dear, no Thundering nor Lightning, nor Tempest. Wines will turn and spoil. Winter shall be unsteady and changeable, great Frost will happen in the Spring, which will hurt Rye, Vines and Flowers. Wednesday. If January enters on Wednesday, Summer will be a little Cloudy, great Sickness will happen, many Thieves and Robbers, great War, Battel and Slaughter in the middle of the Year, at the end of the Year divers pestilent Botches and falling Evils, the Win∣ter will be temperate, at the end Snow and Frost, the Spring shall be Rainy, great store of Hay, Corn, Grass and Fruit, and plenty of most good Things.
Thursday. If January enters on Thursday, Summer will be temperate, Harvest most part Rainy, Wheat cheap, Plenty of all Grain, great War and Division, Taxes easie, Women very bad, Winter will be dry and wholsom, and the Spring very Windy. Friday. If January enters on Friday, Summer will be un∣wholsom, Harvest dry, Corn dear, Winter long, store of Hay, Grass and Garden-Herbs, great Sick∣ness, Thundering, Lightning and Tempest, Earth∣quakes heave thee up, many Beasts will dye. Saturday. If January enters on Saturday, Summer pretty temperate, Herbs and Flesh cheap, old People dye, many Fevers and Agues, many Murthers and Vil∣lanies shall happen, Winter temperate, the Spring∣time Frost, which will hurt Trees and Fruits. The Signification of Thunder. Thunder on Sunday shews that many Judges and Clerks, and divers other People will dye that Year. If on Monday it chance to Thunder, many Women and Children will dye, and the Sun will suffer Eclipse. If on Tuesday it Thunder, there will be great store of Grain. If on Wednesday it Thunder, Whores and Rogues shall dye, and there may be great Bloodshed. If it Thunder on Thursday, Corn wll be very cheap. If it Thunder on Friday, it betokeneth a great Man shall be slain, and divers Murthers and other Evils. If it Thunder on Saturday, it signifies there may be a great Plague, whereof many shall dye. On St. Paul's Day. If Saint Paul prove Fair and Clear. It doth betide a happy Year; But if it chance to Snow or Rain, Then will be dear all sorts of Grain: And if the Wind be then aloft, Then Wars shall vex this Realm full oft; And if the Clouds make Dark the Sky,
To settle your Estate with Prudence. 1. Make your Will in your Health. 2. Make a Christian Will. 3. Make a Prudent Will. 4. Make a Just Will. 5. Make a Charitable Will. 1. He that neglects to make his Will in the time of his Health, but defers it to a Sick-bed, may possibly never make it at all, because Men are often suddenly and unexpectedly snatcht away out of this World. 2. By a Christian Will, I mean, you should compose or frame it so as to declare your self a Christian. 3. By a Prudent Will, I mean, you should distri∣bute your Estate, as Christian Prudence will direct you, by observing the different disposition and Behaviour of your Children, your Friends, and Dependants. Some are Brisk and Active in Business, will look to themselves and secure their own, others are of a Quiet, Sedate and Easie Temper, and it may be of weak and tender Understandings, who do not love trouble, or do not understand it. Some are Frugal and Thrifty, who will both keep and improve what you give them, others are Wild and Extravagant, who will not be confined, nor live by Rule and Measure. Some perhaps have been Sober, Regular, Dutiful and Obedient, others Rude, Insolent, and Disobedient and Affronting in their Behaviour towards you. Now consider with Christian Prudence, and duly examine the several Circumstances of these De∣pendants, and distribute accordingly. If your Relations are Vicious, make Provision for them in Trust, in such a manner, and with such Cir∣cumstances, as may relieve their Necessities and not their Lusts: But by no means do not cast them quite off, for that hardens them in their Wickedness. Those that are Quiet and Easie of Temper, en∣cumber not with any thing that is liigious or per∣plexing. Those that have been Dutiful, should have a mark of kindness set upon them, yet not so as to
disinherit your First-born, or to deprive him of his Birth-right: Say not, your Estate is your own, and you will do what you list, for you are but Stewards, and must give an account to Almighty God, how you have distributed and bequeathed your Estate. 4. Make a Just Will, I mean, you must be fully satisfied, that you have a Just Title to what you dispose of as your own: You must not rob Peter to pay Paul, wrong one Person to favour another, which is too frequent. But know, O Man! there is a Duty called Restitu∣tion, whereby all injurious Persons are obliged to make a reconciling Acknowledgment, and also Repa∣ration and Satisfaction for the wrong they have done, as far as they are able; and let me tell you, more is required to perfect our Repentance of Sins against our Neighbour, than of Sins against God only. For Sins against God are pardoned by Reformation and Amendment, and returning to our Duty by Sincere Obedience. But Sins against our Neighbours, are not only against God, but also an injury to Men; and though (upon Repentance) God will forgive so far as its against him, yet he will not forgive the Affront and Injury against Men, till we have sought reconcilia∣tion with those we have offended, and made restitu∣tion to those we have wronged, by giving satisfaction for the damage done them. St. Augustine says, if a Man restore not ill-gotten Goods, being able, his Re∣pentance is Counterfeit, and not Sincere. 5. Make a Charitable Will, that is to say, give such Gifts to the Poor, or other Charitable use, as thy Christian Prudence will direct thee: But do what thou canst in thy Life-time, for one Pound then given will yield thee more comfort than a hundred on thy Death bed; for though it be a sign of Charity and Good Will, on a Death-bed to give to the Poor, its believed by most People, that it's only parted with because it can be kept no longer.
The Age of Man Man by Course of Nature may Live Seventy two years, saith the Shepherd in his Calendar; his Reason is, so much time as a Man hath to grow in Beauty, Length, Breadth and Strength, so much time hath he to wax Old and Feeble to his End: But the Term to grow in Beauty, Height and Strength is Thirty six years, and the Term to wax Old, Feeble and Weak, and turn to the Earthward is Thirty six, in all Seventy two years, so long he ought to Live by Course of Nature; and they that Die before, its commonly by Violence and Outrage done to their Nature, and they that Live above, its by the good Government of themselves. Shepard's Calendar. Of Measures mentioned in Scripture. A Cab is a Quart, an Omer is a Quart and a half, a Seath is a Gallon and a half, an Epha is half a Bushel and a Pottle, an Homer or Cor is fourteen Bushels and a Pottle, half an Homer is seven Bushels and a Quart, a Chemix a Quart. Liquid Measures. A Log is half a Pint, a Hinn is three Quarts, a Bath is nine Gallons three Quarts, a Pot or Sextary is a Pint and a half, a Firkin is four Gallons and a half. Measures. A Cubit, a Foot and a half. An holy Cubit is a Yard. The Kings Cubit, a Foot and nine Inches. A Sabbath-days Journey, six hundred Paces.   l. s. d. A Shekel of the Sanctuary half an Ounce, worth 00 02 06 A Shekel in weight a quarter of an Ounce, worth 00 01 03 The Kings Shekel weighed three Drams, worth 00 01 10½ The Kings Talent nine thousand Drams, worth 281 05 00
The Common Talent six thousand Drams, worth 187 10 00 The Talent of the Temple 375 00 00 The Common Shekel of Gold, worth 00 15 00 The Kings Shekel of Gold, worth 01 02 06 A Shekel of Gold of the Temple. 01 10 00 A Common Talent of Gold. 2250 00 00 The Kings Talent of Gold. 3375 00 00 A Talent of Gold of the Sanctuary 4500 00 00 A Mina of Silver sixty Drams, worth 01 17 06 The Kings Mina 02 10 00 The Mina of the Temple. 03 02 06 A Gerah. 0 00 01½ A Drachm. 00 00 07½ Two Mites. 00 00 00¼ A Mile is a thousand Paces. Directions to cut a Shift out of two Ells of Holland, as long and large as most People shall do out of two Ells and a Quarter. If you will cut but one Shift Ell and half long, take two Ells of Holland and flit it through the middle; let it be Ell wide or Yard wide, according as the big∣ness of your Body requires, and when split through the middle, instead of taking one half breadth, and just the same length of the other half breadth for the Body, cut an Ell and a quarter off one of the half breadths, and just the same length off the other half breadth, which take for the Body of your Shift, then take the Remainder of one of the half breadths and double it, then lay it across and cut it for your Gores, then take the other Remainder of the breadth and double it, and cut it in the middle, which makes just a pair of Sleeves, then you want on∣ly for the Gussets, which will come out of the hol∣lowing of the Neck of your Shift; which rule you may observe in cutting out four or five Shifts, for when you cut out two, take a Body off one of the
half breadths, and a Body off the other, and when you cut six, take three off one of the half breadths and three off the other, and by that means you may cut them what length in reason you please; whereas if you take your Bodies all off one piece, you can make them but two Ells long, and by this means you save a quarter of an Ell in the cutting out of each Shift. A Treatise of BEES, and their management, that they may redound to Profit and Advantage. Bees are not only delightly to behold, but very profitable if well managed, in order to which I shall briefly give directions. If you have no Stock of Bees, but must be obliged to purchase them, you must be sure to carry them gently in a Sheet between two Persons on a Pole in the Night-time, that they be not disturbed, nor their Combs disordered or put out of frame; and the best time to remove them, is in April, not carrying them from a pleasant to an unpleasant place, least through that dislike they leave you; nor must you open them after you have placed them in your Garden, till you find them at rest, which you may do by the Cessation of their noise and humming, and be sure so to place them, that the Hives mouth may stand towards the Rising-Sun; observing that the Air and Waters, as well as Herbs, Trees and Flowers about them be ve∣ry wholsom; for those they most delight in, are Rose∣mary, Cassia, Thyme, Savory, Sage, Violets, Laven∣der, Balm, Marjoram, wild Thyme, Saffron, Bean∣flowers, Mustard-seed, Flowers, Pinks, Melilot, Pop∣pies, Roses, &c. And those they dislike, which often makes them leave their Masters and wander, are Wormwood, wild Cucumbers, Cornels, Elms, Spurge, Lawrel, Southernwood and all bitter Herbs and Trees, delighting most in Valleys near pleasant purling Streams; and the best Honey is extracted from Thyme, the second best from wild Thyme, and the
third from Rosemary, though there is good Honey where none of these grow. In the beginning of April the Bees look out and begin to work, and if they stand in a pleasant place, they will work so cheerfully, that they will afford Honey three times in the Summer, viz. about the latter-end of May, the latter-end of July, and the latter-end of August, if the Summer be temperate; tho' if you would have them subsist well in Winter, to take their Honey in May and July is sufficient. If it happen that by reason of a young Brood, the Hive be over-charged, which by their clustering about the mouth of it, and their great noise of humming, you may plainly discern, prepare a new Hive in readi∣ness rubbed with sweet Herbs, and observe the coming forth of the young Bees for several days, from eight of the Clock till twelve in the Morning, lest coming out on a sudden, and taking the Wing, they bid you farewel; and if they delay to come forth, you may with Galbanum and Rosin drive out the whole Stock; and if there happen to be two Master Bees, they will divide and settle apart, and so you will have oppor∣tunity to Hive them; and in Winter, if their Stock of Honey fail, you must put in Honey, Sugar, Raisins, Figgs &c. gently with a slite Cane, and cover them with warm Housings of Straw, and they will greatly encrease to your Profit. Lessius his Directions for a right Course of preserving Health. DIvers have written on this Subject, but they charge Men with so many Rules, so much Ob∣servation and Caution, about quantity and quality of Meats and Drinks, about Sleep, Air, Exercise, Blood∣letting, Purging, and the like, that it makes it per∣fect Slavery to perform what they enjoyn: And Men
on the other hand will please their own Mind, and eat of every thing they best like, to their fill; so that neither Precepts nor Observations signifie any thing at all for matter of benefit. Hereupon they bid adieu to all Physicians or Counsel, and leave all to Nature, eating perhaps two or three times a day, without restraint in measure or quality of Foods, but as their Appetite leads them on, so fall to business instantly; neither can they be perswaded to Purge at fitting Seasons, or before Diseases oppose them, supposing all well when they feel nothing to the contrary: Here upon their Bodies in time are filled with ill Hu∣mours, which are increased by length of time, and become putrified and of a malignant Temper, so that upon every light occasion of Heat or Cold, Wind or Weather, extraordinary Labour, or any other Ex∣cess, they are inflamed, and break out into mortal Sickness and Diseases. Many People beside my self have found benefit by the Observations following, which consists in a Right ordering the Dyet, and in a ertain Moderation of our Meat and Drink; such a moderation I mean, as brings Strength and Vigour both to Mind and Body. So that what is here in∣tended, will furnish Religious Persons with such a way and manner of Living, that they may with ore Ease, Cheerfulness and Alacrity, apply them∣selves to the Service of the Great God, for it is scarce∣ly to be believed, what Alacrity and inward Conso∣lation they find that addict themselves to Sobriety. What is meant by a Sober Life, and what is a fit measure of Meat and Drink. I call that a Sober Life or Dyet, which sets bounds both to Meat and Drink, so that a Man must not Eat nor Drink more than the Constitution of his Bo∣dy allows, with reference to the services of the Mind, and this I term an Orderly, Regular and Temperate Life or Diet; this will also reach unto Care in ordering all other things, such as immode∣rate
Heat or Cold, overmuch Labour and the like, through Excess whereof there grows any Inconve∣niency in Body, Health, or disturbance in the Ope∣ration of the Mind. Now this measure is different, according to the diversity of Constitutions and Ages. For one kind of proportion belongs to Youth, another to Con∣sistency, a third to Old-Age; the Whole and the Sick have also their several measures, as also the Phlegmatick and the Cholerick, because that in these Constitutions, the Nature and Temper of the Stomach is very different: Now the measure of the Food ought to be exactly proportioned, as near as may be, to the quality and condition of the Stomach; and that measure is exactly proportioned, which the Stomach hath such power and mastery over, as it can perfectly concoct and digest in the midst of any Em∣ployment that is of Body or Mind, which withal suf∣ficeth to the due nourishment of the Body. I say in the midst of any Employment of Mind or Body, be∣cause that a greater measure is requisite to him that is occupied in Bodily Labour, and continually exer∣cising the Faculties of the Body, than to him that is always in Studies, Meditation, and other like Exercise of the Mind: For half so much commonly serve their turn, who are imployed in Study and Affai of the Mind, as they that apply themselves to Bodily exercise, tho' equal Age and Temper might other∣wise perhaps require an equality in both their Dyets. Now the difficulty lies in finding out this mea∣sure, the non-observance whereof causes Catarrhs, Coughs, Head-ach, pains in the Stomach, Fever and the like, which many People will hardly believe, but lay the fault on Wines, ill Air, Watching, too much pains-taking and other like outward causes, but questionless, they are in the wrong, for its a want of a due measure in Eating and Drinking, that causes these before-named Distempers; and its impossible
that any one certain measure should be found pro∣portionable to all sorts of different Complexions and Stomachs, so that what is reasonable to a Young and Strong Body, is twice too much for an Old or Infirm Person. The Allowance then for all, is to keep within the bounds of Temperance, for whatsoever exceeds this measure, is to be accounted Vice, be it on what oc∣casion it will, whether of Marriage, Feasting, or any thing else whatever; now that is always Excess, which proves more in quantity than the Stomach can perfectly digest without leaving Crudities behind. Rules for finding out the Right Measure. The first Rule is, If thou dost usually take as much Food at Meals, as thou art thereby made unfit for the Duties and Offices belonging to the Mind, such as are Studies of Learning, Prayer, and the like; its evident thou dost exceed measure. So that when∣ever so much Food is taken, as proves of any Remark∣able offence or hinderance to the Operation of the Superiour Faculty, to wit, of the Senses, Imagination, the Understanding or Memory, then it is a sign the itting measure is exceeded: For they who follow a sober Course of Life, are as ready for all Services and Employments of the Mind after their Meats, as before. The second Rule is, If after Meat and Drink thou findest a certain kind of Dullness, Heaviness, Sloath∣ful weariness, whereas before thou wast quick and lightsome, its a sign thou hast exceeded the fitting measure, except it come to pass by Sickness, or the reliques of some former Disease. For Meat and Drink ought to refresh the Body, and make it more Cheerful, and no ways to burden or oppress it. They therefore that find their Constitution to be such, as they feel oppression after Meals, ought to make a∣batement of their daily allowance, having first used diligent Consideration, whether this Inconveniency arise from the Abundance of their Meat and Drink,
or both together; and when they have found out where the Error lies, its by degrees to be amended, till the matter be brought to that pass, that there be no more feeling of any such Inconveniency. There∣fore, if a Man desires to be always quick, apt and ready to motion, and every other use of his Senses, these Humors are to be lessen'd by abatement of Diet, so that the Spirits may have their free Passage thro' all parts of the Body, and the Mind may find them always ready to every motion and service of the Body. The third Rule is, Do not pass immediately from a disordered kind of Life, to a strict and precise course, but do it by little and little; abating from that quantity we had been accustomed to, till at last we come to a just measure, which doth not at all op∣press the Body, nor offend and hinder the Operati∣ons of the Mind: This is the Opinion of all Physici∣ans, that its dangerous to be driven off forcibly from that which a Man hath been long accustomed to; but we must break off old usages by degrees, and not all at once, going backward step by step, as we grow on toward them, so the alteration will be less difficult in performance. The fourth Rule is, That though there cannot be a just quantity set for all, by reason of the great dif∣ference of Age, Strength, and other Dispositions in Men, and also in respect to the great diversity in the Nature and quality of several sorts of Food; yet I think for those that are stricken in Years, and those of weak Cnstitutions, thirteen or fourteen ounces of Food a day should be enough, accounting into this proportion, Bread, Flesh, Eggs, and all other sorts of Victuals; and about as many ounces of Drink would suffice; this is to be understood of those who use but little Exercise of Body, and are altogether ad∣dicted to Study, and the like. I could instance divers that have observed this measure, that have lived to an extream old Age,
that have passed their Lives only with Water, Bread, Pulse, Herbs or Fruits, about sixteen ounces of Water, and sixteen ounces of Bread and Herbs: How much more then, may seven ounces of Bread and seven ounces of other choice Victuals suffice, which yields double the Nutriment, considering withal, instead of Water which served their turn, we now drink Beer or Wine, which yields much Nutri∣ment. And altho' I speak now of weak Persons, and those that are declining in Years, yet I hold it probable that the aforesaid measure is large enough, for the most part, even for those that are in Health, and Strong, in the Flower of their Age; if they be such that give themselves to Study, and the like. The fifth Rule is, That touching the quality of the Food, there is no great care to be had: If so be a Man is of a healthful Constitution, and find that the Meat he eats does not offend nor harm him, for most sorts of Meat agree with healthful Constitutions: If so be right a quantity and measure be kept, so that without question a Man may live long, and in Health on Bread only, with Milk, Butter and Cheese, Beer or Water; especially if he has been accustomed from a Child to them, but from all Foods thou findest a prejudice; abstain, tho' the relish and taste be never so well. Of this sort are most fat Meats, which are to be used sparingly, and eaten with store of Bread; that the Damage they bring may (in part) be avoid∣ed: And in a word, all Victuals that breed Damage to the Constitution of the Body, or Impediment to the Functions of the Mind, are to be avoided. Of DREAMS. 1. By Dreams the Natural Temperament and Complexion, and the secret Diseases of Persons, are as soon or sooner found out, than by any outward Signs.
2. By Dreams scarce any thing discovers the se∣cret bent of our Minds and Inclinations to Vice and Virtue, these Nocturnal Sallies discover Pride, Co∣vetousness, Sensuality, or the like, more free and un∣disguised than when we are awake. 3. Dreams are the clearest Natural Arguments of the Immortality of the Soul, as also one of the usual ways that God revealed himself by, of Old, to Holy Men: Its also one promise, that under the Gospel Dispensation their Young Men should see Visions, and their Old Men dream Dreams. Therefore, whosoever will consider what is here written in short, may find some remarkable cause to consider, that such a Treatise is not altogether useless. Sometimes Dreams are the effects of the Planets Influences, and carry with them the Resemblance of that Planet, from whence they proceed. As, 1. If the Saturnine property carry the upper Do∣minion in Barthy Signs, then those Dreams are Dull, Sad, Heavy, Frightful, and Filled with Fear and Sorrow. 2. If Mars, or the Martial fierce Fire, have the chief Government; then Dreams are Fiery, filled with Wrath, Passion, Fear and Trembling, Amazing and Affrighting, causing the Person often to awake, as also his Limbs to tremble for Fear. 3. If Jupiter, or the Jovial Nature predominate, then Dreams are more Mild, Grave and Moderate. 4. If Venus rule the Complexion, Dreams are pleasant and delightful. 5. If Mercury rule, Dreams are mixt and oft∣times confused. 6. If Sol rule, Dreams will be of great Light, Ho∣nour and Dignity and of Splendid Things. 7. If the Moon predominates, Dreams are uncon∣stant, mixed with Truth and Falshood, and confused. FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books, sold at the Gold Ring in Little-Baittain. THe Anglers sure Guide, Shewing when and how to ga∣ther the best Materials for Fishing. The most Proper Baits, and how to Order them, and your Tackle. 1. The names of Fish, their Haunts, Spaw∣ning time, &c. The way to take them and, Various ways of dressing them; to Store Fish, Ponds wherein the Angler is Punishable by Law, Presidents and Licenses for Angling, &c. Adorn'd with Copper Cuts, by R. H. Esq 40 Years a Practitioner. price 2s. 6d. 2. The Compleat Fisher, being a speedy way of taking all sorts of Fresh Fish, with Baits Natural and Artificial, their Haunts, Seasons, and how to Angle for them in all Weathers, at top or bottom, Night Baits, Oyl and Oyntments, to make Oyl of Asper, and many other Secrets in any bug, also to Fish in Hackney River, by J. S. a Brother of the Angler the 3d. Edition. price 6d. 3. The way to get Wealth, directing to make 23 sorts of English Wine equal to French, Cyder equal to Canary, to make Wine of all sorts of Herbs, to make 40 sorts of Ale in a Minute, to remember all you Read or do, to make Corn produce a Treble Crop, A book of Knowledge, for all Persons of all Countries Containing Ac∣counts Cast up. Rates of Carmen, Watermen and Coach∣men, Receipts, and to Recover bad Debts, to Preserve the Eyes, and divers other Rarities. price 1 s. 6d. 4. The way to save Wealth, to Live for 2 d a Day, a Hundred Dishes of Meat, without either Fish, Flesh or Fowl, Bread of Herbs and Roots to make, Cheap Liquor to Brew, to feed Horse without Hay. Vermin to de∣stroy, Silk-worms to Order, Assices of Bread, Cattle and Poultry to order, to make Cyder, Perry, and Artificial Wines, Land to Improve by Hops, Flax, Liquorish; A∣rithmetical Questions, Sports and Pastime, the way to Live long, and divers other Curiosities, &c. price 1s. 6d. 5. 1000 Notable things, directing to Read Write and Indite Letters, to speak any Language in a short time, as fluent as a Native, Customs of London, modern Curiosities, Monthly observations in Gardning, &c. Birds to Catch &c. The Virtue of Dullidge-water, to take spots of Oly Pitch, &c. out of Linnen Woollen, &c. German Ball to make, to Live long, Dreams and Mes, Signification, &c. Ink to make of all sorts, Sealing Wax and Wafers. Bees to Preserve, Cov  url and Butlers Ale to make, short Writing, with above with 900 other
