W1530 E416_23 99863855 161300
A More full Relation of the manner and circumstances of His Majesties departure from HAMPTON-Court. Written By Colonel WHALEY, At the Demand of the SPEAKER of the House of COMMONS, To whom it was lately sent, for the better satisfaction of the PARLIAMENT and KINGDOME. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black spread-Eagle, neer the West-end of Pauls. 1647.
Mr. Speaker, WHat I spake in the House (according to your command) I present you in writing, as followeth, to my best remembrance. Mr Speaker, IT is not (I suppose) unknown to you, that I have faithfully, and through Gods mercy successefully served the Parliament from my first undertakings, which was, from your first engagement. You have been pleased so much to honour mee, as to let mee share in your favour; and I desire to let you know, that I highly e∣steem it, and shall endeavour further to deserve it. I shall therefore (according to your command) deal cleerly and can∣didly in giving you (as in the presence of God) a true Relation of my service, and the Kings going a way. The place, the guards, and commands that lay upon mee considered, makes it no wonder the King should be gone. The King was never declared to me to be a Prisoner. I was not to restrain him from his liberty of walking, so that he might have gone whither he had pleased; neither was I to hinder him from his privacy in his Chamber, or any other part of the House; which gave him an absolute freedom to go away at plea∣sure. The House is vast, hath 1500 rooms, as I am informed, in it, and would require a Troop of Horse upon perpetuall Du∣ty to guardall the Outgoings. So that all that could be expected
from mee, was to be as vigilant over the King as I could in the day time; and when after Supper he was retired into his Bed-chamber, to set Sentinels about him, which I constantly per∣formed, as is well known to the Commissioners and others. But for some fifteen weeks I had M. Ashburnham's engagement for the King's safe abiding with me: and truly I must do him so much right as to declare, that he dealt honestly, and like a Gentleman with me: For about three weeks ago he came to me, and minded me of his Engagement, which was to continue no longer then he gave me warning: He told me he now did, and would stand engaged no longer. I demanded of him the reason. He replyed, The Court was so much Scottified, that he feared there would be workings to get the King away. Where∣upon I presently sent away a dispatch to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, acquainting him, with it; no long after went my self to the Head-quarter at Putney, at what time his Excellency and the Officers sate in Councell. I there again, before the whole Councell, acquainted his Excellency with M. Ashburnhams disengaging himself, and withall, both my self and friends earnestly solicited for a dismission from that great charge, that had been long imposed upon me; which was not the first time that openly I had desired it: I gave divers reasons for it; One was, that I had been two or three and twenty weeks upon that careful and hazardous duty, and I thought it was but reasonable now to have some relaxation, and that some others should be put upon it. Another, That if they did look up∣on the Kings safe abiding with us as a concernment to the good of the Kingdom, it was impossible for me, the King having that liberty, and such Bed-chamber men about him (as were) so keep him. One of them was Colonel Legg, once Governour of Ox∣ford under the King: the other, though they were Gentlemen of honour and quality, put in by the Parliament; yet they were his ancient servants; and though perhaps they would not put him upon any designe of going away; yet probably would not crosse him, nor disclose any. Therefore I conceive, if the Parliament did expect the Generall should safeguard his Majesties Person, that the Generall should desire leave of the Parliament to put
such Bed-chamber men about the King as the himself would be re∣sponsible for, and might confide in. And indeed, I did there de∣clare, I was very jealous of M. Mawle. The third reason that I gave to be discharged was this; Should the King go away (for I cannot term it an escape, because he never was in custody as a pri∣soner) I should not only run the hazard of losing some reputation my self, but divers of my neer related friends eminent Officers in the Army, would have jealousie cast upon them, being by some al∣ready suspected upon lesse grounds then that would be. But say what I could, or my friends for me I must not go off. It was long debated, and by all concluded, that I could no more keep the King, if he had a minde to go, then a bird in a Pound: yet I must conti∣nue my charge. But truly, I conceive both the General, Officers, and I am sure my self did much relye upon his Majesties Engage∣ment. His Majesty was pleased freely to promise me when I wai∣ted upon him at Newmarket, That he would not go from me, till he first gave me warning When he came to Wooburn, observing my guards, he told me, Colonel Whaley, your guards are strong: but do you think you could keep me if I had a minde to go away? I answered, with these commands I had I could not: No, saith the King, though you had five times as many more, or to that pur∣pose. I replyed, Your Majesties engagement was a greater force upon you, then all the guards I could put, or to the same purpose. His Majestie answered, his engagement was in case he might go to one of his own Houses: But however, I do now freely and ab∣solutely engage my self to you, That I will not stir from you till I give you warning: and if I do, I will give you leave to say I am an infamous fellow. And whereas (Mr. Speaker) you do demand of me, to know whether the King did take himself off from his engagement, I can tell you no otherwise then thus: About a fortnight agoe the Kings Children came to him, staid with him three or four days. The Princesse Elizabeth was lodged in a chamber opening to the long Gallery, in which two Sentinels stood for the safeguard of the King: the Princesse complained to his Majesty that the soul∣diers disquieted her: The King spake to me that it might be reme∣died. I told the King, if the souldiers made any noise, it was con∣trary to my desire & commands; I should double my commands
upon them, and give them as strict a Charge as I could, not to disquiet her Highnesse: which I did: Notwithstanding a second complaint was made: I told his Majestie, stricter commands I could not give; and the Souldiers ensured me, they came so easily through the gallery, and made so little noise, That they conceived it was impossible for the Princesse to hear them. However, I told his Majestie, if he would be pleased to renew his Engagements, I should place the sentinels at a more remote distance. The King answered, To renew his Engagements, was a point of Honor; you had my Engagement; I will not renew it, keep your guards. And as for the manner (Mr. Speaker) of the Kings going away, it was thus. Mondayes and Thurdayes were the Kings set dayes for his writing Letters to be sent into Forreign Parts: his usual time of coming out of his Bed-chamber on those dayes, was be∣twixt five and six of the Clock: presently after he went to pray∣ers, and about halfe an hour after that, to supper; at which times I set gards about his Bed-chamber, because he made no long stay af∣ter supper before he treired himself thither: About five of the clock I came into the roome next his Bed-chamber, where I found the Commissioners, and Bed chamber men: I asked them for the King: They told me he was writing letters in his Bed-chamber. I wayt∣ed there without mistrust till six of the clock, I then began to doubt, and told the Bed chambermen, Mr. Mawle, and Mr. Mur∣ry, I wondred the King was so long a writing: They told me, he had (they thought) some extraordinary occasion. Within halfe an hour after I went into the next Room to Mr. Oudart, told him I marvelled the King was so long a writing: he answered, he won∣dred too, but withall said, the King told him, he was to writ let∣ters both to the Queen, and Princesse of Orange; which gave me some satisfaction for the present. But my feares with the time in∣creased: so that when it was seven of the clock, I again told Mr. Mawle, I exceedingly wondred the King was so long before he came out. He told me he was writing: I replyed, posibly be might be ill: therefore I thought he should doe well to see, and to satis∣fie both my selfe and the House, that were in fear of him. He re∣plyed, the King had given him strict commands, not to molest him, therefore durst, not: besides he had bolted the doore to him.
I was then extreame restlesse in my thoughts, lookt oft in at the key-hole to see whither I could perceive his Majestie, but could not: Prest Mr. Mawle to knock, very oft: that I might know whether his Majstie were there or not; But all to no purpose: he still plainly told me, he durst not disobey his Majsties com∣mands. When it drew towards 8 of the clock; I went to Mr. Smithsby keeper of the privy lodgings, desiring him to go along with me the back way through the garden, where I had sentinels, and we went up the staires, and from chamber to chamber till we came to the next chamber to his Majesties Bed-chamber, where we saw his Majesties cloake lying on the midst of the floore, which much amazed me: I went presently back to the Commissioners and Bed-chambermen, acquainting them with it, and therefore desired Mr. Mawle again, to see whether his Majestie was in his Bed-chamber or not, he again told me, he durst not. I replyed, that I would then command him and that in the name of the Parliament, and therefore desired him to goe along with me. He desired I would speak to the Commissioiners to go along with us: I did, we all went. When we came into the room next the Kings Bed-chamber; I moved Mr. Mawle to go in: he said he would not, except I would stand at the door: I promised I would, and did. Mr. Mawle immediately came out, and said, the King was gone. We all then went in, and one of the Commissioners said, It may be the King is in his Closet: Mr. Mawle presently replyed, and said he was gone. I then being in a passion, told Mr. Mawle, I thought he was accessary to his going: For that after∣noon he was come from London; it being a rare thing for him to be from Court: I know not that he hath been two nights a∣way since I came to wait upon His Majesty. I presently sent out parties of Horse and Foot to search the Lodge in the Park, I sent dispatches immediately away to the Ge∣neral, and Lieutenant-General, who sent me Orders presently to send out parties of Horse every way both from my guard & Regi∣ment: but I had done it before. I sent to search M. Ashburnhams house at Ditton (a mile from Hampton) but my souldiers, when they came thither found the house empty. Mr. Ashburnham was gone three or four days before, his houshold goods two days, and
four horses the night before. I set guards round the house, and searcht that, which was as much as I could do. And whereas (Mr. Speaker) you demand of me, what that Let∣ter was that I shewed the King the day he went away. The Let∣ter I shall shew you; but with your leave, I shall first acquaint you with the Authour, and the ground of my shewing it to the King. The Authour is Lieutenant-General Cromwell: the ground of my shewing it was this; The Letter intimates some murder∣ous designe, or at least some fear of it, against his Majestie. When I read the Letter I was much astonisht, abhorring that such a thing should be done, or so much as thought by any that bear the name of Christians. When I had shewn the Letter to his Maje∣sty, I told him I was sent to safeguard, and not to murther him: I wish'd him to be confident, no such thing should be done, I would first die at his foot in his defence: And I therefore shewed it him, that he might be assured, though menacing speeches came frequently to his ear, our generall Officers abhorred so bloudy and villanous a fact. Another reason was, That I might get a neerer admittance to his Majesty, that so I might the better se∣cure him. And last of all, (Mr. Speaker) whereas you desire to know who were with the King two or three days before his going: I know very few, but them that were appointed to wait no him. The Lord Lanerick was with him on Monday morning, but stayed not: On Tueday all the Scots Commissioners, who went away likewise that night. On Wednesday night the Earl of Southampton, and the Earl of Chichester: On Thursday morning Colonel Legge went away. Mr. Speaker, I have delivered to you a true Narrative of what you desired, and I hope satisfactory; In testimony whereof I have subscribed my name. Edw. Whaley. FINIS.
