W3159 E1818_2 99859494 170412
Furor-Poeticus (i.e.) Propheticus. A Poetick-Phrensie. Some, (probably) will call it so: Thus named, therefore, let it go. It is the result of a private-musing, occasioned by a publike report in the Country, of the Parliaments restauration by General GEORGE MONCKE, in February 1659. and meditated soon after the said General's arrival in LONDON, In dorso Pagi, recubans sub tegmine Fagi: By G.W. Esq; This Author's well, and sober, yet, Although he fell into this Fit; But, if more Wit than Grace he had, Oppressions would have made him mad. Tempora mutantur, & nos mutamur in illis. Times changed be, and so are we. London, Printed by James Cottrel. 1660.
To the Reader. Ingenuous Reader, THough this Poem hath somewhat a mad Title, thou shalt find me neither Mad man, nor Phanatick: For, these Musings were in soberness meditated (upon the first News of General GEORGE MONCK's arrival at LONDON, when he came last out of SCOTLAND, and the Rumors raised thereupon) and were mused to no worse purpose, than that, by rationally pre-conjecturing the most probable events, I might not be surprized by them, but settle my heart (whatsoever should succeed) in a con∣stant waiting upon GOD, and in a contented peaceable∣ness, by considering divine providence had the ordering of all things; and that the intentions and actions of men were no infallible grounds of hopes or fears. And I ex∣pressed my conceptions in the following words and mode, that my Extempore Notions might both remain, a fixt Object for my self (and others, if they pleased so to use them) when occasion required; and to rouze up cou∣rage when it began to droop by mis-apprehensions. Though they appear in an extravagant dress, & are only sudden raptures, not designed discourses, political, phi∣losophical, or divine, they are wholsome fruits of the sea∣son, and, being well digested, will hint many notions per∣tinent to our present condition: For, in these raptures, whatsoever shall be thought of them, I have infallibly in∣formed upon what terms, you, either with your KING, or without him, shall have a lasting peace, and setled Go∣vernment, if ever you have it in this world; and (mark this) That, which henceforth, the common Lot, will be In Weal, or Woe, shall be foreshown in me: For, whether to the right or left it run, Judgement shall at GOD's House be first begun.
I have warrantably made them assume an unusual boldness (which may make them seem to many more bold than welcome) the better to make way into their presence, who either entertain themselves and their Associates in composing and hearing those base and scurrilous Pamph∣lets (now innumerable) which tend to disturbance of the common peace, and are sure presages of their destruction who take pleasure in them; or else to awake them who are so busied in their own vain projects, that they have no leisure to heed any thing conducing to the publike ho∣nour and safety, or to their own. As soon as I came last to London, I communicated them to some of my acquaintance, who conceiving them useful, undertook their publication, which I left to their discre∣tion; but heard of no proceed therein for many weeks, nor any reason of that delay. If they found any just cause to change their resolution, they are to be excused, and so am I, if it come too late, or out of that season which might have made it more effectual. Yet, thy time, nor thy ex∣pence, will be lost, whensoever it comes to thy hands: For, that which I chiefly intended, will be at all times, and ge∣nerally considerable, till we be utterly destroyed, or our publike and private calamities redressed; yea, and then also, to some purposes. If thou findest any thing therein, whereupon I have of∣ten heretofore insisted, consider, that there is the same oc∣casion, and that a Naile cannot be driven into knotty wood at one or two stroaks. Take it candidly for thine own sake, though not for mine; yet for my sake it may deserve thy acceptance: for, if thou love GOD and thy Countries welfare; I am Thy wel-wishing, and truly loving friend G. W.
Furor-poeticus, (i.e.) Propheticus. A Poetick-Phrensie. AFit, that some will call poetick-madness, Hath now surprized me, in sober-sadness; Which, how it seiz'd me, shall be here declar'd, If any think it worthy of regard: Nay, heard it shall be, since it is begot, Whether regarded, or regarded not: For, good to them, is equally intended, Who, shall be therewith, pleased or offended, If, quite insensible, they are not grown Both of the publike welfare, and their own; And, if well taken, this despised-bable, will hint some Notions not unprofitable. From thence, where many did of wrongs complain, (And, where, to right them, some few strove in vain) I was retir'd, as far as I could go, From hearing, what Knaves, Fools, and madmen do; Expecting no such influence from heaven As now appears, till nights and daies were even: About which time (though why I do not know) I look'd for something, like what's happen'd now; But, Rumor, which is flutt'ring ev'ry whither, Hath of a quicker change brought tidings hither:
Whereon, a greater change will soon ensue, If probable conjectures may be true. The Wind is strangely turn'd; but, none yet knows For whose avail, or to whose harm it blows: Because, to guess who is a foe or friend, Or, what, men by their words or deeds intend, 'Tis now so hard, that none can scape deceit Save he, who keepeth his own heart upright, And he (ev'n then) may suffer naytheless, Who walketh in the paths of righteousness. I hear the news; and I have heard it too, With as much joyful hope as most men do Who know the World, and how much doubt and fear May rise from ev'ry thing they see and hear; When there is little Justice, Truth, or Order, The preservation of their peace to further; And where they are so puzz'led in the dark, That they rejoyce in any glim'ring spark. A Star, is now shot hither from the North; But, what events the same will usher forth I cannot tell; nor (though the Morning's bright) What clouds may overshadow us ere night; And, therefore, I must wait a while, to heed With what Aspects those Planets will proceed Which regulate our Clime, before I can Conclude on any thing design'd by man. The greatest Planet, that appears in heaven Hath no more influence than one in seven; And, from malevolence, we are not free While Mars and Saturne in conjunction be, Although to comfort us, we may receive Fair promisings, from all the other five; Except that he who plac'd them in their Orbs Their Constellations qualifies and curbs;
And, they are lying Prophets, who shall dare In his name, any sequel to declare, As absolute, and not conditional, Relating meerly to to things temporal: For, that could only, but a means become, To make men desperate, or to presume. He, that, our grand Aenigma's must unriddle Is in the Zenith now, ev'n in the middle Of that place, where our fatall Gordian-knot, (If my conjectures greatly fail me not) Must be unti'd, or cut; and if so fast And so ensnarl'd it be, that, at the last The Sword must once again the same unknit, Woe be to them who shall occasion it. O'er LONDON, now that Luminary shines, Which, I foretold in my last publish'd lines, Should be the Mountain whence that winde would blow Which of our greatest weal, or greatest woe, Should instrumental be; and I expect Accordingly, ere long time, an effect. We oft see miracles, (I must confess) But, I would fain see truth and righteousness Ascend the Throne; that, we at length might feast Upon that Peace, whereof we had a taste; And, on those mercies which in little time GOD would vouchsafe, if we reli'd on him, And wilfully pursu'd not still that course Which to destroy our hopes, may him enforce; And which, by long neglect of good endeavour, Are now in hazard to be lost for ever. He, many Patrons and Deliv'rers gave us, From Forraign and Domestick foes to save us: Of whom, some, by their self-will and Ambition, Wrought both our sorrow, and their own perdition.
Some of them, we disabled; some despis'd: We flatter'd some, and some we Idoliz'd, Untill to such a height we pust them had, That to our servants, slaves our selves we made; Yet cease not at this hour to do the same, Though still, it brings more sorrow, and more shame; And will, to be deliver'd from one curse Thereby incurr'd, run headlong to a worse. Mark, (though you sleight me) what we dayly do; And brand me, if it shortly prove not so, Unless we tack and wheel about to that Which may prevent it, ere it be too late. GOD, still, in his long suffering doth persever, And, us, from our distractions to deliver Renews his mercy still, when we (almost) Our hopes of reparation have quite lost. Yea, though he finds us willing to return To our late Bondage; to distrust and scorn The Doom pronounced for this Common weal When we did in the field to him appeal: Although he sees us prone in ev'ry triall To make of our just Cause a base deniall; To bid to his assist ances defiance; With his, and our known foes to have compliance; From our professions to apostatize, And to requite him with hypocrisies For all his favours; he is still to us The same he was, though we continue thus; And, though he from our sins himself withdraws, Still owneth both our Principles and Cause. He hath now rais'd, beyond our expectation, A likely means of timely reparation, And, by his providence, a man begot To perfect it, if we corrupt him not,
Nor he decline from what he hath profest In order to the publike Interest; Which I suspect not, if he be so strong As to resist the batt'ries of the Tongue, And use those Antidotes that may prevent The poys'ning that's infus'd by Complement. At this time, to be GOD's Probationer In his great Work, as others lately were, He takes his turn; and peradventure, may Attain a Pow'r as absolute as they; That, what by them was wilfully neglected, (And by a less Power cannot be effected) May now be done. LORD! make him wise and strong, To do what to his duty doth belong; And mindful, that, his chiefest Obligations Are, to be true to Thee, and to these Nations. St George for England, we were wont to say; And, to that Name, assign'd a solemn day We knew not why: But, if what's now begun Shall with sincerity be carried on, It did, perhaps, by way of Allegory, Presage what will produce an Actual Story; That shall in future times, deserve much better Mens credit morally, than in the Letter That Fable did: For, we may hope (unless Good probabilities have ill success) A Champion of this Name shall free us from That Dragon which infests all Christendome, And, set a Bar to their malignant-pow'r, Who threaten this Republike to devour. If so it happen, it will more endear This Name of George, than Dick, or Oliver; Yea, more than all their Names, who lately lost That honour, which they purchas'd at our cost,
And left us in those hazards, from whence, none Now can deliver us, but, GOD alone By his own Arm, or else by an advance Of one design'd for our deliverance, And qualifi'd by his especial grace, To be a Guardian Angel for this place. Instead of that imaginary Saint, Which on our Inns, and Tavern-signs we paint, And, whom our Grandees, in blew Ribbands wore, As badge of their chief honour heretofore; (And in his room, of whom about next Spring, Another Party seem'd in hope to sing John for the King) GOD, hath perhaps, prepar'd That Hero for our Tutelary Gnard; Whom Fame reports arriv'd with an intent To re-invest the baffl'd Parliament With her lost Pow'r: which, if it so ensue, Will make some bid their old St George adieu: His Legend, will be very little priz'd, Except, as now, it is Mythologiz'd: And, this GEORGE will henceforward, by this Nation Be thought more worthy of Canonization Than either He, or any one of those On whose new Saintships, we did trust repose, Till many did our confidence contemn, And few, at last, trust either us, or them. This GEORGE for England, probably intends The publike weal without sinister ends, And is One meaning that which he professes; One, whom nor gifts, nor flattering Addresses Shall tempt from an heroick Resolution, Or, draw to an ignoble prosecution; One, whom the Strumpet, who bewitcheth Kings, Nor those enchanting Songs the Syren sings,
Shall so seduce, as they seduced were, Who, by the Dragons tail were from their Sphere Unhors'd of late: But, one who shall proceed, Till from his Fangs these Nations he hath freed, Despising those Allurements, whereby they Who would divert him, hope to stop his way: For, if his heart be right, he will suspect Those Baits laid to corrupt his Intellect, Or blind his eyes; that, from what's well begun Into their Pitfals he may stumble on. He will consider, that, they who profess Much love (and fawn with most obsequiousness) Are either some of those, or such as they Who did the same to them the other day, Whom now most barbarously they revile; And may abuse him worse within a while. And, he will see, that he must be more wary Than they were, who, not long since, did miscarry, By playing like a Moath about the flame, Till thereby quite consumed they became. I hope, that as I have exprest him here, He is resolv'd: If not, I wish he were; That I might live to see, before I die, One man, whose Deeds made not his words a lie. A Monk profest, an Instrument became Of Reformation: Why not one by Name? If love of honesty with him prevail, The hopes of honest men he will not fail: If love of honour, or of safety move him, Those Interests, will for our Cause improve him. It is a much more honourable thing, To save a People, than to make a King, And safer too; if he that makes him one Shall be his Liege-man whom he doth enthrone:
For, Kings are of their Makers so afraid, That, seldome are such benefits repay'd With less than ruine; specially, if he A man beloved of the People be: But, much more hazardous will be his Case, If he be likewise of the Royal Race. This General, hath been a Royalist, Engag'd against the publike Interest, And, therefore, some suspitious are become He may, at last, his first Cause re-assume: But, that's improbable: For hitherto He nothing seemeth to neglect, or do, Save what he should; If there be neither ought Done or omitted, more than yet, is brought Unto my ears; and his professions are Sufficient to abate the Peoples fear; Yet, with that modesty consist, whose want Made others, lately so exorbitant, That, many did suspect their gaudy signe VVas hung forth but to vent unwholsome wine. He may appear to those who cannot see, Whereto he shall necessitated be To deviate sometimes; yet, naitheless No whit infringe essential righteousness; As when he is compell'd to raise a Blind To frustrate what is by his Foes design'd, And hoped for, by letting them enjoy Those hopes a while, which may themselves destroy; Or, that he may discov'ries make, thereby, Whom to suspect, and on whom to relie. That, he was once a Captain for the King, Doth him with me, in no suspition bring, If he retain but so much gen'rousness As honourable Sword-men do profess:
For, there are many persons whom I know, True to him then, and faithful to us now: And touching him, this is considerable, That he made no revolt dishonourable To his Profession: nor his aide withdrew Fro him, to whom he thought his service due; Or left him till that Obligation ended By his decease, on whose life it depended: No, nor did afterward desert his Cause, Till having leisure to peruse the Laws And Customes of this Nation, he perceiv'd, Crowns were not alwaies by descent receiv'd; Nor justly could be worn by any here, Till by the People they elected were Upon conditions; whereto they were both By Law obliged, and engag'd by Oath: Which having weigh'd; and that by GOD's permission The Pow'r was in another mans possession Without dispute; meer conscienciousness (Not Levity) induc'd him to profess And Act, as he hath done. This, I take leave Till he shall contradict it, to conceive; And, of my hopes concerning him, expect To see ere long, a sutable effect; Whereof, if I unhappily shall miss, My damage will be ten times less than his; Since really, he thereby forfeits more His honour, than he did in shew before: And, if at this time, to his moral trust, And his Engagements he shall prove unjust, (Which may be possible) no further, then, Thenceforward, in the words or deeds of men Will I confide, beyond what I know true; Whether of honesty, they make a shew,
Or of Religion: But conclude that we On whomsoere we trust, may cheated be; And think, (as I did heretofore suppose) None but false friends, and reconciled foes Should overthrow our Cause. My hopes of him Are better yet: (Oh GOD! continue them.) No cause to me appeareth of suspect, Save such as I may reasonably reject. Yet, since he's but a man; and lest I seem To under-prize, or over-value him; Yea, since the heart's unknown; and I now am Of him inform'd, but by a common fame, At such a distance too, as cannot give me Assurance that Report will not deceive me, I'll keep him on the Balance, till I hear How he proceedeth and shall persevere: For Lucifer did fall; yea, and he fell Whom some thought lately, more than parallel To Moses, Josuah, and many more, Renowned for their vertues heretofore: And, since he possibly, by Adulations, May be exposed to the like temptations; I will not, though he bravely hath begun, A Garland make him, till the field is won. But, if I live to hear he shall persever In prosecuting of his best endeavour To that effect for which GOD seems to raise him, Whatere event shall follow, I will praise him In such a Mode, as cannot justly be By others blam'd, or shame to him or me; Which none can do, though his deserts were greater, Who doth not praise a man to make him better. Faithful performances have been so rare, That this Republike barb'rous would appear,
If, what he merits be not duly weigh'd And well rewarded, when her debts are paid. Yet, lest he may be (if deferr'd till then) As ill repaid as other faithful men, Let them reward him now, (and whilst they may;) For, here will be new changes ev'ry day. But, though he do his duty; nor his Pow'r Or Virtue will avail us, till of our Known duties, our regard be somewhat more Than it appears to have been heretofore. No good success, though he continue true, If we be false, can possibly ensue. No Nation can from servitude be saved, Which, when it may be free, will be enslaved. They easily, and justly are betray'd, Where Traiters are for treason better paid Than faithful men, who freely did oppose, With life and livelihood, their Countries Foes. Who can be safe, where it is hardly known Either what Laws, or Cause, or Pow'r to own, Or to disown? VVhere, merited or not, Knaves, Fools, and Wise men have the self-fame Lot? And honest men, deserving best, (and first) A worse than they, who have deserved worst? Yea, where some suffer, till they cannot fear VVorse mischiefs, than they feel already there, Although he should deceive their expectations, Who, now, preserves the peace of these three Nations, Expose us to the fury of the Dragon, And with his horse, draw hither Charles his Wagon. Some, are of this, in hope, and some afraid; But chiefly they who have been largely paid For little work; and some for doing none, Or, that, which had been better left undone.
Some, who were paid with little, for great cost, Which then may be in hazard to be lost: Some likewise, whom their Conscience hath accus'd For having wilfully their pow'r abus'd. But, be it as GOD pleaseth it shall be, It no whit startles, or affrighteth me: For, though this George should act that which will fur∣ther His ends, who is the Soveraign of the Order Of George on horseback, guiltless I have bin Of what may make me dread his coming in; Because, I acted nothing with intent To Innovate the former Government, Or to uphold this Pow'r save that, whereto Conscience and Duty did oblige me to. For, when the late Intestine war begun, I did not by a self-inducement run To make a Breach; but, (called by that Power Which was by Law intrusted, both with our And his Prerogatives who then did raign) Came arm'd, aswell his Interest to maintain, As to preserve our own: Which may appear By that Impress my Cornet then did bear. Pro Rege, Lege, Grege, was the WORD Which manifested why I drew my Sword; And if the Pow'r I ought to have obey'd Misled me, let the fault on that be laid. What is't to me, since I am innocent, If they proceeded further than I went? The Pow'rs that rule, my lawful warrant be, And ought not to be questioned by me. If they had ill intents, in what was done, What blame have I deserved, who had none? Or, who can blame them justly, if perforce The Consequents have hapned to be worse
Then their Design? as I believe (and shall Believe) it was, in some, though not in all. If for the sins of Nations and of Kings GOD casts out Governours, and Judgements brings Upon a People; What man can resist His hand, or mend the matter, till he list? Who doth not stand obliged to maintain The Pow'r that GOD sets up, whilst it must raign, Although it shall oppress him, and were sent To be, for his defaults, a punishment? And, who so little reason understands, That when without advancing of his hands He, by anothers act, (through GOD's permission, May of his long-lost Freedom gain fruition) Will not accept it, when it may be had, Although they who were fools, will be so mad To venture their own lives, those to betray That would not be as very slaves as they? When GOD enthrals a Nation, tis a crime To break their chains and cords before his time; And when he setteth ope the prison door, They do offend as much, or rather more, By adding to ungrateful disrespects Of GOD's free grace, unnatural neglects: If therefore, when our sins we had confest, GOD, them removes from us who then opprest; And when we slip into our former course, Brings back again those Tyrants, or else worse, Why should I murmur to behold him just? Or, (if I do repent, and in him trust) Fear, I shall him inexorable find, Whom I offend not, but against my mind? When frailty, and the torrents of the times, Have hurri'd me into the vulgar crimes?
This I have well considered: And, though they Who, wilfully have gone out of the way, And, with corrupt minds, do again begin To tread the paths which they have erred in; (Not yet repenting) find, that evil-tidings (Because they have not settled their abidings Beneath the shade of GOD-Almighties wings) Are, in these times of trouble, dreadful things; He arms my heart against them; and the more They shake the Earth, and make the Waters roare, The more I slight them. Yea, although, beside Those dangers, which have others terrifi'd, My ruine threatning, there, at present stand Steep mountains, and a Desart on each hand; Deep seas before me, and an host behind Which doth appear malignantly enclin'd; Yet, all these cannot from my hopes remove me, Because, I see GOD in a cloud above me. My chief well-being, totally consists With that wind, which blows when, and where it lists, And, 'twill not mar my prime contentment, whether We shall have Parliaments, Kings, both, or neither; Whether or no, the old Lords, or the new; All the secluded Members, none, or few, Shall to this Parliament admitted be, Or to the next, and all men then be free To chuse, or to be chose: Whether this Sect, Or that; the supream Pow'r will best respect. So Justice henceforth over us may raign, And Truth may her due freedom still retain, I shall be pleas'd, and my endeavour bend To suffer, what I know not how to mend. Whatever GOD permits, his will be done: For, he is not a careless looker on,
But, active in disposing to his ends, What, man, to his vain purposes intends: And, our designs will frustrate be for ever, Unless, with him concurrence we endeavour. The peoples voice is GOD's, the Proverb saies; And is so, many times, but, not alwaies. Their Voice is, that the best means to prevent Our threatned ruine, is a Parliament (Next under GOD) that must be truly free. This, I believe, but, gain'd how shall that be, Or when procur'd? If, none we free must call, But, when there is a freedom left to all To chuse, or to be chose; Some other way We must be sav'd before we see that day, Else we shall be destroy'd. Must we give Theeves (Who live but by their pardons and Reprieves) Pow'r, to dispose as they shall please to do Of our Estates, and think it reason too? To sober men appears it to be just, With murtherers to put our Lives in trust? To any wise men, will it prudence seem, With bloud and vast sums, in the hands of those, From whom we won them, (being still our Foes?) Consent to take what freedom they will give us, Who are the men who did, and would inslave us? And, cauterized consciences permit In judgement, on our consciences to sit? Free Parliaments, can we call such as those? Or, think the Members of it freely chose, When they who much less worthy men do seem In others eyes, than in their own esteem, (And they, who have more wealth and pow'r, than grace, Wit, or sincerity with shameless face,
By bribes, threats, fawnings, or corrupted friends, Procure their own Elections for self ends? And when th' Electors likewise cheated are Of their free choice, by weakness, hopes, or fear? Call you that free, which was at first begot In bondage? Which, at full enjoyeth not A freedom yet? and, was to come and go, When others pleased were to have it so? Can that be free, or freemen make of us, Which is begot and constituted thus? To which a Coney-burrough, or a village, Not able with rents, labour, trade, and tillage, The Charges of one Burgess to maintain, Is as well priviledg'd, to send in twain Unto a Parliament, as any Shire Which doth two hundred times their burdens bear? And may corrupted be to make a choice Which will destroy three Nations, with one voice? But, if a Parliament thus chosen, be By Custome lawful, and reputed free; We must be as we are, till resolution Be taken up, to mend that Constitution. For though this Age to GOD alloweth not His choice, out of our chosen ones, by lot, (As when Matthias, after mans election, Was chose, when chusers had less imperfection:) And though this Lottery was thrown aside, Because it bounded Avarice and Pride; And pleas'd not them whose aime was to retain, Or to acquire pre-eminence and gain; Yea, though it hath, without good reason why, Been wav'd by Clergy and by Laity; By Lot, not only the first vacant place To an Apostleship supplied was,
But, also, Saul thereby Election had Before he by the people King was made: Moeover, Achans crime when close conceal'd From humane knowledge, was by Lot reveal'd. Then, that Expedient, why should we explode, And, in things doubtful, shun the Test of GOD? His providence will order all we do, Whether, thereby we pleased are or no; And his concurrence in our choice by Lot Is just and needfull, though we like it not. For, of his Kingdom, we have oft confest, These Isles are part: Our noblest Interest Depends upon his Title and protection; They are now much endanger'd by defection From him, and by self-trust: That wicked one, Who hath in other Lands usurp'd his Throne, (And here in former Ages) doth intend To re-inslave us; he hath to that end Made up his Breaches; is (with false pretence Of doing right to wronged innocence) Now aiming to invade us, with a Pow'r, In probability, too strong for our; And, to resist, we have not many more Of chosen-ones, than made up heretofore, That little number, whereby (though so few) A mighty Army, Gideon overthrew, Through GOD's assistance, who compel'd their foes To make him way, by their self-overthrows, Because, he credit gave to his direction, Who sent him helpers by divine election; And shall we, in so visible a danger, Make him, that's most concern'd, to us a stranger? All, this premised, why should we refuse To let GOD chuse among us when we chuse?
Or, thereupon distrustful grow, that we Shall in so doing, prosper worse than he? GOD, by despised helpers, oft enables: By Instruments that most esteem but bables; By Lamps concealed in weak earthen pots, And things much more to be despis'd than Lots. But, what expedient likelier can be found To fix that which is alwaies running round? Or, make a choice with which men pleas'd may be, Who, in so many matters disagree, Than (having chose as well as they can do) To let GOD add perfection thereunto? Since, when he lists, he can; and ever will Make all we act, effect his pleasure, still? This makes me, having acted what may seem Injoyn'd by reason, leave the rest to him. This makes me patiently to wait and heed Mens counteractings, with what will succeed; And, wait the more content, because I see, That, sometimes things contemned useful be In that which he at this time hath in hand, If his intents, I rightly understand. For my part, I will there no chuser be Of any, where GOD may not chuse with me; And, I their free choice also would refuse If (singly) Shire or Burrough me should chuse Without a Lot. But little need I feare My being put to such a trial here; For, one unfitting to be call'd unto That trust, most think me; and if not, I do: For, whose end can I serve, that am well known This Principle, and such as this to own? Or, who can hope I will to them be just, Who trust to none but him, whom they distrust?
Let them who of themselves have high esteem Pursue that course which best to them shall seem, Set up what Pow'r, and make what Laws they please, I shall have comfort, though but little ease; And if instead of right, I still have wrong, My time of suffering, will not now be long. To whatsoever Pow'r, GOD, me subjects, I will obey it with all due respects Till he removes it; (as I still have done, Ev'n then, when I was censur'd to have gone Beside my Rule.) When Anarchy takes place By reason, to preserve the common peace, I'll use all good and likely means I may; Sing, whilst it lasteth; when it faileth, pray; That, though from me my Foes the out-works win, I may secure the Fortresses within, And, in the mean space, neither be perplext, Or scar'd, to think, who will enslave me next: For, he that trusts to an internal aid, Of no external Pow'r need be afraid. The troubles of this life will soon be past; The bliss that follows, will for ever last: And, I have seen the Authors of our troubles So oft blown up, and puft away like Bubbles, That much I am asham'd to think how poor My courage was to fear them heretofore. I know what Changes are now menaced, Yet, I'll attend them without servile dread. Let all those do the like, who have took part In this Republicks Cause with single heart; For, though, if he who doth our Peace prolong, Should follow those, who heretofore went wrong, To make them prosp'rous in their undertakings, Who may be mark'd out by their oursed speakings,
(Their malice, slanders, and scurrilities, Their great delight and confidence in Lies.) They must endure the sharpest blast that blew Within this Climate, since the world they knew; GOD, will vouchsafe them his assisting grace To bear it stoutly when it comes to pass, And, put a signal difference, between Those that have honest, and unfaithful been. A storm, is brewing, whereunto, perchance, The late North wind, hath given an advance; For, I perceive, (although from Camps or Courts There be where now I am, but few reports) Some Actings have produced an effect Much differing from what I did expect, And working on the common peoples passions According to their various inclinations; So that he must be wiser than Apollo, Who shall inform us, what events will follow. Some rail, some rave, some scoff, and some do jeer, Some ring, some sing, some hope, and some do fear, Some of them do insult, some others whine; But, all these whirlwinds shake no corn of mine: To my old Principles, I still am true, And will be, whatsoever Change ensue: Because, I am assur'd the Cause we had Was very good, though we our selves are bad; And, that, if after all our pains and cost We lose it, by our wickedness 'tis lost. And, for my part, my portion hath been such, That, if I lose all, I cannot lose much; Nor by my Foes be much worse dealt withall Than I have been by those whom Friends we call. The World can me of nothing disinvest, Save that, which heretofore my cares increast;
And, though she somewhat more oppress me may, She shall not take my happiness away, Nor mar my hopes with all her scorns and brags, Although, she wears, and tears, my flesh to rags. I can be but abus'd, and ground between Two Mill-stones, as I hitherto have been. The favours of the World, to men upright, Makes them the more obnoxious to despight. If she, to place of Pow'r and Trust commends Well-minded men, 'tis but for her own ends: For, when her purposes to pass are brought By them, who, her preferments never sought, (And, others for her service sitter seem) The first she slights, with barb'rous disesteem, And them exposeth to disgraceful scorns, Because, no longer they can serve her turns. Therefore, though worse I speed than heretofore, My peace thereby shall be disturb'd no more, Than if I heard a drivelling fool did swear, His Bable, and Bell'd-cap, I should not wear. As well mine, I confess, as others crimes, Have multipli'd the troubles of these times; And, therefore, I must undergo my share, In what our National demerits are. But, they can never force me to despair, Because, I have a Mediators pray'r; And, such a gracious GOD to trust unto, As neither looks for more than men can do, Nor doth severely mark what's done amiss Through frailty, and without maliciousness. And, though, a real unsuccesseful zeal To do my duty to this Commonweal Hath lost me some friends, and foes made me many, I, am not a malicious foe to any;
Nor were my suff'rings, since these wars begun, For any knavery, but, for having none: And, therefore, I shall thrive, when honest men May have a thriving time; but, not till then: And such a time (though by what's pre-declar'd, It may a very long time be deferr'd) May, very possibly, soon come to pass, If he, that shall have pow'r, hath also grace To use it prudently, when he receives it To that intent, for which GOD chiefly gives it; And shall vouchsafe a more indulgent eare To them, whose words, by deeds confirmed were, Than to the Complements of seeming friends, Who fawn upon him for sinister ends. To fortifie that hope, a little more, I have, (beside what is express'd before) Consider'd this, that, understanding men, Although they make some uses, now and then, Of Parasites, to them, no trust will give, Till they may be induced to believe That, Crows, which flock about a new-yean'd Lamb, (To pick his eyes out) to protect him came; That, they have oft observ'd, it is their guise, To worship all new Stars, when first they rise; Hosanna unto him, this day to cry, Whom they will next day seek to crucifie; Set up a Man of clouts, to be their King, Yea, honour as a God-head any thing, Whereby their present Lust may be enjoy'd, Though thereby, they at last may be destroy'd; And, when by their own faults they are distress'd, Curse their best friends, and those whom they have bless'd. But, this mans fortitude, I hope is such, That, their Bolts will not thereon batter much;
For, GOD confers the Pow'r on him bestown, Ev'n for this Peoples sake, not for his own; And, if their trust in him, he should betray By whom he is, that which he is this day, His loss will be as great (perhaps much more) As their, who have, betray'd it heretofore. Whether to this, or to that Interest, He will decline, 'tis coming to the Test: For, he now standeth on that foed Y, Wherein, a right way, and a wrong doth lie; And, he shall hear a voice behind him, say, GEORGE, that's the left, and this the right hand way: This, leads to honour here, and future bliss; That way, the next way to destruction is: That way, the greatest number doth pursue; Yet, this the safest, although trod by few. Now, whether this, or that way he encline, The danger will be rather his, than mine. Whatever shall succeed, which more or less Obstructs th' enjoyment of our outward-peace, Me, 'twill not make much merrier, or much sadder, Than ratling of three blew beans in a bladder; So, GOD gives patience till the storm be past, And Truth and righteousness prevail at last. What, MONCK perhaps will do, or leave undone, May mar some Trifles, I have doated on; But, that, whereon my best hopes fixed be Doth lie secured betwixt GOD, and me. That, which conduceth to my noblest ends, No more on his, than his on mine depends; And, GOD, I know, will constantly proceed In prosecuting what he hath decreed Concerning this Republick, whatsoever He, we, or any other shall endeavour:
And, when their falshood, malice, and dospight, Insultings, and vain hopes, are at the height, (Who, now, against this Commonwealth conspire To bring on such a Change as they desire) They shall but to and fro, like drunkards reel, Do, and undo, and run round in a wheel, Till they have made that, not to be endur'd, Whereby, they dream distempers may be cur'd; And, GOD shall fol their wisdom in that hour; So break their snares, and weaken so, their pow'r, That, what they did suppose would have o'rthrown His purposes, will quite destroy their own. This I believe, who oft-times have foreseen Contingent things, that have unlikely been: And, though for this, I may be flouted more Than for the like expressions heretofore, And more in hazard; I am not afeard To let them any where, be seen or heard, Nor will be discontent with him who shall Conceive of me, as Festus did of Paul; For, I expect not, that Grapes can be born Upon a Thistle, or Figs on a Thorn. And though the Scorners ask to what intent I have compos'd this Ribble-rabblement, (As they will call it) I, will tell them why, In meekness, that they may as well as I Be thereby profited; and (if their pride, Obstruct it not) lay prejudice aside. At first relation of the foresaid News, I stept aside, to counsel with my Muse, That, as I often do, I might thereby My heart against assailings fortifie: For, (my infirmities, I'll not dissemble) My flesh as prone is to look pale and tremble
As other mens, if I neglect the cures That must be took for such distemperatures As are begot, by sudden informations Of accidents beyond our expectations. To which end, if I did not oft retire To seek by musings, what, GOD, will inspire, And thus preserve them in my slighted Rimes, I could not bear the burdens which these times Impose on me, or mine, and upon those Who first made head against our common foes By their encouragement, who had the pow'r, Which might have sav'd those whom they did de And have as well brought scorn and outward sha On those who acted with them, without blame, As on themselves; and, when GOD did restore Their Pow'r twice lost, still acted, as before. In that, and such like Cases, not in vain, I thus distill out from the heart and brain, The spirits of those many mus'd-on matters Which there I find, to make some cordial waters. For, though they, who confide in men and horse, Deride them, as meer whimsies of no force; They make me merry, when my heart was sad, They keep me sober, when men think me mad; And, by my musings also, now and then, The like effects are wrought on other men; For, they assist us to consider so, Those things, which men may; those, which GOD will do; What, we our selves must act; what, leave undone; What, may in reason, follow thereupon; What madness 'twere to overcharge with sorrow The present day, with dreading more to morrow; Or, mar our sleep, by being discontented At what may not be, or not be prevented,
That, I take up what likely hopes I may My present fears or doubtings to allay; And fix my confidence on him, by whom, I am assured help at last will come: And he still sends in, (when I know not where To find supply for things that needful are) So much, as may support me to persever In what I am obliged to endeavour. I, am as sensible, as most men are, Of all those Dangers, which do now appear; And, till with GOD, I had convers'd a while, GEORGE MONCK with all his Forces in this Isle, And all that He and Mountague can do At Sea and Land, with help of LONDON too, Could put me in no hope they should prevent The perils which appeared imminent: But, now, though all their Forces they should bend Against that Cause, which we hope they befriend, And, all the strength both Spaine & France can bring, Were joyned to impose on us a King Without Conditions, I should not repent My Principles, or fear the consequent. Because, if by his coming, he shall heal Our wounds, and breaches, we are safe and well; And if he come in vengeance, we shall taste A bitter Cup, and, he the dregs, at last. For, having as Appendants to that Pow'r Sins unrepented, and as great as our, Which daily will encrease, when they come in, SIN, shall do execution upon sin: Prophaness, joyning hands with superstition, And, Sanctity dissembled, with Ambition; They shall so plague each other, that, if ten Of honest and true-hearted English men
Be left in ev'ry thousand, and, together Knit in true Charity fast to each other, They shall be a RESERVE, to make this Nation More prosp'rous in another Generation, I, would have said, before this year be gone, If, I, had now seen Justice better done; Or, any probability perceiv'd, That, what I should declare, would be believ'd. But, peradventure, 'tis a day too late, This day, on any terms to promise that, Which yet, expected is, by some of them, Who, have the means neglected, and the time. For, Charles those great advantages hath won By what hath been omitted, and miss-done, (Which, I long since foresaw) that, though his Pow'r MONCK shall employ for us; nor his, nor our, Nor both united; nor a Parliament, Established with full and free consent, Of all the People; (if by penitence, GOD, reconciled be unto that Prince) Can at this present, make the scale so even, (Ʋnless our peace be likewise made in heaven) But, that there will be ten for one, at least, To weigh him out his claimed Interest, And, force us those conditions to receive, Which he himself shall pleased be to give. For, our great Wars, confusions, and dissenting, Will frustrate so, endeavours of preventing Our fears, and setling true peace, in that way, Whereby, we for a settlement assay; That he, by whom, lost hopes reviv'd became, May accidentally, without just blame, Through breach of trust, make way to bring him in, Who, hitherto hath most opposed bin.
For, that, which cures, where one distemper lies, Kills, where are complicated maladies; Or, else, at least, produceth an effect Much differing, from what we did expect. If still both Parties be the same they were, They rather shall encrease confusions here Than qualifie them: and, for ought that, yet, To me appeareth likely to beget A better hope: nought, Reason offers us, But this; GOD, grant it prove no worse than thus. If, he be qualifi'd, as now some say He is; and as (for ought I know) he may, That will be then effected, which few thought Could have here whilst they liv'd to pass been brought. And, if to GOD, he reconciled be, Why, not to men? Or, wherefore not to me, Who, never was for self-respects to him An Adversary, or, a friend to them Who were his Enemies, for being so, But, as he was, or seem'd to be, a Foe To GOD and Justice? If, he be not such, Why should I doubt his favour? Or, fear much His wrath? For, doubtless, if he be upright, He, then, in honest men will take delight; Yea, peradventure, may have need of one To do such services as I have done, Without regarding greatly what men shall Be pleased, or displeased there withall; And, if he be a Tyrant, I know why He, will have greater cause to fear, than I. If, her, who with her Cup of fornications Hath long made drunk the Kings of many Nations, He hath not pledg'd in secret; nor, so long Drunk her inchantments, that they are too strong
To be expell'd, there may be perfect cures For all meer natural distemp'ratures, Whereby, he from Impostures may depart, To own what GOD hath written in his heart. And, then, it will be evidently seen Which way, he might a glorious King have been, Who, now is none; and what the Parliament, Which promised to make him such, then meant; For, he that governs men, must righteous be, And, there is no such glorious King as he. When King and People are confin'd by Laws, Neither the Princes, nor the Peoples Cause Can be infring'd; and questionless, if he Inclin'd to such a condescention be; This would, when both sides thereunto submit, Good will to men, and peace on earth, beget; And, both GOD's Justice, and his Mercy too It would illustrate, if it might be so. For, GOD's Long-suff'ring doth abide for ever; And, Judgements, very seldom times, or never, Are past by such an absolute Decree, As, by Repentance not revers'd to be; Nor doth he look, that, man's Repentance should Proportion with his Deviations hold, Since his Free Grace, a standing help supplies, To make amends for those deficiencies. Manasses, guilty of sins most abhorr'd, Was cast out of his Kingdom, and restor'd; Yea, and this Parliament, whose Crimes are more Ten times, than his, were twice shut out of doore; Yet, now in grace again (God grant they may Take heed of falling the third time away,) For, GOD, will then perhaps, the second time, (As he did of the rest) make proof of him.
What he will do, is known to him alone, Because, he only knows, what will be done By them, to whom Conditions are declar'd With threatnings, and a promised reward, As they shall be neglected, or fulfill'd; Or, men are either well, or evill-will'd: For, they, the Devil's, not GOD's, Prophets are, Who, absolutely, either peace, or war, (Or shame, or honour, poverty, or wealth, Or life, or death, or sicknesses, or health) Shall promise unto them, who have transgress'd Without conditions tacite, or express'd; And they are Fools abus'd by ill suggestions, Who tempt men, by demanding of such questions. Yet, GOD, sometimes indulgently complies With us, ev'n in our curiosities; And, other while, unsought for, giveth hints, To prove us by conditional events. Among some other things, made signes to me, When, here a setled Government should be, My Britains Genius hath long since recorded A signal previous one, which is thus worded: Brit. Genius, Pag. 100. A King, shall willingly himself un-king, And, thereby, grow far greater than before, &c. This, in the meaning, might have twice, ere this Fulfill'd have been; and once, in Terminis, If Pride, self-will, and frowardness of mind, Had not, by false lights, made true Reason blind. And, if that he, whom it will most concern, Shall now, GOD's visitation-time discern,
(Not letting opportunities depart, By suff'ring vain hopes to obdure his heart) When GOD shall on his soul begin to strike, A call to penitence, Manasseth-like, But, meekly comes, and laies revenge aside, All self-will, animosities, and pride; It shall have such effects the self-same hour, On these three Nations, by a secret pow'r, As, will so change them too, that, ere the Sun Is at his next height, and through Cancer run, It will amaze the World; their Foes confound; Make some believe, all things are wheeling round; Or, think, that Revolution drawing near Which must conclude the great Platonick-year; And, good, to many Realms, 'twill pre-divine Betwixt the Tropicks on both sides the Line. This, doubless, will by no man be withstood Who seeks his own weal in the common good, And, doth not either strive to have possession Of other mens concernments, by oppression, Or, is displeas'd with ev'ry Government, Save that, which his own wisdom shall invent. If this, may be vouchsaf'd, or, any thing Which might appear to have a modelling By GOD's, and Natures Laws; I am so far, From Jonah's frowardness, when, GOD, did spare Great Niniveh, that, though it quite dissented, From all that I have aimed at, or hinted, (Here, or elsewhere) I, therein should rejoyce, And praise Almighty GOD, with heart and voyce, That, though he both did threaten to destroy, He lets both parties, at the last enjoy More grace than they deserve; and turns to them, In mercy, though they turn not, yet, to him:
For, my endeavours wholly were bestown, To have GOD's mind fulfilled, not mine own; And, whether he in mercy or in wrath To give us Kings again, determin'd hath; If he, shall bring one hither, I'll receive him With such obedience as I ought to give him; And, praise GOD for his Justice, though his hand Shall smite me first of any in this Land. But, I shall not believe he hath Commission To raign here, by GOD's grace, or his permission, Untill he gets admittance by th' Assents Of these three Nations in their Parliaments; Or, by re-conquest: Nor, will I desist From still adhering to that Interest Which we possess, and, on Appeals from heaven, Was by GOD's Doom, unto this People given: But, I'll assert it, while life shall endure, Or, till for sin, GOD, takes the forfeiture Of what he gave; and absolutely shall Translate it; or, on terms conditionall: Or, till I see our diff'rences decided, And, how the Pow'r now claim'd shall be divided. Mean while, I neither to be saved from His wrath, or, to find grace in time to come, Will have with him compliance; lest I wrong That Pow'r to which my services belong: Nor, will I, whilst this lasts, one deed assay Which tendeth to removing it away. Nay, notwithstanding it should me oppress, And, ill requite me for my faithfulness, I would not tell in secret, how it should Supplanted be, although, perhaps, I could: Except, in telling Charles, his Resignation, Will be the best means of that supplantation:
For, though the Cause, I fought for, were unjust, I am a Traytor if I break my trust. Yea, though thereof, I be well satisfied, If I shall turn unto the other side Before that trust, I, totally resign, With all that Pow'r, which by that trust was mine, Or, make my self a starting hole, whereby I may be false, with shews of Loyalty. The Royal Pow'r, I loyally obey'd; And, though it did oppress, was so afraid Of innovating; that a Reformation Thereof I wished, not an extirpation. But, when by other men, through GOD's permis, It was remov'd; to that, did yield submission, Which then succeeded; and so would have done, Had twenty been admitted one by one, In whom I saw the soveraign pow'r reside, And, with most visibility abide: For, ev'ry private person it behoves, Till that whole Orbe, wherein he's fixed, moves, To keep his place, not medd'ling any way To overthrow the Pow'r he should obey. Let that MONCK, whom I see but through a cloud, (And may two faces hide beneath one hood,) Consider this; and take heed, lest he may By fair appearances be led astray, And make his Pow'r to over-balance that Which must be weigh'd out, by their free debate To whom it appertains: for, they alone, Must, now, untill their own set time is gone, Determine that which in suspence doth stand; And, if the Pow'r then slip into his hand, (As possibly it will) he then may do What GOD and his own conscience prompts him to.
Mean while, it will behove him to be wary; For, if an equal hand he shall not carry, As their Affairs now stand, 'twill treason be, Ev'n in the most superlative degree; And, shall be, doubtless, in the final swinge Rewarded with superlative revenge, Whether the Pow'r, from whom his Pow'r he had Were perfect, or, some way imperfect made, Either by their own faults, or other mens; For, his defects have no excuse from thence: Because, a servants trust, must be maintain'd, How e'r their Masterships, his Masters gain'd. Let him consider well, that, he is bound To them in that state, wherein them he found When they intrusted him; till their own Acts, Or, providence, invalid those Contracts; Or, totally annihilates the Band By which they mutually obliged stand; And, that, if they, through what he shall miss-do, Be either forc'd, misled, or frighted to Those condescentions, which may quite destroy That Pow'r, by which he did his Pow'r enjoy, His Faith is broke; unless, he do his best, To re-impow'r them; or, make good, at least, That End, for which GOD and the people gave To them, and him, the Pow'r which now they have. And, this, (if there befall an oversight) Must be endeavoured with all his might; For, ev'ry promise, vow, and undertaking, Repugning this, is made null in the making; And, all the bloud which is in this Cause shed, Will down be showr'd, in vengeance on his head, Who shall to wrong the Common right endeavor, And in that prosecution still persever.
This is the Judgement, which this day, my Musings, Dictate (as I think, by divine infusings) To some good purposes, if we repent That Course, which yet obstructeth GOD's intent. And, when that mad distemper is allay'd Which frustrates all that can be writ or said. These Principles, by musing, I assay To keep up, in my self; and, as I may, To build in others, thereby, to encrease Their faithfulness, and settle common-peace. These Principles, so long as that Pow'r lasts Which is in being, though it dayly wastes, Is much contemn'd; (and without likelihood Of ought effecting for the publike good) Compels me conscientiously to wave All self-respects; and all those which I have To them, whose welfare is to me more dear Than mine own life, and all things mortal are, Rather, than I those duties would neglect, Which, I think, may the common-peace effect, (Though duties nor exacted, nor regarded, But, oft, with in juries, and spights rewarded.) Yea, still, though most my purposes deride, And, make me scorn'd of Fools on either side; I, take up all occasions to re-mind them Of needful Cautions which they cast behind them, As now I do, and heretofore have done: Sometimes, foretelling, what would fall thereon, And, then, remembring them as I saw need, How, that which was foretold them, did succeed; That, them (if possible) reduce I may Before it be too late, into that way, Wherein they may be safe; for, they have bin Long out, and likely, never to come in,
Till GOD, by what he seems about to do, (Or, some such way) shall force them thereunto. For, 'tis not that course which hath practis'd bin, Our putting this man out, and that man in; Our punishing, of some for miss-conceiving Their duties; nor, our giving, or forgiving, According as our ends, it may effect, Or, as we favour, or, else dis-respect; Nor our Prudentials, though they did excell The plots and counsels of Achitophel, That will procure our safety; or, succeed Much better, at this present, than his did. No sure Conclusions, can be grounded on That, which this General hath lately done, Although, to make his passage hither smooth, He Lambert foyl'd, as Lambert foiled Booth; For, men, and humane actions, whatsoe'r They promise, or portend, so trustless are, That, none can yet know, whether of the Three Shall to himself, or us, most prosp'rous be; Though, for the present, there is in the One Hope of much good, and in the other none. 'Tis not discov'ring of each others shame, (And of those dunghils, out of which they came) By suff'ring scurrilous base Pamphleteers To fill the streets, with slanders, lies, and jeers, Till there is hardly left us time and room Of useful Truths, informed to become. Nor preaching Swordmen, nor the fighting Priests, Are they, who must support our Interests. Nor they, who make our publike plagues the more By shutting private mercies out of door: For doubtless they, who, find not time, to hear A man oppressed, once in twice four year,
Though urg'd with frequent importunities, Will make GOD's ears as deaf unto their cries. 'Tis not our Fellowship with pious friends, Made instrumental for meer carnal ends: 'Tis not our eagerness to miss-apply The grace of GOD, and cloud it with a Lie, Which will endear, and make us acceptable To him, who to deliver us is able. Nor is't our formal Off'rings, or our zeal To GOD, and safety of this Commonweal Pretended, by our weeding from his Corn Those, whom he doth command to be forborn Till harvest-time, (lest, as we dayly do, Among the Tares, we pluck up good wheat, too) That, will be our protection from the smart And sting of Conscience, when GOD tries the heart; Nor from those ou'ward plagues, which many run To meet, in hope, by that course, them to shun. 'Tis neither our, nor the designs of those Who, to this Commonwealth are open foes, That help, or harm us: For, none can contrive Worse mischieves, than both Parties do derive From their own projects; (as it would appear If, they of their successes heedful were.) Nor will it be our having of a King Or no King good or bad, that peace will bring To either side, till they shall better heed How mis-advisedly they do proceed. Nor is't a pack'd, peec'd, or, new Parliament, Elected by a general assent, That will repair us, though it might be had: But, some things, whereof small account is made, As we shall shortly find, when we have tri'd What, by exper'ence will be verifi'd.
Some will desire to know them: would they could As heartily desire it, as they should, And mend what is amiss, when they do know it, As easily as I can truly show it. It is, that Mercy, and that righteousness, Which, hypocritically we profess, When we do shut our doors, our eyes, and ears, Against the sad Petitions, cries, and tears Of men oppress'd, and cast away that Bread To dogs and swine, that Children should have fed. 'Tis self-denial, and not that alone Which ought by all men to be undergone, But also that in chief, which by a Vote Was once pretended, and e'r since forgot. It is a conscientious reparation Of this Republicks Faith, whose violation Makes all unprosp'rous which we take in hand; And, which hath brought a Curse upon this Land That will not be remov'd, till we have payd Those Vows, which have been shamelesly delay'd. 'Tis want of meekness upon either side, And Charity, which (making men divide, And subdivide) doth day by day, encrease Those Discords, which destroy the common peace; For, nor mens wrath, nor their Phanatick zeal, Compleats GOD's will, or cures the Commonweal, Or edifies his Church: But, Righteousness, And Truth profess'd, with sincere soberness. 'Tis these things, that must cure our Grand disease, And, if we perish, 'tis through want of these. These, are the sins, (as often heretofore I have affirm'd, and say it now once more) Which have destroy'd, and totally laid waste Great Monarchies, and States in Ages past.
Yet, to these Crimes, this Age hath added many, Beside hypocrisie, the worst of any. Yea, they have crown'd them with impenitencies For sins committed under fair pretences; With perseverance in them, whilst GOD's hand Is stretched forth in anger o'er this Land. And, it is Penitence for these Transgressions, As also, for our manifold omissions, That must prevent the plagues now coming on. GOD, grant, it may be timely, thought upon; And, this, therewith, in season minded too; That, we in conscience, are oblig'd to do As much as possibly we shall be able To seek preventing of that miserable And sad condition, whereto they are brought, Who, for the common Interest, have fought By their injoynments, (who then managed The Pow'r, which their obedience watranted) And, thereto, not alone contributed Their Livelihoods. but, in their service shed Their precious bloud, with hazard of their lives, And ruine to their children, and their wives; Whom, if we slightly leave indempnifi'd, Will raise the loudest CRY that ever cri'd; Make all men say, (who have their Cause well scann'd) That honest men by knaves have been trapann'd; Fulfill, what, in my OPOBALSAMƲM, I, fifteen years now past, foretold should come; And in some other Premonitions too, (Though heeded not) nigh forty years ago. Yea, and, bring Vengeance, ev'n on those who shall Suppose, it them concerneth not at all; For, most, one way or other, guilty be, And from the punishment, few shall be free.
What pinch was that? Oh gracious GOD! where art? Stay by me: For, a sudden twinge at heart, So gripeth it, with an injected fear, As if some dreadful thing, were drawing near. Waves, after waves, begin (methinks) to roul, And, are come up, almost, ev'n to my soul. Yet, why my soul, art thou cast down in me? What is it, that can thus disquiet thee? Still, trust in GOD; thy self to him resigne: For, thou art his, and he is truly thine. Although the Waters roar, the waves mount high, And we are far from shore, yet, GOD is nigh; Although the ship sinks, he can, if he please, Make us, with safety, walk upon the Seas; And, if we down into the Deeps must go, There, we shall find him, and enjoy him too. Take courage then, my heart, firm credit give, To what he promiseth, and thou shalt live. This pang is wholly past, and all my fear Is now, for them, who, senceless do appear Of their own hazards; who are without dread Of that destruction which hangs o'er their head; And, who have help and peace expected from Those hills, from whence, their welfare cannot come; As, they would soon find, if they heedful were What winds breathe from them, and what fruits they bear. How long! how long! shall GOD unto this place Make dis-respected offers of his Grace? How often, since great failings first begun, Hath he provoked almost ev'ry one, Apart, or joyntly? Ceasing not to prove By Judgements and by mercies interwove, How difficultly, either Grace or Nature Can work upon a self-corrupted Creature?
By all things which may any way relate To soul or body, credit or estate We have been call'd upon, one way or other; By sweet, and sharp things, and both mixt togeth By what to our chief joy, and sorrow tends; By servants, neighbours, kindred, and by friends; By sicknesses, and health; by scorns, and jeers; By shame, and honour, and by hopes, and sears: By other mens examples, GOD, forewarns; Sometimes, by our own suff'rings, wisdom learns; One while by wise men, and true Prophets reaches, Sometimes, by Wisards, fools, and children preach Then, last of all, when no effect these take, By things (as now) like Bal'ams Ass, doth speak: And, that, which all this, probably presages, Is (without swift repentance) Bal'ams wages; Which will be surely paid, when they who may Prevent it yet, shall give their pow'r away: Unless that Mercy, which no ending hath, Shall once again, put off the day of wrath; (Now-near approaching) when, in few, or none, There shall be any hope it maybe done. So, for a while, my mad fit now is over. Would other mad men might as soon recover: And, be as sober in their Intervalls, As I have hope to be, whatere befalls. Thus, once again, although that heretofore, In this mode, I resolv'd to write no more, (As, justly, otherwhile, the Parliament Revokes their Orders, when impertinent To Common safety) I, have boldness took, For like respects, my purpose to revoke. And, though, as our Cause now at hazard lies, Most men will judge me far more bold than wise,
To own these Musings. I so dreadless am, That, to attest them, I subscribe this Name At Hambledon, Feb. 19. 1659. George Wither. An Advertisement. IT is the great mercy of GOD that the Author of this Furor-poeticus, (all things considered) fell not into Fu∣rorem Bethlemeticum, long since: (for beside three Ad∣dresses in Manuscript, presented to the two Protectors, and many hundreds of other Poems, Papers, and Petiti∣ons printed and written, published, and privately prefer∣red, during almost 18 years sollicitation for publike and private justice and mercy) it will be partly demonstrated what experience he the said Author had of these Latter times, to all those who shall have patience to peruse those few Poems, preparatories, and Epistolary discourses, only, which have been divulged within the compass of the last year, (or, not long before) and which may be had with the Printer hereof, or, at Mrs Stamps, who selleth Books in Westminster-hall, & at other Book-sellers, being these in particular. 1. A Narrative of the series of his Grievances, with a preparatory to his Petitions, and the said Narra∣tive, intended to each Individual Member of Par∣liament. 2. The Sinners Confession, or the product of a private humiliation. 3. The Poem intituled Salt upon Salt. 4. Epistolium-Vagum-prosa-metricum, or an Epistle at Randome in Prose and Metre. 5. A Cordial Confection, to strengthen their hearts, whose courage begins to fail by the Armies late dissolving of the Parliament, &c.
To the last mentioned Epistolary Discourse, written to Mr R. Hamon, Merchant, I will here add this Postscript, upon the occasion therein expressed. A Postscript to Mr R. Hamon, Merchant. SIR, THat Letter, which to you I lately sent, On second Rupture of this Parliament, I am inform'd, by some, this censure had, That, doubtless, when I wrote it, I was mad: (As I, perhaps, might have been long ago, Had, I their wit, whom troubles maketh so.) They know not what it aimes at, I hear say; But, were they not more mad than I, they may: For, from the whole Contents, they may collect What, of their hopes, will be the sad effect; And, draw forth also from it, this Conclusion, That, they, and I, and all are in confusion; That, neither Army, Parliament, or King, Nor any other sub-celestial thing, Can have a self-sufficiency to cure Our present Ruptures, and distemperature, As we are now distemper'd; till a Pow'r Therewith concur, transcending their, and our: Till Righteousness with Mercy is inthron'd; Till selfness, and self-ends are more disown'd: Till ev'ry single person shall apart Reform his Will, his Actions, Words, and Heart;
Or, so endeavours it, that one by one, We, may do that, which yet by none is done, Untill to Numbers, Ʋnites do encrease, And make at last, those Numbers numberless. Such Ends, as these, I aim'd at; and perchance, If they, had more Wit, and less Ignorance, Who censur'd me, their prudence had discern'd My purpose, or more soberness had learn'd. Or, peradventure, they had understood, That, should I then have written in a mood More absolute, of things concerning those Who were of diff'ring Judgements, friends, and, foes, It might have added fewel, to encrease Those flamings, which did then infringe our peace; And wholly have made void that honest end Which, I did in simplicity intend. For, had I magisterially exprest What I dislik'd, or own'd, or judged best To be resolv'd on; I should have appear'd A Party, and by neither side been heard Without suspect, that I would have acquir'd, Not what was best, but, what I most desir'd. Much, therefore, positively to declare I purpos'd not; but, somewhat to prepare All Parties, without frowardness of heart To weigh those things, which joyntly, or apart, Would most concern them; and, then, make that use, Which an Atonement soonest might produce. I, somewhat further, might Apologize; But, this, on my behalf, may well suffice, Who, more for others sakes, than for mine own, These words and Lines, have thus together thrown. FINIS.
