y23 e1660_2 99867918 170235
The Penitent Murderer. BEING AN Exact Narrative Of the Life and Death of NATHANIEL BƲTLER; Who (through Grace) became a Convert, after he had most cruelly murdered JOHN KNIGHT. With the several Conferences held with the said Butler in Newgate, by the Right Honorable the LORD MAIOR, and several eminent Ministers, and others. As also his Confession, Speech, Prayer, and the Sermon preached after his Execution; with several useful Admonitions, and excellent Discourses. Collected by RANDOLPH YEARWOOD, Chaplain to the Right Honorable, the Lord Major of the City of LONDON. Deut 13.11. And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you. London, Printed by T. Newcomb for J. Rothwell at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-Row in Cheapside, and Tho. Matthews at the White-horse in the New Buildings in Pauls Church-yard. 1657.
blazon or coat of arms of the city of London London, Saturday Sept. 12. 1657. Reader, THis is that Exact Narrative concerning Nathaniel But∣ler, which was some time since promised to come forth by my appointment, under the hand of Randolph Yearwood. Robert Tichborne, Major.
To the Right Honorable, Sr ROBERT TICHBORNE Kt, Lord Major of the City of LONDON. My Lord, You have done (being directed, and enabled from on high) many noble and good acti∣ons for this City, the Govern∣ment whereof is yet yours. But really (my Lord) the right ho∣norable act was this, your perso∣nal
and frequent visiting Natha∣niel Butler, when he lay a prisoner in Newgate. His soul certainly was precious in your eyes; and this engaged you to send others, and to go your self to see him several times: I verily believe you will see him yet once more; not as a Malefactor in an obscure disparaging Goal, but as an An∣gel of God in the Kingdom of Christ, whither (I am confident) he is gone, and you are going. Before he went, he desired me to give you humble thanks for all the favor he had received from you, or by your means from o∣thers: He was very thankfull to your Lordship, and the rest
of the Honorable Bench, for his Fortnights Reprieval; confessing that Court to be both just, and merciful; Just, in condemning his body to death; and merciful, in sparing his life for some weeks after the Sentence, upon design to save his soul: And truly you may safely conclude, that his soul is safe. And is not such a Con∣clusion a rich Requital of all your Exhortations, Tears, and Prayers? My Lord, I shall rejoice to see you grow and abound yet more and more in Righteous∣ness, Holiness, and (as the Elect of God) bowels of Mercies:
which will render you like unto, and well liked of by the LORD of Lords. To whom I leave you, and remain Your Lordship's Servant, RANDOLPH YEARWOOD.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Reader, THE Malefactor mentioned in this following Narrative was none of mine acquaintance, till (for his horrid fact) he was ap∣prehended and imprisoned. So that it was not any Relation of mine to him that put me upon this publication; but I undertook this work, as judging it of gene∣ral concernment to all men both good and bad. 1. As to the bad. If thou art an evil wicked man er woman, then this Narrative (with the annexed admonitions and sermon &c.) much concern thee, to make thee (if possible) penitent and truly re∣formed. 2. Art thou a gracious, good man, or woman; then thou hast reason to rejoyce on carth, as God
himself and the Angels of God rejoyce in heaven ever one repenting sinner, Luke 15.7. and 10. I doubt not but thou wilt be well satisfied by the following Lines concerning the true conver∣sion of a very hainous Offendor. Now (good Reader) grant me one request, not to look upon the following Discourses as a bare story or a piece of News, and so having read and seen it, there is an end: But read and consider, read and pray that this great and extraordinary passage of divine Providence may profit thy Soul, which is the desire of my heart and Soul, to God himself. Otherwise I could not be (as indeed I am) thy Well-wisher, Friend and Servant, RANDOLPH YEARWOOD.
Three Conferences held with Nathaniel Butler (during his Imprisonment) by the Right Honorable the Lord Major, under his Lord∣ships own hand. WHen Nathaniel Butler was first appre∣hended and brought before me, he was in exceeding great burden of Spirit, full of tears, free to confess the Fact, with all the aggravations thereof, and was sollicitous for nothing, but a few days respit for his poor Soul, it seeming to me that nothing at that time was on his thoughts, but what should be∣come of his Soul. At my first Conference with him which was about five or six days after his Condemnation, I found him very ready to acknowledge his actual sins, and to charge himself with them and the aggravations that did accompany
them, and this with sad tears of complaint, and indignation against himself and his sins; but did take no notice of his sinful Nature; Which my self and a Friend with me (Mr Grif∣fith of the Charter house) perceiving, We en∣deavoured by Scripture to shew him his sin∣ful Nature, as the Root of all his sinful acti∣ons, which he diligently hearkened to, and was affected with, but acknowledged his former Ig∣norance herein, and that he had not so expres∣ly before thougth hereof, or been instructed hereabout, and what he heard and received at this time among other Particulars, was so far blest, and wrought into his soul, that to our selves, and (as we heard) to others, he did from that Night following much insist upon and bemoan his sinful nature, and the state of sin he was born in, as well as, or together with those sinful acts he was guilty of. At my second being with him, after apply∣ing the free grace of God and Christ cruci∣fied to his faith for the pardon of his sins; I asked him whether his heart could most wil∣lingly receive that pardon, or a pardon for his life, and bid him consider, and tell me what his heart said in that Point: After a little pause, he made me this Answer, That indeed he did not desire to live longer in this world, for he had found sin so bitter a thing, and him∣self,
so prone to sin, that if he should live lon∣ger, and sin against God, it would be much more bitter to him then death, and he did heartily Blesse God that had brought him to the hand of Justice, and did truly love the party, who (as he thought) was the In∣strument to discover him, acknowledging that the Devil had tempted him to lay violent hands on himself; and after that temptation to fly beyond the Sea; which if God had suf∣fered him to do, and so escaped Justice, he might have gone on in his former course of sin without Repentance, but did truly bless God that had delivered him from these tem∣ptations; and had brought him to that conditi∣on that then he was in, he did acknowledge with much thankfulness to God man, the mercy of a few days between death and judge∣ment, and that God had given him so great a share in the hearts and prayers of his peo∣ple; he did several times throw himself on the free grace of God in the blood and merits of Jesus Christ alone for his Salvation, renoun∣cing all but Christ, acknowledging that he beleeved to be washed from his bloody Fact, and all his other sins, by no means but by the blood of Jesus Christ. At my third and last time of being with
him, which was the night before he died, I indeavoured to hold forth to his faith from Scripture, the glorious state in heaven to all Eternity, that Jesus Christ had purchased and was in the possession of for true believers, and into which such souls should immediatly en∣ter, when they leave the body, and abide there with Christ their Head for ever: To which he gave very great heed and attention, and though his lips said little, yet to my apprehen∣sion his soul spake very much, for it wrought in his body, as if it were raised up by Faith; through what was held out to him, even to the admiring of that grace and glory; The working of his soul, was mixt with Tears (as I conceive) of Joy; for he mention∣ed nothing of the fear of Death, though he was often minded of it, how neer it was at hand, nor did I then perceive any paleness in his face, or sinking of Spirit, (the Symp∣tomes of the fear of Death;) But that those workings of his Soul were reachings after that glorious Inheritance held out in Rom. 8.17. To be heirs of God, joynt heirs with Christ, which Scripture was then opened to him: And that glorious inheritance set forth by the concurrence of several other Scriptures, with an indeavour to give him a View by the eye of faith, of that which in a very few mo∣ments
after, his soul should to all Eternity be made partaker of in joy and glory with Christ in Heaven, which was infinitely more then could be expressed or conceived; and this I judge did make his Soul so work within him. After some time in prayer, I parted with him, and almost the last words I had from him were these, He told me, he was really offend∣ed with himself, because he hated sin no more, which had caused him to offend God so much; he told me Satan was busie to perswade him, That all his Faith and Repentance was false, but he had beleeved the Divel too long, and he would trust him no longer, but now cast his eternal soul on the free grace of God in the Blood of Christ alone for Salvation, renouncing himself wholly. In this resolu∣tion and frame of Spirit I left him: And as I am informed, (through the free grace of God) he did abide and increase in it to his last breath. Upon the whole, I am truly per∣swaded from that Work of God that I ob∣served to be wrought in him, and the de∣grees of it, that though his former life was full of all wickedness, his soul exceeding ignorant of God, and his own sinful nature all that time, and his Repentance and Faith in Christ very late, yet that the free grace of God (who is not bounded to time) did make
both his Faith and Repentance true, and do beleeve he is with Christ in glory. I do not give this Publike Attest to encourage sin, but to magnifie the free grace of God in Jesus Christ to Sinners, and I do assure whoso∣ever reads this, that poor soul which is the Subject of it, found sin to be exceeding bit∣ter before he had any tast of the sweet∣ness of Gods free grace in Christ. Hoping this may be of Publike Use, I am free to Attest it with my Name. September 10. 1657. Robert Tichborne, Major.
A brief Account of a Visit given to Nathaniel Butler, a Prisoner in Newgate upon, the Friday before he suffered, by Tho. Case, a Minister of the City of London; wherein he made these following Obser∣vations. THE said Nathaniel Butler expressed, 1. A deep sense of that desperate Bloody fact which he had committed, which he loaded with all the blackest aggra∣vations that might be; especially with this Consideration; That for ought he knew, he had destroyed body and soul with oue blow: He had begg'd and obtained a space of Repentance from his Judges, but had not afforded his Brother one moment to beg pardon at the hand of God. This Consideration stuck so deeply upon his spirit, that it had well nigh sunk him into de∣spair, had not God sent in some relief by the hand of one that visited him in prison, in the
instance of Manasseh, who having sacrificed his sons unto Devils, and shed much other in∣nocent blood, upon his repentance finding mercy, did not despairingly afflict himself with the consideration of what became of the souls of those whom he had so cruelly murder∣ed. Secret things belong unto the Lord, &c. 2. He exprest not only sense of the guilt of Blood, but a right Gospel-notion of the sinfulness of sin; All sin, the least sin, not as destroying only, but as defiling; not as con∣trary to the Creature in the effects of it, but as contrary to God in the nature of it; A grieving of the Spirit; a crucifying of Jesus Christ afresh; a most unworthy requital of the love of a crucified Saviour. 3. He discovered also that, which indeed was the thing which I came purposely to the Prison to enquire after, viz. A right appre∣hension of Original sin, the Corruption of his Nature, which he lookt upon as the Fountain and Spring-head of his Murder, Theft, and all other actual wickedness bewailing them all with David, in their first source and spring; Behold, I was born in sin, and in iniquity did my mother conceive me, Ps. 51.5. In a word, He had as right a notion of
the state of Unregeneracie, as ever I found in any new Convert. 4. He exprest also an high appretiation of Jesus Christ; not only for pardon of sin, but for power against sin; not only to de∣liver the soul from the wrath to come, and everlasting burning, but from the state of Na∣ture; As a Fountain of Holiness, as well as a Fountain of Happiness. 5. An high apprehension and admiration of Free-grace, in pardoning such a sinner as he was: Which he exprest with much self-abhorrencie, as one that had no regard to the Sabbath never acquainted himself with the Bible, or Catechism, never prayed; And if a good Thought were entring his heart, he would thrust it away from him with greatest indignation. The pardon of these, with other sins, he admired in some such language as the Apostle did, 1 Tim. 1.13. 6. God had vouchsafed him a sweet taste of the Promises; some whereof, most suitable to his condition, God had pitched his soul upon, which he repeated with so sweet a relish, as a man might perceive his soul was even ravished with the sence thereof.
7. Wonderfully did he bless and admire the goodness of God in calling such a cruel enemy to mankind as he was, in murdering his Brother, into the prayers, compassion, and care of so many of his precious Servants, both Ministers and others. He did particular∣ly acknowledge the extraordinary pains, care, and tenderness of the Chief Magistrate of the City, to be beyond all president, or expres∣sion. 8. Great affection and compassion he ex∣pressed to the souls of others: His Fellow-Prisoners profanenefs and desperate security he exceedingly lamented; the ignorance and blindnefs of many that came to see him, he heartily bewailed; They would aggravate his bloody fact, and ask him whether the sight of the Bags were not the first temptation to the murdering of his Brother? But alas! said he, it was not the sight of the bags, nor the instiga∣tion of the Devil, that could have put me upon such a wickedness, had there not been a curs∣ed nature within me, by means whereof I was a Murderer before ever I slew my Bro∣ther and an Adulterer, and a Blasphemer, &c. Yea, he said he looked upon that original corruption he carried about him, a greater sin before God, then a thousand acts of murder, of adultery, &c. because it is the fountain of
them all; which I never saw, said he, or took notice of till now that God hath opened mine eyes in this wonderful manner. Neither do the most of men and women see it; but be∣cause by the restraining power of God; they live free from such gross and scandalous crimes, they think themselves in a good estate, and that they shall be saved: But alas, said he, they have the same nature that I had, and until their natures are changed and renewed, they are accounted as guilty of all sins before God, and as uncapable of Heaven and salva∣tion, as if they had committed them in the greatest act; this ignorance of the generality of people, old and young he bewailed with much hearty sence and feeling. 9. He was very firm and fixed to the Prin∣ciples of the Protestant Religion, though he had but newly suckt them in: Insomuch that being several times encountred in Prison by some Priests and other Papists, that came to seduce this poor dying Wretch, who told him that if he would be reconciled to the Church of Rome. and turn Catholique (as they call it) they has power to pardon absolve him (which his Ministers had not) and that if he would not renounce his Religion, there was no way with him but damnation; with divers such menaces
to terrifie him, and flatteries to ensnare him: Yet the Young-man, through grace, stood a∣gainst all these Temptations, as a Rock that could not be moved, but sent them away with a great deal of contempt and indignation. He wisht the Civil Magistrate would be watch∣ful, and restrain the liberty, and prevent the temptations of these Seducers; which he pro∣mised to make his humble request to them at his death. 10. He did not at all doubt of his sal∣vation through Free-grace, the merits and love of Jesus Christ; though withall he did make it a very solemn Query, Whether he might warrantably and safely cast himself up∣on Jesus Christ, on such terms as God holds him forth in the Gospel to poor lost Sinners, being such a Sinner as he had been? 11. He was not at all afraid of death, nor desirous to live; but being asked by a Gentle∣man that stood by, what he would do if he should live? he answered, He desired not life if he might have it; partly because he durst not trust his own heart; partly out of an infinite desire he had to be with Christ, who had loved such a loveless wretch as he was.
One expression he used was, That he was not at all angry with his sin for bringing him to such a shameful end, the shame and death do not in the least trouble me. He was above all these considerations, and desired that God might be glorified in, and by his suffer∣ings. 12. And lastly, He earnestly desired them pre∣sent to joyn in prayer with him, which was performed by a Minister, who was witness to this part of the Narative. He exprest strong affections, and workings of spirit during prayer, and much thankfulness for that Chri∣stian office. In many of these particulars, possibly his very expressions in terminis, may not be so exactly rendred; but a to the import and substance of every particular, this is a faith∣ful and true relation. In all he spake, the manner of his speech and countenance exprest the highest affecti∣on that might be. THO. CASE.
Certain Observations of Thomas Parson, Minister at Micheal Wood-street London. BEing desired to preach at Newgate, Aug. 30. in the Afternoon (being the Lords day immediately preceding the Execution of Nathaniel Butler) I carefully observed him while preaching, and had discourse with him both before and after Sermon. While preaching, I took notine, that the man seemed wholly taken up with what he heard, not minding the great crowd about him, that came to see a poor reed shaken with the wind, staring him in the face as a condemned Malefactor; but he minded the Pardon I in the Name of God offered him, (treating of the Pardoning Grace of God) with so fixed an eye frequently did he look up∣on me, and so heedfully turn to Scriptures, as one taken up with the weightiest matters, when as otherwise it might have wrought som discomposure, to have so many such Observers. When with him before and after Sermon, I took notice both of his carriage and Words, by both which, great discovery of the frame and temper of his mind might be made.
His Carriage to my Observant and Impar∣tiall apprehension seemed to be excellently at∣tempered to his present condition, being sweetly submissive, neither servilely dejected under the Apprehensions of his past sins and present state, nor forwardly confident as though he forgot he were such a Malefactor: His deportment did in my Judgment (not without some admiration, then, & after in the reviewing thoughts of it, of the Decorum and suitableness of it to his present condition) speak a well mixed and compounded sence of his own deserts, and divine mercy; which also did his Words. His Words might be reduced to these two main and excellent heads, A declamation against sin, and Admiration of Grace. Agrainst Sin he expressed the greatest Dis∣plicency and abhorrency, yea the Sin of his Nature, that Root of bitterness, which he said men took but little notice of: and for actuall Sin abstractedly from the fruit of it, even sin as against the holy, just, and good law of God, and as against God that had deserv∣ed better at his hands, Professing that (as in general he had no desire to live) so if the greatest hier should be offered him to live, if it might occasion his return unto folly, he
would not accept of life, and the World with it; And that Sin as Sin, even the least. Sin did make his heart rise at first thought of it, and he could spit it out with detestation, wondring that men made no more of Sin, bewailing he was no more sensible of and humbled for Sin, expressing how affraid he was now of doing any thing might offend God, even in the least. Then (as all along) he was ready to take all occasions of a full, free, and impartial confession of Sins, cloathing them with their agravating Circumstances, to make them out of measure sinfull. His high admiring thoughts of the Love and Grace of God, several ways he expressed in a most serious affectionate manner, both in generall, and in reference to himself, and his sence of his interest in them. He was much in Repetition with thankful wonderment of ma∣ny proomises of God; some I had before spoken of in preaching, and some others, such as set forth Gods readiness to pardon; the freeness, largeness, and unchangeableness of the Par∣doning mercy of God; and again and again speaking in the words of Paul, And that such an one as I should obtain mercy! Such an one as I find mercy! Admiring the distinguishing grace of God towards him, that when other Prisoners (though in lesse danger then himself
of Death, whom we then heard above make∣ing a noise) were without thought of Sin or God, God should snatch him as a Fire-brand, and that in such a way, making sin, so great sin to be overruled to his great good. He expres∣sed his appretiating thoughts of Gods promi∣ses, savourly descanting upon them, and com∣fortably applying them to himself, saying, I could formerly find no thing desirable in a Promise or any Word of God, it was a bur∣then to me, but now that the promises were the rejoycing of his heart. He said, Satan had sorely winowed and buffeted him, but Christ was on his side: And using the words of the Apostle, This is our rejoycing, the Testimony of our Consciences, he added, God hath said, whosoever repenteth and beleeveth shall find mercy and be saved; my Conscience telleth me and witnesseth to me that I unfeignedly repent, and really beleeve in Christ, and I am one of those Whosoever; therefore Christ is mine, &c. As to his Condition in general, from what I found or otherwise heard, I conceive, there are many things very remarkable. 1. As to his sin committted. 1. That this great Sin was clearly a judiciall sin, the pu∣nishment of former Sins, for which God left him. 2. That as it was the deserved fruit of a bad Cause, so it was the accidentall cause
of good fruit, the Lord overshooting Satan in his own bow, when and by what meanes he took to make sure of him, God startled and roused Conscience, which would not with the noise of lesse guilt be awaked, and humbled the Sinner, &c. Secondly, It seemeth to me very observe∣able, as to the Work of God upon him, that it was so orderly gradual; he being first bound up partly through his ignorance in which he had been brought up, partly through the amazing guilt that with an overwhelming stupifying power came upon him; he afterwards by degrees, and that at last to such a measure of clearness and distinct∣ness of Understanding in the things of God, had an extraordinary beam of divine light darted into his Soul: and that by degrees, his sence of the sinfulness of sin increased (as I have been credibly informed) to a deep humi∣liation, not without horror, and so ingenious confession: And then upon the alone, and most sufficient foundation of the rich and pre∣cious promises of the Gospel, he was raised up to the apprehension of mercy, and at last of his particular interest in it. 3. The hand of the Lord upon the hearts of his People, Magistrates, Ministers, and other Christians in some measure evidencing the
thoughts of God towards the poor man, to be thoughts of Peace and good-will: In that favour he (so high an Offendor) found to have time of repentance and reconciliation, who himself gave none to his Friend: In the means afforded him, and manifold helps for his spiri∣tual advantage, which he, in my hearing took notice of with admiring thankfulness; Ser∣mons, Visits, generall pitty of Gods people, in the importunate enlarged fervency of Mi∣nisters and Christians in praying for him, scarcely to be parallel'd in the memory of men. THO: PARSON.
Some PassAges between Nath. But∣ler and a Friend of his that came to visit him, which have been omitted in the other Con∣ferences. Friend, HOw do you Nathautel? N. Butler, Very well blessed be God; only I must tell you, that even now here were with me some Popish Ladies, who asked me concerning my Faith, and what Religion I did intend to die in: I told them in the true Prote∣stant Religion of the Church of England, They answered, if I died not in the Roman Catholick Religion, I could not be saved, and prest it with several Arguments. Pray inform me therefore what is this Popish Religion. Fr. It is such a Religion, that dares not trust in Christ alone: without mingling their own merits, with the merits of Jesus Christ. Nath. That is saddest Religion in the world for me; I shall never be of that Religi∣on! (clapping his hand on his brest) for I am
the vilest wretch that lives: I have not a good thought to trust to: I must be saved only by the merits of Christ, if ever I be saved. The same Friend watching with him, the night before he dyed, wished him to think of the free mercy of God in Jesus Christ, that God should call him at the eleventh hour. He answered, I desire to be vile in mine own eyes, and admire free grace. About five of the clock that morning he was to suffer death, he was raised to a high pitch of joy, and cried out, Oh sirs, help me! Help me to glorifie God! shew me how to do it! I cannot do it enough! I cannot contain my self! yet suspecting himself, he asked those about him, Was it so with you? and with you, when God wrought on you? They replied, it was. Oh then said he it is right, blessed be God: Come let us sing the 100 Psalm, which he sung with much ala∣crity. About an hour after they knockt off his shackels; now said his Friend, Come Nat. now thy shackles are off, I will get thee out, and thou shalt run thy old course, and have money enough, and take thy fill of lust and pleasure again: He seriously replied, Really, Really, Real∣ly, (clapping his hand on his breast) if I
know my own heart, I would not for ten thousand worlds lose the opportunity of this morning. I am now going where I shall ne∣ver sin again. So leaving the dark Dungeon, wherein he was Prisoner, in order to his execution, he uttered these expressions to his friends about him; O this dark Dungeon! The best Room that ever I came in; and this contemptible Bed, the best that ever I lay in!
AN EXACT NARRATIVE Of the Life and Death of NATHANIEL BUTEER; With the several Conferences held with him by the Right Honorable the Lord Major, and several eminent Ministers; As also his Confessions, Speech, Prayer, &c. together with the Sermon preached the Even∣ing after his Execution. BEfore I enter upon the Narra∣tive, give me leave very briefly to premise, how Nathaniel Butler behaved himself be∣fore this Murther committed, viz. That he was a very lewd Young man, being addicted to divers sins, which he himself hath freely confessed. For instance, 1. He was a great Company-keeper, and given to Gaming very much; whereby he gain'd money, and several Watches of Young men, one whereof he restor'd to the Owner, after his Conscience was awaked, in prison
2. He enticed some Servants to purloin from their Masters, and sell the Goods; then would he and they go together and spend the money among themselves. 3. He lived in Fornication, frequenting the company and the houses of Harlots; in so much that (as he himself under his own hand informed me) he judged, this very sin of Whoredom did draw him on to that of shedding blood. Concerning which fact I shall now speak; as also concerning his car∣riage in Prison, and at his Execution, being an Eye and Ear-witness thereof. THis Nathaniel Butler came from Alton in Hampshire, where he was born; and at the time of his Apprehension, was an Ap∣prentice with one Mr. Goodday, a Drawer of Cloth in Carter-lane, London; during which time he became acquainted with one John Knight, an Apprentice also in the same City. These two were much together, but especially when Mr. Worth (John Knight's Master) was gone to Bristol-Fair; then did these two young men lie together several nights at Mr. Worth's house, at the Rose in Milk-street; where in the shop, on Wednesday morning
being the 6. of August 1657. Nathaniel Butler seeing some Bags of money, he was thereupon tempted to take away the life of his Friend and Bed-fellow, that he might securely convey away the Money which he had now seen in the Till of the shop. After they had been abroad that day, at night they lay again to∣gether, the bloody design running still in the mind of Butler; he intending about the dead of the night (for so he expressed himself to me) to destroy the Young man by cutting his throat: Accordingly he took his knife in his hand, but his heart would not suffer him to do it; then he laid down the knife again, yea he took up, and laid down hi sknife several times (so he told me) before he acted his cru∣elty: But in the morning very early he did indeed fall very violently and inhumanely on the Youth, who lay harmlesly asleep upon the bed. The first wound not being mortal, awaked him, whereupon he strugled and made a noise (not considerable enough) which was heard into another room of the same house. Then Butler chopt his fist into the mouth of the Young man, and so they two lay striving and tumbling very near half an houre, before the fatal blow was given; but at length he did most barbarously murder the Young man, giving him a very ghastly deadly
wound, cross the throat: And then he went down, taking away out of the shop a sum of money in two bags, being about One hundred and twenty pounds: And so with his double guilt of Robbery and Murder, leaving his bloody Shirt behind him, and a Lock of his own Hair in the hand of the dead Young man, which Hair was pull'd off in their striving to∣gether, one to commit, the other to prevent the fact; after he had so done, he went to his masters house in Corter-lane, where he pri∣vately laid the Money in a new Trunk that he bought with part of the Money. This Murderer abode for certain days, that is, from Thursday to Saturday, at his Masters house unsuspected, following his business at home as formerly. Many thoughts and jealousies were work∣ing in men, who should be the Murderer: And in a few days, one in Milk-street (the street where the Murder was done) knowing that Butler used sometimes to be with the Young man who was now murder'd, went to Butler's Master's house in Carter-lane, and spake with him, by whose words and carriage he supposed he might be guilty, and so caused him to be apprehended: But yet for some small time, the said Butler denied the Fact; but at length confessed, That he, and he only
did it. After his apprehension, he was brought before the Lord Major of London, to whom he declared the Murder, and the Circum∣stances of it, crying out for a little time for his soul, and much lamenting his sin. That night he was committed to Newgate, and there lay exceedingly startled about the state of his soul, saying often, What will become of my poor soul! What shall I do to be saved! beginning now to see the sinfulness of sin. Whom I may compare to Manasseh in three respects. 1. As to matter of fact; for Manasses shed much innocent blood, 2 King. 21.16. so did he shed (too much) innocent blood. 2. He something resembled Manasses in his imprisonment, mentioned 2 Chr. 33.11. As Manasses was taken and bound with fet∣ters, so was he clapt in the Hole or Dun∣geon of Newgate, with heavy irons about his legs. 3. Manasses and he were one and the same in this sense, that when they were in affliction, they besought the Lord God, and humbled themselves greatly before the God of their fathers: For this great Offender could often say, He could never be humbled enough. Upon the 13 of August, when he was ar∣raigned at the Sessions in the Old-Baily, he pleaded Guilty to the Indictment, with very
much shame, confusion of face, and sorrow of heart: And on Friday the 15. of August, he demeaned himself very humbly before the Bench, heartily submitting to the Sentence of Death that then passed upon him, saying, He had destroyed the Image of the Eternal GOD; alluding (as I verily believe) to those words in Gen. 9.6. — For in the image of God, &c. After his Sentence, he was conveyed back to prison; penitently acknowledging, that he had neglected the good Word of God, and therefore was the longer kept off (through ignorance of the Gospel) from closing with Christ Jesus. But after a few days discourse with several Ministers and others, who opened the Scriptures to him, he began to understand (through the grace of God) the Word of Grace. And though he had many good Books brought to him by divers visiting Friends, yet he chiefly looked into the holy Scriptures themselves, and found very much advantage, light and peace by these following passages out of the Old Testament, viz. 2 Sam. 12.9. Where Nathan spake sharply to David, for despising the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in the sight of the Lord, in killing Ʋriah the Hittite with the sword — Vers.13. David said to Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord; and Nathan said
to David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin. From hence he understood the readiness of God to forgive confessing, repenting sin∣ners, though they are guilty of innocent blood. Job 33.27, 28 He (the Lord) looketh up∣on men (Oh that men would look after the Lord!) and if ANY say, I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; he (that is, the Lord) will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light. Isa 45.18, 19.— I said not unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will ABƲN∣DANTLY pardon. The word abun∣dantly, he used to pronounce with an em∣phasis; for, he saw (his eyes being now an∣nointed with spiritual eye-salve) that he had multiplied sins exceedingly, and that he stood in absolute need of the Lords abundant, mul∣tiplied pardons: whereof he had good hope through this good word of Isaiah. Ezek 18.23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, saith the Lord God, and not that he should return from his wases and live?
30.— Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions; SO iniquity shall not be your ruine. 31. Cast away from you all your trans∣gressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel! 32. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth: wherefore turn your selves and live ye. Ezek. 33.11. Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord (here the poor Prisoner would note to his comfort that a repenting sinner hadnot onely the Word and Promise of God for forgiveness, but the Oath of God to give such a finner the greater assurance of pardon) I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his ways and live: Turn ye. turn ye (see the importunity of God with poor sinners for the good of their souls) from your evil ways. For why will ye die O house of Israel! Micah 7.18. was a place pleasant to his soul. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardon∣eth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the reranant of his heritage? He retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mer∣cy. Vers. 19. He will turn again (as one doth when his anger is gone) he will have
compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou wilt cast ALL their sins into the depth of the Sea. Now I shall give you a short List of some New Testament Texts, whereby the Lord conveyed Counsel and Consolati∣on to this doubting staggering poor Wretch. Matth. 18.11. — For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost. Joh. 3.14, 15, 16. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever be∣leeveth in him, should not perish but have eter∣nal life; For God SO loved the WORLD, that whosoever (this word [whosoever] he he spake with joy) beleeveth in him, should not perish but have everlasting life: Now (saith Nathaniel Butler) I am one to whom this word speaketh; and therefore God gave the Lord Jesus Christ for my soul; I beleeve in him, and therefore I trust to live eternally through him, according to the gracious terms of the Gospel. John 6.37. —and him that cometh to me I will in no wise (here he would repeat and reiterate these words in NO WISE CAST
OƲT, in NO WISE, in NO WISE) cast out: 1 Tim. 1.15. This a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. 1 Tim. 2.5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time. In hearing, reading, and conferring upon these (and many more) Scriptures, he would often say to me and others, these are good Scriptures, brave Scriptures, are they not brave Scriptures? He would make very di∣ligent and frequent search into his soul, con∣cerning the sincerity of his sorrow, and would not easily beleeve that his repentance was true, or that he had right to the precious promises of the Gospel. But by much speak∣ing to him by many good people, that he would applie Christ, and also by seeking un∣to God for a spirit of Faith for him, he did begin to act a faith of recumbency and ad∣herence, being (as he often said) perswaded that the Lord Jesus Christ was able to save to the uttermost, and willing to save such as come unto God by him; yet he could not come up to that full assurance of hope and
confidence, as he desired, and we also desired heartily on his behalf. So that sometimes he would break forth and say, How can I that have been gurlty of all sins whatsoever (al∣most) as Murder, Fornication, Theft, &c. chal∣lenge or apply a pardon? He was much afraid of running upon either of these two Rooks, that is, presumption or despair; I told him that diffidence and despair was the strongest presumption against God, saying to him, Is it not presumption for a man to dis: obey God, and not to beleeve him? Now the command of God in his glorious Gospel is, that men weary of, and heavy laden with sins should come to Christ, that they might find rest to their souls. The design of God (said I) in the Scriptures is not to give some feeble weak hope of pardon, but a lively hope, and a firm expectation of salvation, to all that mourn, and really repent. Which so wrought upon him that for the space of some daies before his suffering death, it pleased the God of all comfort to give him joy and con∣solation, and sometimes strong consolation, insomuch that he would at times express very great inward gladness, which all that knew his former mournings were glad to see, and glorified God for giving him the joy of his
salvation; for he was so satisfied concerning the favour and mercy of God towads him in Jesus Christ, that he rather now desired death then feared it: as seeing death through Jesus Christ without a sting. On the Lords Day towards evening the Lord Mayor (to whose Conference I refer you) went the third and last time to visit him (for the next day he was to die) and my Lords advice very much refreshed his spi∣rit, it being his Lordships design to speak of Heaven, with the glory and joy of that King∣dom, and to establish the Prisoners thoughts thereon. After his Lordship had left him, he seem∣ed to be very chearful in his spirit, blessing God, that he should put it into his Lordships heart to condescend so far as to pray, and confer with such a despicable poor wretch as he was, heartily thanking his Lordship for his abundant love. That night being his last night, I kept him company in Newgate, so did divers others; continuing with him in the Dungeon, or Hole (for so the Keepers call it) till towards midnight, conferring with him, and endea∣vouring to comfort him to the end; he de∣lighted all the time of his Imprisonment, in
Christian Company, and spiritual Discourses; but in his last night he was very much carri∣ed forth to spend himself about spiritual things: So that we judged it meet to leave him alone a while, lest being altogether with∣out rest and refreshment in his body, he might thereby be made unfit for the service of the next day, intending then to declare what the Lord had done for him, and to speak also by way of Counsel to those that came to see his execution. When we had withdrawn for two or three hours from him into the Lodge, (some of us observing in the mean time that he did slum∣ber, and as we supposed that he slept also) then we all returned to him, he lying cover∣ed upon the Bed in his cloaths; when we came again about him, he raised up himself, and fell afresh to his former good Dis∣course. Then I sat down by him, and did read the 14 verse of the 51 Psalm, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my salva∣tion; and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. I then divided the Verse into these two parts: 1. Davids prayer, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, &c. 2. Davids promise and engagement to
God upon the granting of his desire, And my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. Then I made these Observations from the words of David, Viz. 1. Obs. Not only a wicked unregenerate man, but a gracious godly man may (possibly) commit a most horrid murther. David was blood-guilty. 2. Obs. The sin of Murther is a very dan∣gerous sin where-ever it is found: Deliver; [now that word implyeth danger, Deliver me,] if David murther, he is in danger of damnation. 3. Obs. 3. Prayer is a work for a person guilty of blood; Deliver me; this David said by way of desire and supplication, yea most of this Psalm sets forth Davids prayer which was preferred upon the account of his blood∣shed. Prayer is the best way to obtain de∣liverance from blood-guiltiness. 4. Obs. From those words, (O God, thou God of my salvation) that, There is salvation in God for men that have shed blood, if those men become penitent and beg that sal∣vation. This Note did refresh Nathaniel very much. 5. Obs. From the Promise. And my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness, that men who know what it is to have the guilt of sin
(guilt of blood or any other sin) taken away, will certainly sing aloud of Gods righteous∣ness, faithfulness, truth. And indeed this poor man did magnifie God and sing aloud of his righteousness, making mention of his, and his only; he de∣sired us to sing Psalms several times with him, and to rejoyce with him, which also we did. About five a clock he fell into such a rap∣ture and extasie of consolation as I never saw, nor (I beleeve) any of my fellow-Spe∣ctators; for he would shout for joy that the Lord should look on such a poor vile crea∣ture as he was: He often cried out, and made a noise, and indeed did not know how to ex∣press, and signifie fully enough his inward sense of Gods favour, saying, Must he be an heir, an heir of God, and a joynt-heir with Je∣sus Christ, a fellow Citizen with the Saints, &c. He could not bear such a glorious dis∣covery. Now that his joy was right Evan∣gelical joy, appeareth thus, in that mourning and bitterness went before it; yea, he rejoy∣ced with trembling, and could exceedingly often say that he would yet have a deeper, and a more thorow sense of sin; he could never be sufficiently abased before the Lord.
Now the time was at hand that he should be carried forth to Execution, but he thought it was not neer enough; for he asked several times, What a clock is it? I demanded why he enquired so concerning the time of the day? Would you gladly die? said I. Yes, yes, saith he, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ which is best of all. About seven the Coach came to carry him away; the Kee∣per knockt off his Irons, and now he was a freeman indeed; for the hand of Grace had before this time taken away the Fetters and Bolts about his Spirit and Conscience. I went with him in the Coach, and by the way his great desire was as he passed through the Streets to fix his heart more fully on God, and to think with more intention and firm∣ness of minde upon the riches, the unsearch∣able riches of Grace. In a short time ha∣ving passed through many thousands of peo∣ple, many of whom prayer for his soul, and shewed compassion otherwise to him; he came under the Gibbet which stood in Cheapside just over against the end of Milk-street, where he had done the murder, he went up the Ladder, the Executioner standing above him, and I below upon the Ladder: When he was tied to the Gibbet, he began to speak to the people, having a Speech writ∣ten,
which he purposed to have read through; A true Copie whereof followeth verbatim. Beloved Friends, I Am here a miserable Creature, and had not God of his infinite Grace and Mercy looked upon me, as sad a spectacle of misery as ever your eyes be∣held, by reason of my wicked and sin∣ful life. And now by the justly hand of God I am come here to die justly for my sins: And it is my desire that all that see me, or that hear of me, might learn this most true Lesson from me, that have not learned it from the Word of God in the Scriptures, That the wages of sin is death. I have been a very great sinner, and as I think, the greatest of sinners: And my desires are that my repentance may be greater then my sins; Which I am affraid is impos∣sible to be without the infinite mercy of God, who hath graciously promised to
accept the will for the deed. The par∣ticulars of my sinful life, I have, for all those who shall be pleased to look into it, gathered together, and given to my Lord Mayors Chaplain, and intreated him to have it printed for a timely warn∣ing to all other young-men, especially to the Apprentices of this City, that by my harms, they may through the Grace of God learn to beware. Good people, That which I shall speak unto you is but little, because my strength is now but weak: Indeed I wish I had more strength, that my words might reach not onely unto the ears, but unto the hearts of every rebellious and disobedient Child and Servant in this great City, yea, throughout the whole Nation: And my counsel is, that every one would take heed of the beginnings of sin. I remember when I first was enticed unto evil ways and practices, I was tender and fearful of them, and trembled to think what those waies might bring upon me; but I neither
hearkened to the Word of God, nor the voice of mine own Conscience, which exceedingly checked me, but resolved to go on therein, and through the Devils enticements joyning with my wicked heart, by degrees I grew more bold and hardy in evil waies, every day more then other, and at last came to be so far har∣dened in sin and wickedness, that evil waies and actions were as familiar unto me as eating and drinking was. Truly Sirs, This is very true, and this I speak by sad experience, to warn every one that they would hearken either to Gods Word, or unto their own Con∣sciences, when they are first checked for their sins: Therefore good people, as you love your own Souls, take heed of the beginnings of sin, and kill sin be∣times before it grow too strong for you. If I had done so, I verily beleeve, and think that sin had not at this time thus killed me, as now it will certainly do. But seeing it is so, that I am here brought a poor distressed Captive unto my death
by the Tyranny and cruelty of sin; it is my desire that I may through the graci∣ous assistance of God be enabled to do a greater mischief unto sin by my death, then sin hath done unto me in bringing me to this death, which will I hope but kill my body onely, although it be a bitter, cursed and a shameful death: Oh hearken to what I have said un∣to you, and let me for that purpose humbly beg of all that either hear me or shall hear of me; and oh that I could prevail with every young person, to cast away sin betimes, to check it in the first beginning. I do seriously think there is no such course to destroy the growing of it in the hearts of men and women as that would be. Sirs, I am now a dying man, and truly if I knew of any better way to ruine sin then other in mine own observation. I would surely now tell you. For I bless God I can say it truly, that I am a real enemie to sin, because sin I find is such a great enemy to God, to all Mankind,
and particularly, I have found it my greatest enemy that ever I had. Oh that I had taken this counsel, which now through the great goodness and grace of God I have given to you; certainly it would have prevented the growth of sin in this poor, sad, and now sorrowful soul of mine: Certainly, I had not now been here as I am, to suffer this cursed and shameful death which I am justly to suf∣fer both from God and Man for my most foul, horrid, and bloody sin. The taking away the life of him who was unto me as dear as my Brother; which sin, I hope God for his Son Jesus Christ his sake, hath in mercie to my poor Soul forgiven. This sin this bloody sin, I hope the onely wise, merciful, gracious and good God hath sanctified for the everlasting good of my poor Soul. He who is able to bring light out of dark∣ness, and good from the greatest evill, can by his infinite goodness bring from this sin of mine, which is the destructi∣on of my Body, the eternal salvation of
my Soul. This is a Mercy never to be forgotten by my friends; that although I have been so unhappie as to stain their Names and Reputations here, yet I hope through the grace, mercy, and goodness of God I may be their joy and rejoycing hereafter. Oh this sin that the Devil was suffered to tempt me to commit, my wicked heart consenting thereunto! I have observed since my imprisonment, this blood-guilty sin, was as a punish∣ment of my other sins which I went on in without considering whither I was going. Had I truly and timely repented of my former sins, I verily beleeve and am fully perswaded I had prevented this; this foul, this horrid sin, for which I can never be too much affected nor af∣flicted. Yet nevertheless, this sin I hope through the grace of God hath been a rousing, and an awakening sin to me; it hath caused me to call to remembrance all my former sins, and to be humbled for them, and I hope through the gra∣cious assistance of God I have truly re∣pented
of them all. I thank God for his mercy, I can truly say, that I am now another manner of Creature then formerly I was: Formerly God came not into my thought with any joy and con∣tent; but now to think of God is exceed∣ing precious to my soul: To think of the name of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ is the chief joy and rejoycing of my soul. This is some change, and I think a great change, and I hope a good change; for∣merly I sinned with great delight, and now through the grace of God I delight not in any sin; nay, I can truly say more, I do now through Gods grace hate and loath sin; and this I know to be true; for I do even hate my most beloved sin, The sin of Uncleanness, which I do ad∣vise all Young-men to watch and pray against; and for the more effectual pre∣vention thereof to live very temperate∣ly and soberly, making no provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof. This sin, I bless God for his grace, I can now truly say I hate it, I hope if I were
to live as many years in the world as I may do moments, I should through the grace of God never commit more: And the sin of Lying which formerly I made no conscience of, I think I can truly say now through the grace of God thar I truly hate it as a wicked sin, and Lying now is so base an evil in my sight that I could not be hired to tell a lye, no not I hope if I had the promise of my life givenme, which in my condition is the greatest gift which man can bestow upon me; yet I hope, even for my life, to save it from this terrible death, I should not be tempted to sin against so good a God, who hath given me the hopes of an eternal life, and delivered me from a thousand times a more terrible death; nor against my blessed Redeemer, who died to take away my sins and who hath thus graciously looked upon me, so vile, so wicked, and so miserable a sinner as I have been; and hath shewed mercy upon me, not for any worth that is in me, who am the unworthiest of all men, but
for his own names sake, because mercy pleaseth him: To whom therefore be glory for ever, Amen. I have now declared unto you the grounds I have of my hope, that I have made my peace with God through Jesus Christ, and have obtained through his grace and mercy my perfect reconciliati∣on to God, and my blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ. I shall in the next place in deep humility, as being very sensible that I have wronged very many, and therefore I do here humbly beg my par∣don from all the World, for all the wrong and injury that I have in any kind done unto any one: And indeed I should be glad, if I could, to make resti∣tution to every one: but that I am not able to do; and therefore I must content my self with begging their pardon and forgiveness, which I do here desire from every one, man, woman and child, even for Jesus Christ his sake, whom it is that they themse ves must all fle unto for his pardon, or else be miserable for
ever; and as they desire the Lord Jesus should forgive them all their wrongs done against him, so I hope they will for his sake forgive me all mine com∣mitted against them. And as I have de∣sired my pardon and forgiveness from all the world for the wrongs and injuries which I have done; so I do here desire to declare, and that freely and with all my soul, that I do truly forgive all the World for all the wrongs that I have suf∣fered from every one therein, even those evil Companions of mine which have in any kind been the Devils instruments in tempting me, and thereby have brought me unto that evil which here I am now to undergo, even the losing of my life: Confessing it was more mine own evil and sin in consenting to do those wicked actions which have occasioned me now to be here to suffer, then theirs; and I am more to blame my self in being here, then any other whatsoever. I am fully satisfied, that through Gods assistance I might have resisted the temptation, and
avoided that evil I have done; so that that the true cause of this my present misery is wholly mine own; though I intend not hereby to excuse the Devil nor any of his Instruments. I therefore here once more advise all young men and women to take heed of the begin∣ings of evil, and to take heed that they never forsake God, nor his ways and counsels; for I have found that there first began my ruine, neglecting Gods Word, and not regarding his counsels given me there, he left me to mine own ways and unto mine own counsels, to fol∣low them, as a just punishment for my great wickedness in leaving God, and the directions which he had given me for my good. And as I desire to forgive every one, so it is my heary prayer, that God for Christs sake will forgive them for all that is evil in any of them. And let me say this to magnifie the infinite goodness of God, who oft-times makes a poor Creatures extremity to be his own opportunity: I might now have been
going from this place to Hell, had not the mercy of God prevented me, which I hope he hath done for his own names sake, and for his dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, who is my blessed Redeemer, who hath purchased life and salvation for all humble, penitent, and believing sin∣ners, of whom I hope I am one, who de∣fire to manifest the truth of my Faith by all the means which God hath enabled me; and where I am not able to do what I would, Phope God in mercy will ac∣cept the will for the deed. I have now almost done: As I have been a wondrous greast sinner, and God hath shewed forth wondrous mercy to save me; so it hath pleased God to shew forth wonderful kindness to me, in stir∣ing and moving my Lord Major to move the Bench to give me so large a time of Repentance; and not only so, but his Lordship hath used great means not only in sending me the assistance of good Mi∣nisters, but he also came twice himself to visit me, and prayed with me; which
kindness of his I pray God to reward a hundred sold into his bosom. And here I desire to bless God as for the time and means for repentance, so for the grace and heart to repent which all were effects of the wonderful love of God towards me so vile and wicked a sinner as I have been. I have great reason also in all humili y to thank the good people of this City for their many prayers to God for me, and for their kind visits of me: I hope they will believe that God hath heard their prayers on my behalf, and wil visit them, even every one of them that in love to my poor soul have visited me in this my great necessity. And it is my desire and hope, that the good people of this City may by this experiment be so encoura∣ged, as never to cease seeking of God for his grace for any sinner whatsoever, who of his infinite grace and mercy hath had respect unto so wicked, so vile and sin∣ful a Creature as I was, out of whom I hope I may truly say, he hath cast forth
legions of sins, and left in me none be∣hind to hinder my access unto God by Jesus Christ. I have now done: What shall I say more? Lord teach me what to say, that I may glorifie thee, who hast thus glori∣fied the riches of thy mercy upon me, a poor vile Creature; as a close of what I have to say, and so therewith to close up my life, my wicked and sinful life, and withall go into a life where I shall sin no more, offend God no more, but be in an estate of blessing and praising God for ever and ever. And therefore unto that God of all grace, who is able to keep that which I shall commit unto his trust, and to preserve me both sould and body; into thy hands, O merciful Father and blessed Redeemer, I commit my soul; humbly beseeching thee to remember that good word whereupon I desire to rest and wholly cast my self, even the sure word of thy faithfulness, O blessed Savi∣our! from whose sweet lips dtopped this sweet saying, That whosoever cometh
unto him, he will in no wise cast out. This blessed saying hath been, and at present is the joy and comfort of my soul. And for this body of mine, which hath been a body of sin, it is now through grace become the Temple of the Holy Ghost. And as the blessed Apostle Paul believed, and therefore he spake; so I believe, and therefore speak; That he that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise me up also by Jesus, and present me unto God without blame. I have done. Good people, all you that have had the patience to bear me thus long, let me humbly beg your prayers with me, and for me, That he which hath begun a good work in me, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ. Nathaniel Butler
After he had read some part of this Speech, the people pressing and making a noise, I told Mr. Sheriff Milner, that I humbly conceived it best for the Malefactor to forbear reading any further, the people not being able to hear because of the noise, and that he should rather speak briefly from his own breast with∣out book; whereunto Mr. Sheriff consented, and the Prisoner put up his written Speech, and spake then with a very loud voice, and with abundance of tears, to this effect: That he would humbly desire the Magistrates of London to look after the suppression of Popish Priests and Jesuites; for some of the Popish party had been with him in prison, perswading him (but in vain) to die in the Roman Catholique Religion. Then he addressed himself to Masters and Servants, advising and pres∣sing them strongly to be both very watchful and careful in their several ca∣pacities; Masters to look well after their Servants, and Servants to serve their Masters in singleness of heart; admonish∣ing and exhorting all men to fear the
Lord, saying, If you love your souls, leave off evil ways, and be warned by mine ex∣ample: But if ye will keep your sins, and hope for pardon, God will keep his pardon, and you shall keep your sins. Having finished his Speech, he then called on the Lord by Prayer, intreating the people to join with him: He prayed with an ele∣vated voice, and with many tears, this Prayer following. O Merciful GOD! which according to the multitude of thy mercies doest so put away the sins of those which truly repent, that thou remembrest them no mnore: Open thine Eye of Mercy upon me wretched Sinner that I am! who most earnestly desire pardon and forgiveness of all my former sins, and particularly for my late horrid Blood guiltiness. Lord, if it be not too late (and I trust no time is too late for thee to shew mercy) wash away this blood of my Brother, which sticks so close to my soul, in the blood of
my Saviour (O let me call him so!) which was shed for my sins, and the sins of the whole world. Let not the voice of my murdered Bro∣thers blood cry louder for vengeance, then the blood of our crucified Jesus be heard to cry for pardon. Give me, Lord, a truly penitent heart; and then accept of that penitent heart of mine, which is thine own gift. Given me, plenty of brinish tears; but first steep and wash those tears of mine in the wounds of thy Son. Make me here to abhor, and loath, and judge, and condemn my self; that in thy great day hereafter, The great day of the Lord, I may not be condemned eternally both body and soul. Renew in me, most loving Father, whatsoever hath been decayed by the fraud and malice of the Devil, or by mine own bloody carnal will and frailness. Cause me to set all my sins before my face, and then do thou cast them behind thy back.
Cause me to spread all my sins before thee my God, as Hezekiah did the the blas∣phemous Papers of Rabshekah; and then do thou blow them away with the blast of thy holy Spirit. And forasmuch as I do humbly and earnestly desire to put my trust only in thy mercy, Impute not unto me my former or latter sins; the sins of my body, and the sins of my soul; sins of omission, or sins of commission; sins which I have done to please my self, or others; sins against the First, or against the Second Table; a∣gainst thee my God, against my Neighbor, or against mine own Sonb. Let this first death of mine, which I am now ready to pay in satisfaction to Man's Law, be acceptable in thy sight, O God; and so do thou deliver me from the second death. Deliver me from my Blood guiltiness O God, and take me yet into thy favour, through the merits and blood shedding of thy most dearly beloved Son, Jesus Christ. Amen! Amen!
Wretched man that I am, who shall de∣liver me from my blood guiltiness! who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death! Lord have mercy upon me a sinner! Christ have mercy upon me a sinner! Lord have mercy upon me a sinner; A Merciless, a Profane, a Thieving, a Bloody sinner! Lord, though I had no mercy upon my Brother, yet do Thou have mercy upon me: For, Lord, I have so much the more need of mercy for my soul, by how much I had so little mercy upon his life. Lord, I confess with horror of soul, that I killed him suddenly, giving him no time to prepare for death: Yet, Lord, I must confess to thy great glory and goodness, that Thou hast given me time and respite to repent before I die.
He then desir'd me, as I stood upon the Ladder, to pray for him; which I also did, he joining therein very solemnly. I then having done prayer, asked him how he did? He told me, he doubted not of doing well; he laid all behind him, and would go to Christ alone for life and salvation; saying, Now I am lanching into the Ocean of Eternity! Then he delivered to me the written Speech, desiring the Executioner to forbear Turning him off, till he lifted up his hands and said, Lord Jesus receive my soul! I then took him by the hands, and took my leave of him. After he had stood still a little while in a way of Ejaculations, with his Cap over his eyes; he lifted up his hands, and said the words aforesaid: Then the Executioner did his office, and he was a dead man in a few mo∣ments: And in a few moments more, who knows which of us will not be dead men also? Oh consider therefore, all you that yet are alive, the following Admonition.
An Admonition to all persons whatsoever, especially to Parents, and Children; Masters, and Ser∣vants, &c. TO Parents and Masters of Families; hear what the Lord faith to you, Ephes. 6.4. , it is a putting of a thing into the mind, an urging and pressing of it, an informing and instructing the mind. Leigh. crit sac Now this Text tells you of two very great faults, viz. First, In case admonishing of Children and Servants be totally omitted; where's then your obedience to God, who leaves their Education to your care? Nay, instead of giving good advice and examples to Youth, you many times (I mean many Heads of Fa∣milies) rather ruine them, by living without Knowledge and without Conscience your selves. Oh consider this, and acquaint your selves with God and with Jesus Christ, that you may be able to acquaint all committed to your nurture with the fame God and with the same Lord Jesus Christ, the knowing of whom is the excellencie of knowledge.
Secondly, A word to men of care (but of very little care) in this thing: I grant you use prayer, and you read Sermon-notes some∣times, and the Scriptures themselves among your people at home; but how often? and how earnestly is that exercise? Alas, once it may be on the Lords day, and then no great regard had how they profit, or whether they profit or no, so that something be done, though nothing come by it by way of benefit to their Souls. 'Tis a wonderful weakness in many great Professors of Religion, who will pray and beg of God strongly upon their knees for Light, Knowledge, Grace and Ho∣liness to be given to their dear Children, and to their Servants; and yet these very persons will contribute little or nothing besides good wishes towards the conversion and welfare of souls, that (by their importunate suppli∣cations) seem to be precious in their eye. If praying be all you have to do for your Fa∣mily, what mean then those many Scriptures that command the doing of many other du∣ties besides praying with, and praying for your people? and if prayer onely be not e∣nough, why do you onely pray? Indeed 'tis well done, to wish well to them that dwell with you (though it be part) it is the least part of your duty; doth not the Lord look
for much more from you? doth he not charge Fathers, and Mothers, and Masters to instruct, rebuke, correct their Children and Servants, and to call them to account concerning their profiting in Gospel knowledge? I am confi∣dent the carelesness of you in these things is that which renders Preaching so unprofit∣able. What will it profit you, or yours, to hear Sermons, and after that never to hear more of them? Take heed of ignorance and idleness; ignorance, in not knowing what ye ought to do; and idleness in refusing to take pains with your people. Mal. 3.16. Formerly, They that feared the Lord spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of re∣membrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought on his name. But now how seldom do we see Fa∣milies conferring among themselves, Hus∣band and Wife speaking of God and of Christ, that Children may learn. Where is a Master and Mistris, or Master and Dame that now adaies drop one gracious word in the hearing of their Servants the whole week or moneth, nay (it may be) the whole year throughout? is it any wonder then for young ones and inferiors to fall into evil ways, when you that are elder, and their
Tutors and Governors, walk so loosely and unchristianly before them? Will you now search the Scriptures, and know your work, and do it entirely? will you be faithful and true to all those Souls the Lord hath entrusted you with? and take heed least their present miscarriages, and their after-condemnation be (and it will be, unless you do all that be∣longs to your part) charged upon your ac∣count. Nathaniel Butler hath given me un∣der his hand, that if he had continued with one Master to whom he was turned over, he beleeved he never had come to such a pass as he did. The day is coming, when it will come to pass that God shall set your sins and de∣faults in order before your faces. And dare you then accuse God, or can you excuse your selves, when in truth it shall be laid to your charge, that such a Son, such a Daughter, such a Man-servant, or Maid-servant had ne∣ver done so wickedly in one kind or other, they never had faller into the waies of the Devil, nor fallen under the wrath of God, if we who had the nurturing, over-sight, and admonishing of them, had done our duty. O remember the counsel of Christ in these two, Scriptures; That of Paul to the Ephe∣sians, 5.4. and latter end lately touched upon,
Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: That is, teach them to know, and love, to serve and fear the Lord; give them such nurture and instruction, such spiri∣tual matter for their minds to work upon, as the Lord prescribeth by the Scriptures. The other Text of very great use and service to Masters, is in Col. 4.1. Masters, give to your Servants that which is just and equal, know∣ing that also ye have a Master in Heaven. 'Tis not onely just and equal to give food and raiment, or knowledge or understanding in a Trade, to your Servants; but 'tis just and equal for you to give good counsel to your Servants to serve God; and till this be, you are unjust men, and unequal in your waies, unconscionable as to the souls of your Ser∣vants. 'Tis a very honourable character that the most High himself gives to Abraham, Gen. 18.19 For I know him, that he will command his Children and his Houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord— Abra∣ham did not command his Children and Ser∣vants to honour him, and serve him onely, (for so most men are apt enough to lay their commands upon children and housholds) but his command required his Relations to walk in the way of God. If men would fol∣low
Abraham herein, what orderly, holy and reformed Families would then be found in the Land? I hope that these Scripture-passa∣ges, and passages of providence also (one whereof, and indeed a very sad one, you have seen in the fore-going Narrative) will touch your hearts, and engage you to look after this, that you and your Children, you and your Servants be henceforth found in the way of the Lord. Many Masters are very like the Egyptian Task-masters in two respects, which are both remarkable, viz. 1. The Egyptians made the children of Isra∣el to serve with rigor, and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage in Morter and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the field; all their service wherewith they made themserve was with rigor, Exod. 1.13, 14. O the rigor and bitterness that some servants abide during the time of their serving some men! how many merciless, harsh, cruel Parents and Masters are more like Egyptians then Israelites, more like Turks then Christians by their cruelty, provoking (directly against the Gospel-Sta∣tute) Sons, Daughters, and Servants to do that which without unreasonable provocati∣on they would never have done. 2. Too many Heads and Rulers of houses
seem Egyptians rather then Christians, not only in exacting service from their inferi∣ours with all storminess and bitterness of spi∣rit, but likewise in this sense (more wicked then the former) that they will not (so far are these men from pressing their servants to serve God) suffer them to go and serve the Lord; do not some upbraid and revile, threat∣en and discourage Servants, and Sons and Daughters, if they look after goodness and exactness of life? Exod. 7.16. And thou shalt say, The Lord God of the Hebrews bath sent me unto thee saying, Let my people go that they may serve me in the wilderness; and behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear. I beg of you these two things. 1. That you would be content when your children and servants do perform to you reasonable service. And 2ly that you would exhort and beseech them by the mer∣cies of God to present their bodies a living sa∣crifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is to God∣ward their reasonable service. But least I should not prevail with you, I shall therefore direct my counsel and admonition to children and servants themselves that in case your O∣verseers see not their duty, or do it not; yet your selves may make conscience to carry it so towards God and all men that ye adorn thereby the Doctrine of God our Saviour.
Young people, hear what Christ command∣eth, Eph. 6.1. Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right; this is well-pleasing un∣to the Lord. Gol. 3.20. The Lord is angry at, and displeased with disobedient Sons and Daughters. Eph. 6.5.6, 7, 8. Servants (saith Paul a servant of Christ) be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, (for as to soul and conscience Christ only is Lord and Master and in this sense we are for∣bidden to call any man Master, Matth. 23 8.) with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ: Not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men, Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doth (though never so mean a servant) the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Obj. But some servant may say, My Master is a very harsh froward man, or else I could willingly serve him in singleness of heart. Aus. Thou art bound by the Gospel to obey and be in subjection to such a man, if he be thy Master, 1 Pet. 218, 19. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, (of neglecting their lawful commands) not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. For this is
thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even here∣unto ye were called; because Christ also suffer∣ed for us, leaving us an example that you should follow his steps; Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatned not, but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously. I confesse it were well for Masters (for wo to them that are naught and froward, making their servants to suffer words, and buffetings and other abuses wrong∣fully) and well for Servants if they could serve men gentle and good; but however, they serve a God and Saviour that's good, and that will reward all that suffer lesse or more for his sake: As my advice to you is that you would honour and obey, and be faithful in all things to your Masters, so I beseech you shun all sins, and all appearance of evill, but especially flee from idle companions. Prov. 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. Rio∣tous deboist, drunken, swearing, cursing, whoring wretches are fools in the sense of
Scripture; and seeing it is self-destructive to be a companion with such persons, wilt thou walk any more with such? drinking to drunkenness, Dicing and Carding are things of evill report, and very evill things; they lead likewise to other evils. Nathaniel But∣ler was a great Company keeper, and a great Gamester, and what did he grow to at the last? 2. Flee (2 Tim. 2.22.) youthfull lusts. Flee fornication, 1 Cor. 6.18. But before a man will flee from any thing, he must see that thing to be dangerous; Now that Fornica∣tion, Uncleanness and Whoredom is dange∣rous, I demonstrate thus, (whereby it will ap∣pear every way destructive) that it 1. Endan∣gereth Reputation, 'tis a dishonour to the name and person of a Man or Woman, Deut. 23.17. There shall be no whore of the daughter of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the sons of Israel: Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow; for even both these are abo∣mination unto the Lord thy God. Rom. 1.24. Wherefore God gave them up unto uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to disho∣nour their own bodies among themselves. Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed underfiled (implying the defiled is shameful) but whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge. 2. Endangereth substance, Pro. 29.3. Who so loveth wisdom rejoyceth his father, but he that keepeth company with harlots, spendeth his substance. How many have spent fair Estates by following this filthy sin! Many spend their own substance, and that also which is not their own (but their Masters or Parents) upon impudent wicked whorish women; it is a disgracing and an impo∣verishing sin; who sees not this by experience oftentimes? 3. Following Harlots will lead thee to Hell, will provoke God to take ven∣geance on thee, Jer. 5, 7, 8, 9. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy chidren have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods; when I had fed them to the full then they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in Harlots houses (the vengeance of God will rout and miserably destroy such troops, when he sets himself in array against them) they were as fed horses in the morning, every one neighed after his neighbours wife: Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord, and shall not my soul (wo then to their souls) be aven∣ged on such a Nation as this? Prov. 7.25, 26, 27. Let not thine heart decline to her ways. go not astray in her path, for she hath cast down many wounded (wounded in their credit, wounded in their Estates, and wounded in
their Consciences) yea many strong men have been slain by her. This is a bloody, wound∣ing, slaying sin. Vers. 27. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death. To live in chambering and wantonness is the way to lie down in the chambers of death. Remember the two young men named in the Narrative, who were lately bedfellows above ground, and now are become chamber-fellows bellow; for the fear of the Lord prolongeth dayes, but the years of the wicked shall be shortned; break off then speedily from all sin, as you hope for long-lasting life here, and for everlasting life hereafter. Obj. We can repent, and mourn, and pray hereafter: For did not Nathaniel Butler live a long time wickedly, and repented in a short time at the last? Answ. Do not think that you can repent when you please; if you put off Repentance, you put it to a peradventure, 2 Tim 2.25. In meekness instructing those that oppse them∣selves, if God peradventure will give them re∣pentance to the acknowledging of the truth. Do as David did Psal. 119.20. who made haste and delayed not to keep the Commandments of God Delays in matters relating to life are most dangerous. I hope no man nor woman will presume that the Lord is any way obli∣ged
to wait upon them so long as they please; indeed it pleaseth him to wait to be gra∣cious, but who knows how neer to a pe∣riod the time of Gods attendance on sinners is? Acts 17.30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commandeth alt men e∣very where to repent. 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count slackness) but is long suffering to us ward not willing that any should perish, but that all (as Acts 17.30. men every where) should come to repentance. The Gospel of God, and the goodness of God are gone forth for this very end, to lead men to repentance; but if sinners refuse to repent, then after their hardness, and impenitent heart (under the Gospel, goodness, and long-suffering of God) they treasure to them∣selves wrath against the day of wrath, Rom. 2.5. 1. God hath a day of grace for every poor sinner; 2. He hath a day of wrath for men finally impenitent. Think on it; is it not a thing proper and likely to provoke God a∣gainst you to swear in his wrath, you shall never enter into his rest, seeing men despise his good∣ness and do receive his grace in vain?
Nathaniel Batler being Executed in Cheapside over against Milk-street End, about eight or nine in the morn∣ing, (a Multitude of People being Spectators) he was afterwards cut down, and his Corps put into that Coach which brought him to Execu∣tion; and from thence conveyed to Gregories Churchyard London; where about Noon he was burled. That Evening at S. Gregordes Church, a Sermon was preached by Mr Ran∣dolph Yearwood the Lord Majors Chaplain; (there being a great conflu∣ence of People,) The Substance wher∣of, take as followeth:
I JOH. 3.15. Whosoever hateth his Brother is a Murderer, and ye know that no Murderer hath eternal Life a∣biding in him. THE Apostles intent in this Epistle was (and indeed my design in this Sermon is) to promote true love in mens hearts towards one another: His Arguments are many, which he pro∣poundeth as so many provocations to love. Consider these seven. 1 Arg. 1 John 5.9, 10, 11. He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness, even until now. He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hateth his brother, is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whether he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes (as though he should say) Love surpasseth hatred, as far as light excelleth darkness. Arg. 2. Men are not of God, but they
are the children of the Devil, unless they love as brethren. This is plain and manifest, 1 John 3.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: who∣soever doth not righteousness, is not of God, nei∣ther he that loveth not his brother, 1 Joh. 4.7. Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God: and every one that loveth, is born of God— Arg. 3. He that Ioveth not, knoweth not God, for God is love, 1 Joh. 4.8. Arg. 4. A man otherwise cannot clear up his love to God, 1 Joh. 4.20. If a man say, I love God and hateth his Brother, he is a Lyar. For he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? Arg. 5. 1 John. 4.10.11. Herein is love, not that we loved God: but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Arg. 6. If you love the Brethren, ye have passed from death to life, 1 Joh. 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, be∣cause we love the brethren. Arg. 7. The last Argument is drawn from the dreadful estate of a man that loves not his brother, 1 Joh. 3.14. He abideth in death, he
is a murderer, he hath not eternal life abiding in him. And now I am returned to the words which I intend to handle. Whosoever hateth his Brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer hath eter∣nal life abiding in him. Here we have two things very remark∣able. 1. A description of a Gospel-murderer (for in the sense of our Law, meer hatred doth not make a murderer) Whosoever hateth his Brother is (what is he?) a Murderer. 2 A declaration of the damnable state of such a murderer. And ye know ('tis a known case) that no murderer hath eternal life abide∣ing in him. Let us consider the first of these two truths, in the words of the Apostle, viz. Obser. 1. Whosoever hateth his Brother is Murderer. It is requisite to say something by way of Explication to this truth, and then by way of Application. Whosoever] (, every one) every ma∣licious man without exception, whether he be reputed good or bad, holy or unholy, if
he hateth his brother he is a murderer; if he be rich or poor, high or low, Magistrate or Minister, whosoever he be, if he hate, he is here included in the indictment of murder. [Whosoever] is a term of universality. Hateth] By hating two things are hinted in Scripture. 1. A comparative respect. This first is plain in Gen. 29: 30. And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more then Leah — 31. And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, — that is, was loved less then Rachel. Luk. 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and his own life also, cannot be my Disciple. Now 'tis not lawful properly and indeed to hate a mans self or his Relations, though he might gain heaven thereby. Observe, Luke the Evangelist saith, cap. 14.26. If a man hate not — brethren — he cannot be Christs Disciple; and John the Apostle af∣firms, Whosoever hateth his brother is a mur∣derer — So that we must take the term [hate] in some places to signifie a less de∣gree of love: so in Luke. He that loveth not Christ more then himself, more then his Wife or Children, more then Brethren or
sisters cannot be my Disciple; as suppose a man must either forsake Jesus Christ, or else his na∣tural and near relation; this for saking of them, and cleaving to Christ, the Scripture expres∣seth by hating of them; not that men hate, or may lawfully hate their Friends, but they love them less then they love the Lord Christ, So Matth. 10.37. He that loveth Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me; and he that loveth Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. 2. Hating is taken for a very strong disre∣spect, and a mighty implacable disaffection in the heart of one man towards another mans person; insomuch that a man cannot find in his heart to say well of, or do good unto another; but he can find in his heart to speak all manner of evil, and act all manner of mischief, hurt and wickedness against another. This is our Apostles sense; He that hateth his brother, i.e. he that sheweth no pitty or com∣passion to, but prejudice, cruelty, and indig∣nation against his brother, is a Murderer. This is utter hatred, according to that in Judg. 15.2.—I verily thought thou hadst utterly hated her.— [Brother] 1. Natural brother, Mat. 4.18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother.
2. Kinsman and Country-man, Rom. 9.3, 4. —For my brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites. 3. A Christian, one obedient to Christ, Mat. 12.48 49.50. —Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand towards his Disciples, and said. Behold my mother, and my brethaen: for whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother. Heb. 3.1. Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of the holy calling— 4. Any humane creature, man, woman or child, Mat. 7.3, 4. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye (meaning in the eye of any other person) but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye Or how wilt thou say to thy brother (to any man) Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye? and behold a beam is in thine own eye! Acts 17.26. And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth. [Is a Murderer] That is, in his desire and design, and in God's sense and esteem, who searcheth the heart. As a man that doth not commit the act of Adultery, is an Adulterer nevertheless if his heart lust after a woman, Mat. 5.28. So if a man never lay violent hands upon another, yet if his heart dis∣affect and hate him, he is a Murderer.
[And ye know that no Murderer (whether he be a Murderer in the sense of this Scripture, or any other) hath eternal life abiding in him.] that is, hath the promise of eternal life, or the evidence of it abiding in him. Do not con∣ceive from this clause, that a man who was at any time guilty of blood by murthering another, or hating another, cannot be saved, or enter into life; for Manasseh, David, and others were blood-guilty, but upon repen∣tance were pardoned. I doubt not of Na∣thaniel Butlers life eternal (though he did destroy and take away the life of his Brother) because God gave him repentance and humili∣ation. The meaning is this; No Murderer hath eternal life abiding in him, if this man abide in his malice, hatred, and under his murder im∣penitent and stupid. Is he (whosoever he be) that hateth an∣other, a Murderer? Then, Ʋse 1. Examine your selves. Is Hatred so hainous a sin? How may we know then whether we are not haters of any man? Now Hatred is manifested thus: 1. By refusing to rebuke thy brother or neighbor for his sin. Lev. 19.17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart; thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy brother, and not suffer sin upon him. Prov. 13.24. He that spareth the rod, hateth his son.
2. By keeping (without cause) at a distance from men, Gen. 26.27. And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me and have sent me away from you? If ye cry, Away with him, away with him, to banish∣ment, imprisonment! Away with such an one out of my sight! I cannot endure this or that person in my sight! Thou art an hater and a murderer. See Judg 11.7. And Jephtah said unto the Elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my fathers house? 3. Warlike language. Gen. 37.4. They hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him. When men cannot give one another a good word, what is this but malice and hatred in the heart? Gen. 49.29. The archers have sorely grieved him and shot at him, and hated him. Bending the bow, and shooting bitter words, speak out bitterness and hatred within. 4. Lying in wait for, rising up against, and mortally wounding another. Deut. 19.11. But if any man hate his neighbor, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him and smite him mortally that he die, &c. Rev. 17.16. These shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire. Harsh usage shews hatred. Try your selvs by these and other Scripture-signs, and try impartially.
Ʋse 2. Exhort men to lay aside their sin. See what the word chargeth upon't. 1. 'Tis from the Devill (as love is of God.) 1 Thes. 4.9. Ye are taught of the Devill to hate, 1 John 4.11, 12. This is the Message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another, not as Cain who was of that WICKED ONE — meaning as Cain was a man of cruelty and hatred, so he was of the Divell; hatred is all hatcht in Hell! O then retain it no more in your hearts. 2. It proves a man to be yet unregenerate, Titus 3.2, 3. For we our selves also were some∣times foolish and disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in MALICE and ENƲY, hatefull and hateing one another. But after that the kindness and love of God () appeared &c. Its too too ap∣parent from this passage that the kindness and love of God hath not wrought kindly upon mens hearts so long as they live in malice, en∣vy and hatred; how can a man be a cut throat and a Christian at the same time, a man of hatred and a child of God? 3. Thou art a murderer. I have here trans∣scribed some suteable passages of a very reve∣rend Godly man (I mean Mr. Joseph Caryl) who in his excellent exposition upon the 5th Chapter of Job and 2 verse, speaketh thus con∣cerning
wrath. So in like manner wrath is said to slay a man; first because it thrusts him head∣long upon such things as are his death; he runs willfully upon his own death; sometimes by the dangerousness of the action, when a casu∣all sudden death surprises him; sometime by the unlawfulness of the action which brings him to a legal judiciary death. Secondly his wrath is said to kill him because his wrath is so vexations to him that it makes his life a continual death to him, and at last so weari∣eth him out and wasts his Spirits, that he dies for very grief, and so at once commits a three∣fold murder. First, he murders him intenti∣onally, against whom he is wroth. Secondly he really murders his own body. And thirdly he meritoriously murders his Soul for ever, ex∣cept the Lord be more merciful then he hath been wrathful, and the death of Christ, heale those wounds by which he would have pro∣cured the death of others, and hath (as much as in him lies) procured his own. This is true of hatred as well as of wrath, for he that hateth his brother is a Murderer. 1. He murthers his Brother whom he hates; hatred is a wishing and seeking for (at least in heart) the slaughter, death and destruction of his Brother; when the Apostle John affirmeth, whosoever hateth his Brother is a Murderer;
his meaning is he is a Murderer of that Bro∣ther whom he hateth, and he is so because he hateth him. 2. He that hateth his Brother is a Murder∣er, more then once; he doth not only murder his brother but himself — by bringing etern∣al death upon himself for hateing his Brother: he that murders himself is (felo de se) a Self-murderer, is manifest from these words; and ye know that no murderer (meaning a malicious man) hath eternal life abiding in him. To be a murderer is, 1. A crying sin, Gen. 4.10. And he said, what hast thou done? the voyce of thy Brothers blood cryeth unto me from the Ground. If men would think, what am I doing, now I am hateing my Brother; I am murdering in Gods account, and murder is a loud sin: Surely then we should harbour no hatred. Murder, 2 It is a very reproachful shameful sin, considered in the act that followes it: to prove a man guilty of willfull murder renders him a shame to himself, a blot to his relations: thou that hatest, art a murderer! O be ashamed of this shameful ha∣tred. 3. Murder is a sin that sets the vengeance of God against a man, the very Barbarians beleeve that vengeance and death will fall
strangely and speedily on Murderers, Acts 28.4. And when the Barbarians saw the vene∣mous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves (very confidently) no doubt this man (meaning Paul) is a murderer, whom though he hath escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live. Rev. 21.8. But the fearful and un∣beleeving and abominable, and MƲR∣DERERS, (heart-murderers and hand-murderers) and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all Liers, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brim∣stone; which is the Second death. Tis not tor∣ture enough for a Murderer to die only once; God hath designed for him a second death, an eternal death; no Murderer (remaining a man of hatred) hath eternall life abiding in him; the Devil himself will as soon be saved as he that hateth his Brother. Rev. 22.15. For with∣out are Dogs, sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers — malicious angells (devills) and malicious men (devils incarnate) must be ex∣cluded together; heaven is no place for men of hatred and malice. Three Objections. Object. 1. But (some may say) 'Tis no dan∣ger to hate a poor man, Prov. 14.20. The poor is hated even of his own e Neighbour; but the rich hath many Friends; no man (nor God
himself, as some men think) mindeth the poor man. Obj. 2. A man surely may hate him that speaketh evil, that prophesieth damnation a∣gainst me, as in 1 King. 22.8. And the King of Israel said to Jehosophat, there is yet one man (Macaiah the son of Imlah) by whom we may enquire of the Lord, but I hate him, for he doth not prophesie good concerning me, but evil. Obj. 3. He hateth me (saith another) he is mine enemy; may I not hate him? Matth. 5.43. Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; but I say unto you, Love your enemies — or else you will prove your own worst enemies; for it is death (the second death) to hate a poor man, an enemy, or any man. Is hatred a Man-murdering sin, and a Soul∣murdering sin? Then take heed of helping on this hatred any way. As there are ways to provoke to love (which few love to walk in) so there are tricks and devices of the Devil to drive on the design of hatred in mens hearts, that he may drive men to de∣struction. Decline (especially) naming men by this or the other name of reproach. D. Hall, late Bishop of Norwick, who was a very wor∣thy, learned and godly man, in a small Trea∣tise of his, called Pax terris, p. 44. speaks thus;
Damnentur ad imum usque barathrum illa nominum opprobria, Lutheranorum, Calvinia∣norum, Arminianorum, Puritanorum, Praela∣ticorum, Presbyterianorum, Independentium, quae fidei ejusdem professoribus vulgò objectari solent. i. e. Let those terms or names of re∣proach and disgrace (saith he) of Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, Puritans, Prelaticals, Presbyterians, Independents, which are com∣monly objected to the Professors of the same faith, let them be condemned to the lowest hell. I am confident they were coined there, and they prove an occasion of much hellish hatred among Christians. It's often known that one man hateth ano∣ther meerly because he passeth in the world under one or other of these dividing names, whereas (it may be) the man deserves no such name; but if he do, I am fure it is not fit nor Gospel-like to leave loving a man of a differ∣ent minde in some circumstantial matters of Religion. You will not be able to come off in the day of account by this plea. Indeed I hated such a man, and I thought I did well, for he was called an Episcopal man, or a Pres∣byterian, or an Arminian, or Anabaptist, or a Schismatick and Sectary. The Lord God will demand, Was not such a man thy brother, was he not thy neighbour (nay, did he not
fear my name? notwithstanding this or that nick-name maliciously put on him) and shouldst thou have hated thy Brother, thy Christian Brother, a man that lived in all good conscience by thee, considering this startling Text, Whosoever hateth his Brother is a murderer, and ye know (O then hate no more!) that no murderer hath eternal life abide∣ing in him. Lastly, We see the excellency of Love, in 1 Cor 12. ult. — and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way. ) 'Tis the way of life; as hatred puts mens lives in ha∣zard and jepoardy; so love looks after the sav∣ing of life; it permits others to be in peaceable possession of their own lives; and then love to brethren is an evidence of that mans life e∣ternal, that loves his brethren, 1 Joh. 3.14. We know we have passed from death to life be∣cause we love the brethren. Hatred is deadly and perillons to men every way, and love is of a soul-protecting tendency; Love is excel∣lent and lovely in this respect. A Philanthropie in us, a love to men, as men; and a love to regenerate men as such, assures our hearts we are in the path-way to heaven; as malice and hatred is the high-way to hell, from which the Lord of heaven deliver your souls. 'Tis the way, the high-way to Heaven, a
man never goes after God till he walks in love, Ephes 5.1, 2: Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, and walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us. So long as men (caled Christians) live in bitterness, wrath, anger, and clamour, evil speaking, and in malice, they are the Children of the Devil, for him they obey; but when we are kind one to ano∣ther, TENDER-HEARTED, for∣giving one another, even as God for Christs sake is ready to forgive us; this God-like, and Christ-like life, this love-life is a lovely evi∣dence of our following God our heavenly Father, as dear children; and of following our dear Lord and Saviour. Consider Ephes. 4 end. and Ephes. 5.1, 2. and I hope that con∣text will make smooth, and sweeten your rough and bitter spirits towards each other mutually. A Recollection of the sum of two Discourses between S. T. and N. B. in Newgate on Thursday Aug. 13. and Thursday Aug. 20, 1657. both continuing several houres. HAving by the Providence of God upon due occasion and call, bin with N. B. as an eye & Ear witness (among others) of the won∣derfull grace of God to him in his last dayes,
to the rejoycing of my heart; and being de∣sired and prest to contribute some thing to the Narrative by those worthy persons con∣cerned in the publication thereof, I shall do it very briefly, according to my best know∣ledge and remembrance. My first address unto him was, to know what serious sense he had of his hainous sin, and his soules condition? In answer to which, he did in a very mourn∣full manner, largely lay open the strong con∣victions he had upon his conscience of the sinfulness and damnableness of his sin, ennu∣merating (himselfe) the several aggravating circumstances thereof with the time and manner of his conviction, which began not untill his imprisonment and fetters began. For albeit he was followed and filled (as he said) with distraction, amazement, and dis∣quietment, from the time of the fact, making him restless in all places; Yet he told me he had no solid conviction of his sin, untill he came to be alone in his Chaines, like Ma∣nasseh, 2 Chron. 33 11.12. his prejudgment of the sentence of death, brought in the thoughts of an eternall after-estate, and then said he, my conscience was enlightned and a wakened to see my self in the glass of Gods law, and under the judgment of eternal death,
which wrought such horror, consusion, and astonishment, that made me cry out in the bitterness of my soule, as one under the wrath and tertors of the Almighty; Moreover said he, the thoughts of this second and after∣death of my poor soule, did blot out of my remembrance the death which was approach∣ing. Hereupon I began further to apply to him after this manner, That in this your present condition, there are two things of greatest con∣cernment to your soule. First, that you be rightly regulated in your repentance. Se∣condly, rightly directed the way of beleeving in Christ. I shall endeavor to make both plain and practicable. 1. Not to swell the Narrative with the re∣hearsall of what I offered him about a true and right conviction of sin, (not of this notorious sin only, but of others also,) and the corrupt root and fountain from whence all sprang, with the nature and necessity of a Gospel-re∣pentance, pressing seriousness and sincerity upon him, this not being a time to Trifle, much less to dissemble, about the weighty concernments of his soule, a false and a faigned repentance being as bad as the sin it self, with more the like, as occasion was offered. N. B. Answers very sensibly, in these and
such like words following not in a continued discourse, but in an Intercourse of speech. N. B. Oh saith he, not only this one hay∣nous sin, but multitudes of other sins, are set in order before me, as well small as great; and the smallest appeareth great to me, as being against a holy God and an infinite good; I never thought such things to be sins, which I now see to be sins. Oh what an ignorant dead Creature was I before! I now apprehend the filthiness, and feele the hardness of my heart; my heart is discovered to the very bot∣tome; the whole trade and course of my life is brought to my remembrance, (and wring∣ing his hands the most of the time) Oh now saith he, I discerne I was in a miserable and damnable condition before I committed this foule fact. Others think themselves in a happy condition because they are not under the guilt of my sin, and under the same sentence, but alas they are lamentably mistaken, as I also was. Now do I apprehend the sinfulness of my thoughts and secret immaginations, as wel as outward actions: And all this and much more exprest with such a manner and measure of earnestness, as did apparantly signifie, that the two-edged Sword had past and pierced through the very powers of his soule, discern∣ing (and abilitating him to discerne) the in∣ward
thoughts and intents of his heart. Oh saith he I dare not lessen my sins, nor exten∣uate my great sin, they are against the righte∣ous law and holy nature of God; and fre∣quently in our discourse he would intermix this speech of Davids, with hands wringing, and strong affection, against thee O Lord have I sinned, against thee, even thee, O Lord, have I sinned and done wickedly, and Lord Pardon mine iniquity, for its exceeding great. Psal. 25.11. And when I proceeded upon the parts of repentance, and contrition as one great branch of it, he said. That he did heartily repent to his utmost as before the Lord; and did hope the Lord would break him more. Oh saith he, its the griefe of my heart I can grieve no more, and though my heart is bro∣ken, yet I am sensible of hardness yet remain∣ing (and by way of concession to my words) saying, Oh, its not a time to Trifle indeed. I know my heart is deceitfull, but I desire nothing more then a through and faithful dis∣covery of the deceitfulness of my heart by all that come to mee, that I might not mistake and lose my soule; and amongst other deceits I desire to avoid this of resting upon any re∣pentance of mine, but upon Christ only for salvation: but I hate sin heartily, not only for that it hath brought mee to this misery, but
also for its filthy nature; and because against a holy and mercifull God. 2. The second thing I endeavoured to man∣nage, was, the possibility of pardon and salva∣tion, notwithstanding the magnitude and mul∣titude of his sins, which when I began to speake, his heart was raised to an earnest ex∣pectation and attention, rejoycing to think there might be a dore of hope I proceeded to three or four considerations to evidence his sin pardonable, and his soule salvable. First, because there was more grace in God to for∣give, and more vertue in the blood of Christ to save, then was in his sin to damne him. Secondly, because God in the Gospel had de∣termined all sins of all sorts pardonable, ex∣cept only [the sin] against the holy spirit, Math. 12.31. 1 John 5.16. which for sun∣dry reasons he could not possibly be guilty of; this I did inculcate the more, that he might sted fastly and firmely beleeve the record and testimony hereof, before he went further, unto which he did profess a full and sound assent, gathering herefrom hopes that he might be saved, and exulted in those hopes. Thirdly, that God had recorded eminent examples in his word of shewing his mercy, to such sinners who had committed the same sin,
and that with a higher hand, viz. Manasseh. 2 Kings 21.16. compared with 2 Chron. 33, 11, 12, 13. I did endeavor to enforce the Parallel, about the meanes and manner of Gods humbling, by the same fetters of afflicti∣on; upon which he said, Oh I bless God for this affliction, I bless God that I was discove∣red and taken; I might have run out my course in sin, and directly to hell, had not God taken this course with me. Oh I would not exchange my present imprisonment with my former liberty in sin for all the world. I hinted also the Murder of David in the matter of Ʋriah, and Davids prayer again, Psal. 25.11. which he said Mr. Samuel Jacombe of Lumbard Stret had preacht on in the Prison, which did much help his hopes, and he voluntarily called to remembrance the Jewes who mur∣dered Christ, Acts 2.36.37.38. and made a comfortable improvement thereof. Fourthly, I alledged that the Gospell did pronounce and proclaim pardon of sin; and eternal salvation upon true repentance, and beleeving on the Lord Jesus Christ; and there was no visible barr to exclude him more then any other in world: the substance of this faith lying in this, that if upon the sight of his lost condition by sin, and upon a firme assent to the record of God concerning his sons being
an only and al-sufficient Saviour, he could but cast himself upon the mercy of God, and roule his sinfull sincking soule upon the Lord Jesus as a foundation, heartily hateing sin, and abhorring himself, and cleaving to Christs righteousness, he should be certainly and un∣doubtedly saved, according to Mat 11.28. Joh. 6.37. Acts 16.31. Esay. 55.7. also 1 Tim. 1, v. 15. hee hereupon brake out. I see my self undone for ever, without the mercy of God in Christs blood. I know not whether to go but to Christ, [but intermixing interroga∣tively] is there mercy for me? Is there hope for such a one as I am? well, I will adventure my soule upon this foundation, I am resolved I will trust and hang here, [adding that com∣mon Phrase] I can but perish, I can but dye, and if I do, it shall be in trusting upon Gods grace and Christs righteousness, but I will hold fast that word, John 6.37. he hath said those that come, I will in no wise cast out: I do come to him, and I will cleave to him; surely he will not cast me off. I told him that upon this Gos∣pell ground, he might soundly and surely ga∣ther to himself comfort; and if his repentance and faith (thus farr) were but sincere, he might assuredly conclude upon the faithful∣ness of God, and truth of his Gospell that he should be saved, the which I endeavored to
make plaine and practicable to him also. The Lord was pleased so wonderfully to enable him by his spirit to lay hold upon, and embrace these considerations, that his heart was filled with Joy and Peace through be∣leeving, in so much that he was in such a brearhing panting Extasy, that he put his hands upon his sides, and cryed out, Oh my heart will break! is there hope for me? is there salvation for me? Oh what comfort is this, I never felt nor tasted the like before! I formerly thought there was no comfort but in my sinfull way, nor no joy but in sinfull pleasures, with much more the like; and to the amazement of several persons present. But in the midst of this Joy, correcting him∣self, he breaks out, Oh what is become of the soule of him I have murthered, to whom I gave no space to repent! I told him that was indeed a high aggravation of his sin, and therefore should be improved to humble him the more; but withall, the state of the others soule was to him a secret, and all his distracting thoughts about it, would contribute nothing to the other or himself; and therefore that he should spend the rest of his time and thoughts about his own soule: finally and principally, Manasseh might as well have had
doubtfull thoughts about the multitudes of soules, whose Innocent blood he shed in Je∣rusalem; but this hindred not his pardon. Oh saith he, what a mercy is it that I have space to repent, that I was not served as I served him! I might have escaped apprehension, and some way or other have died suddenly in my sins. He took much notice of the patience of God, and of the tenderness of the Lord Major, from whose visits and Instructions he had reapt much benefit also, that his souls con∣dition was so much upon the hearts of such who knew the weight of sin, and the worth of a soule, to be instant with God for him. Oh but saith he, I am afraid of Presump∣tion, lest I should take comfort too soon. I told him that as a person might be presump∣tuous in crying peace, whiles going on in sin; so might he, if he were not sincere and sound in his repentance, and faith: but if that were true, he could not be presumptuous in conclu∣ding and applying the promise of the Gospel to himselfe; nor on the other hand could he presume too farr in coming to and resting upon the grace of God in Christ, but the more he did, the more accepted. He said, I am sure I am humbled for my sins, as in the sight of God, and I would be more; I do abhor my
selfe and my sin, that if I had oportunity I durst not commit sin against so good a God to offend and dishonor him; and mentioning that Text. 1 John 3.20.21. my heart doth not condeme mee of hypocrisy in this; and here∣upon hiis heart was greatly raised again to a strong confidence in God. I do hope, saith he, (according to that word Phil 1.6.) that God hath begun this work and will performe it to the day of Jesus Christ: and whiles I do live, I will trust in him, and seek to him, and yet not rest on any thing. Some Papists have come (saith he) & told me I must be a Roman Catholick, or no salvation; but alas what works have I to rest upon, but my murder and my other many evil workes before, that would sink me for ever, but for the mercy of God on which I trust! Others doubt, saith he, I dis∣semble; but alas what wil that availe me now? the Lord knows, I do discover what I can of persons and their sins, that I may do the utmost good I can in preventing sin against God, and the ruine of others soules: and I have a heart to do more if I could for God before I dye. Finally he exprest much bope and com∣fort & joy several times in a panting breathing manner, and that Mr. Yearwood had been an instrument of great refreshment to him in his
frequent Visits; to whom I refer the Reader for a more perfect Narrative; he oft exprest not only his willingness, but desire to dye, both because of that just law of God, [blood for blood] and because he had such good hope through grace, that his sin and sorrow should both have an end, much admiring at his gift of memory to retain all spoken to him, and also wondring at the change in his heart, & his comforts & joys, as being new strange things to him, greatly wondring and magnifying God that he should take the occasion upon this his most foule sin, to bring him to a sight of all other sins and save his soul. The Lord grant it may have the like effect on others in the same pernicious pathes; and that especially yong men may hear and fear, and be converted and healed. FINIS.
A SERIOUS ADVICE TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON, By some MINISTERS of the GOSPEL in the said CITY: Upon occasion of the HORRID MURDER And DREADFUL DEATH OF NATHANIEL BUTLER, An high Malefactor Beloved in Christ, AS we thought it a great duty lying upon us, before the execution of the sentence of death upon Nathaniel Butler to lay out
our selves to the utmost for the promoting of his spiritual and eternal good; in frequent pray∣ing with him, in constant praying for him; in endevouring to convince him of the super∣lative greatness of his sins, and in spreading of the freeness of the grace of God in Christ before him, according to the penitential work∣ings, we observed in him. So (having done our duty to him, (who is dead under the stroke of justice) and as we hope with some success too through the grace of God, for which we bless him) we humbly judge there is a further duty incumbent upon us, unto you the inhabi∣tants of this famous City, who have been spectators of this Tragedy, in a serious re∣commending of this providence to you and the duty which it calls for. Psal. 9 16. The Lord is known by the judg∣ment which he executeth. And surely this latter Age (though an Age full of sin) hath not set before you a more dreadful instance of mans sinfulness, and Gods justice (though in the end sweetned much with mercy) then that which in and upon this notorious Male∣factor hath been laid before your observation. And therefore we cannot here be silent, but must take this advantage with all humility and affection to your souls good, plainly to open our hearts to you.
By some (we know before hand) we shall be slighted and censured as men too busy, and may be, as men too credulous; but in the pre∣sence of God we can say, our aim is publick good and the discharge of our consciences, and therefore we are not discouraged. And we are not wholly without hope, but that some benefit may be reaped from these few lines, which here with all sincerity we do present upon that late providence which hath been before you. Exod. 14.20. That providence we say, which like the Cloud is on one side very dark, on the other side very bright; very dark as to mans sin, very bright as to Gods mercy. Tis the daily and inward grief of our spirits, God knows it, that our Ministry is so successe∣less, that we see so little fruit of the word preached by us, that in a City where there is such plain and powerful preaching, such horrid sins should be committed; Ezek. 19.14. This is a lamentation and shall be for a lamentation. But possibly some secure sinners may be a little startled and awakened by this terrible judicial hand of God; and so a word setting in with this providence may be more effectual then many in an ordinance. We cannot but comply with the will of God in the use of all means for the furtherance of your salva∣tion.
And oh! that God would so bless this dis∣pensation that you all may hear and fear and sin no more. Touching the sad occasion, we will not in∣large upon that: the hainous murder, the abo∣minable uncleanness, the wicked theft, of which Nat: Butler was guilty (of the former but once, which we speak not by way of extenuation; for that's too much, of the two latter very of∣ten) as also the shamefulness and dreadfulness of his death: these we pass over, as being very well known to all of you. Neither shall we in∣terest our selves in any narrative of the work∣ings of God upon his heart, during his impri∣sonment, and at his execution; (though here∣in we could speak much as being (for the most of us) very often with him in this time, and narrow observers of him.) Nor shall we ex∣patiate upon some of those great truths of the Gospel, which this famous instance doth lead us to; Namely that sometimes it pleases God in the sovereignty and prerogative of his grace to ceaze upon the greatest sinners; and out of the coursest rubbish to erect the monuments of his unlimited mercy. 1 Tim. 1.16. The Lord doth sometimes take the vilest wretches, and hangs them out as patterns of his infinite love that the freeness of his grace may be ad∣mired, and the greatest of sinners may be incouraged; but still in the way of
Faith and Repentance, we do not, we dare not limit the Grace of God, as to exclude this Notorious and Bloody sinner from it; nay we have good hope, that through the infinite Mercy of the Father, and the All-sufficient Me∣rits of the Son, he is accepted to eternal Life. Indeed, when we consider the horribleness of his sin, the greatness of his joy, after a short humiliation (yet deep and through we hope) we easily conjecture, that some will question both the prudence of any publication, and the truth of his Conversion. But we will med∣dle with neither of these leaving men to jude of the former and God alone (who searches and knows the heart) to judge of the latter. Waving therefore all these things, our on∣ly design and businesse in this application, is to press upon you (the inhabitants of this City) to some of whom we are more neerly related in our respective Charges) the several du∣ties, which do naturally result from this Provi∣dence. We would exhort you in the first place, To be thankful to God for his Restraining Grace; which though it be short of his Renewing Grace, yet tis with all thankfulness to be va∣lued: Oh! bless the Lord, who keeps you from those sins which this poor Wretch was guilty of, that you are not Adulterers, Theeves,
nay, Murderers and Malefactors, to be punished by the Judge; this is the Lords mercy. 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes you to differ from others? Have not you the same Names? Have not you the Seed and Spawn of all wickedness in you? And should God leave you to the baseness of your own hellish hearts, would you not also run to all Excess of sin, and that with Greedi∣ness too? When you read over this sad Sto∣ry, we beseech you lay your hands upon your hearts, and say, What a mercy is it, I was nei∣ther the Murderer nor the Murdred! We desire you to mourne over the crying sins that are to be found amongst us. Oh! the Scarlet sins that swarm in London, even in London! Swearing, Drunkenness, Un∣cleanness, Profanation of the Lords Day, Con∣tempt of the Gospel, and of the Ministry thereof; nay, even Blood-guiltiness is to be found amongst us! Should not your Souls, like the Soul of Righteous Lot, be vexed within you for these things, 2 Pet. 2.7? Should you not all come up to be Ezekiel's mourners, in the remembrance of them, Ezek. 9.4? Especi∣ally, considering that these things are done in times of Reformation, and in a place of Vision, even in London, where the Light of the Gos∣pel shines so gloriously; where the Words is Preached so plentifully and powerfully, even
there these abominations are to be found. Will you not lay them to heart? And what reason have you to admire the pa∣tience of God to this City? Tis a wonder London is not made a Sodom, that desolati∣on doth not seize upon your houses, that you are not all swept away with the Beesome of suddain destruction, that you are not hung up∣on the Gibbet as Spectacles of Gods vengeance to all the Nations round about! What? so much provocation, and yet the City to stand! Oh the Patience and Long-suffering of God! Doubtless, if God had not a Remnant amongst you, who seek him daily, and fear his Name, you had been laid desolate long before now. Isa 1 9. We need not from hence to stir you up to submit to Government, and to bless God that you live in a place where Laws are Executed. What a Chaos? what a Wilderness of wild Beasts should we be, if Malefactors were not punished? What Confusion, Cruelty, Bar∣barousness, would overspread all, if by whol∣some Laws, and the care of good Magistrates in the Execution of them, we had not some Boundaries set to the Lusts of men? whether would the heart of man run, if there were not some rein upon it? Tis sad the Law of God will not keep men from sin, but seeing it will
not, tis mercy we have the Laws of Man: Ma∣ny are afraid of the Gallowes, which have no sense of Hell. This great Sinner is represented to you as an eminent instance of the Grace of God, and so we hope he was. Tis very necessary there∣fore, we should here insert a Caveat against the abusing of this Grace of God. How apt are we with the Spider to suck Poyson, where with the Bee we should suck Honey? How many will be apt from hence to encourage themselves in sin, and to say, Let us sin, that Grace may abound, Rom. 6.1. Or, let us sin, for Grace will abound. Man is not more prone to any thing then to catch at eminent Acts of Grace, and to make that Fewel to his Lust, which God intended only to be Food to his Faith. And never was there any age wherein there was more of this Spirit of Presumption, then this wherein we live; insomuch, that upon this very account, some of us were very inclina∣ble to think, That 'twas better to have the sto∣ry of this man suppressed then published. But since providence hath so ordered it that it doth see the Light, we cannot but annex to it an Antidote against presuming. Sinners, do not pervert this Grace of God; God lets you have it, to keep you off from the rock of de∣spair, not that you should run upon the rock
of presumption. Deut. 29.19, 20. If you sin you may have mercy, but if you presume to sin, can you then expect mercy? Grace rejected may yet save you (though that will cost you dear) but oh tremble to abuse the grace of God to incourage you in sins! God sometimes gives some rare instances of his grace to notorious sinners that none may despair, but he is very choice in these that none may presume. Tis true, upon re∣pentance the greatest sinner shall find mercy, but how do you know, that God will give you repentance? How many are in the same con∣demnation that this offender was, that die with∣out any such work upon them? we affectio∣nately beseech you and warn you, not to turn this grace of God into wantonnesse. These things we hint in general; More particularly we shall address our selves to you in the several capacities wherein you stand. You the Right honourable Magistrates of the City, with all submission, and yet with all boldness we exhort you to do your duty. Tis not enough for you to punish sin when 'tis be∣fore you, but you are to endevour the prevent∣ing of it, you see what is the sad fruit of Ale∣houses, Whore-houses, and such places, we hope your zeal will yet continue, nay be heightned in the suppressing of them. Down with them,
Down with them, spare them not; they are the Divels Shops, and let him have no Free-Trade amongst us: If you will, none shall have so many Customers as he. How many Labourers drink that away at these houses, which should maintain their wives and chil∣dren with bread? How are the youth of this City debaunched at them? where they have their Gaming, Cheating, Whoring; and what not? Oh let your Reformation be se∣vere and throughout in this particular! But herein blessed be God, we have great cause as well to commend as to quicken your zeale. We heartily wish that those who have power in the Suburbs of the City, would be as active in the restraining of sin as you are; that those places and persons which you will not indure in the City (the naming of which would soul our pen) might not be held up and harboured there; otherwise it will be small ad∣vantage to smother Whores out of one Hive, when they have another ready to receive them. We hear and fear tis too true that Priests and Jesuites (those Romish Locusts) do swarm amongst us in the City and Suburbs: We be∣seech you for the sake of Jesus Christ, and for love to the Gospel, to put forth your power to the utmost for the discovering & suppressing of them: And the rather, because they and their
party are so bold, as to intrude themselves upon prisoners condemned to die, to pervert them from the true Religion, (for this attempt they were bold to make upon N. B. before he was executed.) We should also speak to our selves, and to our reverend Brethren in the Ministry. Doth not this providence speak something to us? Should we not from hence be stirred up in our several congregations, more vigorusly to re∣prove sin, and to deter men from sin? Whi∣ther will sinners go, if we let them alone? Let our preaching be lively, quick, power∣ful, by Gods blessing, it may be a means to prevent these abominable practises; How∣ever let's do this and then let our hearers do what they will, their blood shall be required at their own hands. Ezech. 3.18, 19. We shall be free from it. Let us beat down drunkenness. Adultery, &c. and such scandalous sins; and while we labour to preach down unbelief, let us take heed that presumption and gross sins do not break in upon us with a mighty breach. Should we enlarge upon these things, we should be tedious. Our principal intendment was to speak a word to you, the people and Citizens of the place which we shall dispatch with all plainness and brevity. And here we
will only take the liberty of advising you in the Notion of Governours and Governed. You that are Governours, (we mean Go∣vernours of families) give us leave to set in with this providence, and to stir you up, to make more conscience of the Family-duties and engagements that lie upon you, in refe∣rence to your children and Servants. Pro∣bably (if things be not mis-repesented) had there been a consciencious discharge of these duties in the Family, where this young man lived, he had never come to this sad end. But we had rather awaken then censure; Was not that a brave resolution of Joshua? I and my house will serve the Lord. Josh 24.15. Gen. 18.9. Can you have a better Evidence of sincerity towards God, then a faithful com∣ming up to relative and Family-duties? Do not parents that send up their children to you, put a great trust into your hands? Are not their children dearer to them then all their outward comforts, and shall they miscarry under you for want of care? Will not their blood be required at your hands, if they pe∣rish through your neglect? will it not be sad to have children and servanns to rise up in judgment against you and to bring in evidence at the great tribunall of Christ? Lord my
Father never minded me! Lord my master ne∣ver regarded me, I might sin, he never re∣proved me, I might go to hell, it was all one to him, will not this be sad? will not this be sweet to you, when you come to die to be a∣ble to say, Lord I have walked in my house with a perfect heart? Psal. 101.2. Have you no love to religion, to propagate it, and to provide for it's flourishing when you are dead and gone? Doth not your neglect of family-duties make all the endeavours of our godly magistrates, and of godly ministers to be ineffectual and frustraineous? God hath put it into their hearts to do good, but tis but little, they can do in publick, because you are so remiss in private. And tis the desire of our souls to beat down sin but we groan under the sense of sad disappointment, and this is one reason of it, what we do at the Church is undone by you again in your Fa∣milies; No setting on the word, no pray∣ing over the word &c. Oh that these things might be as so many spurs in your sides, to quicken you to family duties. Set up prayer in your Families; There's a curse pronouned upon the Families, that do not call upon God. The Lord be merciful to the thousands of Families in the City,
where there is scarce a purger by the mast∣er of the family, from yeer to yeer. How can such hope for the blessing of God to be upon them, who, though he gives mercy free∣ly, yet he will be sought unto for it? Ezek. 36.3, 7. How can such look for Gods bounty, who deny him his worship? Doth not prayer pro∣cure all your Family-comforts, and sanctifie all your family-comforts? Morning and Evening call upon God; and call in your servants, let them not want the benefit of prayer; 'twil be poor to feed their bodyes, and to starve their souls. If you eate to∣gether, by all means pray together. Catechize your children and servants; in∣struct them in the fundamentals of religion; would you keep them from error in the Head, from loosness in the life, make conscience of this duty. How excellent, how necessary, how profitable is this ordi∣nance, and yet how sadly is it neglected, we may in a great measure blame you for the many Hereticks, and erroneous persons, with whom we swarm in these dayes. Read and open the Scriptures to them, but do this with all humility and sobriety, or else there will be danger. These are the Ma∣gazine, the Treasury of all knowledge, able to make you and yours wife to Salvati∣on;
Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you; and in all that belong to you See that they frequent the publick Ordinances let them follow you to the house of God, not out of state, but in love to their soules; and when they are there, see they keep there, that they do not run out again to Ale-houses and Taverns (as too many do, to our grief and your shame be it spoken) when a publick Or∣dinance is ended, call them to an account, see what they remember, wherein they profit, how they relish the word; this is to do good indeed to their soules. Keep them to a strict observance of the Lords-day; you will not let them trifle away your day, then you'l hold them to their work; Oh! let them not trifle away the Lords day. Why do your children and servants stand gaze∣ing at your doors upon the Sabbath? Call them in, put them upon reading wholsom books, and other exercises which are proper to the day; be not partakers of their sin. What ever liberty you grant them at other times, hold them to a close sanctification of the Sabbath. And spend this day with them, in prayer, repetition, singing of Psalms; This is to make your Families as so many little Churches of Jesus Christ. How little con∣science do the generality of you make of Sab∣bath
bath-duty; we might sadly bemoan this before the Lord. For your selves you can make that day which is a day for Physick for the soul, to be the Day for Physick for the Body; you cannot spare time all the weeke long, you'l take it upon the Lords day. And for your children and servants, let them walk in the Field, play in the streets, sleep in their beds, or drink in Taverns, 'tis all one to you! Will God beare this from you? Certainly, this will be bitterness in the end. Do not indulge your servants in idleness, that is the bane of youth, the Devils in-let to all temptations. An idle person is like tinder that will take every sparke that falls upon it, let them be out of imployment, 'tis a thousand to one, but presently they are in some sin. And yet those that know how to use their Liberty, let them have it sometimes for lawful recre∣ations, but this we leave to your pru∣dence. In the pursuit of your own pleasures and conveniences have a care of your Families; Many of you go to your Country houses (we condemne you not for it) but what becomes of your servants? As Eliab said to David, with whom have you left
those few sheep in the wilderness? Whilst you are in your pleasant gardens gratifying your selves in your creature-enjoyments, who takes care of them that are left behind to pray with them, to instruct them, to see they san∣ctifie the Sabbath; the health of some Masters bodies is the ruine of their servants souls. Set them in all things a good example, if they see you can strain in defraunding others, they'l easily come to strain in the defrauding of you; let them see you fear to sin and that will be an awe upon their spirits against sin. Take your Apprentices out of religious Fa∣milies in the Country; Many of you are pu∣nished with vexatious servants, you may thank your selves for it; you take your Ap∣prentices by the pound, not by good education, who will give most, not who will deserve most, and you smart for it afterwards. But how do these Heads swell upon our hearts, though we do but name them! These are some of the things which we should pre∣sent to the serious consideration of you, who are Governours Families; and the Lord make them useful to you. In particular, it is of great use to prevent much wickedness to look to the keys and doors of your houses and to have them in your own custody not in your servants that so an occa∣sion of sinning may be cut off from those that
seek such occasions as most fit for their pernici∣ous designs, Keep up Discipline, or rather restore it again; How is it fallen in these times, how is it almost lost amongst us in the City; The reins which your predecessors held with a very strict hand, are very loose in yours; ma∣ny of your servants will do what they list, and you let them alone; we do very much la∣ment the low ebb of Discipline and Govern∣ment and judg that to be one Cause of the ma∣ny disorders which are among us; we heartily wish it may be restored in Church, in State, in Families, if this be wanting, all things run up to strange confusion. A Word to the Youth and Apprentices of this City, and we have done. Oh that you would hear us now, least you mourne at the last, and say, How have we hated instruction, and our hearts despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of our Teachers, nor inclined our car to them that instructed us. This Great Offendor was one of your Rank, had he taken the advice of Gods Word, his sin had not been so great, nor his punishment so terrible. Of all, we fear, our counsel to you will be the most successless; Youth is rash, inconfi∣de ate vain proud, but sometime or other you will remember what we say. Take heed of lesser sins. Little sins will
make way for greater sins; if you sip of sin, youll be drunk of it at last. How modest is sin at first, but when 'tis gratified, it growes im∣pudent. This poor man lately executed, first he began to game, then to steal, then to Whore, and then to Murder. Be careful of your company: associate with them that fear God; say unto them that are vain and wicked, Depart from us, for We will keep the Commandments of God, Psal. 119.115. Bad company is the way to corrupt and spoil you: Can a man touch pitch, and not be defiled? Read the Scriptures much; by them you must stand or fall to all eternity; when we walk by you in your Shops, we see many have their Play-Book in their hands, but few have the Bible in their hands; the Shop-Book is o∣pen, but the Bible is shut. Entertain high thoughts of Holiness and ho∣ly men: The froth of your wits runs out too often in jeering godlinesse; but take heed, thats not a thing to be so dealt withal. Many of you count sin to be gallantry, and Religion but a low and disgraceful thing. God convince you of your folly. Frequent Publick Ordinances, especially upon the Lords day, because you have not opportu∣nity so to do upon the week days. You'l find more comfort in the Word and Prayer, then in all your youthful delights.
Keep the Sabbath; You, have six dayes, let God have one; can he have lesse? God out of special respects to servants, hath instituted and sanctified this day. How can you hope to keep an everlasting Sabbath in heaven, if this Sabbath on earth be profaned by you. Many go to Tiburn lamenting the profanation of the Lords day, as that which ushered in all their wickedness. Every day spend some time in private pray∣er; 'tis but rising a little the earlyer, and go∣ing to bed a little the later; you shall never be the worse for that time you spend in the Ser∣vice of God. Be, subject and obedient to your Masters; study how to please them; bear with their passionate infirmities: Do not purloyn but shew all good fidelity, that the doctrine of God our Sa∣viour may be adorned, Tit. 2.9, 10. Be dili∣gent in your Callings; if you be idle, Satan will get an advantage. The sitting bird is easi∣ly shot, and the standing water gathers filth. Love those that curb you, and restrain you in wayes of sin; they are your best friends: 'tis better to beheld in, then to have a wick∣ed liberty; 'tis better to have lust restrained then satisfied. Be not angry with those who cannot see you damne your souls, and let you alone. Enter upon the wayes of God betimes, the
sooner the better: Shall the devil have the best draught, and shall God be put off with the Lees and Dregs: Eccl. 12.1. Live alwayes as in Gods sight, and know, if you sin, God will certainly sind you out one time or other. Alas how many wayes hath God to bring the most hidden works of dark∣ness to light; sometimes by startling mens own consciences to an accusation of themselvs, sometimes by awakening some of their com∣plices to the discovery of the rest. If you sin together, you shall smart together. Let this sad example never be forgotten by you for this: Those that were Confederates in sin, are made instruments and occasions of misery each to other. Look not upon sin in the plea∣sure of it, but in the danger of it: The Wine sparkles in the cup, but 'twill be poyson in the belly. Fear the strokes of God more then the stroaks of man; What's a fetter, a dungeon, a gallows to hell fire? Mortifie a spirit of pride Never such pride amongst the youth of the Ci∣ty as now; What vanity in apparel, what su∣perciliousness in carriage, what contempt of Authority? Oh, be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. Give not way to imaginaay, speculative heart sins; Murder in the heart, will soon be Murder in the hand; uncleanness allowed in the thoughts, wil come to bodily uncleanness at the
last. Keep Satan at a distaace, if he get in, he'l be too hard for you To sum up all: A dreadful spectacle of Gods Justice, and of the fruit of sin, bath been lately set before you, we beseech you in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, break off from all your sinful wayes by repentance; One is smitten that ma∣ny may fear; He's a warning to you, take heed lest you be made a warning unto others. If you would avoid his end, walk not in his sins; as secure as you are, if you will allow your selves in that which is evil, you do not know whither the divel wil carry you in a way of sin, or to what God will bring you in a way of punsh∣ment. Stand in aw therefore and sin not, Ps. 4.4. Flee youthful lusts, 2. Tim. 2.22. Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he sal, 1 Cor. 10.12. Every day pray that God will keep you from and strengthen you against temptation: Say not, 'tis not possible I should ever be so vile as this Malefactor was; Alas, if God leave you you'l be as bad as he. Blessed is the man that feareth alwayes. Prov. 28.14. In all things so carry your selves according to the rule of the Word, that you may neither fall into the hands of men, nor into the hands of God, which is far the most dreadful. 'Tis a fearful thing to fal into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31. That Governors and Governed may thus discharge their duties shall be the great design
of our Ministrie by Gods assistance, and our constant prayer at the Throne of Grace. Septemb. 11. 1657. Edmund Calamy. Arthur Jackson. James Nalton. Tho. Jacomb, Robert Hutchison. Thomas White. Thomas Parson. Thomas Doelittle. Simeon Ashe. Thomas Case. Will. Taylor. Roger Drake. Geo. Griffith. Matthew Poole. Dan. Batcheler. Finis.
