S2467B 51617441 175368
En Famous Discoverers Sr. Fran: Drake Mr. Tho: Candis title page engraving THE Coasting Pilot: Describing the Seacoasts, Chan∣nels, Soundings, Sands, Shoals, Rocks, & dangers: The Bayes, Roads, Harbours, Rivers, Ports, Buoyes, Beacons, and Sea-marks, upon the Coasts of ENGLAND FLANDERS and HOLLAND With directions to bring a Shipp into any Har∣bour on the said Coasts. Being furnished with new Draughts, Charts, and Descriptions, gathered from ye experience and practise of diverse Able and Expert Navigators of our English Nation. Collected and Published By John Seller. Hydrographer in Ordinary to the King And are to be sold at his Shopps at the Hermitage in Wapping: And in Exchange Alley in Corne-Hill And by W. Fisher at the Posterne on Towerhill And by Jo. Wingfield in Crutched Fryars right against the Church: Cum Privilegio LONDON
chart A Chart of the Seacoasts of ENGLAND FLANDERS & HOLLAND Shewing all the Sands Shoals Rocks and Dangers The Bayes Roads Harbours Buoyes Beacons and Seamarks on the said coasts. By John Seller Hydrographer in Ordinary to the King And are to be sold at his shops in London
THE COASTING PILOT: CONTAINING A Description of the Sea-Coasts, Capes, Head-lands, Channels, Sound∣ings, Sands, Shoals, Rocks and Dangers. The Bayes, Roads, Har∣bours, Rivers, Ports, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-Marks, &c. upon the Coasts of England, Flanders, and Holland. Shewing the Courses and Distances from one Place to another: The Setting of the Tydes and Currents: The Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. With Directions for the bringing a Ship into any Harbour on the said Coasts. Being furnished with New and Exact Draughts, Charts, and Descriptions; gathered from the Experience and Practice of divers Able and Expert Navigators of our Eng∣lish Nation. Collected, Described, and Published, By JOHN SELLER, Hydrographer in Ordinary to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. A short Description of the River of Thames, from London-Bridge to Hopeness, alias, Sands-head Point; shewing the Shelves and Dangers in each Reach. The Pool, IS that part of the River that lyeth from London-Bridg to Cuckolds-Point, and is divided into three Parts. First, From London-Bridge to Wapping-Ness, which lyeth W.N.W. and E.S.E. And a∣bout the lower end thereof, near to Fountain-stairs, lyeth a Rock on the South side, A Rock. which is dangerous for Ships to come aground upon. The second part reach∣eth from Wapping-Ness to Ratclif-Check, and lyeth N.E. and S.W. The third part reacheth from Ratclif-Check to Cuckolds-Point, and lyeth rounding upon four Points of the Compass, from the N. E. to the East. These three Reaches are noted in the Draught of the River with the Letters a, b, c. Limehouse-Reach. This Reach leadeth from Cuckolds-Point down to Deptford, and lyeth North and South; on the West side are two Wind-mills, from the southermost of which, about half a mile downwards the River, is very shoal and flat, A shoal. there being not above six foot at low∣water. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter d. Greenwich-Reach. This Reach lyeth from Deptford to the lower end of Greenwich, and is much winding, but about the middle it lyeth East and West: At the lower end thereof is a convenient place for Ships to ride, Greenwich-Hole. called Greenwich-Hole; and there is in this Hole about two fathom at low-water. There is a shoal, A shoal. at the upper end of this Reach, that lyeth off from Sanders-Ness. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter . Blackwall-Reach. This Reach lyeth from the lower end of Greenwich to Blackwall Town: This Reach is very good for Ships to ride in any part thereof, but especially on the West side, which is the best of the Channel from Layness, which is a Point right against Blackwall, from whence runneth off a shoal which is dry at low-water. A shoal. This Reach lyeth North by West and South by East, and is noted in the Draught with the Letter f. Nel-Hope, (alias) Bugby's-Hole. This Reach leadeth down from Layness to Hookness, and lyeth North-west and South-east. It is somewhat
shoal off from Hookness, wherein is not above two foot at low-water. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter g. Woolwich-Reach. This Reach lyeth down from Bugby's-Hole to the lower end of Woolwich Town, East by North, and West by South: On the North side is Ham-Creek, a lit∣tle to the southward of which lyeth a shoal called Wool∣wich-shelf, Woolwich shelf. whereon is not above two foot at low-water; it lyeth one third of the Reach over from the Essex-shore. In this Reach is three fathom and a half water, but below the Town deeper. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter h. Gallions-Reach. This Reach lyeth from the lower end Woolwich-Town, almost to Barking-Creek, and lyeth N.N.E. & S.S.W. On the West side thereof standeth a little House and some Trees, called Gallion House and Trees; right against them is good riding for Ships; and at the lower end of this Reach is a Point called Maggot-Ness. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter i. Barking-Reach. This Reach lyeth down from Maggot-Ness to Cross-Ness; a little above Cross-Ness stands two Trees, on each side the River one, either of them being called Half-way-Tree; Half-way-Tree. they bear that name, because it is there reputed to be half way between London and Gravesend. This Reach lyeth somewhat crooked, and as it were in two Reaches, the first part lyeth from Mag∣got-ness, half way to Cross-ness, due East and West; and the other part to Cross-ness, lyeth N. E. and S. W. In this Reach is the greatest shoal in the River, called Bar∣king-shelf, Barking-shelf. which lies in the middle of the River: Be∣tween the Shelf and Barking-Creek, there is not above six foot at low-water, but the best of the Channel is between the Shelf and the Kentish-shore; it is narrow, but two fathom, and two fathom and a half at low∣water. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter k. Dagenham-Ietty-Reach. This Reach extendeth it self down from Cross-ness to Gillion-Tree, Gillion-Tree. which stands on a Point of Land on the Kentish-shore, almost against Raynham-Ferry; it lyeth in two parts, the westermost lyeth E. S. E. and W. N. W. and the other part East by South and West by North; in this Reach is four fathom, and four fa∣thom and a half at low water: In most parts of this Reach, off the Point where Gillion-Tree stands, lyeth a shoal, but not very dangerous, there being about eight foot at low-water. On the Essex side, lyeth out a jetty to secure the Bank from the strength of the Tyde, which setteth very much on that shore, it is called Da∣genham-Jetty; Dagen∣ham-Jetty A shelf. between which, and Cross-ness on the Kentish-shore, lyeth a small Shelf, which is sometimes dry at low-water. This Reach is exprest in the Draught with the Letter l. Erith-Reach. This Reach lyeth N. N. W. and S. S. E. and ex∣tendeth it self from Reynbam, down to a Point on the Essex-shore, called Cold-barbour. In most part of this Reach there is about four fathom water; but right a∣gainst the Church is the best place for great Ships to come to an anchor, because it is somewhat deeper. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter m. The Rands, Is a short Reach, extending it self from Cold-barbour to Crafford-ness, which lyeth on the West side of Dart∣ford-Creek, bearing East by North, and West by South: Right against which Creek, A shoal called Rand-hill. lyeth a shoal in the middle of the River, called Rand-hill, but not dangerous. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter n. Long-Reach. This Reach taketh its Name from its Nature, being the longest Reach in the River, and lyeth E. S. E. and W. N. W. and extendeth it self from Crafford-ness to Greenbith Town. On the North side, between Purfleet and Sleepers-bole, lyeth a shoal, but not dangerous; A shoal. in the upper part of this Reach, there is five fathom and a half at low-water, and all down the North Reach there is seven fathom water. This Reach is noted in the Dranght with the Letter . St. Clements-Reach. This Reach lyeth in two parts, first from Greenbith to St. Clements, and lyeth N. N. E. and S. S. W. and from St. Clements to Grayes it lyeth East and West. This Reach is the most dangerous in the whole River, being very subject to foul weather, by reason of its scituati∣on, especially with some winds, as a South-west and North-east wind, which doth make very bad weather, so that here are more Boats cast away, then in all the Reaches in the whole River; and by reason of the bad weather that annoys this Reach, Fidlers-Reach. it is called Fidlers-Reach, because any little wind will raise the Waves, and make the Boats dance: At the lower end of this Reach, a little above Grayes-Town, Black-shelf. lyeth a shoal called Black-shelf, whereon Ships sometimes come aground, taking no harm, but sit upright. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter p. North-fleet-Hope. This Reach leadeth from Grayes-Town down to North-fleet, which is on the Kentish-shore, and lyeth North-west by North, and South-east by South; there is about eight fathom water all along this Reach, and is bold enough, having no danger on any side. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter q. Gravesend-Reach. This Reach lyeth East and West, and extendeth it self from North-fleet below the Town of Gravesend, to a place called the Piles; Piles. there is good riding on any part of this Reach: the water riseth here three fathom and a half; above the Town you will have eight, and below six fathom. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the Letter r. Tilbury-Hope. This Reach lyeth North-east by North, and South-West by South, and extendeth it self from the Piles aforesaid, down to Mucking-Creek, which is on the North shore; and Hope-ness, alias, Sands-head-Point, on the South side: Here is in most parts of this Reach five, six, and seven fathom at low-water: Ships may conveniently ride in any part of it. This Reach is no∣ted in the Draught with the Letter s.
A Description of the Sands, Shoals, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-Marks on the Coast of England, from Thames-Mouth to Flamborough-head. Shewing their Bearings and Distances from the most Eminent Places on the Land; with the Depths of Water on them, as well as in the Channels between them. Blyth-Sand. THis Sand begins at the lower end of the Hope, from Hope-ness, alias, Sands-bead point, on the South side, and runneth down below Hull-ha∣ven; it lyeth E. N. E. the lower down the broader: there is some distance between the eastermost end and the shore, but the westermost end joyneth to the Land: those that turn, either going up or down, must come no nearer it than five fathom at low-water, and seven fathom at high-water. On the North side you will have five and six fathom at low-water. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter a. Hull-Haven-Scarrs. Hull-Haven-Scarrs is a dangerous shoal, being very hard ground, and joyning to the shoar a little below Hull-Haven, stretching off from the Land about two Cables length, being very steep, and having ten fathom close by it. This, and the lower end of Blyth-Sand, makes the Channel more narrow then either above or below, and causeth the Tyde to run very strong. In Spring-tydes it is dry at low-water. This shoal is marked in the Draught with the Letter b. The Chapman. The Chapman is a shoal that lyeth about two miles be∣low the Scarrs on the North side: The West end there∣of joyns to the shore, Chapman-head. and is called the Chapman-head; it lyeth down nearest from the Scarrs East, is near half a mile in length, and steep too, having nine fathom close to it; a good part of the East end thereof appeareth dry at low-water, being hard, strong, and uneven ground, having six fathom water close aboard of it. The thwart mark for the East end of the Chapman, is to bring Hadley Church and Hadley Castle both in one. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter c. From hence runneth a shoal which reacheth below Canvey-Island, High-Sand. and is called High-sand. Middle-Ground. This Middle-ground is a shoal that lyeth against Lee, in the middle of the Channel, and at low Tyde there is no more then 11, 12, or 13 foot water, and on each side about 4, or 4 fathom and a half. The South side is the deepest, it is about two miles in length, and lyeth down East as the River doth. Marks of the middle Ground. The Mark for this Sand, is to bring Lee-Church on the East Point of the Marsh, (which is the East end of Canvey-Island) then are you thwart of the shoalest part of it, where you have but ten foot at low-water: to avoid it, you may go on ei∣ther side thereof. This Shelf is noted in the Draught with the Letter d. The Nower and Buoy. The Nower is a Sand that lyeth from part of the Isle of Grean, and runs down nearest East two little miles; on the East Point thereof lyeth a Buoy in twelve foot at low-water: this Sand is broader in some places than in other, by reason of some Swatches that are in it, Marks of the Buoy. and dries every low-water: Minster-Church, in the Isle of Sheppy, bears South by Bast from the Buoy of the Nower, and Shyrness West, half southerly, about three miles: From the Buoy of the Nower to the Buoy of the Oaze-Edge, the course is fast one quarter southerly, near five miles. This Sand and Buoy is marked in the Draught with the Letter e. The Cant. The Cant is a great Flat that lies on the North side of Sheppy, and joyns to the shore, and begins a little to the eastward of Shyreness, and so runs to the East end of the Island, where the West end of the Red-Sand and Spaniard joyns to it; this shoal lyeth off from Sheppy in some places a mile, in others two; the more to the East the farther off, by means of its joyning with the Red-Sand. There is no mark for this Sand, (only the depth of Water being four, five, or six fathom) so near the Ship may go (the time of Tyde considered): But from the lower part of the said Cant, begins deep water close to it down to the Spile, as 11, 12, Spile. or 13 fa∣thom, and is called Bradgate-hole. Shooberry-Ness. Shooberry-Ness is part of a great Flat that beginneth below Lee-Town, and runneth down the River norther∣ly to the North-east of Whitaker. This Ness lyeth right off a mile from the shore, and falleth dry at low∣water, is steep too, having ten fathom close to it. To avoid this, come no nearer it than eight fathom. Thwart Marks of Shoober∣ry-ness. The thwart Marks of it, is to bring two high Trees a little open to the West of Shooberry-steeple, which is a spire Steeple. To go clear of Shooberry-flat, Longst Marks. keep the high Land of Lee open of the Land on the North-east of it, and that will go in the best of the Channel. Black-Tayl. This is a part or the foresaid great Flat, and lyeth below Shooberry-ness, E. N. E. about four miles, being steep too, and having six, seven, and eight fathom a∣bove and below it; but you must come no nearer it than eight fathom. The Warp. The Warp is a shoal that lyeth in the Fair-way, com∣ing out of the Swin up the River, beginning near to the Buoy of Oaze-edge, and tayleth up as high as the Mid∣dle ground of Lee; upon it there is but four fathom at low-water. On the North side there is eight and ten fathom, and on the South side ten and eleven fathom. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter f. The Shooe and Beacon. The Shooe is also a part of the forementioned great Flat, being very steep too: The course from the Black∣tayl to the Shooe and Beacon, is North-east, half easter∣ly, about four or five miles. You must not come nearer the Beacon then nine or ten fathom; and you may stand over towards the Mouse in ten fathom, and no nearer.
From this Beacon to the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, the course is South-west by South, distant about four miles. Between this Beacon and the Whitaker, you may come in six fathom on the North side, and on the South side, near the Mouse, in ten fathom. In the Fair-way is se∣ven, eight, or nine fathom. The Shooe-beacon and Buoy of the Red-Sand, do bear North and South, near∣est one of the other, betwixt five and six miles. Middle-Ground and Buoy. This Sand lyeth between Buxey-Sand and the East-Barrows, being about five miles in length, and lyeth near North-east and South-west; upon the South-west end is placed a Buoy, which bears from the Shooe-beacon North-east by North, two degrees easterly, about five miles; you may sayl from the Shooe (being below it) by your Lead, towards the Whitaker, in fix, six fathom and a half, and seven and a half, and on the Barrow side in eight fathom; in the Fair-way is nine or ten fa∣thom; the Buoy, at low-water, lyeth in eighteen foot. And on this Sand, at low water, is 4, 5, and 6 foot water. The Middle-Middle-Ground. This is a small shoal that lyeth W. N. W. half a mile from the Buoy of the Middle-ground, and extends it self a little below the Whitaker-beacon; on this Sand there is no more then fourteen foot at low-water. To avoid it, you must keep within two Cables length of the Buoy of the Middle-ground. At the North end of this shoal there is five or six fathom water. This is no∣ted in the Draught with the Letter g. The Whitaker and Beacon. The Whitaker is also a part of the aforementioned great Flat, and is the North-east Point thereof, on which standeth a Beacon, from whence runs off a tayl of the foresaid Flat, a little to the northward of the Beacon: To avoid which, come no nearer then seven fathom; betwixt this and the S. W. end of the Buxey, goeth in a small Channel up towards Foul-ness, called North-fletch, North-fletch. useful only for small Vessels. From Whi∣taker to the Buoy of the Buxey, you may sayl in six or seven fathom, and towards the Middle-ground in eight fathom; in the Fair-way there is seven fathom, and on this tayl there is but two fathom at low-water. The Buxey and Buoy. The Buxey is a Sand that lyeth on the North side of Whitaker, and stretcheth it self South-west and North-east, falling dry at low-water. At the North end thereof lyeth a Buoy; betwixt this Buoy and the South-west end of the Gunfleet, goeth in a Channel called the Spits, where there is but six and seven foot at low-water, be∣ing a quarter of a mile broad. Marks for the Spits. The Mark for it, is a flat Steeple, called great Holland; bring it into a small Swamp or Gaul in a red Cliff, then doth the Church bear North, half westerly; then steer in North-west till your water deepen; then bear down toward the Naze, according to your wind, the nearer the Gunfleet the deeper the water is; as you sayl, you shall have 5, 6, 7, 8 fathom water. The Gunfleet and Buoy. The Gunfleet is a long Sand, by judgment eight or nine miles, and hath in it some small Swatches; the South-west end of it, and the North-east end is flat, and good shoaling, but on either side steep, in some parts of it more than other: You may sayl alongst it on the South side; from the South-west end downwards in seven fathom, till you come within a large mile of the Buoy, come no nearer then nine fathom: Here lyeth a Hook E. S. E. off from the Sand a long Cables length, A Hook. on the South-east side of which goeth a small Swatch quite through the Sand to the North-west, which cau∣seth the Tyde to set in there; so that when Vessels pass near it, (if not careful in time) it draweth them into the Swatch, or upon the Hook; to avoid which, come no nearer this part of the Sand then ten fathom. From this Hook, to the North-east end, this Sand is very steep too, but at the end flat as aforesaid: This Sand lyeth North-east and South-west, a good part of it dryeth, in some parts half a mile, and other parts one third of a mile broad; and if you stand from this Sand to the Heaps, come no nearer them than ten fathom; in the middle of the Channel is eight fathom. The Buoy of the Gunfleet lyeth from the Naze South-east by East four miles. The Heaps. The Heaps are several Banks of Sand, as it were, By some called the Hurdles. joyning to the North-east end of the Middle-ground, E. N. E. and W. S. W. on which, at low-water, is but seven foot, and very steep too, and runs down about three miles; the North-east end thereof doth bear from the Naze South by East, half casterly: The Channel betwixt them and the Gunfleet, is four miles broad; in turning up or down, come no nearer them then ten fa∣thom. Some of these Heaps do dry on Spring Tydes. These are noted in the Draught with the Letter b. The Andrews. The Andrews is a narrow Point of small stones that lie out from Landguard Point near half a mile, and dryeth at low-water: On the South-west side of this Spit, lyeth several heaps of small stones that also dry at Spring-tydes; but when you have the two Light-houses in one, (sayling so) it directeth you free of them; and as you sayl out of Harwich to the northwards, when you have brought Bawdsey Steeple open of the Land to the south of Bawdsey; then are you clear of the Andrews, Oazely-Bay. and may sayl towards Oazely-Bay. The Altar. The Altar is a small Ridge that lyeth N. N. W. and S.S.E. right against Landguard-fort; the Channel here, at low-water, is not more than a Cables length broad; on the Fort side is five fathom, on the Altar is six foot at low-water; a Cables length within the Fort is a Cross Ridge, on which, at low-water, A Cross Ridge. is but fifteen foot, it lyeth quite cross the Channel; then you must sayl along the Beach on the Fort-side, to avoid the great Flat, called the Guard, Guard. that lyeth off from Harwich-Town, till you bring open Manning-Tree, and a high Tree that stands to the southwards of the Hill Point (next above Harwich-Town) in Manning-Tree-Water; then may you anchor where you please, in five, six, or seven fathom, Shotley-Point. taking care of a long spit of Sand that runs out from Shotley-point, cross to Ipswich-Water. This shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter i. The Ridge. The Ridge is a small Bank of great stones, and lyeth on the South side of you, as you sayl in by the Andrews, on which is four or five foot at low-water. The mark to avoid it, is to bring the two Light-houses at Harwich in one; and if you shut Harwich Mill in the North end of the Cliff, you run right on it; if open, then you
may go clear; it lies North-east and South-west, and is but narrow, and half a mile in length. Noted in the Draught with the Letter k. The Rowling-Grounds. The Rowling-grounds is the Road where commonly Ships ride, being without the Altar, and within the Ridge, and thwart the Andrews, where is at low-water four or five fathom. Marks of the Rowl∣ing-grounds. The Marks for it, are, to bring the Wind-mill on the North end of Harwich-Cliff, and the Beacon on Bawdsey-Cliff, over the North-east Point of the Beach that runs from Landguard-Fort to the north∣wards. The Platters. The Platters are several Heaps and Banks of small stones that lie between Landguard-Fort and Woodbridge-Haven, Woodbridge-Haven. they lie close to the shore: To avoid them, come no nearer than four fathom. To the northwards, near Woodbridge-Haven, A shoal. lyeth a small shoal, where is but ten foot at low-water: To avoid this, come no nearer than five fathom off the shore thereabout. This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter l. West-Rocks. The West-Rocks are a great many Heaps and Banks joyned together, having several small Swatches amongst them, the ground being of several qualities, partly Sand, and partly stones, both great and small; in se∣veral places it dries, and in most other parts of it but two, three, four, five foot at low water; the ground uneven, and is of great extent; N. E. and S. W. about 3 miles, and lyeth N. W. and S. E. near 5 miles. There are several shoals that lie within it on the N. W. side, that are accounted parts of it, and the Cork-Sand that lyeth on the North side of it, there being only a smal Swatch of 7 foot water that parts them; the S. W. part of this shoal, lyeth a mile & half from the Buoy of the Gunfleet, North by East, and N. N. E. you must come no nearer to it then seven or eight fathom on the South side: when you are to the southward, and against the Body of it, then Harwich-Church will be a little nearer to Land∣guard-Fort than to Harwich-Cliff. Marks of the West-Rocks. The Cork. The Cork is a Sand that lyeth on the North side of the West-Rocks, and doth almost joyn to them, there being only a small Swatch of seven foot water betwixt them; it dries at low-water, and lyeth near three miles from Landguard-Fort, and South-east by East from the out-part of the Andrews. The marks to go clear of it, in and out, is to bring Harwich-Church on a black Brew-house, that stands a little within the Land, as is before exprest in the going out of Harwich. The Cutler. The Cutler is a shoal that lyeth off from the North-East of Bawdsey-Cliff a small mile, on which is but six foot at low-water: This Sand lies badly, if men be not careful of it, because the Tyde of Flood or Ebb sets so right upon it, that if a Ship cometh aground, it is bad getting off, the Tyde binding so directly on it; you may come in four fathom of it; in the Fair-way is five and six fathom: it is almost round, and very hard ground. Longst mark. The longst mark to keep clear of it, is to bring Harwich-steeple a Sayles breadth open of Felsteed Cliff. Thwart mark. The thwart mark for it, is Bawdsey-steeple on the North end of a thick Wood by the water side; then the Steeple bears off you North-west, five degrees West. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter n. The Middle-Ground. The Middle-ground is a Bank that lyeth betwixt Or∣ford-haven and Orford-ness, half a mile from the shoar; on which at low-water is eighteen foot, and between it and the shoar is five and six fathom, and lies one third part of the way off to the Whiting-Sand; it is about half a mile in length, and lyeth along as the shoar lyeth: between this and the Whiting is six and seven fathom. This is noted in the Draught with the Letter o. The Onion. The Onion is a round knowl that lies a third part of a mile to the southwards of Orford-ness, just within the stream of it, and there is on it, at low-water, fourteen and fifteen foot. Marks there are none, but to observe the Tydes. This shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter p. The Sledway. The Sledway is a Channel through which all Ships pass that come within the Sands at Orfordness, and go up or down the Swin. The Marks for it are, to bring Bawdsey-steeple open a little to the northward of Bawd∣sey-Cliff in two or three Trees, and then the Church will bear from you N. N. W. and so you must keep those marks together, and sayl out S. S. E. in the very best of the Channel, which direct you clear of the South-ends of the Sands of Orford-Town, and of the Cork and West-Rocks to the northward of them; and if you bring Bawdsey-steeple on the North end of Bawdsey-Cliff, then it will bear from you North by West, and brings you very near the West-Rocks; and if you bring Bawdsey-steeple North-west from you, it will bring you near the South end of the Shipwash: When you sayl out of the Sledway from Bawdsey, (it bearing N. N. W. from you) the depths are 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 fathoms; then stear South-west by West, and W. S. W. according to the Wind, and that will bring you near the Buoy of the Gunfleet, to direct you up the Swin; and when you come to ten and eleven, then hale South up towards the Buoy of the Gunfleet. This Sledway is very un∣even Ground, you shall have 7, 8, and 9 fathom, and the next throw 4 and 5 fathom. The Whiting. The Whiting is a Sand that lyeth against Orford-Town, and lyeth North-east by North, and South-west by South, on which is but five foot at low-water, and is in length three miles and a half, and in breadth three Cables length; the North end of it beareth from the Light-House on Orford-ness S. S. W. four miles and a half, and Orford-Church N. N. W. a large mile from the shore; the South end is the broadest, when you are at the South end in four fathom. Marks of the Whi∣ting. The Marks are Alterton-steeple, West, eight degrees northerly; and Bawdsey-steeple, West by South, three degrees southerly: This end of the Sand lies from the Shore two miles; and a∣bout half a mile South-east from this end of the Sand, there is but five fathom at high-water: Not knowing whether this be that which some Colliers report, that lyeth about the South end of the Whiting, which they call the Kettle-Bottom, being a round Knowl, on which some of them said they have seen a Ship aground, but could not tell us where it was, neither could we find any other. The Whiting is noted in the Draught with the Letter q.
Bawdsey-Sand. This is a Sand that lyeth without the Whiting, ly∣ing North-east and South-west, in length four miles and a half, and in breadth three Cables length, and a great part of it dryeth at low-tydes. The Marks for the South end of it, is Bawdsey-steeple, North-west, six degrees: then the Church stands open to the South of a little tuft of Trees. This end lyeth from the there four miles and a half, and is very steep, having eight and nine fathom close to it, and a very strong Tyde runs by it. Marks for Bawdsey-Sand. The Marks for the North end, is Orford-Castle, North by West, six degrees westerly; the Light-houses North, six degrees easterly; five miles off this end is more slat and broad than the South-end; this end, and the South end of the Whi∣ting, doth bear North-west by West, and South-east by East, two miles asunder; the depths betwixt them is 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 fathom the most, and on the East side 8, 9, 10 fathom, and 7 and 8 at the West; and from Alterton-Church it lyeth West by North, half nor∣therly; and from Bawdsey-Church, West, half sou∣therly; then will Bawdsey-Church be on the North end of a short Wood. The Shipwash. The Shipwash is a Sand that lyeth without Bawd∣sey-Sand, and is properly so called, it having, out of doubt washed many a Ship quite away; It is a very dangerous Sand by reason of its length, and the strength of Tyde that runs by it, and the great part of it that dries at low-water, and the devouring nature thereof, swallowing up any Ship that is lost on it, quite out of sight in few dayes: it lyeth North by East, and South by West, and is in length nine miles, and in breadth a quarter of a mile; but at the South end it is half a mile broad, by reason of a Hook that runs off the North-west side, as in the Draught is described. Marks for the North end of this Sand. The Marks for the North end, are Or∣ford-Church, North-west, six miles off, and five miles from the Light-Houses: Or Orford-ness South-East by South. Marks for the South end. The Marks for the South end, are Bawdsey-steeple North-west, five degrees West, eight miles and a half off from the shore. The South-east side of this Sand is very steep too, having ten fathom close to it; but the North-west side is not so steep, for you may sayl along that side in seven and eight fathom, taking care of the Hook; the South end is more flat than the North end. The Depths between this and Bawdsey-Sand. are 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 fathom; two miles without this Sand, to the East, is 15 and 16 fathom. Alborough-Knapes. Alborough-Knapes is a Sand that lyeth about five miles from Orford-ness. The Marks to carry you clear of it, are to bring Orford-Church and Castle one in another: Alborough-Church West, brings you just upon it; there is but two fathom and a half wa∣ter upon it at low-tyde. If you come within the Knapes, you will have twelve or thirteen fathom wa∣ter, and if you go without it, you will have sixteen fathom; which are sure notes to know whether you are without or within the Sand. Bernard. The Bernard is a Sand that lyeth a little to the northwards of East-ness; it lyeth in the Sea North-East one mile and a half; the South end lyeth East from Covehithe-Church, if you are bound to the north∣ward; to go clear of the North-east end of it, keep Southwold open of the South end of the Cliff, until you bring Leystaff Windmill open to the northwards of the Town of Laystaff. The Sea-Horse or Newcomb. The Sea-Horse is a Sand or Bank which lyeth thwart the Steeple of Covehithe, (which is a high sharp Stee∣ple) not far from the shore, which falleth almost dry at low-water, but at half-flood you may sayl through between the Land and it in 2 fathom: upon the outer∣side it is very steep, so that you cannot come nearer it than in nine or ten fathom. When the Steeple of Covehithe is W. N. W. from you, then you are to the southward of it; and when the Steeple is South-west by West from you, then are you to the northwards of it two leagues. St. Matthews-Sand. Off from Pakesfield, almost three miles, lyeth St. Matthews Sand, being in length one mile and a half, and in breadth about three Cables length; it lyeth in the Sea North and South; the South end beareth from East-ness North-east by North, five miles and a half; the North end lyeth from Leystaff East by South, three miles and a half. The Holmes of Yarmouth. Off from Leystaff beginneth the Holms of Yarmouth, which are several Banks and Sands, having many Channels going between them, and you may sayl through upon divers Marks, if you are acquainted: And also within these Banks, from Leystaff until you come past Winterton, (for they reach thwart of it) most of the Banks have particular appellations, as Corten-Sand, Leystaff, Knock, New-warp, Cockle, Hombsby, Hurd, the Knock, Middle-ground, Thredle-dore, St. Nicholas-Sand, Scrobe, &c. If you sayl alongst by the Land, you must keep the Soundings of the shore in 5, 6, or 7 fathom; some of them are steep too on out-side, where you may have 12 and 13 fathom; but off Thredle-door, St. Nicholas-Sand, and Scrobe, you have but 4, 5, and 6 fathoms, three or four miles off. To go without the Holm-head, keep the Knock-Bea∣cons one in the other: Also upon the Ebb, if occasion serves, you may borrow into four fathom of the North end of the Newcomb; or you may go off in 11 or 12 fathom as you please; coming from the northwards, you must go no nearer the Cockle than five or six fa∣thom, but on the shore you may borrow in four fathom. Scroby. E. N. E. from the Town of Yarmouth, two miles from the shore, is a Sand called the Scroby, lying North and South in the Sea, being in length almost two miles; this Sand is steep too, having on the out-side ten and eleven fathom; in the middle of the Channel you will have twenty fathom between it and the New-warp; the South end of this Sand lyeth half a mile from the end of the Knowls, and the North end almost the same distance from the Knock. New-warp. South-east by East, five leagues and a half from Winterton-ness, lyeth a Sand called New-warp, being in length two mile and a half, and lyeth in the Sea East and West; on it, at low-water, there is but two fa∣thom
without it you will have ten and twelve  between it and the Hlms five and six fathom, but near the Holms ten fathom. The Overfalls. East from Yarmouth about nine miles, lyeth the South end of the Overfalls; extending it self to the northwards more than five miles in length, but in breadth not considerable: This Bank is dangerous, because it is very shoal; on the East side of it you will have 5 fathom and even ground, but being about two miles distant you will have 20 and 24 fathom. Bounses. The Bounses is a Sand which lyeth North-east, a little northerly from Winterton-ness about five miles and a half, being round Sand, whereon there is three fathom at low-water; within it you have 16 and 17 fathom, but without it 8, 12, and 16 fathom; it beareth from New-warp North by West, a little we∣sterly, about a mile. Haseborrough-Sand. This Sand lyeth from Haseborrough North-East by East, about six miles and a half, and lyeth in the Sea North-west and South-east, being in length two miles and a half; the South-east end lyeth from Winterton∣ness North and West, a little westerly, nine miles and a half; between it and the shore you have twelve and thirteen fathom water, but on it three and four fa∣thom. The Owery. The Owery is a Sand which beareth from Winterton∣ness North-east almost seven leagues distant; it lyeth in the Sea North-west and South-east, being in length about four miles, and in breadth a mile and half; it lyeth from the Limber East by North, distant 3 leagues and a half; between which you will have 17, 18, and 19 fathom. The Limber. The Limber is a Sand which beareth from Winter∣ton-ness, North by East, half easterly, and from Hase∣borrough E. N. E. distant from either of them about four leagues, and from New-warp North, two leagues; between which you will have seventeen and eighteen fathom water; it lyeth in the Sea North-west and South-east; in length four miles, and in breadth a mile and half; on the South end there is but two fa∣thom, but on the North-west end six fathom at low-water. Blackney-Sand. This Sand lyeth before Blackney, being distant a∣bout five miles; on the inner side you will have four fathom water, and without 4, 5, and 6 fathom. Pole and Piper. The Pole and Piper is a Shoal that lyeth between Blackney and  to the . The Bea∣cons that you sayl by,  by the Pi, at the West end whereof goeth in the Channel of . Burnham Flats. Between Wlls and Burnham there lyeth the great Flat called Burnham-Flats, a league distant from the there, which at low-water lyeth dry in divers places. At high-water you may well go over it. The ground on the North side goeth up flat and plain; Or the South side it is very steep; as soon as you are over  shoalest, you shall get suddenly deep water, and good sandy ground; within it is good riding for easterly winds. The Sonk. The Sonk is a Sand which is nigh the South end of Burnham-flats, and lyeth to the norward of Chappel-land, and is dry at low-water; you may sayl about it on both sides. Dousings. The Dousings is a Sand which lyeth on the North side of Burnham-flats; it beareth from Wells North, half westerly, 21 miles; the South side is steep too. where you will have nineteen fathom, not far from it, and on the North side nine and ten fathom. Inner-Dousings. This Sand lyeth from St. Edmonds North-west by North, thirteen miles; and from Skegness N. N. E. ten miles. Dogs-Head. Dogs-head is a small Sand which lyeth on the North side of Wilgriph, about a mile from the shore. Boston-Knock, Is a Sand which lyeth off the Point of Legerness, which falleth dry at low-water; between it and the Land there is but two fathom; but it floweth there∣about five fathom up and down. When Legerness bears W. N. W. from you, then go on South-west through between the Knock and a Shoal (which shoot∣eth off from the westward of Legerness) until you can get again the depth of six or seven fathom. Long-Sand. The body of this Sand lyeth against Legerness, di∣stant about three miles; being without the Point of the Ness, you may run through between Boston-Knock and it, when the Trees in the Point come a hand-spikes length to the eastward of Legerness; then go on South∣west, and you may run right into the Deep between Boston-Knock and Long-Sand; between the Knock and the Point of the Long-sand you will have five fathom; being past the Knock you will have eight, nine, and ten fathom deep.
A Description of the Sands, Shoals, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-Marks vvithin the HUMBER. Rose. THE Rose is a Sand which lyeth before Salt-fleet, being a round Sand, and is two miles from the shore. Riff. The Riff is a Shoal which joyneth to the shoar be∣tween Sand-hall and Clay-ness, and stretcheth it self N. E. by East almost six miles into the Sea, the Point whereof lyeth from the Sporn South-east by South, four miles, and from the Buoy of the Bull East by South four miles. Bull. The Bull is a Sand which lyeth almost in the middle of the Channel, on the North-east side whereof lyeth a Buoy, which lyeth from the Sporn South-east, half southerly, three miles and a half; the Buoy lyeth in se∣ven or eight fathom water. The thwart Mark of the said Buoy, is a House upon the West end of the Cliff of Clay-ness, and from thence to Grimsbey-Road, and anchor a little below the Beacon. Stone Banks. These are several small Banks which lie East from the Sporn-head. If from the Point of Kelsey you steer South by East, until the Point of the Sporn be West, half northerly, then are you clear of them. Borcom. Borcom is a Sand which lyeth off Stanningborrough a∣bout a mile from the shore; on the North side hereof lyeth a Buoy, which lyeth from the Sporn West by South, half southerly, seven miles, and from the Buoy of the Bull East by South four miles and a half. Sonk. The Sonk is a Sand that lyeth on the North side of the River almost as far down as the Sporn, if going up on the South side you bring Pauls-Tower open of the Red-Cliff to the eastward, then you are clear or about the Tayl of the Sonk. Holms. The Holms is a Sand which lyeth about a mile from the shore. The East end cometh within the Tayl of the Sonk, and on the West end lyeth a Buoy which beareth South a mile and half from Pauls-Church, and from the Buoy of the Bull North-west by West about thirteen miles. The Dogger-Bank. East from the Sporn-head, six leagues, lyeth the we∣stermost corner off of the Dogger-Bank, from which it extendeth it self North-East by East 77 leagues, the eastermost end being but 17 leagues, South-west by West from Rinkopper-deep in Jutland; the breadth of this Sand is 11 leagues; on the westermost end hereof you will have 10, 9, 11, 12, and 13 fathom; but to∣wards the East end 14, 15, 18, 20; and at the Point of it 25 fathom; on the North side you will have 50, 46, 45, & 40 fathom; on the South side 28 and 26 fathom. Crouch-Bank. In the mid-way between Flamborough-head and the Naze, lyeth this great Bank, North by East, and South by West in the Sea, being in length 35 leagues; the South end hereof is distant from the Dogger-bank five leagues, and from Flamborrough-head North-east, half easterly, 39 leagues; on the South end of this Bank is 22, in the middle 38, 39, and on the North end 28 fathoms, which beareth from the Naze W. S. W. 39 leagues. The White-bank. About twenty leagues North from Friezland lyeth the White-bank, being in length 27 leagues, and in breadth five leagues, being distant from the Dogger-bank 13 leagues; lying East by North, and West by South in the Sea; on the West end is 23 fathom, and on the South end 22. The White-water. North-West by West, fourteen leagues from the Texel, lyeth a Bank called the White-water, lying North-east by East, and South-west by South in the Sea, being in length ten leagues, on which is sixteen fathom, the West end being distant from the Well se∣ven leagues, where you will have 24 and 25 fathom, and between it and the Dogger-bank 27 and 28 fathom. The Well. North-east by North from Wintertonness, about ele∣ven leagues, lyeth the Well, being a large square Bank, in length 13 leagues, and in breadth 10; the ground whereof is very uneven, where at the first cast you will have 12, the next 16, and in some places 22 fathom, between it and the Dogger-Bank, from which it is distant about four leagues; near the said Well 30 and 24; near the Dogger 51, 44, 30, and 28 fathom; between it and the Bread-bank 23 and 24 fathom; and between it and the English shore 20, 26, and 24 fathom.
A Description of the Sands, Shoals, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-Marks up∣on the Coast of England, from the Buoy of the Nower to Dover. The Flats. THE Flats are so called, by reason of their ge∣neral flatness, on which you may sayl 4 or 5 miles and not alter one foot in depth. In the course from the Narrow to the Red-sand, you may have ten foot water; to the eastward, in some holes, you have fifteen and sixteen foot water. The Dangers that are in these Flats, are discoursed of in their place; for he that keeps himself on the Course that leads from the Buoy of the Wool-pack to the Buoy of the Red-sand, (which is North-west by West, a quar∣ter North) if he take Tyde according to the draught of his Ship, shall not meet with any dangers. The Gilman. The Gilman is a Shoal that lyeth up from the Buoy of the Spell W.N.W. about five miles, and a quarter of a mile South-east by South from the East end of the Spaniard, and falls dry on Spring-tydes. He that keepeth in the Course that leadeth from the Buoy of the Woolpack, to the Buoy of the Red-sand, will not come near it. This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter C. The Spaniard. The Spaniard is a Sand that takes its beginning from Sheppy-Island, and runs down East by North, until the Buoy of the Red-sand is North-west by North from the East end of it, a mile and a half distance: a good part of this Sand falls dry. And he that keeps the West end of St. Nicholas-Wood in the Gore, open to the east∣wards of the Reculvers-steeple, will not come near this Sand. Between this and the Red-sand, runs down the first Depths, where there is 5, 6, 7, and 8 fathoms; the more to the eastward the deeper water. The Red-sand and Buoy. The Red-sand is very long; on the East end whereof lies a Buoy to direct them clear (to the North of it) into the Channel, betwixt this Sand and the Oaze-edge, which leads towards London, or downward over the Flats; the North side of this Sand, from the Buoy up∣wards, is steep too, but indifferent shoaling. This Buoy lies from the Buoy of the Oaze-edge East, half North, and West, Marks of the Buoy. half South, about three or four miles. The Mark on the Land for this Buoy, is to bring the Lands∣end South-west, and St. Nicholas-Wood open to the Reculvers, or to bring the Reculvers South-east. The eastermost end of this Sand lies out with two Tongues, upon the northermost of which is placed a Buoy. The Oaze-edge and Buoy. The Oaze-edge is a Sand that lies to the northward of the Red-sand, and lies E.N.E. and W.S.W. contain∣ing about 4 miles in length, and half a mile in breadth. The Channel betwixt this and the Red-sand, is in some part more, and in some less then a mile broad: The South side of this Sand is steep too, and the deepest part in the Channel is nine and ten fathom. At the West end of it lies a Buoy, and bears North by East from the Lands-end, Mouse∣hole Church. (on the North-east of Sheppy) then Mouse-hole Church is open to the Eastward of the said Lands-end; from this Buoy to the Buoy of the Nower, the Course is West, a quarter South, about five miles. The Spile. The Spile is a small round Sand, and lies almost thwart the Buoy of the Oaze-edge to the southward; on the North side of the West-tayl of the Red-sand, you have but six foot at low-water, and lies very dange∣ously. The Buoy of the Woolpack. The Buoy of the Woolpack is the westermost Buoy in the Narrow, on the North side of the Channel, Marks of this Buoy. and lyeth on the West Spit of the Woolpack-sand, and bears from Reculvers-sleeple North by West; then you have two little Hills like two Paps on the upper Land to the southwards, just open and shut to the Reculvers-sleeple. This Buoy is noted in the Draught with the Letter x. The Buoy of the Spell. The Buoy of the Spell lyeth on the South side of the Narrow or Channel, a little to the eastward of the Buoy of the Woolpack; betwixt these Buoys, the Channel is a Cables length and a half broad, and but nine foot at low-water. This Buoy is noted in the Draught with the Letter y. The Hook. The Hook is a Shoal that runneth out from Marget-Sand South-east, so far to the southward, that it makes the Channel very narrow. The thwart Mark for this Sand, is to bring Birchington-steeple into a green Dauk or Valley in the Cliff, then the Steeple will bear from you South-east, five degrees southerly. The longst Mark, is to bring St. Peters Church upon the West end of the Cliff. This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter z. Longst Mark. The longst Mark to direct you clear of the Hook to the Buoy of the Searn, is to bring St. Peters-steeple over the East side or Cliff of Westgate-bay. You must keep them so, till you bring Birchington-steeple over the Gual, when you take hold of the Mark to go through. Middle-Ground at the Cliff end. The Middle-ground is a Shoal that lyeth below the Hook, nearest the shore, on which there is but fourteen foot at low-water, and on each side four fathom: this being a small narrow Ridge, lyeth E.N.E. and W.S.W. one third of a mile long. Marks to lead clear of it. The Marks to keep you clear, Is to bring St. Peters Church over the East side of the Westgate-bay as aforesaid; or to bring the nether∣most Tree on the next high Land, (to the westward of the Reculvers) a little open to the southward of the Reculvers, (this Tree leaneth a little to the southward) and is a good Mark for the Hook downwards, or from Marget-sand upward. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter A.
The Horse. The Horse is a Shoal that lyeth a little above the Hook of Marget-sand; on the South side, a little be∣low the Reculver Church, on which it is very shoal at low-water. The Mark. To avoid this, you must keep St. Peters Steeple (on the East side of the Westgate-bay) a little upon the Cliff, upward to the Buoy of the Searn, and so from the Buoy downward. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter B. The Buoy of the Searn. The Buoy of the Searn is the eastermost Buoy that lyeth on the North side of the Reculvers; the Steeple bearing from the Buoy South by West, then have you a Wind-mill a little open of the Channel of Reculvers Church, or to bring over a small House that standeth a little to the East end of the Church. The Course up∣wards from this Buoy through the Narrow, is W.N.W. The longst Marks on the shore, Marks of this Sand. is to bring Birchington Church right over a Gaul, or black Hole in the western part of the Cliff end. This Buoy is noted in the Draught with the Letter w. Between the Woolpack and the Pan-sands, or the West end of the Wedge and the Pan-sands, A new Channel. goes down a Chan∣nel of one mile and a half broad, and runs down E.N.E. At the first entrance, below the Wedge and Pan-sands, you have five fathom water; and so down to the east∣ward deeper, as 6, 7, and 8 fathoms; but at the North side of the Woolpack, betwixt that and the Pan-sands, there is but three and a half, and four fathoms at low-water; the more to the East, the Channel is deeper and broader. The Wedge. The Wedge is a Sand that lyeth on the North side of Marget-sand, being broad at the West end, and sharp at the East end, resembling its appellation; it lyeth West by North, and East by South, about six miles in length, having at the westermost end between it and Marget-sand three fathom water, and so down to the east end until it joyn with Marget-sand, there is two fathom, and on the North side 7, 8, and 9 fathom. Marget-Sand. The East end of Marget-sand lyeth before Marget, and Westgate-bay, and up till you are thwart the Recul∣vers. And by reason of some Swatches that are in it, it is divided into more names, the Searn, the Weelpack. The East end of this Sand beareth from Marget-Church North, half West, four miles distance; and as it runs up to the westwards, Marks for the East end. so it grows nearer the shore. The Marks for the East end, is to bring Marget Steeple and the Mill in one. The Depths you have along this Sand, as you turn up or down, are at the East end, and so upward, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5 fathoms. On the North side of this Sand, a quarter of a mile off, lyeth another Sand, The Wedg called the Wedge, which runs down alongst by it, and a Channel of 4, 3, 2, 1 fathom water; at the lower end it joyns with the other Sand: at the East end, the most part of this Sand dries at low-water. The Colborn. The Colborn is a Shoal that lyeth to the northwards of White-dike, and a little to the fouthwards of Broad∣stairs-Peer, (which sometimes ebbs dry) it lies a large half mile off the Shore, and there is nine foot water between it and the Shore. The Mark for a small Ship to avoid it, Is to keep the top of St. Peters Steeple open over the Land. This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter u. The White-Dike. The White-Dike is a Shoal that runs off from the shore a large half mile, and lies half a mile to the northwards of Ramsgate; all the inner part of it dries every Ebb, and on the outer-part it is two foot at low-water; and at sometimes there is but eight or nine foot in the Chan∣nel betwixt this and the Querns. Inner Channel. This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter t. The Querns. The Querns is a small Shoal that lieth W.N.W. from the Brake; The Inner Channel. between them both is a Channel for good Ships at high-water; it is a mile broad, only at the South end there lies a small Middle-ground near to the Brake, on which there is but seven foot at low-water. Longst Mark. The longst Mark for this Middle-ground, Is to bring St. Mar∣gets Church (near the South-Foreland) a Ships length open to the southwards of Deal-Castle. Thwart Mark. The thwart Mark, Is to bring Winsborough Steeple a Ships length open to the northwards of Sandwich Steeple, then are you to the northward of this Middle-ground. Leading Mark. The leading Mark through this Channel, Is to bring St. Margets Church in the middle, between Wamer and Deal Castle, (the Middle-ground excepted) for when you come near that, you must keep the Church as a∣foresaid: Or you may turn the Church from the mid∣dle between Deal and Wamer Castle. If you bring the Church more then half over towards Wamer Castle, you will be near the Brake, if not on it. The Mark for the North end of the Querns, Is to bring St. Law∣rence Steeple a Ships length to the Southward of the Cliff. For the South end, bring the Mill near Rams∣gate, to the northward of Ramsgate-Peer. Depths in this Channel, at low-water, are two and a half, three and a half, and four fathom; the nearer the Brake the deeper. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter s. The Brake. The Brake is a Sand that lyeth to the westwards of the North part of the Goodwin; between this and the Goodwin, is the Channel for great Ships to pass; the North end of it is the narrowest and most steep too, and dries most at low-water. The Mark for the North end, Is to bring St. Lawrence Steeple on the South end of the Cliff, to the northward of Ramsgate-Peer. This Sand lyeth N.N.E. and S.S.W. The Mark for the South end, Is to bring Ash Steeple open a hand-spikes length to the South of Sandwich Steeple, then are you clear to the southward of the South end; or else the Wind-mill on the Cliff, at the South-east end of the Town of Ramsgate. The Depths in this Channel are 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 fathom. The Mark to lead through to the northwards of the Cliff of the South-Foreland Point, or else Marget Church on the third Cliff from the Foreland northward, to the northward of the Bunt-head. The Goodwin is not so steep too, but you may come there in eight fathom, and to the Brake in six and seven fathom, according to the time of Tyde. This Sand is about two miles long, and a quar∣ter of a mile broad. The Goodwin. The Goodwin is a Sand that lyeth before the Downs, and is from the shore, in some parts four miles, and in some five; the southern half lies S.S.W. and N.N.E. rounding towards the South-Foreland, the northern part
of it lies North & South, rounding to the East side, and is in most places steep too; at the North end there is indifferent good shoaling. The Sand, by storms and strong Tydes, alters every year, is very broad, and dries a great part of it, but most to the North end. The Marks for to go clear of the North-sand-head, Marks for the North-sand-head. Is to bring St. Peters steeple on Broad-stairs-Peer; this Mark will direct you by it in five and six fathom, according to the Tyde; and in the Night, the Light on the North-Fore∣land North-west, Marks for the South-sand-head. half West. The Mark for the South-sand-head, Is the steeple of Ring-joul, on the Village called Kings-down, or the Light-Houses on the South-Foreland together. From this Sand, spits out against the Brake, Bunthead. a Sand called the Bunt-head, which is very steep too, having eleven fathom close to it. The North end lyeth off Broad-stairs about six miles, and the South end about three miles off the shore. If you, coming from the West, do keep Folkston Land open of Dover Land, it will carry you without the South-sand-head. The Falls. The Falls is a long narrow Sand that lies South by West from the Galloper, about twelve miles; it is fit∣teen miles in length, and lyeth South by West, and North by East: The South end lies about seven miles without the Goodwin-sand, and bears from the Light-House on the South-Foreland E. N. E. about thirteen miles; the North end bears from St. Peters Church on the North-Foreland E. N. E. about sixteen miles: the South end is shoalest, where there is but 20 and 21 foot at low-water: This end hath a broad round flat head like the Galloper, where the Tyde doth ripple and whelm very much; close to it there is twenty fathom; some say they have been on it in fifteen foot water; on the North part of it, four, four and a half, five, and five fathom and a half. Whether it alters or not, we can∣not learn of any: the Ground is gross Gravel, and the Soundings about it are very uneven; a mile within and without the North end there is 27 fathom; it is steep too on both sides. The Soundings we had from the North-Foreland, are 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 22, 24, 27, 28. 24, 23, 22, 20, 11, 6 and a half; and on the North end there is, as about the South end, 15, 19, 20, 25, 28 fathom within and without it. The Galloper. The Galloper is a Sand that lies near South-east by South from the Gabard about ten miles, and is pro∣perly so called, by reason of the great length of it, with the strength and crossness of the Tyde that sets over it, being very steep on both sides; all which, in foul weather, makes such a great short Sea, that if any Ship come near it, it makes Her, and the People in Her to gallop to get from it. Of all the Sands, none are like to this for narrowness; it is a wonder, that be∣ing it consists on the upper part of small shingle or stones, and the Tydes setting so strong and cross over it, together with the Sea that must fall upon it in foul weather, being so great, with the steepness on both sides, and the narrowness atop, that it is not dispersed and carried away; It is supposed, that the most part of this Shoal (some depth under the shingle) is a Rock, the top whereof holds in the shingle; And it is also ve∣ry like that it doth alter every Winter in stormy wea∣ther; it lyeth North by East, and South by West, in length it is eight miles and a half, and in breadth twen∣ty or thirty foot; but at the South end it hath a broad head, and flat at top, half a mile broad, but steep too round about it; close to the South end was a Hole, where we saw the Tyde make a very great whelming and ripling; we thought that the least water had been there, but when we had hove the Lead within it, we had twenty fathom the next cast; without it we had but 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathom. The North end of it bears from Orford Church South-east, seven degrees East, 24 miles off. The South end bears from the North-Foreland North-east, five degrees North, 27 miles: Within the body of this Sand we met with a Hole, S.W. and N. E. three miles in length, where we had twenty fathom water. Other Depths that we had betwixt this Sand and the Shipwash, were 14, 16, 17, 18, and 20 fathoms, and such like. On the South-east side of this Sand, two miles off, we had from the Sand off-ward 15, 17, 18, 20, 24, and 26 fathom. The Tyde sets over it North-east by East, and South-west by West, four leagues a Watch; and it floweth South & North, and hath but 14 and 15 foot at low-water; on the top of the Spring, and close to the outward side of the Sand, you will have 14 fathom, and at the inner side ten and eleven fathom. The Gabard. The Gabard is a Sand that lies near East from the Shipwash, about eight or nine miles, and lyeth North and South, being in length three miles, and a Cables length broad; on which at low-water there is but 12 or 13 foot, and hath good shoalings on both sides: it lyeth E. S. E. five leagues from Orford Church and Castle. Bearings of the Gabard. The Depths between this Sand and Orford-Ness, is near 18, 19, and 20 fathom, only a mile W.N.W. from the North end of it we had, two casts off, 27 fa∣thom: The South end of it, by judgment, lies from the North end of the Galloper nine or ten miles, South-East by South, and North-west by North. The Depths betwixt this Sand and the North end of the Galloper, were 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18 fathom. Kentish-Knock. The Kentish-Knock is a Sand, the body whereof lies five miles South from the Long-sand-head, and is three miles in length North-east and South-west, and in breadth two miles North-west and South-east. This Sand hath the resemblance of an Oval, and hath a Ridge in the middle, from North-west to South-east, on which there is but six foot at low-water: To the North-east and South-west of this Ridge, there is 18, 10, 12, 14 and 15 foot, as you are near the ends of it, and it is steep too round about. Between this and the Long-sand, is a Channel near two miles broad, where there is twelve and thirteen fathom: from the South-west and North-east end of this shoal, runs a Ridge more then a mile to the North-east and South-west, on which there is 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathom; and off either side more water. South by East from the Long-sand-head, you will go to the eastwards of this shoal. To the E. S. E. of this, you will quickly come in 15, 17, 19, and 20 fathom water. Bearings of the Ken∣tish-Knock The body of this Knock lies from St. Peters Church (on the North-Foreland) N. N. E. three degrees East, fifteen miles: the North-east end of the Knock and the Long-sand-head, bears South by East, and North by West. A Note to know the Knock from the Long-sand To know when you are near the Knock or Long-sand-head, is thus, When you are near the Knock, you shall see the Land of the North-Foreland very plain; but when you are at the Long-sand-head, you will hardly see the Land, except it be very clear weather, or unless you go up the shrouds. At the Knock you may see it plainly on the Deck. Pan-Sands. These are a heap of small Sands of divers shapes, ly∣ing at the South-west end of the Long-sand, which dries
at low-water, and hath some water ranning betwixt them, but no passage for ships; one of which Sands joyns to the South-west end of the Girdler, and lies up from it W. S. W. in length two miles and a half, and makes the entrance into the Black-deeps, where the Channel is but half a mile broad, and 10, 11, and 12 fathom water. The rest of these Pan-sands lie E.S.E. from this four miles, and then trend away North-east, five miles and a half, even with the Long-sand, and to it. These Sands are noted in the Draught with the Let∣ter E. The Girdler. The Girdler is a Sand that lies South-west from the Long-sand, and spits home to it; it lies North-east by East, and South-west by West; it is four miles and a half long, and half a mile broad, being steep too on the North-west side, where there is 12, 15, 16 fathom water. From the North-east end of this Sand to the South-westward, the Channel grows narrower and narrower. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the Letter D. The Long-Sand. The Long-sand is properly so called, by reason of its great length, containing fifteen miles and a half; in breadth it is from one mile to two, and lies North-east by East, and South-west by West. On the North-west side it is steep too, having in most places ten fathom close to it: But at the North-east end, which is called Long-sand-head, is good shoaling, lying off a mile N.E. but in nine fathom; the South-east side not so deep, you may sayl along it in 4, 5, and 6 fathom. Much of this Sand dries at three quarters Ebb, and in some parts of it there is long narrow swatches, two or three one by another, Long sand Head. which run upward and downward as the Sand lies, in which at low-water was three and four fa∣thoms, the Ridges between are dry: The Head of this Sand bears from St. Peters Church (on the North-Fore∣land) S. S. W. and N. N. E. about twenty miles; and from the Naze E. S. E. five degrees South, 17 miles; and from the South end of the Galloper West, five de∣grees South, Bearings of the Long-sand. about eleven miles; and from the North end of the Falls, it bears North-west by North, about sixteen miles. At the Head of this Sand it flows North and South, and the Flood and Ebb sets on several Points of the Compass. The Shivering-Sand. The Shivering-sand runs up to the South-west from Knock-John, and lyeth North-east and South-west, be∣ing in length about seven miles, and in breadth a mile, running away sharp at both ends, and rounding on the North-west side, where you have 8, 9, and 10 fathom close to it; on the South side 10 and 12 fathoms; and in the middle, between it and the Girdler, there is 12, 13, 14, and 15 fathoms: From the South-west end of this, to the Buoy of the Red-sand, is three miles W.S.W. and E.N.E. and from the North-west end of the Mouse, to this Sand, is four miles and a half, East by South, and West by North; and from the South-west end of this, to the South-west end of the West-Barrows, is two miles and one third, N.N.W. & S.S.E. and from the South-west end of this, to the South-west end of the Pan-sands, is half a mile South by East, and North by West. Knock-John. Kneck-John is a Sand that lies at the Southwest end of the Sunk, lying North-east by East, and South-west by West, and is in length about six miles, and a mile broad in the middle, growing narrower towards each end, and runs up with a Tayl on the North-west side of the Shivering-sand, where there is a small swatch that parts them, but is not navigable: This Sand is winding and sharp at both ends, the North-east end tayling on the South-west side of the Sunk: A great part of this Sand dries at half-tyde, and is steep too on both sides, having ten fathom close to it; Betwixt this and the Long-sand, the Channel is a mile and three-quarters broad; and betwixt this and the East-Barrows it is a mile broad. The Sunk. The Sunk is a Sand that lyeth on the North side of the Long-sand, Bearings of the Sunk. whose North-east ends do bear one from the other E. S. E. and W. N. W. about two or three miles distant; between them both enters the Channel called the Black-deeps, where there is 11, 12, 13, 14, Black-deeps. 15 fathom water, and ten fathom close to the Sands on both sides. This Sand lyeth North-east by East, and South-west by West, about eight miles and a half, the West end running a little on the North-west side of Knock-John, having a small swatch that runs through be∣twixt them, dividing them into two Sands, but is not fit for ships to pass through. This Sand dries in seve∣ral places, and is half, and three quarters of a mile broad. East-Barrows. The East-barrows is the North-east part of the whole Barrows-sand, and lies down from the North-east end of the West-barrows, North-east by East, about four miles, in two several Sands, one at the end of the other, the South-west end of them tayling upwards. Beatings of this Sand. On the North-west side of the North-east end of the West-bar∣rows, is a small swatch passing between them; also be∣tween the two East-barrows there is a swatch, where small Vessels that are acquainted do pass through; both these Sands fall dry at low-water, and are in length about four miles; the South side of these two Sands is steep, the North-west more bolder, yet something steep. The North-east end of these doth bear from the Naze South by East, ten miles distant. The Channel betwixt this and the Heaps, is a mile broad, in which you have 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathom water; and in one place a cross Ridge lies thwart the Channel, where there is but two and three fathoms. West-Barrows. The West-Barrows is the South-west part of the whole Barrows-sand, there being some Swatches two third parts down to the North-eastwards that divides this Sand, which makes it to be called the East and West-Barrows. That part which is called the West-Bar∣rows, begins at the North-east end of the Mouse, and lyeth down North-east and South-west; it falls dry in several places at low-water, and is steep too on both sides; on the South-east side there is seven and eight fathom close to the Sand; but on the North-west side you have ten, eleven, and twelve fathom close to it. This Sand is in length six or seven miles, and betwixt it and the Shivering-sand, you have in the middle nine, ten, and eleven fathom; this Sand dries in several pla∣ces: amongst all these Sands it flows South by East. The Mouse. The Mouse is a Sand that lyeth from the Body of the Oaze-edge, North-east about a mile; between them is a Channel, where is seven or eight fathom water, and lower down to the eastward there is nine or ten fathom.
chart A Draught of the SANDS, CHANNELS, BUOYES, BEACONS AND SEA-MARKS upon the Coast of ENGLAND: From the Southforeland to Orfordness Discovered by Capt gilbert Crane and Capt Tho: Browne elder Bretheren of Trinity House The Sea Coast Survghed by Ionas Moor Esquire & Published by the Special License and Aproba∣tion of his Royal Highness the DUKE OF YORK. Made and Sold by John Seller Hidrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty in Wapping London
This Sand is between three and four miles long, and half a mile broad, being steep too on both sides; It lies in length E. N. F. and W. S. W. and joyns to the West-Barrows, only a small Swatch runneth betwixt them. The North-east end of this Sand bears N. N. W. two miles and a half from the South-west of the Shi∣vering-sand. A Description of the Sands, Shoals, Rocks, and Dangers, upon the South Coast of England, between Dover and Silly. The Vane or Ripraps. THE Vane or Ripraps is a Bank that lyeth a lit∣tle to the southwards of the Heads of Calice and Dever, some-what nearer to the French-Coast, it is but narrow, but in length it is four leagues, lying about N. N. E. and S. S. W. and so windeth it self southerly toward the Land of Bulleyn, bearing West by South from Calice-Cliff and South by East from Dover. The North-easter∣most end is the shoalest, not having more than nine, 10, or 11 foot at low-water: On both sides of this Bank, as well to the eastwards as the westwards thereof, you will have 20, 22, 23, and 24 fathom wa∣ter; betwixt this Bank and the Land lyeth also two or three Shoals, but not very dangerous, having three fa∣thom and a half, or four fathom at low-water. Easterborrough-Head. South of Arundel about six or seven miles, Easterbor∣rough-Head. lyeth a Bank called Easterborrough-head, which dryeth at low-water, and at Spring-tydes about a furlong, being Rocks and Shindles: To avoid this danger, if you be bound to the southward from Sborum, run S. S. W. into the Sea until you get eighteen fathom, and then you may steer boldly W. S. W. and that course will lead you without the Owers; also close by this Shoal you will have fifteen fathom: from this to the Owers it is almost two leagues W. S. W. come no nearer than in twelve or thirteen fathom, and that depth will carry you with∣out the Owers. A Ledge of Rocks. Between Easterborrough and the Owers lyeth a Ledge of Rocks, on which there is not above six foot at low-water: This Ledge is half a league to the North-west from Easterborrough-head. The Owers. W. S. W. five leagues from Arundel, Owers. thirteen leagues West by South, somewhat westerly from Beachy, about four leagues to the eastwards of the Wight, and half a league from the Shore, lyeth the Owers, being alwayes under water. The thwart Mark is, when Chichester Spire-steeple is N. N. W. Marks. from you, then are you thwart the souther side of it. For a longst Mark, set the Point of Dunness with your Compass, it will bear direct West by South, half southerly; Dunness W.S.W. is right upon them. To avoid the danger hereof, if you be coming from the eastwards, with a northerly wind, be sure to keep in 18 fathom water or more: al∣so coming from the westward, you must come no nearer than East by North, keeping your self in the afore∣said depth: Many have been deceived coming from Dunness, which steered East by North, and E. N. E. (not regarding that the latter part of the tyde sets into the Isle of Wight) which were brought on the Owers unexpectedly: If you are acquainted with them, you may sayl to the northwards between them and the Land. The Black-Rocks. From St. Hellens-point, Black-Rock. being the eastermost Point of the Isle of Wight, runneth off a Riff E. N. E. two miles into the Sea, called the Black-Rocks: when Calver-Cliff is hid behind the North-east Point of the Island, then are you within this Riff; come no nearer it than in seven or eight fathom. The Horse. Within the foresaid Riff, in the Fair-way, Horse. between the Island and the Main, lyeth a Shoal called the Horse. The Marks for it are, when South-sea Castle, and a square Steeple within the Land are both in one, then are you thwart it. The Mark to go clear, Marks. is to keep Ports∣mouth Castle on the West side of the Wood; this Mark will carry you between the Horse and the Main: on it at low water you will have but ten foot. About it is good shoaling, come therefore no nearer it than in five or six fathoms. When St. Helens Church bears S.W. by West from you, then the South-east end of the Horse bears North-east by North, and the North end, North by East from you. Nomans-Land. Eastwards from the Point of the Road of Newport, Nomans-Land. lyeth a broad Sand called Nomans-Land, which falleth almost dry at low-water; it is so steep, that half a Ca∣bles length from it is twelve fathoms deep: When the Town of Ride, and the Wind-mill which standeth S. S. W. from it, are both in one, then are you thwart the midst of it. If you come so near the Shoar that the Wind-mills on the High-land of Wight be hid with the Land, then will you be aground against it; but as long as they are open you need not fear. The Brambles. Betwixt Cowes-Road and Calshot-Castle, Brambles. lyeth a hard Shoal, nearest the North Shore in the Fair-way, called the Brambles, and reacheth as far thwart as Newport; at low-water and Spring-tydes it falleth almost dry; then you may know it by the Sea breaking over it. To avoid it, keep close to the Isle until you come into Cowes-Road. The Swing-hills. West about a mile from Hurst-Castle, Swing-Hills. lyeth the North Point of the Swing-hills, which you must be very care∣ful to keep clear of that sayl in or out at the Needles; for the Flood setteth on the Needles, and the Ebb on the said Swing-hills: Therefore if you go out on the Ebb, you must lie off South, or South by West. In sayling in at the Needles, you must come within a Cables length of them to avoid the foresaid Shoal, where you will have five fathom at low-water.
The Eddystone. Two leagues South, Eddystone. a little easterly from Ram-head, lyeth a Rock above-water called Eddystone. It lyeth from the Point of Plymouth N. N. E. distant about four leagues, being alwayes above water. Sunken-Rocks in Plymouth-Sound. In the Sound of Plymouth, Sound. not far to the northward of the Manstone, lie two or three sunken Rocks, on which is at low-water not above three fathoms. The Marks for them are these; To the eastwards of Ply∣mouth standeth a Tower called Mount-Batten, with a Mill; and to the eastwards of Drakes-Island standeth a House called Mount-Edgcomb; when the Turret there∣of cometh over the Point on the West side of the I∣sland, and Mount-Batten and the Mill come one in the other, then are you upon the innermost Sunken-Rock, which bath on it four fathom at low-water. But when the Point of Hamose cometh without the Point to the westward of the Island, and the foresaid Tower and Mill one in the other, then are you on the outermost Rock, where is at low-water and Spring-tydes three fathom and a half. The Manacles. To the northwards of the eastermost Point of the Lizard, The Ma∣nacles. betwixt Hilford and the foresaid Point lie some Rocks a league and half from the Shore, called the Ma∣nacles, South by East from the Harbour of Falmouth, and E. N. E. from the Point, many whereof do appear at low-water, at some of them at high; betwixt them and the Shore it is very foul and rocky, so that you can∣not  through betwixt them without great danger:  you come out of Falmouth, and are bound to the twards, you must not come near the South than S. S. E. and South-east by South, according as the Wind shall be, for to run clear of the foresaid Rocks. A Sunken-Rock near the Lands-end. About a league West from the Lands end, A sunken Rock near the Lands-end. and half a league without the Land, lyeth a sunken Rock, which is dry at low-water: Thwart of the Rock standeth a Church upon the Land; which when you can but see over the high Land, then are you thwart the said Rock; But when the Church is hid behind the Land that you cannot see it, then are you nearer the Land than the Rock, so may you go through betwixt it and the Land; but keeping the Church open of the Land, then are you clear without it. The Long-ships. At the Lands end of England lies the Long-ships, Long∣ships. you may run within them, as well to the northwards as to the southwards of them, and come to an anchor in eight or nine fathoms; coming in there from the south∣wards it is narrowest, but ten fathom: Close to the North Point of the Lands-end lyeth also a sunken Rock, which you must avoid when you sayl in there. The Seven-stones. Between the Lands-end and Silly, Seven-Stones. lie the Seven∣stones, West, and West by South, almost four leagues from the Lands-end, and N. E. by East, and E. N. E. almost three leagues from Silly, which is a range of Rocks that appear not above-water, but you may see it break over them. The Gulf. S.S.W. & S.W. by South, 3 leagues from the Lands∣end, and five leagues East from Silly, lyeth a sharp Rock called the Gulf, which cometh at half-flood a∣bove water, and is round about indifferent clean. A Table of the Soundings coming into the Channel, according to the respective Bearings and Distances of several Places, viz. Silly, Seams, Ushant, &c. Shewing also the Nature of the Ground. Names. Bearings. Distan. Depth. Latit. Nature of the Ground.         G. M.   Silly. North. 10 or 12 65 49 15 Broken Shells, with white and red Sand. Silly. E. N. E. 7 60 49 15 Some black Sand. Silly. E. N. E. 16 or 20 80 49 15 A kind of Rocky Ground. Silly. E. by N. 14 or 16 72 49 15 A Peppery Sand, with yellow Sand amongst it. Silly. E. by N. 7 or 5 72 49 15 Oazy like to Mustard-seed, with broken Shells amongst it. Silly. E. N. E. 8 60 49 15 Black Sand. Silly. E. N. E. 7 60 49 30 Small Sand. Silly. N. E. by E. 20 or 22 85 49 10 Sand and Owse together. Silly. N. E. by E. 10 55 49 20 Small white and red Sand, with Shells amongst it like Nits.
Silly. N. E. by N. 10 57 49 20 Small red Sand. Silly. E. by N. 14 or 16 72 48 50 Sand somewhat peppery, black and yellow. Silly. N. E. by E. 50 100 49 50 White Sand, with Owse and Nits amongst it. Silly. N. W. 4 or 5 50 50 10 Branny Sand, and black Sand amongst it, as it were Nits, and ma∣ny black and broken Shells. Silly. E. by S. 8 58 50 12 Owsey Sand, and some of St. Jame's Shells amongst it. Silly. S. S. E. 5 45 50 12 White Sand, Shells amongst it. Silly. E. by N. 25 72 49 50 Stones, black, white, and red, with Owse amongst it. Silly. N. E. by E. 25 64 49 50 Branny Sand, and Shells white and red like grains of Meal. Silly. N. E. by E. 6 48 49 10 Black Sand. Silly. E. N. E. 7 60 49 40 Black Sand. Silly. South. 5 50 50 20 Branny Sand as big as Wheat-meal. Silly. N. E. 10 65 49 40 Small branny Sand, Herring-bones, and small stones, as it were Nettles. Silly. N. N. W. 33 77 48 52 Red Sand, and Shells amongst it. Silly. N. W. by N. 7 54 49 40 Some more Shells; the Lizard N. E. distance 18 leagues. Silly. E. by N. 20 70 49 40 White owsey Sand like mustard-seed, and pieces of shells amongst it. Silly. N. E. by E. 13 65 49 43 Branny Sand, some pieces of shells. Silly. N. W. 7 60 49 47 Stony Ground. Silly. E. by N. 84 97 49 50 Fine white Sand. Silly. N. N. E. 100 102 49 47 White Sand, and then you are entring upon the Bank. Silly. North. 10 65 49 47 White Sand, and that is the East part of the bank. Silly. S. S. E. 12 60     Course Owse. Silly. N. W. by W. 10 54 49 47 Sand with little red shells amongst it. Silly. E. S. E. 6 53     Course Sand, and fine red shells. Silly. N. W. by W. 4 61 50 25 Red, mixt with black Sand, and some glistering white shells and dents in them. Silly. W. by N. 13 63 50 25 Fine white Sand, with a little Owse. Silly. West. 21 66 50 08 Red Sand, with small black Sand, and some white glistering shells, and some small red shells amongst it. Silly. W. half S. 29 68 50 00 Fine Sand, of an owsey colour, with some glistering shells among it. Silly. N. W. by W. 2 44     Course shells and Sand, with fine thin shells, some small things like the points of broken Needles. Silly. W. by S. 32 75 49 50 Fine white Sand, small glistering shells, & some small peppery Sand. Silly. W. S. W.½ W. 34 or 35 81 49 40 Fine white Sand, with some long slender white glistering shells, and some peppery Sand amongst it. Silly. E. by N. 20 76 49 41 White owzie Sand, with some shells. Silly. E. N. E. 55 103     Fine white Sand. Silly. N. E. by E. 48 100 48 49 Sand somewhat white, with Hakes teeth. Silly. N. E. by E. 25 68     Like Wheat-bran, with some shells. Silly. N. by E. 18 68     Small shingly red Sand, and white, with some black and white scollop shells. Silly. W. by S. 3 40     Like broken Wheat, or course Bran. Silly. E. S. E. 13 62     Course durty owzie Sand, somewhat blackish.
Seams. N. E. 12 68 47 50 Branny Sand, with some white stones as big as Almonds, and other small gravel stones, and broken shells. Seams. N. N. W. 4 40 48 28 Like as before. Seams. E. by N. 12 100 48 30 Branny Sand, with stones, as big as Pease, & little shells among it Seams. N. E. by E. 7 63 48 15 Branny Sand, and many small shells like Wheat and small Mace. Seams. East. 25 70 48 36 Stones like Grains, and stones as big as little Beans. Seams. E. by N. 25 100 48 36 Red Sand, broken shells, and black stones. Seams. North. 18 90 48 00 Red Sand, and black stones like Salt-stones. Seams. N. E. by N. 7 42 48 18 Cockle-shells. The Bridg of the Seams. E. half S. 3 or 4 62     Small scollop shells, with some Hakes teeth. Ushant. East. 18 or 20 70 49 00 Branny Sand, and some few shells amongst it. Ushant. S. E. by E. 20 72 49 15 Great stones like Beans & Pease, gray & great dents in the Tallow. Ushant. East. 6 65 48 00 Red Sand, shells and stones, things amongst like little points of Needles. Ushant. East. 15 or 16 70 49 15 Fine white Sand. Ushant. East. 18 or 20 72 49 15 Branny Sand, and some small shells amongst it. Ushant. East. 4 82 49 15 Little stones like Grains, black and red, with little shells, as it were pieces of Awles points. Ushant. N. E. 29 85 48 50 Great pieces of Cockle-shells, and little pieces amongst it. Ushant. East. 33 87 49 15 Dazling Sand in the likeness of Barley-straw. Ushant. E. S. E. 15 70 49 15 Great shells, gray and red, with pieces of broken Cockle-shells amongst it. Ushant. E. S. E. 12 68 49 20 White and gross Sand, with shells and peppery Sand amongst it. Ushant. S. E. by E. 9 65 49 15 Sand, and some shells. Ushant. N. E. by E. 7 68 48 36 Sand like Mace, or points of Feathers, some gray and some white. Ushant. North. 5 or 6 63 48 36 Full of small Mace-sand. Ushant. East. 4 6 49 10 Full of Mace-sand, and broken shells. Ushant. N. by E. 18 80 48 15 Round stones, mingled with Scollop-shells. Ushant. E. by N. 12 70 48 40 White shells. Ushant. E. S. E. 8 64 or 68 49 05 White shells, and little fine stones. Ushant. E. N. E. 12 or 14 68 48 36 Small shells, and things like straws or Herring-bones, and some black Mace-sand amongst it. Ushant. N. E. 25 50 or 55 48 10 Sand, gray and brown, and some small white shells, with black stones amongst it. Ushant. S. E. by E. 7 65 48 30 St. James▪s shells. Ushant. N. E. by E. 7 or 8 68 48 30 Mace-sand white and gray. Ushant. E. by N. 25 85 48 30 White and gray Sand, with small red stones, like hake Teeth.
Ushant. E. by S. 4 63 48 56 Shells like Perwincles. Ushant. S. E. by E. 15 60 49 25 Small scollop shells, with some small shingly stones. Ushant. E. S. E. 5 or 6 60     Most Hakes teeth, with some shells like the Husks of Oatmeal. Ushant. N. E. by N. 11 60     Small shells mashed together, as if pounded in a Morter, and small Hakes teeth. Gulf. N. by E. 1 mile 40     Mashey shells like husks of Oatmeal. Rock. N. by W. 1 mile 38     With some Hakes teeth. Gulf. S. S. W. 1 mile 31     Great shingley stones as big as Beans. Rock. N. by W. 1 mile 37     Course ground, and mashey shells. Near the 7 Stones, betwee them & Silly, they bearing N. by E.   35     All rough and stony ground. Nearest Silly, they bearing. N. by E.   40       Long-ships E. N. E. 3 mile 33       Rocks. And within shot 1 mile 32     Rocky ground. Lands-end. N. by W. 2 mile 33       Lands-end. North. 6 & ½ 50     Mashey ground, like husks of Oatmeal and small stones.   N. by E. 3 32       Mousoele. North. 3 33     All fine Sand, with white and red mingled.   N. N. W. 2 27       Lizard. N. E. by N. 10 ½ 53     Mashey shells, and some Hakes teeth.   N. E. 6 ½ 48     Mashey shells, and some scollop shells.   N. N. E. 11 54       Lizard. N. N. E. 9 52     Mashey shells like the husks of Oatmeal, and some hakes teeth.   N. N. E. 8 50         N. by E. 15 58     Mashey shells, and some Hakes teeth. Lizard. N. E. by E. 12 57     Some scollop shells.   N. E. by E. 4 44     Great stones, and rough ground. Lizard. North. 1 39     Great rough sh as big as Deans; and so is the ground right thwart of the Lizard, from the very point to 4 leagues off. Lizard. N. W. 5 45     Gray Sand like the flower of Oatmeal.   N. W. 3 43     Mashey shells, and some stones. Lizard. W. by N. 4 40     White mashey shells and white stones. Lizard. W. N. W. between 3 & 4 45     Small shingly stones, and mashey brown shells. Lizard. W. by S.           Falmouth. N. W. by N. 30 41     Black gravelly ground, with some small stones. Manacles. W. N. W.           Deadman. N. W. by N. 30 37     Small redish gravel, some small shells, with small stones. Rambead. North. 10 46     Like the dust of a Grind-stone, with many Hakes teeth, and some shells.   North. 1 mile 35     Dirty brown Sand, and some Hakes teeth. Edystone. West. 2 mile 34     Dirty brown Sand.   South. 1 mile 26     Fine Sand, and within this 28 and 30 fathom. Deadman. N. E. by N. 5 43     Fine gray Sand.   N. N. E. 3 30     Fishing ground, the offermost ground as above said, but the two nethermost Soundings black and shingly stones and gravel. Lonland. North. 5 mile 27         North. mile 18       Between Boult and Salcome. One mile thwart off.   26     Shingly ground with some shells.   N. by E. Northerly. 8 40     Like the dust of a Grind-stone with Hakes teeth, and shells, and fine white Sand. Start. N. W. Westerly.             N. W. by W. 4 43      
Start. N. W. by N. 3 38     Gravelly Sands, small stones, and some shells.   N. W. westerly 12 38     Reddish shells, mashed as if beaten in a Morter, fine white Sand, scollop shells, and small stones.   N. W. by W. 14 42       Berry. N. by W. 3 27     Fine black peppery Sand.   N. W. by N. 4 35       Portland. N. E. by E. 8 35     Small shingly stones as big as Pease.   North. 8 40     Stremy ground, small stones.   N. by E. 5 ½ 33     With some black Sand. Portland. N. E. by N. 11 41     Fine Sand, and scollop shells.   N. N. E. 8 40     Fine Sand, scollop shells, and small shingly stones. Gansey. S. E. by E. 5 42     Shingly stones as big as Pease. Caskets. South. 6 40     Shingly stones, and scollop shells. St. Albton. N. by E. 5 28     Stony ground, dents in the Tallow, and nothing come up but brown Sand that will crumble between your fingers.   N. by W. 4 27       Portland. N. E. by E. 2 27     Shingly ground.   W. N. W. 2 20     Small stones. Needles. N. E. by E. 2 17     Great shingly ground.   N. E. casterly 2 ½ 19     Small shingly ground.   N. E. 2 13     Rocky ground. The Body of the Isle of Wight, Donnose, Needles. N. by W. 3 20         E. by N. 4 21     All the ground from St. Albions to the East end of the Wight, is chalkie, it will make dents in the Tallow, and nothing come up but blown Sand in rowls, which will crumble in your fingers.   N. by E. 3 18         North. 3 18         N. by W.           Donnose. W. by S. 4 16     Sand and Gravel, a kind of fishing-ground, rough ground, & some big stones; take notice that the Sand & Gravel is for 21 fathom   West. 4 21       Donnose. W. N. W. 8 33     Fishing ground, somewhat red, with some stones as big as Pease, and some as Beans.   W. by N. 6 26       Arundel. N. by W. 3 ½ 16     Gravelly ground. Beachy. N. E. 5 38     Gravel and shingly stony ground like blew Slates broken in pieces.   N. F 4 32       Beachy. E. by N. 4 31     Gravelly shingly small ground. Beachy. N. N. E. 3 30     Gravelly Sand.   North. 3 33     Gravelly, mixt with black Sand.   N. by W. 3 23     Gravelly Sand, with some small stones. Beachy. E. by N.   15     Gravelly ground. Arundel. North.   15         E. northerly.           Beachy. And Sboram, 8 17     Gravelly Sand.   N. by E.           Beachy. N. W. by W. 4 21     Gross black Stones. Fairlee. N. by E. 3 20     Gravelly Sand, with some shells.   Northerly. 4 27     Red shingly Sand with some shells. Fairlee. N. N. W. 4 20     Fine fishing ground, and sometimes you shall have five Fingers stick on the Tallow.     3 16       Fairlee. N. by W. 8 10     Gravelly Sand upon a Bank called the Sow, our Fishermen fish near it.       12       Fairlee. N. W. 3 17     Gravelly Sand, with small shingly stones. Fairlee. N. W. westerly 3 ½       Soft owsie ground, not to be perceived, and nothing upon the Tallow, but their Sounding is but one place not above 2 casts. Dungeness. N. by W. 2 ½ 17       Dungeness. N. by E. 1 mile 18     Shingly ground, with small stones, and some times small shells amongst it.   N. by W. 2 mile 21       Dungeness. N. W. 2 ½ 22     Very fine white Sand.     3 23       Blackness.   2 28     Stony ground. Calice-Cliff East.         Rough ground. Balloin. E. by S. 2       The same ground.
Staples. E. by N. 3 27     Fine Sand.   And East.           Flats. E. by S. 4 29     Slate and fine Sand.   E. S. E.           Free-port. S. E. 2 ½ 16 or 18     Stony ground.   S. E. by E. 3         Deep. Between   14     Great stones.   S. E. 4 15         S. E. by E.   16       A Description of the Banks, Sands, Shoals, and Dangers upon the Coast of Flanders, Zealand, Holland, Friezland, &c. from Calice to the River Elve. Blackness. ABout a great league to the westwards of Calice-Cliff, lyeth Blackness, being a foul out-point; and to the southward, alought the Shore, there lyeth many Rocks, and foul ground. New-Land. The New-Land is a Bank that lyeth alongst the Shore, to the westwards of the Haven of Graveling, and runneth far into the Sea, and reacheth westward unto Calice; you may run alongst by it, or over it, in 5, 4, and 3 fathom, at pleasure. A Bank. Thwart from the wester Head of Calice lyeth a Bank, whereon is two fathom; betwixt the Head of Meyland and the same Bank, men may run through in three sa∣thom at half-flood; under Calice-Cliff you may anchor in ten fathom, but at the West end lyeth a Rock under water a Bow shot from the Land. The Cliff. The Cliff is the outer or westermost Bank, and ly∣eth from Calice-Cliff N.N.E. about four leagues and a half, and hath three fathom and a half water on it; be∣twixt this and the Ruyting, goeth a wide deep Channel of 23 and 24 fathom, and lyeth in the Sea N. N. E. half easterly, and S. S. W. half westerly, and is in length almost three miles. Ruyting. The Ruyting is a Bank which lyeth from Calice-Cliff North-east by North about four leagues, where you will have five or six fathom; but on the South end is a Ridg of one fathom and a half; this Sand lyeth in the Sea N. N. E. and S. S. W. in length almost seven miles; when the South end of Winoxberg cometh betwixt the two flat Steeples to the westward of Dunkirk, then are you thwart of the Ridg: Also there standeth three or four Mills to the eastwards of Dunkirk, when the outermost cometh ever the East end of the Town, then the Steeple of Dunkirk shall bear from you South-east, five leagues; this is a good mark for the said Ridge: This Saud is very dangerous, because it lyeth in the Fair-way. Dike. The Dike is a Bank that lyeth from Calice-Cliff North-east, nine miles; the depth of water on it is four and five fathom; upon the South and North end of this Bank are Ridges, on the southermost is but one fathom, and lyeth upon the Marks of Wynoxberge; about North-west, somewhat westerly from Dunkirk, on the northermost, there is about four fathom and two foot, and lyeth N. W. from the Cloyster Tenduynen; it lyeth in the Sea N. N. E. and S. S. W. in length four leagues and a half. Rattle. The Rattle is a Bank which lyeth from Calice-Cliff North-east by East, and hath 3, 4, and 5 fathom water on it; on the South end is a Ridge, where you have but one fathom at low-water; at Spring-tydes these Ridges fall dry. Between this and the Dike goeth a Channel of twelve fathom, to the northward, until you are against the Ridge hereof, then you will have 9, 4, 7, and 17 fathom, then are you clear of it. Be∣twixt it and Broad-bank goeth a great Channel of 19 and 20 fathom; in all the Channels betwixt the said Banks, you may turn to windward from one Bank to another, and anchor betwixt them where you will; this Bank lyeth in the Sea N. N. E. and S. S. W. in length four leagues, being about four and three quar∣ters distant from Calice-Cliff. Broad-Bank. The South end hereof lyeth from Calice-Cliff N. E. by East three leagues three quarters, and hath a Ridge on the South end, where there is but half a fathom at low-water; this Bank lyeth in the Sea North-east and South-west, being in length five leagues; on the S. W. end you have 5, 7, and 8 fathom, and on the N.E. end, 1, 1 and a half, 2, 2 and a half, 3, 4, and 5 fathom; from the S. side, which is convex, runneth off a Spit E.N.E. 3 miles, whereon is but 1 and a half, and 2 fathom; the N.E. end lyeth from Newport West by North 4 leagues and a quarter, and from the Cloyster of Tenduynen, North-west by North, three leagues and a half. When Graveling is South-East from you, then are you thwart of the South end of the foresaid Banks; and when Newport is South-east by East, then are you thwart of the North end of them.
Splinter. The Splinter is a Bank which runneth off from the wester Head of Dunkirk two leagues long, which fall∣eth dry at low-water; in many places you may sayl be∣hind this Bank by the shore from the westward, almost to the westward Head of Dunkirk, and there may an∣chor in 5 6, 7, and 8 fathom; about half a league from the westward Head, there runneth a Channel through the foresaid Bank, where small Ships may pass through at high-water; the West end lyeth from Graveling N. N. W. four miles. Quade-Bank or Brake. The Quade-Bank runneth off to the eastwards of the Head of Dunkirk, at least two leagues to the west∣ward, ending thwart the Heads of Dunkirk, to the east∣ward of the easter Head; you may anchor behind the Bank, sheltered for a North-west, a North, and North∣east Winds; you have two fathoms there at low-water, but in the coming in it is shoaler; before the Havens Mouth of Dunkirk is nine and ten fathom, and to the westward of the wester Head 6, 7, and 8 fathom; from thence men may run over the small Bank in three fa∣thom, and come against the Broad-bank. North-Cames. North-Cames is a Bank which lyeth near the North end of the Brakes, and lyeth from Dunkirk N. N. E. about a league, being in length two miles, whereon you will have but two foot at low-water, but on the East side, 7, 8, and 9 fathom. Cames. The Cames is a Bank whereon there are many Ridges, which have but 2 fathom at low-water; you may run through between the Land and this Bank in 8, 9, & 10 fathom, and may ride thee for all winds; it lyeth from Dunkirk North-east, four miles, and from the Ses one mile. Brewers-Bank. The Brewers-Bank is triangular, and lyeth thwart of the Cloyster Tenduynen W. N. W. from the shore about a league in the Sea; when the said Cloyster lyeth South from you, then are you at the innermost part hereof: you may run through between the Land and this Bank in four fathom, and low-water; but men do run commonly about to the westwards of it, when they sayl through within the Banks alongst the Coast of Flanders. Small-Bank. On Small-bank you have but two, three, and four fa∣thom at low-water, and lyeth without the Cames and Brewers-bank about a mile and half, and from the shore a league; it lyeth in the Sea North-east by East, and South-west by West, in length almost two leagues; it lyeth from Dunkirk North. Stone-Bank. When the Cloyster of Tenduynen beareth from you South-east, then are you thwart of the Stone-Bank, or the Ridge which is on the middle of it, whereon there is but three foot at low-water, and sometimes falleth dry at Neap-tydes; this Bank lyeth from the shore about five miles, and hath on the East side a Hook which ly∣eth to the eastwards, running to nothing almost against Newport; on it you have three fathom; in the Chan∣nel, between this and the Small-bank there is 7, 8, and 9 fathom; between the South-west end of this and the Broad-bank (from which it is distant about a mile) run∣neth also a Channel of 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathom. Call-Bank. Call-bank, of some called Small-bank, which lyeth alongst by (or without) the Stone-bank; almost a league; betwixt them is a Channel of 7, 9, and 10 fathom; without it you have a Channel of 8, 10, 12, and 14 fa∣thom; this Bank lyeth in the Sea North-east by East about nine miles, being very narrow, on which you have five and fix fathom; on the middle of it, South∣east by East from the Haven of Newport, lyeth a Ridge, whereon there is scarce three foot at low-water, being sometimes dry. Ships that will go before Dunkirk, and cannot get alongst by Flanders, must run about without these Banks, until they come against Broad-Bank, and then run in alongst between it and the Stone-Bank in 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathom. Stroome-Bank. The Stroome-Bank lyeth before Newport, about four miles from the shore, whereon you have two and three fathom water; within and without it you have 9, 8, and 7 fathom, and at each end 5 and 6 fathom: The Mark for the South-west end of it, Is to bring the Town of Suern South by East from you, and so steer through between it and the Stone-Bank in 5 and 6 fathom. The Geer. The Geer is a Bank that lyeth alongst the Land, from Ostend to Dunkirk, whereon there is but two fathom, and two and a half; between it and the Land goeth a Channel of 7, 8, and 9 fathom, from which it is di∣stant about a mile. Boon-Land. Boon-Land is a Bank which lyeth East from Ostend, about four miles distant, whereon is but two, and two fathom and a half at low-water; between it and the Geer is a Channel of 5, 7, and 8 fathom; half a league from the North end hereof lyeth two or three small Banks, whereon you have but two, two and a half, and three fathom. Peerdemart and Hart-Sand. Peerdemart and Hart-sand are Banks which joyn to∣gether, lying alongst the Coast Peerdemart, at the en∣trance into the Sluys; the Hart-sand endeth about a league North-west from Ostend, which is almost fix leagues and a half; on these Sands there is but two, two and a half, and three fathom; within it you have 3, 4, and 5 fathom. Inner-Bank. Inner-Bank lyeth off Gad-sand a mile and half from the shore, it lyeth South-west by West two leagues, whereon there is but 1, and 1 fathom and a half; when Nasson and the Castle of the Sluys are in one, then are you thwart the middle of it; when the Castle of the Sluys bears South, then are you clear the East end, and may steer your course for Flushing; when the West Chappel and the Knock are both in one, then are you clear of the South end: on the inner side hereof lyeth the Channel called the Inner-Weelings, and on the out∣side the Weelings.
Heist-Bank, Ripthart-Sand, and Utter-Bank. The Heist, Ripthart, and Utter-Bank, joyn toge∣ther, being all in length about eight leagues and a half; when the Castle of Sluyes is South from you, then are you clear of the East end of Heist-sand; when the West Chappel and the Knock are brought in one, then are you thwart of the Ridge of it, called Engelse-Ridge; this Sand is in some places a mile broad, having no more than two, and two fathom and a half at low-water. The Ripthart is a narrow Bank, whereon there is 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 fathom; the Utter-Bank in the middle joyns to the Ripthart, lying in the Sea South-west by South, and North-east by North, in length two leagues, where∣on you have 7, 6, 4, and 3 fathom: The Mark for the South-west end of it, is to bring the Steeple of Geer on the South-west end of Ostend, then are you thwart it; but when Oudenburg is on the North-east end of the Town, then are you clear of it. Drooge. Drooge is a Bank which lyeth from the Sluyes North∣west, distant from the Shore about three leagues, lying in the Sea E.N.E. and W.S.W. being in length two leagues and a half, and in breadth one mile and a half; the East end hereof is dry at low-water: When Nassan and Sluyes Castle are both in one, then are you clear of it. On the West end of this Bank is a Shoal, whereon is but 1 fathom and a half, and two fathom; when West Chappel is South-east by South from you, then are you thwart of it; but when West Chappel and the Knock are in one, then are you clear of it. Small Bank. Small-bank almost joyneth to the North end of the Utterbank; it lyeth in the Sea N. E. by North, in length almost three leagues, whereon is seven and eight fa∣thom; the North end lyeth from the Sluce South-east by East, four leagues. White-Bank. White-bank lyeth between Ostend and the Sluce, di∣stant from theshore four leagues and a half; it lyeth in the Sea North-east and South-west; in length three leagues and a half: The Water on it, is 9, 8, 7; 9, 8, 11 fathom deep. Easter-Bank. Easter-bank lyeth without White-bank, distant about a league, between which goeth the Channel Den Heke∣lag: This Bank lyeth almost parallel to the other, be∣ing in length five leagues, whereon you have 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, fathom. Stone-Bank. Stone-bank lyeth off Walcheren, distant from the shore three great leagues; when the Steeple of Midle∣borrough and Domburge are one in the other, then are you thwart of it: When Buyenskerk and West-Chappel in Walcheren are both in one, then are you clear of the South-west end; when Middleborrough lyeth South-East from you, then are you clear of the North-east end; this Bank is in length two leagues North-east and South-West, being very dangerous, there being on it but two and three fathom. Geer. The Geer is a little Bank which lyeth on the South-West side of Walcheren, being distant from the shore about a mile, you may go within it in four, five, and six fathom, by keeping the Town of Flushing shut with the Land. Eastern and Northern Rases. Off from West-Chappel, a mile from the shore, lyeth a great Bank, whereon are two Rases, which fall dry at low-water, called the Eastern and Northern Rases; St. Anna bearing South by East from you, carries you clear the out-side of it, and the aforesaid mark of the Geer will carry you clear on the inner side, until West-Chappel be North-east from you; then follow the di∣rections for Land-deep. Calloert and Querns. Calloert and Querns are two Banks which lie on the North-west side of Walcheren, being half a mile distant one from the other, and also from the Northern Rase of the foresaid Banks: the Querns at low water is dry in many places; the Calloert also hath but three foot water; between these go a Channel of five and six fa∣thom, called the East-gat. Banjaert. Banjaert, alias, Kanteyn-steyl, is a great Bank which bendeth it self towards Walcheren, from which the West end is distant almost two leagues; the East end is di∣stant from the Land about two mile, from whence it runneth East by South almost four mile; in which space there lyeth four Buoys: the conver side lyeth along by Schowen; between it and the Land lyeth a small Bank, whereon there is a Buoy, at each end this Bank falleth dry at low-water in many places; a Cables length from the West end hereof lyeth two small Shoals, called Rif∣gens; to avoid which, Keep East-Chappel and Middle∣borrough one in the other, which mark will carry you clear. New-Sand. New-sand lyeth from the West part of Schowen, half a mile from the shore, and runneth off W. N. W. five mile: between Banjaert and it runneth a Channel, cal∣led the Velt, half a mile broad, where there is 1 and a half, 2 and 3 fathom at low-water: This Sand in some places will be dry at low-water. The Hill. The Hill is a Bank which lyeth on the North side of New-sand, between which runneth a Channel, called New-deep, where you will have three and two fathom: On this Bank there is but 6 and 8 foot. Ourust. Ourust is a triangular Sand, the East corner whereof is distant from the West side of North-Beveland about the third part of a mile; the West corner lyeth from the Buoy of the Little Sand, called the Shoots-man, half a mile on the North corner, which runneth out into the Channel, called the Room-pot; there lyeth a Buoy in 1 fathom and a half water; on the side of this Sand, half a mile distant one from the other, lyeth two other Buoys to direct men which go up the Channel: This Sand is dry in many places.
The Shoots-man The Shoots-man is a little Sand which lyeth on the East side of Walcheren, being distant from Terveer about a mile, and is two mile in length, lying close by the Shore; on the North-west end there lyeth a Buoy, from which to the Point of Walkeren there lyeth three others, South-east by South, and North-west by North one from the other: These Buoys lie in four and six fathom water. The Laegten. The Laegten is a Sand which lyeth between Schowen and Goeree; on the South side thereof lyeth 3 Buoys East and West one from the other; the West end where, of is distant from the Hill about a mile and half. The mark for this end, Is to keep Rimse on the Cliff of Weolsack, and it will carry you through clear of the said end, between which you will have 17, 18, 19, and 20 fathom; to go clear of the corner at the East-head, the Buoys are sufficient marks; which course will also carry you clear the West end, and also of the Hill; in some places of this Sand you will have but three and four fathom, in other places 11 and 12 fathom. This Sand is in length two leagues and a half, bending to the northward, both sides being steep too, having within 12 and 14 fathom, and without 12, 14, and 16 fathom. Springer. Springer is a Bank which all times is almost dry, and joyneth on the West side to the Laegten; from the South-east side runneth out a tayl two mile into the Sea, the point whereof is distant from the mouth of Browers-Haven North-west, almost three mile: The Mark to go clear of it, Is to bring Ziericzea and East-street (which is a House to the westward of Browers-Haven) both in one, and will lead you in the best of the Chan∣nel, where you will have 10, 20, and 24 fathom; but if you go within, between Schownen and it, keep the Town of Bomment East by South, which will carry you directly to the westermost Buoy within the Laegten. Keet-werf. Keet-werf is the westermost point of the Land Geeree, from which runeth off a small tayl four mile into the Sea, called West-head, being distant from Laegten not above half a mile; it is steep too, having seven and eight fathom close to it. The Mark for the Point of it, Is to bring Ziericzea on the West end of a Wood. which will carry you clear of it. The Hinder. The Hinder is a crooked Sand, which lyeth on the North side of the Goeree bending with the Land, in some places distant above a mile, in other some less, where you will have, at the eastermost point, 18 fathom, and in the Channel 20, 30, 40, and 50 fathom; it is in length two leagues and a half: on the East end you have but two fathom; but the farther to the West the deeper water; at the West end you will have twenty fa∣thom. West-Plat. West-Plat is a Shoal that runneth out from the West end of Voeren about four mile into the Sea, being distant from the Hinder about two thirds of a league; on it there is but 3, 5, and 10 fathom; the Channel between it and the Hinder is 9, 10, and 12 fathom: The marks for it, Is to keep the Steeple of Quack just open of the Land, and it will carry you through in the best of the Channel. The Broad-fourteens. The Bread-fourteens, so called, by reason of the breadth and depth of water upon it, which in most pla∣ces is 14 fathom; it joyneth with the Land, beginning at Scheveling, and runneth off W. N. W. almost five leagues, then N. W. by North nine leagues, from thence N.E. by North, 23 leagues, which is the very point of it, where you have 18 fathom, which lyeth from the Texel, 8 leagues; it extendeth it self from Scheveling on the Coast northward 5 leagues, or within a league and half of Santrt, from which it runneth with a concavity to the said point. The Hard, Outer-Rib, & Small-acht. These are three small Sands which run into the Bread-fourteens; the Hard is a little to the northward of Stantvoort, and runneth off South-west, six leagues, whereon you have 3, 5, 7, and 8 fathom; the Rib, and Small-acht, and it, are parallel one to the other, Small∣acht beginning at Egmont-zee, and runneth off into the Broad-fourteens, distant from the Outer-Rib about four miles; between these Sands, the Channel is 6, 7, 8, and 10 fathom. Reysers-Plat. Keysers-Plat is a Sand which lyeth a league from the West end of the Texel, on which side there lyeth five Buoys to direct men through the Channel called the Spaniard; Channel called the Slenk, near the Texel. through the middle hereof goeth a Channel called the Slenk, which is very narrow, wherein you have 27 fathom; in the said Channel there lyeth fix Buoys; that Sand which is on the other end of this Channel, reacheth within a mile or less of the Land of Holland; between goeth a Channel called Sand-deep, wherein there is three Buoys; this Sand is steep too, for without it you have 48 fathom, and at the N. W. corner 90; within it is 30 and 33 fathom. Vogel-Sand. Vogel-sand lyeth between the Texel and Wieringen, being two leagues broad; the North side is distant from the Texel a mile and half; on the North corner lyeth a Buoy to direct you through the Channel, where you will have 70, 80, and 90 fathom; on the N.E. side standeth three Beacons, by which you will have 40 and 50 fathom; from the Ness-beacon, this Sand runneth South five mile to the Uliter-beacon, from which it run∣neth West to Repel-beacon, being four great mile, from which it runneth N. N. W. four miles and a half, and from thence E.N.E. three mile, which is the Buoy be∣foresaid; which Buoy lyeth from the eastermost point of the Texel S.S.E. a mile and half. Schieringhalls. Schieringhalls is a Sand that lyeth along by the Fly∣land, there being a Channel between them, but not na∣vigable; on the N. E. side standeth five Beacons, and on the East point thereof, which is four mile and a half S.S.E. half easterly; from the Fly-land lyeth a Buoy; about three Cables length S. E. from which lyeth ano∣ther on the side of this Sand, which lyeth South, stand∣eth six Beacons, it being five miles in length, then it runneth S. W. by West, 4 miles, from thence N. W. by West, 6 mile, from whence it goeth N. W. (being concave) four mile, which Point is called the Pan,
from which it runneth by the aforesaid Fly land to the first Beacon, which course is E.N.E. almost 4 leagues; the said Point or Pau lyeth from the West end of Eyer∣land S.S.E. a great mile. Bree-Sand. Bree-sand is separated from Schieringhals with a small Channel; from the Buoy on the tayl of the foresaid Sand to Claes-Owens Beacon, the course is S. S. E. di∣stant four miles and a half, between which you will have 40 and 48 fathom, from which to a Beacon that stands on the Hook of this Sand, the course is S. S. E. a mile; from which Beacon to the tayl of the Sand, the course is South three great leagues; in which space, on the edge of the Sand, there standeth four Beacons, from which tayl it runneth N. E. by East, about two leagues rounding about until it run North, which will bring you to a Buoy on the N. W. corner, not above half a mile from the South Point of the Shieringhals. Langer-Sand. Langer-sand hath on the North side of the Head of it three Buoys, which lie one from the other S. E. by South, and N. W. by West. This Sand lyeth within the Island Grind, and the N. E. side of Bree-sand; the East side is distant from Harling half a mile. Hendrick-Traerts Plat. Hendrick-Traerts Plat is a Shoal which lyeth off from the Island Grind, having a Buoy at the South Point of it, being distant not above two Cables length, from Langer-sand; the East Point hereof runneth from the Island about 2 mile, being distant from Harling N. E. by North a mile and half. Schorre-Ground. Schorre-ground lyoth without between the Schelling and Fly-land, and falleth dry at low-water; on either side of it you have 30, 40, and 60 fathom within it; on the North end of the Fly-land lyeth another dry Plat, which extendeth it self from the Shore about two mile; between this and the foresaid Plat, Wester∣bems-Gat. goeth the Wester∣booms-Gat: to the southward of those are two other Plats, but there is Buoys and Marks to direct you clear of them all. The Abdt. The Abdt is a Sand which lyeth within the Schelling, there is a Channel, but not navigable; it is two mile distant from the Land, and about a mile from the Grind. Camper-Sand. Camper-sand lyeth between the Schelling and Ameland, distant from Friesland about a mile, which falleth almost all dry at low-water; between it and the Horse goeth a Channel called Cromme. Born-Riff. Born-Riff is a Sand which lyeth without Camper-sand, between which goeth the Channel called Ameland-Gat, Ameland-Gat. where there are Buoys to carry you through. The Watt. The Watt is a Sand which lyeth on the South side of Rottum; Wester-Emes. on the East side thereof goeth up the Weser-Emes, in which Channel there lyeth a little Sand, called Hubers-Plaet, at the tayl whereof lyeth a Buoy: on the South side stand four Beacons, from the westermost Beacon you may direct your course West, and sayl into the Channel which goeth up to Eastmerhorn. Ruyt-Sand. From the going in of the Wester-Emes, all alongst the Coast of Greninger-land, there lyeth a Flat a great league from the Shore; on the East side, viz. in the Wester-Emes, there lyeth many Buoys and Beacons; against the second Buoy, above Hubers-Plant, lyeth the point of a Sand, where a Swatch goeth in on each side, which Sand is called Ruyt-sand, on whose Point standeth a Beacon. Ransel. Ransel is a Shoal which lyeth on the South side of Borcom, and runneth S. E. five miles; on the S. E. end of it standeth four Beacons, the Western and Eastern-Emes go upon each side of it; at the Point of Borcom lyeth two small Sands, the one called Brewers-Plaet, whereon standeth a Buoy; the other the back of Hoge∣beern, whereon standeth a Beacon; near the S. E. end on the said side, lyeth another small Sand, called Cornix-Plaet, where there is a Buoy to direct you clear of it: On the West side of the said Island of Borcom, runneth off a Shoal West three leagues and a half; Borcom-Riff, and the outmost end whereof, you have four and five fathom; on the South side of the Point hereof, lyeth a little Sand called Geltsack, between which, at your first entrance, you will have five fathom, and at the going in of the Wester-Emes, eight fathom. Scuyt-Sand. Scuyt-sand is a Shoal which lyeth on the Coast of Emderland, from Greitzyl unto Betroen; on the North side hereof standeth four Beacons. Leysand. Leysand beginneth at Groetzyl, and runneth alongst the said Coast of Emderland, until you come to Wester∣breeck; on the eastermost Beacon, which standeth on Scuyt-sand, there runneth in a small Channel, which runneth down to Norden, on the North side thereof, at the entrance, standeth also four Beacons to direct you through. Bandt. Bandt is a Flat which joyneth to Juyst, and runneth as far as the little Island Bursen, and runneth along by the Easter-Emes South, two leagues; on which side there are many Swatches: at the South-west corner of it there is a small Island, whereon standeth two Beacons to direct you through from the Easter to the Wester-Emes: On the South side of this Sand standeth also four Beacons to direct you through a Channel which goeth between Lysand and it; from the North-west side of the Island Juyst runneth off a Riff called Juy∣ster-Riff, three leagues West into the Sea, Juyster-Riff, whereon you have three fathom; at the end hereof is the en∣trance in of the Emes. Watt. The Watt is a Shoal which beginneth at the Voer, and endeth at Westerbreeck, joyning every where to the Shore, wherein are many Swatches; without which there are Shoals belonging to every Island, viz. Nor∣derny, Baltrum, Langergh, Spikergh, and Wrange∣rogh, where are Channels going in between every one
of them, and also a Channel between the Watt and them; on the in-side of Wrangeroog, on the side of its Shoal standeth eight Beacons, called the Beacons of Wadt; and also on the North-west side lyeth two Buoys likewise: On the East side of the said Watt, standeth six Beacons to direct you up Stonebalg. The Old-Doge. The Old-Ooge is a Sand which lyeth on the East side of Watt, distant a mile and half; by the North Point hereof, runneth up the Channel called the Weser. Rode-Sand. Rode-sand lyeth North-east from Wrangeroog, almost two leagues; it lyeth in the Sea North-west by West, and South-east by East, in length four miles and a half: on the North-east end is the going up the We∣ser, where lyeth three Buoys; and on the North-west end standeth a Beacon. The Hooge. The Hooge is a great Flat which joyneth to the Land of Languarden, being seven mile in breadth, running from the said Point North-west, four leagues, where it endeth with a Tayl called Smits-tayl: on the North side hereof lyeth many Buoys, which is the Weser-Channel, Weser. and in this side are many Swatches. The South-Grounds. The South-Grounds are great Flats which lie in all alongst the Coast of Reydinger-Land, in some places distant from the Shore about four leagues; on the South-west side of it goeth up the Weser; this is cal∣led Black-ground, on the North-west side called Witte∣ground, whereon goeth many Swins or Channels, viz. Broad-Channel, the South Channel of Wester-Till, the North-broad Channel of Easter-Till, on the North∣side, called New-work-ground; by it goeth in the Chan∣nel called the Elve, 2. where lie many Buoys to direct you up: Here also runneth in another Swin, called Emder-Channel; Lder∣haeuicl. about a league from the North-west point hereof lyeth a small Sand called Middle-sand; at the North-west end of it lyeth a Buoy, which is distant from the middle-buoy on Rode-sand about two mile, between which goeth in the Channel of the Weser. North-Ground. North-Ground lyeth on the North side of the Elve; from the South side hereof runneth off a Sand, called Vogel-sand, West, five leagues into the Sea; on the Tayl thereof you will have first three fathom and a half, then five, afterwards seven, eight, nine, and ten fathom: On the South side goeth in the Elve, on the North side the North-Elve: From the West side hereof a Flat called the North-Ground, whereon there is se∣ven and eight fathom; on the South side of this Sand lyeth also a Shoal called New-ground, having a Buoy at the West end of it: between the North-Ground and the Shore lyeth a great Shoal running off from the Shore at least two leagues; the North-east corner of the North-Ground is distant from Busen a mile. Hodemer-Sand, Iseren, Hendrick, and Blavoort. Hodemer-sand lyeth on the North side of North-Ground, between which goeth a small Channel called the Pype; on the East side there is another small Chan∣nel called the Pype going into the Elve; on this side of the Sand standeth two Beacons; on the North side hereof lyeth a Sand called Iseren-Hendrick; between these goeth the Channel called the North-Pipe; from the said Hendrick runneth off a Sand to the west∣ward called Blavoort, beging in length four mile and a half; from this runneth off a Tayl, West, 3 leagues, whereon there is two and three fathom, and is called the Tayl of the Plaet Blavoort; on the North side hereof runneth in the Channel of the Eyder, Ey. where lie Booys to direct you through. Ballast-Plaet. Ballast-Plaet runneth off from Schulper-Zill into the Eyder-Channel; on the North-east side whereof standeth three Beacons, from whence it runneth a∣longst the Coast of Ditmarschen, until you come to Busen, in which there are many Swins; on the West corner standeth a Beacon, and on the North-west side lie three Buoys. New-Ground, or Broad-Rug. New-ground is a Sand which lyeth on the North side of the Eyder-Channel, on the South-west side whereof stand four Beacons; from the eastermost Bea∣con, called the Hulk, to the westermost Beacon of the Ballast-Plaet, the course is East by North, a mile: be∣tween this Sand and the Shore goeth a small Channel, the westermost end hereof is called Broad-Rug. New-Grounds. New-grounds are three Sands which lie on the West side of Eyder-land, not above three Cables length from the Shore at Ebb; between these and the sou∣thermost goeth a Channel called Oudeland-deep; Oudeland∣deep. in the northermost is a small Island called Utto; these Sands lie off in the Sea two leagues. The Quade. The Quade is a Sand which lyeth on the South side of the Hever, distant from East-Hever, West by North, five mile; on this Sand standeth two Beacons; on the South side of this Sand goeth in a Channel, South-Channel. called South-Channel, East, three mile from this, lyeth a Sand with two other Beacons on it. Nuval, Elan, and Gorde. Nubal, Elan, and Gorde are broken Grounds, which lie about the Island Strant, from which there runneth out Shoals on every side of the said Island. The Voren. The Voren is a Shoal which encompasseth the Island Ameren and St. Jans, making a Channel between them and Strant, called Small-deep; on the North-cast side thereof runneth another small Channel, which is caused by a Shoal which runneth off from the Shore; on the North side of which runneth up a Channel to Luck-Tonderen. Silter-Riff. Silters-Riff runneth off from the South Point of the Island Silt, running off S. S. W. four leagues; on the East side of it runneth the Channel called Silter-deep; Silte-deep on the North end of the Island lyeth four
chart A Chart of FLANDERS Between Calm and Walcheren will all ye sands and shoals upon that coast by John Seller Hydrog: Regiis
chart A Chart of the SANDS, CHANNELS, BUOYES, BEACONS, AND SEA-MARKS upon the coast of ENGLAND; From Dover to the Northwards of Orfordness by John Seller Hydrographer to the King.
Sands; between them and the Land goeth up Land∣deep; there goeth up also another Channel, called New∣deep; Rust, and the Land being on one side, and the Maker, Berling-sand, and Haef-sand on the other. Coer-Sand and Iurt-Sand. This Sand reacheth on the Coast from Ripen to Lutke Tondo, running off so far until it encompasseth the Island Mann and Rem; between which Islands, on the Sand, standeth a Beacon. Phann Knuts. Phanu-Knuts is a Shoal, from the North-west Head of Phanu, by which goeth in a Channel called Graeuw∣deep; on the North side of which Channel, near the Point of Langeleg, Wisdick. lyeth a small Sand called VVisdyck∣sand: Also at the South end of the Island Phanu, be∣twixt Manu and it, wherein there is some broken ground; on the South side of this Sand lie two Buoys, within Phanu, on the Shore of Jutland, from Ripen to Holm-head, running a mile from the Shore. Riefhorn. Rief-born runneth off from Horn, from whence it taketh its name, West by South, eighteen leagues, whereon you have three, four, and five fathom; a league to the northward of it lyeth another small Shoal, seven leagues in length; on the South side of it, near the Shore, lyeth a small Sand called Doel-sand; Docl-sand on the North side, close to the Shore, lyeth another small Shoal called the Uyl. Uyl. Iutland-Riff. Jutland-Riff is a great Shoal which runneth many leagues West by North into the Sea, whereon you will have 10, 12, 16, 18, 20 fathom, &c. Directions for sayling into the Harbours and Channels on the Coast of Hol∣land and Zealand, from Ameland to the Weilings; Shewing the Marks and Depths of Water for Piloting a Ship through any of them. Ameland-Gat. TWO leagues to the eastwards of the Schelling lyeth Ameland, lying E. N. E. and W. S. W. 4 great leagues; upon the West end of Ame∣land standeth a Cape, and a great thick flat Steeple called the Hoelm; the Roof of the Church is broken off, but the after-form with the Roof stand∣eth above the side Walls; to the eastward of the Church of Hoelm standeth a Mill, (with a House to the westward of the Mill) also a broad flat Tower. About the place where Midland-Church was wont to stand, lie three or four Sand-hills, which are low, flat, and long; toward the East end it is knobby Land, with white Sand among it: From the East end of Ameland runneth off a Riff almost three leagues into the Sea, Born-Riff. called Born-Riff, which is upon the out-side very steep, come no nearer it than twelve fathom; coming from the eastwards, you can∣not sayl within it, but sayling alongst by it in seven fa∣thom you shall not run a Bowls cast alongst without it. For to sayl into Ameland-Gat, coming out of the Sea. To sayl into Ameland Gat, coming out of the Sea, bring the Cape upon the East end of the Schelling, right over the Steeple of Horn, which shall then bear from you S.S.W. or a little more westerly; sayl in right with them, until that the Cape upon Ameland and the Steeple of Hoelm are one over the other, then leave the first Marke, and sayl in upon the second, and you shall find the outermost Buoy, which lyeth somewhat within the outermost Point of Born-Riff. Coming from the east∣wards, run alongst by the Strand of the Schelling, in five, or five fathom and a half at low-water, and you shall not fail to sayl right upon the outermost Buoy, and then the Church and Steeple upon Ameland shall also come one over the other, and bear from you East, or a lit∣tle more southerly. Coming alongst by the Schelling in four fathom, you shall not sayl within the Kogge∣deeps-ground; over against them lyeth the first Buoy, on the South side of Born-Riff; run alongst to the southwards of it, keeping the Cape and Steeple one over the other, until you be past the second Buoy, which lyeth thwart of the West end of Kamper-sand; the Fair-way betwixt these Buoys, The going into Ame∣land. is five and six fa∣thom deep. Being past the second Buoy, bring the Steeple somewhat to the northwards of the Cape, and go on N.E. towards the third Buoy upon Gerritshouden, for to avoid the Plat which lyeth off from the South side towards Born-Riff; on it lie two white Buoys, the first over against the aforesaid third black Buoy, the other over against the fourth black Buoy, lying from the third about S.E. leave the black Buoys all on the Larboard∣side, and the white on the Starboard, and run through so betwixt them; both the Plats is on the North side indifferent flat, so that you may run to it upon the Lead; reckon well your Tydes, especially be careful of a fore-Ebb, which falleth very strong over the Channel N. N. W. into Sea over Born-Riff. Betwixt the second and third Buoy, in the Fair-way it is 8 & 9 fathom; Between the third, and the aforesaid Plat, 7 fathom; Being past the fourth Buoy, both sides are very steep, and the Fair∣way 8, 9, 10, and 12 fathom deep; go then in S. S. E. until that the Steeple of Holm come over the South Point of Ameland, where the Boats lie, and then you come in the Bight, where it is on the South side flat, and good anchoring in five or fix fathom; the North Shore is very steep. For to sayl further into Horsen; For to sayl into Hor∣sen. Go away from the Bight E.N.E. alongst by the South side in 5 or 6 fathom, so long until Heynooms-Chamber (being a red tyled House) come a hand-spikes length to the northwards or to the eastwards of Holm-Church, anchor there in 5 or 6 fathom; you shall lie there in good ground shel∣tered for all Winds, also there goeth little Tide. In this Fair-way it is twelve fathom deep; the North shore is there very steep: These foresaid depths (like as those of the Fly) are said to be at low-water. Easter-Booms-Gat at the Schelling. The Easter-Booms-Gat is altered very much; the Schorre-grounds, or (as some call them) Peters-grounds, are overgrown very near to the Shore or Strand of the Schelling; before it lies a Bank or little Sand-plat; Be∣twixt the aforesaid Schorre, or Peters-ground, and the Strand, is, according to the testimony of Masters, or Schippers, who usually sayl in and out with their Smack-Ships, about the half of a Ships length broad, and about
two Ships length long, is upon the Plate or Bank 5 and 6 foot, but between the Schorre, or Peters-ground, well 11 or 12 foot water; so that if there lay on the corner of the Schorre or Peters-ground a buoy or Mark, to dis∣cern or find this Entrance or Gap, one could then very easily sayl in or out with a Fluyt-ship; but seeing the Place is not marked with a buoy, it is judged uneasie to be used by great Ships, and only navigable for Smacks: Coming from the East, and having Midland-Church standing upon the Schelling S.S.E. from you, then you are near about the said Bank; and seeing there is no∣thing else to be written of this Easter-Booms-Gat, we will leave it, and pass over to the Description and Sci∣tuation of the Wester-Booms-Gat. Wester-Booms-Gat at the Schelling. To sayl in at the Wester-Booms Channel, coming from the West, Bring the Cape and Tower of Brandaries together, that is, East, and East by South from you: thereupon you must run to find the outermost Buoy, there is fix fathom water; keep then the Cape and Tower so standing, till you come to the second Buoy; bring then the Tower a great hand-spikes length to the southwards of the Cape, and sayl thereupon, then you shall sayl betwixt a white and black Buoy; there it is upon the shoalest 17 foot at low-water, from thence you come to 6 and 7 fathom, and then you come again in the right Booms-Channel; on the North Wall it is deep∣est; it is wide and broad, so that you cannot well bear it up; the Stream runs there of it self right in in still weather. The Ietting. To sayl into the Jetting, coming through the Robbe-Gat, about the Rosyne-Plat, You must run towards the Buoy upon Longe-sand, and forth between the White and Black Buoys, leaving, in sayling up, the Black on the Larboard, and the White on the Starboard, till you come by the Beacons on the Nakens, (you may easily see from Buoy to Buoy) sayl then forth alongst by the Beacons upon the Nakens E. S. E. on, till Brandaries cometh hard by Grind, Grind. but not upon it; keep them so standing, and run southwards on, and you shall sayl up∣on the Buoy on the tayl of Hendricks-Taerts-Plate; these you may under-sayl on the East side; leave them on your Larboard, and run on West away S. S. E. to the last buoy that lyeth upon the South point of the afore∣said Hendrick't-Taerts-Plate. Over against the Beacons upon the Nakens, lie on the South Wall two white Buoys, the most easterly lyeth upon the Tayl, which sayling off, you may under-sayl southward between the two last black Buoys; by the West Coast is the Road where the Ships which are bound to Harlingen set on to lighten. Note. ☞ All the depths here before rehearsed, as well of Stortmeleck as of the Booms-Gat, are said of the low∣est water, at half-flood is three foot deeper; it floweth upon these at the aforesaid places with a common Tyde five and a half, or six foot up and down. The num∣bers of the depths set down in the Card of the Fly and Ameland-Gat, are to be understood for feet: As for Example, By the outer Buoy of the Boomkens-Gat, stand 66, that is, 66 foot, or 11 fathom, six foot being reckoned for a fathom. Stortemeleck. To sayl into Stortemeleck, (that is the Land-deep of Ulie-land) Bring the Cape that is on the East end of Ulie-land and the Light-house together, they shall then bear from you S. S. E. or a little easterly; sayl there∣upon, and you shall fall right on the first Buoy that ly∣eth on five fathom, on the outermost of the long Bank; the Bank is on the North side reasonable plain, so that those who come out of the North, may run thereby on the Lead in five or fix fathom, and so likewise find the outermost Buoy. If need require, men may run over the end of the long Bank, but not too far eastwards of the outermost Buoy, in 3 fathom, or 18 foot. Towards the Shore, though not eastward of the second Buoy, but a good way westward, lyeth right southward the point of another small Tayl, whereupon near the Buoy it is no more than 11 foot water; between this Tayl and the long Bank, runneth a Chop in the Ground to the eastward, of five fathom deep: It happeneth some∣times, that Ships coming over the end of the Long-Bank, and finding again deeper water, do think them∣selves to be in the right depth of Stortemeleck, where∣upon they luff, but run in the aforesaid Chop, in be∣twixt the two foresaid Tayls; and if with a westerly wind, not without great danger, and yet must run out again backward; coming out of the West along by Ulie∣land in 4 or 5 fathom, you shall not miss to run the fore∣said outermost Buoy in sight: he that in the night fall∣eth about Stortemeleck, let him bring the Light-house S. S. E. from him, and run thereupon till he come near∣er the Shore, he shall run to the westwards of the outer∣most Buoy; within Stortemeleck there lie 7 black Buoys, with one white Buoy; sayling in, leave all the black on the Larboard, and run along the southward, leave the white on the Starboard, even as all other white Buoys, as well in Booms-Channel, the Jetting, as upon the Ulie-Stream. In coming from Stortemeleck, you must somewhat shun the Shore, for it hath a Shoal right over against the first Buoy. The second Buoy, called the Outermost-Drooge-drie, Droog-drie. lyeth on 11 foot upon the ridge of the shoalest of the Channel; South thereof is also not more than 11 foot water, and a little further again 16 foot deep. The third, called the Innermost-Drooge-drie, lyeth in 16 foot; the right depth betwen both is 3 fathom. The fourth is called Heyckboeck; between this and the third, the right depth is 5 fathom: Over against the fourth, lyeth the white Buoy on the Strand, hard by runneth a little Tayl from the Shore, which you may undersayl when you sayl outwards to this white Buoy; or to the third, which from without it stretcheth E. N. E. in; from the fourth to the fifth almost East, and further more and more southerly: The fifth Buoy is called the Outermost Corner Buoy; the sixth the Middlemost Corner Buoy, and the seventh, or last, the Innermost Corner Buoy; betwixt the Outermost and Middlemost Corner Buoy, the next Outermost runneth a Tayl from the Shore, which you may undersayl from without, this groweth sometimes almost as far as the Buoy; then breaketh the depth by the Wall again through, and scoures the Tayl wholly to the North Shore; from the Innermost Buoy, men run forth alongst by the Strand of Ulie-land, or southward to the Buoy upon the Plate. To sayl in at the Spaniards-Channel. For to find the Spaniards-Channel, coming from the northwards, You must bring the Capes upon Huysdown one in the other, or a little through one another, (to wit) the Runner, that is the southermost and greatest, a little to the eastwards of the other, then they shall bear S. S. E. from you; sayl then in right with them, keeping them so, and you shall sayl right upon the out∣ermost Buoy, or in sight of it, which lyeth (as is said) upon the Point of the Keysers-Plate in 22 foot at low∣water: When you come to the Buoy, Keysers-Plate. the Kooger-Church shall lie full E. N. E. from you: Therefore if you come from the westwards or southwards, then
bring that Church not more northerly from you then E. N. E. but rather a little more easterly, and sayl then right in with it, until that the Capes come one right against another; or else you shall lightly sayl upon the Keysers-Plate, which is without upon the North side very steep; Men may run a little west∣wards of the Outermost Buoy; alongst to the cast∣wards of it it is broader. From the first, or the outermost Buoy, to the se∣cond, the course is South, somewhat westerly; and from thence to the third, fourth, and fifth, which is the Buoy of the Cape and Steeple, it is almost one course S. S. E. or somewhat southerly; the Buoys lie along the West Shore; men may for need sayl alongst to the westwards of them, but not far, for the West Shore is so steep, that if a great Ship should lie with the Stern against it, there should be no more than 3 foot at Head, and by the main Mast at least three fa∣thom deep; but the East Shore is flat, you may run alongst by it upon your Lead, until you come within the Buoys: The Buoy upon the Tayl, that is, the in∣nermost, Old-Slenk upon the Buoy of the Old-Slenk, lies from the Buoy upon Cape and Steeple, South by West, and S. S. W. but the Helder S. E. then you may sayl from the Buoy upon Cape and Steeple right with the Hel∣der, without danger; or to the Buoy upon the Tayl, and from thence alongst by the South Shore, which is also very steep, or right to the Helder, as shall be most convenient for the Wind and Tyde. The Fore-flood sets very strong over the South-ground to the Spaniards-Channel, till half-flood, and the Fore-ebb S. S. E. till half-ebb. The Helder lyeth from the Buoy upon the Tayl E. S. E. and S. E. by East: When you are come near the Helder, run close by it, so to avoid a Tayl shooting off from Geest-sand, which you may sayl within as you come from Sea, there lyeth a Buoy upon it, which leave on the Larboard∣side; being past the Helder, go N. E. or a little more easterly, or alongst the Texel-side in eight or nine fa∣thom, into the Capevaerden-Road. The Wieringhen side is steep. The Slenck. In the Slenck used to lie six Buoys, but the Sands are grown now so high, that they have stopt the Pas∣sage. Within the sixth Buoy it is wide enough to sayl from thence to the Helder E.S.E. To sayl into Land-deep. To sayl out at the Land-deep, Run alongst within a Bow-shot of the Foot-strand of Huysdown, and about by the Heads, and you shall not miss the innermost Buoy lying on the Shoals, nearest the West Shore, in 17 foot at high, and 13 foot at low-water; that shoaly place is not above two Ships length broad; over it, and also within, it is deep enough. Thwart of that Buoy shooteth of a Tayl from the Shore towards the Buoy, therefore run close alongst by the Buoy, and leave it on your Starboard-side in sayling out. Besides that Buoy, there lie three other Buoys in the Land∣deep, which you must leave all lying to Seawards of you, and so run between them and the Shore; when you are past the fourth Buoy, you are past all the Shoals, and you may sayl where you will. To find the Land-deep, coming from the Sea south∣wards, You must sound the Shoal in 4 fathom and a half; and running so by the Shore, you shall sayl right with the outermost Buoy; which done, come no nearer the Shore, else you sayl within the Tayl of Arrian-Bergers-Creek, which shooteth off from the Shore to the South Sand-hill; or else if you come from Sea, with an open Wind, then keep the great Cape upon Huysdown over Dirckoms Sand-hill, (that is a round Sand-hill a little to the South of Kichdown, but not so high) and sayl so in right with it, you shall then meet with the outermost bucy, which lyeth at low∣water in 4 fathom and a half, near the wester Grounds, Hakes. or the Hakes, leave it on the Larboard-side, and run in alongst to the eastwards of it; betwixt it and the Shore, it lyeth most N. E. and N. E. by North in; you can take no hurt on either side, if you take heed to keep you in the Shore. Thwart of the Kich∣own, or coming to the southwards of it, you must edge a little from the Shore, to avoid the Shoal which lyeth near, somewhat from the Shore. When you come to the second buoy, then cometh the Mill to the northwards of Kickdown, and at the third, the Mill and Can-Nells-House come one in the other, which two buoys lie in five fathom at low-water; from the third, to the in∣nermost Buoy, it is N. E. by East; run close alongst to the eastward of it, to avoid the foresaid little Tayl of Sand which (thwart of it) lyeth off from the Shore, and then forth within a Bow-shot the Heads, and so along by the Strand of the Holder. To sayl into the Mase. The Mase is at present a wide or broad Flat, ha∣ving little change of depth, which may be sayled with all winds. When the Wind is South, regard the old Marks; Marks. that is (coming from Sea) before you see the Capes, bring the Steeple of the Brill, which is a stumpy Steeple E. S. E. from you, or a little East or southerly; after you have gotten the Cape, bring them together and run on; or if you bring the Brill Steeple a hand-spikes length northwards of the Tower of Oostveern, and run on, you shall then first run the buoy in sight lying in three fathom at low-water. From this first buoy, we sayl to the second and third buoys right upon the Capes. The second buoy lies on 13, and the third upon 11 foot; being there, the Stee∣ple of Goeree comes a little upon the foot-strand of the Land of the Brill: The fourth buoy lyeth much alike with the third, right upon the Capes, though a little more southerly; between these buoys, the shallowest of the Mase is about 10 foot; by the fourth buoy it begins to deepen, with a common low-water it is about 11 foot deep, but with a southerly or S. E. Wind it runs shallower; from thence to the fourth buoy it is broad, so that there we may sayl in a reasonable depth. Be∣low the Heydick, or innermost Beacon, it is much nar∣rower. The fifth buoy lyeth distant from the fourth E. N. E. and N. E. by East, from the fourth buoy to the fifth; southward along the buoys, in the right Chan∣nel, it is 14, 15, 16, and 17 foot deep, and near the fifth buoy five fathom. The sixth buoy lyeth from the fifth East by North in 12 foot; there along the south∣ward it is 5 and 6 fathom deep, and is called the Pit, coming then a little beyond the sixth buoy, so cometh Maeslant-Sluce and Ulaerding-steeple together; keep them so, and run forwards till you bring the Old-Head of the Brill in the New-head, then you may run to the Land of the Brill, and so alongst the south∣wards till you come before the Brill, where you may anchor; now those that will run higher up the Mase, let them run all alongst South-Wall, till they be past the New Sluce, let them chuse then the North Wall: from the East end of Rsenburgh there comes a Tayl off, which you may under-sayl coming westwards; if then (when you are past the heads of the Swartwall) you bring North the Brill-Steeple without or north∣wards these Heads, but keep to the southwards, you cannot under-sayl it, but must run far about south∣wards. Old-Mase Full eastwards of Heenvliet runs the old Mase in; the Flood falls there very hard, you must take heed that you be not deceived with the Terwasand, that
is a great flat Sand, lying formost in the midst of the Old Mase, & that lies a great way dry at low-water, and stretcheth with a long small Point westwards into the Mase. To shun this, take notice of a bush of Trees standing on the South-wall, a little eastward of the Old Mase, keep the Steeple of Roterdam northwards of that Bush, so shall you not sayl over that Tarwe-sand; but if you let the Steeple come southward of the Bush, you shall surely strike upon the foresaid Tayl. Northward of the Tarwe-sand it is deep, upon which you may sayl in the Old Mase even to Dort; therein lie also 2 buoys, he that will run upon the aforesaid Marks of Roterdam Steeple and the bush of Trees, so long till the Steeple of the Brill comes together, with a tiled House which stands upon the South side of the East end of Roosen∣burgh, and keep that so standing, so shall he not miss of the buoy; being past the Old Mase, you may sayl in the midst of the water beyond Vlaerding, till you come to the five Sluces; from thence you must chuse the South Wall, and run along near unto it, till you come over a small Sand or Bank, where with low∣water, there is 11, or 11 foot and a half water; the nearer you keep to the South Wall, so much the deep∣er it is stretching cross the Mase; as soon as you are past that, keep strait to the Schtedams-head, there you have the deepest water. To sayl into the Mase with a northerly Wind. But if you will sayl in the Mase with a northerly wind, you must keep the upper Wall, that so you may have the smoothest deepest water; for by the North Wall there goes in a depth, where a full foot of wa∣ter and more is then by the buoys above written, and is called Everskill; to reach this, you must bring the outermost Beacon in the Brill, and keep it so standing, till you bring two bushes of Trees on the North side, East of it, that is, about a Musquet-shot north∣wards the outermost buoy; bring the most northerly Bush in with Delfs-Steeple, so are you then on the North side of Everskill; and the southerly Bush to the Eer, then are you on the South side of Everskill, then keep so long between both the Beacons, (then are you right over against the Hompel) then run again to the Land of the Brill, either to the Pit, or the aformenti∣oned Southern-Gat. The Goerees-Gat. Betwixt the Land of the Brill and Geeree, goeth in also 2 Channels, the northermost is called the Quack∣aeeps, and is not for great Ships, but onely for Smacks and small Ships; the other the Goerees-Gat: betwixt these two Channels lyeth a great Plat called the Hin∣der, which at low-water is not deeper than 5, 6, and 7 foot; to the northwards of it goeth in the Quacks∣deep, and the southwards of it the Goerees-Gat. For to find the Quacks-deep, coming in out of the West, You must keep the Steeple of the Brill East from you, and run so in, until that a great Countrey House (which you shall see stand alone a little within the Point of the Quack) come to the southermost Sand∣hills of the Land of the Brill, which shall then bear near about East from you, keep that then so standing, and come so right in, until that Oostvrn come to the westermost or southermost Sand-hills, then come in a∣longst by the Strand somewhat more southerly, until that Goeree come to the eastwards, or within the Sand∣hills, then you shall be past the East Point of the Hin∣der, which the Pilots call the Buoyen; run then towards Goeree, or the eastwards, to Helleveet-Sluce, where you desire to be. For to sayl in at the Goeree-Gat, You must bring the Steeple of Goeree and the Cape upon the Land of Goe∣ree, one in the other, and then they shall bear Fast by South, and E. S. E. from you; or if you cannot see the Cape, then bring the Steeple East by South, or E.S.E. from you, according as you shall have the wind, sayl in right with it, until you come hard aboard the Strand, and within a Bowls cast in alongst by it, East by North, and East in, so long, until that the Land do fall away more to the southwards; thereabouts runneth off from the Shore a little Tayl, which you may sayl within in going out, but not in coming in; there you must edge a little further from the Shore; being past that, luff up again towards the Shore or Haven of Goe∣ree, and anchor there before it; or else if you will run up the Hellevoet-Sluce, then bring the Mill which stand∣eth to the westwards of Goeree, a little to the north∣wards of the Steeple of Goeree, keep them so standing, and sayl so up to Hellevoet-Sluce, and you shall not come near the Plat, which lyeth over against, or to the southwards of Hellevoet-Sluce. When you sayl in at the Goeree-gat with a bare sou∣therly wind, and that you cannot bring the Cape and Steeple one in the other, you may bring the Steeple wel E. S. E. or a great Capstane bars length to the north∣wards of the Cape, and then run on until you come over against the Strand, and so you shall run over the Tayl of the Hinder in 14 and 15 foot at low-water; but when the Cape and Steeple are one in the other, you shall not have less than 19 or 20 foot: being come over the Tayl of the Hinder, in the right depth, it is 6, 7, and 8 fathom, deeper water. A little within the Cape, or almost thwart of it, is the narrowest of the Channel, further in it is wide; on the side towards the Hinder, it is rising Ground, but the south shore alongst by the Strand is very steep. To sayl in at the Brewers-Haven. Before the Land of Scowen, thwart of the Brewers-Haven-Chan∣nel, lie 3 Banks, the outermost called the Bree-bank lyeth a ken∣ning without the Land, upon which it is 7 fathom deep, and again within it 10 fathom deep; upon the second, near the Shore, it is 5 fathom deep, and again within it is 7 fathom. The third, called the Ooster, lyeth close by the Land, and runneth into the cast∣wards, betwixt Schowen and the Land of Goeree; upon it is no more than 6 foot water: When you would sayl into the Channel of Brewers-Haven, you must go about to the westwards of it. Upon the West end of Schowen stand two Capes, bring them one in the other, and run so right in with them, until the Steeple of the Remisse (which Steeple is somewhat sharp) come to the Blenck or Wlsack, that is a high white Sand-hill, which shew∣eth it self out in Whiteness high above all the other Sand-hills, then leave the Capes, and run in by the marks of the Blenck and Re∣misse, until that Outdrop (a little white Steeple upon the Land of Goeree) come to the Steeple of Gree, and so you shall go in be∣twixt the Ooster of the Larboard-side, and the Hill on the Star∣board-side; and alongst a little to the southward of the outer∣most Buoy, until you come within the Ooster. When Outdrop and Geeree are one in the other, then leave also the aforesaid marks of Remisse, and run in right with Goeree, until you come by the second Buoy; or (if there lie no Buoys) until that Bommence come a little without the Oxe-Tayl, that is a Point of Schowe, lying out a little to the westwards of Brewers-Haven; sayl so right in until you are past the Brewers-Haven. This Channel of Brewers-Haven, is a broad and deep Channel, very convenient for great Ships; he that must turn in or out to windwards, may run alongst a good way on boch sides, as well of the outermost as the second Buoy; but to the southward of them it is deepest, and the common Fair-way. The third Buoy, is a Buoy with a Tayl, and lyeth upon a Point of a Tayl off from the Ooster, which you may not go to the northwards of, until you be very close alongst by it. All alongst by the Strand of Schowen it is very deep and steep, you may run close by it from the outermost Buoy unto Brewers-Haven, there is nothing that can hurt you; the shoalest of this Channel is 18 or 19 foot; at least a league without the Land, in the coming in betwixt the Ooster and the Hill; further inwards it is 4, 5, 6, and 7, and at some places 10 and 11 fathom, as it is shewed in the Chart by the number of feet, and all at low-water.
chart A Chart of the EEMES ELVE Amelander gat Lauers Scholllgh Weser Eyder and isever and how the same doth bare from Holy land by John Seller chart A Chart of the Coast of IUTLAND with the Adjacent Islands shoals and depthes from the Hever to the Schaw by John Seller
chart A Chart of the SOUTH SEA Texel and Fly-stream with all ye Sands Depths and Soundlings by John Seller chart A Chart of the EEMES as the Easter and Wester Eeams Scholbalgh & the Lauer by John Seller chart A Chart of the FLY and AMELANDER gat by John Seller
chart A Chart of the WESER and Iade by John Seller Regis Hydrographus
chart A Chart of the MAES Showing the Chan∣ of Brewers haven Zierick and Viergat by Iohn Seller Regis Hydro chart The Coast of HOLLAND Between the Maes and the Texel by Iohn Seller Regis Hydrog.
Directions for Sayling into all the Harbours upon the East-Coast of Eng∣land, from the Downs to Flambrough-head; shewing the Marks for bringing a Ship to an anchor in any of the Roads and Harbours on the said Coast; The Depth and Soundings amongst the Sands; and the Nature and Quality of the Ground; With the setting of the Tydes, &c. Directions for the Mouth of the River. FRom the Point of the Hope, called Sands-bead-Point, down as far as the Isle of Sbeppy, the Reach lyeth East and West: A little below Sands-bead-Point, is Cliff-Creek; and between this Creek and that Point, lyeth Blyth-Sand, which lyeth close by the Shore, whereon is but seven foot at low-water: Right against Cliff-Creek, lyeth Shell-haven on the North side; and a little below that lyeth Hull-Haven; about a Cables length from the Shore lyeth Rocks, Hull-Ha∣ven-Scarrs cal∣led Hull-Haven-Scars, which are very dangerous, for a Ship that draweth but twelve foot water hath been a∣ground on them. A mile to the eastwards of these Rocks, is the entrance into Lee-Swatch; the Chanuel going into Lee, is at the eastermost part of the Sand be∣tween the Marsh Point and it. A mile below this en∣trance into Lee, Canvey-Island. right against which Town is a low Island, called Canvey; and from the eastermost Point runneth off a Sand four miles in length: Chapman. There is also a Sand called the Chapman, lyeth far from the Shore, and is steep too, for close by it you will have seven fa∣thom water, and the next cast a-ground; and to the eastward of the Chapman, lyeth a smooth Sand which is dry at low-water; and between this Sand and the Kentish Shore, there are two middle Grounds, which do tayl down from Shooberry to the Whitaker, and there is no riding for a Ship that draweth 17, 18, or 19 foot water. From between Shooberry-ness and the Nower, and so down to Black-tayl, Warp. there lyeth a Sand called the Warp, whereon there is not above three fathom and a half, or four fathom at low-water; on the sou∣thermost side, right against Shooberry-ness, is a Sand called the Nower, whereon is a Buoy, which is right a∣gainst the West-swayl, coming out of the Waters of the Medway, which lyeth between the Isle of Grean and the Isle of Sheppy. Directions for sayling from Tilbury-Hope down to the Buoy of the Nower. When you break ground from Tilbury-Hope, if the wind be foutherly, Blyth-sand keep the South Shore close aboard, but be careful of Blyth-sand, which lyeth close to the South-shore; and accordingly observe these marks to carry you clear of it; keep the Steeple of Tilbury-Church a great Sayls breadth without Sands-bead-Point; or if it be in the Night, or hasey weather, keep your Lead, and come not within five fathom at low-water, and seven fathom at high-water, on the South side, and that depth will carry you clear with out the Sand; Nower-bead. and those depths will lead you down to the Nower-head. But if the wind be northerly, then you must keep the North-shore, which is steep too, until you come as low as Hull-haven; and so keeping the Soundings afore∣said, you may come down to the Nower; and if you please, you may come to an anchor at the East end of the Nower; and that you may know how to anchor clear of the Sand, bring Prickelwel steeple a Sayles breadth to the eastward of the Wood that is on the North-shore by the water side, and there you may come to an anchor. Directions to sayl from the Nower to the northward through the Swin. From the tayl of the Nower, or thwart of Shooberry∣ness, to the Black-tayl, the course is E. N. E. Black but if the wind be westerly, you may keep along the Essex-shore, and you may wear off and on the Sand, in six or seven fathom water; or keep the Hill to the west∣ward of Bemfleet, open of Hadly-land above Lee, and that Mark will lead you down to Black-tayl. Thwart marks for the Black-tayl, are the tuft of Trees upon the Kentish-shore, called Challock-Trees; right over the Isle of Sheppy, commonly called the Lands-end, from the Black-tayl to the Sho-beacon, the course is North-east, and you may borrow off and on upon the Sand, in 6, 7, or 8 fathom water, until you come to the Shoo-beaton, for there it is deeper, and steep to the Land. This Deep is called the Shoo-hole, Shoo-hole. where you shall have 10, 11, 12, or 13 fathom, accord∣ing as the Tyde is, by which depth you may know where you are, and the Hole is not above half a mile in length: Right against the Shoo-beacon, the tayl of the East-barrows-bead, East-Ra∣rw . extends from the eastwards very far, so that the Channel is narrowest in that place, and is not a mile over. From the Shooe to the Whitaker-beacon, the course is N. N. E. if the wind be westerly, you may borrow upon the Sand in six or seven fathom; and when you are right thwart of the Whitaker-beacon, the Mouth of Bornam-water will be directly West from you, and the spire Steeple, that is three miles to the northward of Bornam, will bear North-west, half northerly. From the Whitaker to the Buoy of the Buxey, Buoy of the Buey. or the entring in of the Spit, the course is North by East about 5 miles; you may borrow upon this Sand, in five, six, or seven fathom, which will carry you clear within two middle Grounds that lyeth between you and the East-barrows; on the westermost middle Ground, there is ten foot at low-water; but on the eastermost, there is not so much, for in some places it is almost dry: At the South end of this Middle-ground, there lyeth a Buoy, which is almost a mile below the Whitaker-beaton; Whitaker-Beacon. if the wind be easterly, you must be careful to give the Buoy a Birth, for the tayl of that Sand is flat, and tayleth over towards the Whitaker, (being to the North-west of this Buoy) then edge over to the eastward, and you shall have the deepest water toward that Sand, about seven, eight, or nine fathom, according as the Tyde is; this
Sand is steep also, so that if the wind be northerly, that you are forced to run down, stand not over to that Sand, until your water shoal, for you shall have eight or nine fathom, and the next cast aground, but you may stand over to the westward Middle-ground into five or six fathom; East-Bar∣row-head. the North end of the eastermost Middle-ground, doth tayl or joyn to the East-barrow-head, and there it is flat with a tayl a good length over to the northwards: The North-east Flat lyeth near North∣west from the Buoy of the Buxey, and then the Trees on the North side do bear North-weft from you. When you are thwart of the Buoy of the Spits and Buxey, Spits. Buy. you may steer out North-east by East, down the Kings Channel; or, if the wind will give you leave, to borrow upon the Gunfleet in seven or eight fathom water, then that depth will lead you down to the Buoy at the East end of the Gunfleet. Also by this means you shall be sure to keep clear of the Middle-ground that lyeth between the Gunfleet and the eastward Sand, which is called the Heaps, which at low-water hath but ten foot in some places. This Middle-ground reacheth a great length; when you are at the South end of it, the Naze-land will bear North from you, and Orfordness N. N. E. When you are at the North-east end of this Sand, then you will be thwart of the Buoy on the North end of the Gunfleet, and Harwich Church will be open and shut of Harwich Cliff; from whence if you be bound for the North-foreland, you may steer E. N. E. and East by North, till you bring the Naze-land to bear W. N. W. from you, and then you may be sure you are northward of the tayl of the Sonk; but if the wind be southerly, bor∣row close aboard the tayl of the Sonk. Other directions for the Swin, and so through the Kings-Channel to∣wards the Downs. When you come down as low as the Whitaker, then take heed and keep the shoaling thereof, until you are two miles below it; then you come to the shoaling of the Middle-ground, Middle-Ground. which is steep too; for if you do turn down, you must about when you come to ten fa∣thom water, because it is narrow; and so the shoaling of the Middle-ground doth continue till you come down as low as the Buoy of the Spits: Buoy of the Spits. The Channel begins to be broader, and if the wind be so that you must turn, be sure to keep hold of the Gunfleet; Gun-fleet. but if the wind be fair that you may lead it, run down in the shoaling of the Gunfleet, till you bring the Naze N.N.W. and then go thence North-east by East also, that it will lead you clear of the Sonk; and go still that course, till you have brought the Naze-land W. N. W. or West by North. The Sonk doth lie from the Naze North-east and South-west; so that if you bring the Naze-land to lie West by North, you may be bold to go a more easterly course, until you come to sixteen or eighteen fathom; for fourteen or fifteen fathom will go hard by the Kentish-Knock. Kentish-Knock. Note also that you may see the Trees over the Naze, when you cannot see the Naze. The Kentish-Knock doth lie from the Long-sand-head, Long-sand-head. three or four miles E.S.E. And when you have the aforesaid sixteen fathom, then you may judge the Naze-Land to be W. N. W. or West by North; then go thence S.S.W. upon an Ebb, and upon a flood South, or S.S.E. as the Wind is, or the weakness of the Tyde, so must you work, and that will carry you clear with the North-Foreland; and if you go about the North-sand-head, or about all, or the Goodwin, then you must keep more easterly; North-sand-head. and note, that the North-sand-head and the Long sand-head, lyeth South and North, and the Kentish-Knock lyeth from the North-foreland North by East, and South by West; there is nothing between Marget-sand and the North-foreland, and therefore you need not fear: And as I said before, to go about the Goodwin, run off till you come to 26 or 30 fathom. for 18 or 20 fathom goeth near the Sand; and so run in this depth until you have brought the Land of Dover open of the South Foreland, then you may be bold to hale in with the Foreland; there is nothing between the Goodwin, and Marget-sand, or North-foreland, to fear. To sayl unto Cowen and Malden-Water. When you are at the Buoy of the Spits, Spits. your course is W.N.W. in four or five fathom, as the Wind serves, for the Ebb setteth upon a Shoal that lyeth to the East∣ward, called the Eagle; Eagle. and the Tyde of Flood set∣teth on a Shoal, called the Knowl, Knowl. and is to the west∣ward of your going in; and you may run down to the southward, borrowing in five fathom upon the Main, until you bring Banbury-land (which is the high Land that lies above Malden) a Sayls breadth open with Brad∣well-point, (which Mark will bring you between the Eagle and the Knoul) and run with these Marks until you bring a Steeple that stands on the North shore, open of the red Cliffs end; and so run with these marks open and shut, North up, Marzey-Block-House. until you come to Marzey Black-house, and there you may come to an anchor in six or seven fathom water. Directions to sayl into Harwich coming from the southwards. If you come from the southward, keep Harwich-Steeple open a good birth off the Cliff end, and on the North end, keep Farberry Clifts open of the Beach on the East fide; and so you may go in, bearing close by the Beach for fear of the Altar, Altar. which lies within a Cables length of the Beach; and so you may go along clear, keeping by the Beach, till you come to the Were∣bere-head, and then you may steer up with Ipswich-water, and anchor with Harwich S. S. W. in five or six fathom water; and the higher up, the better ground, till you bring the Town South of you. Other Directions for Harwich coming from the Northwards. When you come from the northward, and are shot past the Whiting as far as Bawdsey-Cliff, keep Orford Church and Castle open of the Cliff, and that will car∣ry you clear of the Andrews; and then when you see the Light-Houses, bring them one into another, and get into four or five fathom-water, or somewhat more towards high-water, then run in about by the Point: The Channel lyeth in due North, but in the midst of the Havens lyeth a sunken Rock, called the Altar, which you must avoid, by sayling on either side, by one Shore or the other, but along by the East Shore is best; being within it, you cannot sayl amiss, or take hurt, except you run against the Shore: There you may anchor all over where you please, before the Town, in four, five, six, or seven fathom-water; or you may go further into the Bight, for it is every where clean. Other directions to sayl into Harwich. The Mark in this Channel, to sayl into Harwich, is to keep the top of Harwich Steeple half way betwixt the Fire-beacon on Harwich, and the North end of the Cliff, or the lower Light-house, a little open of the North end of Harwich Cliff, and so sayl in N. N. W. keeping those marks so, till you come within half a mile
of Harwich Cliff; then bear to the North-eastwards so far, till you bring the body of the Church open to the northwards of the Cliff, then edge toward Land-guard-Fort, till you bring both the Light-houses in one; then run in with them so, till you see your self within the South Point of the Andrews, which you shall know, by having Bawdsey Church open and shut on the Land to the Southwards of Bawdsey; or if there be any Sea, or half-tyde, the Andrews is plain to be seen; then you must edge near to the Beach where the Fort stands, to shun the Altar, another Shoal that lyeth directly against the Fort. To sayl out of Harwich. In the North Channel you may sayl out, as is before described in the going in, till you come without the Fort; then bring the two Light-houses into one, and so sayl out, till you bring the Steeple open of the Land to the southward of Bawdsey-Cliff, then are you clear of the Andrews and Ridge; then steer North-east by East until you bring Harwich-Church on the North side of a black House, called the Brew-house, which stands a little to the northward of Landguard-Fort, keep∣ing them marks so standing, until you bring Bawdsey-Church open a little to the northward of the North end of Bawdsey-Cliff, then are you open of the Sledway. Between Alborough and Dunwich, half way, lyeth a Wood, which is high at both ends, and the midst low, in form of a Saddle; this you shall commonly see first, when you fall with the Land thereabouts, and is the best to know the Coast  for the Land without, and to the southwards, is very low, and shingly ground; about two leagues to the southward of Alborough, lyeth Orfordness; between them both there standeth two Woods, which sheweth at a distance like Castles and Towers; on Orfordness standeth a flat Steeple, and a broad Castle, which hath also a thick flat Steeple, almost in fashion like the Steeple of Ranop, open above, with Holes in it like Bell-holes; before Dunwich you may anchor; there is good lying in eight or nine fathom water, somewhat soft ground: Before Alborough is the best Road of all the Coast thereabouts, in six or seven fathom. To know Bawdsey, Oasly, and Alter∣ton-Churches. Bawdsey-Church is the highest and biggest Steeple, being flat at top as the others are; it stands to the south-wards of all the rest, a mile from the Shore. Oasly-Church hath a flat large Steeple, but is lower than the other two, and stands a mile to the northwards of Bawdsey-Steeple, three quarters of a mile from the Sea. Alterton-Steeple stands to the northwards of Oasly-Church a mile and a half; it is a very high square Stee∣ple, but much smaller than the other two, and stands about a mile from the Sea. To sayl out of the Sledway to the North-Foreland. First, Bring the North end of Bawdsey-Cliff North-West from you, then shall you see a flat Steeple right with a Cliff, which you must keep on, or a little open of the Cliff-end, until you bring Beamont-Tree on the Naze-land W. N. W. and then you may steer South-East, or South-east by South, if the Wind serves, having not less water than seven or eight fathom; and when you have laid the Netherland to water, you may sound for the Kentish-Knock, and come no nearer it than 8 or 9 fathom, as the Wind and Tyde serves; and being a∣bout the Knock, you may go S. S. W. as you see occa∣sion. To sayl out at the back-side of the Gun-fleet. If you will sayl out at the back-side of the Gun∣fleet, being in the Sleds in seven fathom, borrow on the West-Rocks in four or five fathom, steering S. S. W. or South-west by West; but go not to the southwards of five fathoms, till you be over the tayl of the Rocks; and when you are over the Rocks, you shall have seven or eight fathom; but go not without eight fathom on the West side, and borrow on the Gunfleet in six or se∣ven fathom, going South-west by South, or South-west, till you come up to the Spits, or as you see occasion. To sayl by the Naze to the Northwards. From the Eagle to the Naze, you may borrow to the Shore, and the course is N. E. by North, or N. N. E. to go by the Naze, you must bring Harwich-steeple unto the East part of the Saddle in the Cliff-end; be sure you shut not St. Hellen into the Naze, before you bring the Steeple into the Saddle; and so you may steer with the Steeple, until you bring the Dove-house with the Naze; or the Naze-end unto a Tree on the lower end of the Hedge-row that is to the southward of the House; and being in one, then may you have your other marks, and steer to the eastward, keeping the House and Tree in one; and more to the south∣ward of the Hedge-row, in the lower end of the Field, a stones cast from the Hedge, is a lively Tree, or great Bush, which you may bring into a Tree, between two high Trees that are to the southward of the House; and these marks you may keep in one, steering North-east by North, keeping Harwich-steeple open of the East end of the Cliff, and then you may bear in with the Harbour; but the best water is when the Steeple is on the Hommock, between the Beacon and the Cliff, and so steer to the northwards as you please. To sayl clear of Alborough-Knapes. East from Alborough, two leagues, lyeth Alborough-Knapes, which is a Sand that at low-water is not deeper than seven or eight foot; you may sound round about it in five fathom, but it is not good to come nearer with Sea-winds; you may discern it plainly by the breaking of the Sea; but with northerly and westerly winds, the Sea breaks not at all upon it, if it be fair weather; he that runneth by it to the northwards with an Ebb, shall see it ripple much upon it, likewise upon most of the English Bank; and indeed not upon the Banks, but a∣gainst them, for upon the shoalest of them is alwayes the smoothest water, as experience teacheth every where: When as Alborough is West from you, and the two Steeples of Orforness one in the other, there you shall find Albôrough-Knapes. These are sure marks of that Sand. To sayl to the westward of the Whiting-Sand. The Whiting is somewhat a small long Sand lying to the southward of Orfordness, and the shingly ground to the southward of Alborough, lyeth alongst the Reach, but the South end lyeth further from Land than the North end; there is not above six or seven foot water upon it at low-water: Coming from the northward, men most commonly sayl to the westward of it, that is, through between the Land and the Whiting, towards
the Naze; men may also sayl along to the eastward of it, through between the Whiting and the eastermost points of Bawdsey-sand; the North end of the Whiting lyeth near the Snore, and lyeth from the Steeple of Orfordness South-west by South; it is so exceeding steep and sharp, that at one cast you have nine fathom, and the next but five, and then you are but a Ships length from it; and before you can heave the Lead again, you shall be upon it; when you sit with the Fore-ship a∣gainst it, you have five or six fathom at Stern. Alongst the inward side it is also every where so steep that you cannot sound it, but on the out-side you may run alongst by it in five fathom, till you come with∣in the Sands. When you come from the northwards, and will sayl through within the Whiting, you must run close alongst by the Shore, and South-west about by the Point of the Shingle, to the southward of Albo∣rough, until you come within the North Point of the Whiting. When the Steeples of Orfordness come to the North-west by North from you, then you are right thwart of the North Point of the Whiting; being with∣in it, go again more southerly, (viz.) South-west by South, towards Barzey-Cliff. To run in to the castward of the Whiting. Bring the Steeple of Bawdsey W. S. W. from you, and so sayl in right with it until you come by the Whi∣ting in five or six fathom; and lead it in so by it upon the Lead, until you come by Bawdsey, or can get deeper water. When you come near Bawdsey, whether you come in from the northward or southward of the Whiting, you must keep somewhat off from the Shore, because of a small tayl that shooteth off from the Shore, thwart of Bawdsey-Cliff, which you must avoid with Ships of great draught, for there remaineth upon it, at low water, no more than two fathom; you may perceive it well by the ripling of the Tyde most commonly. Directions from the Buoy of the Buxey down to the Kings-Channel, and from thence to the Northwards. When you are at the North end of the Gunfleet, or thwart of the Buoys, in ten or twelve fathom, if you be bound to Sea for Norway, East-land, Hambrough, Holland, &c. Steer out North-east by East, and E.N.E. until you come to twenty fathom water, then you are clear of all, and direct your course to the place you are bound: But if you are bound for the North Coast of England, and would hale in for Yarmouth. Road, then from the Buoy of the Buxey, steer North-east by East, until you have brought Bawdsey-Cliff to bear from you North west by West; then you may borrow upon the Shipwash in ten or eleven fathom; or steer away North East by North, and North-east, until you come to bring Alborough-Church to bear from you N. W. then bear in with it N. N. W. till you come to nine or ten fathom upon the Shore, and that will bring you within the Sand called Alborough-Knapes, on which there is ten or eleven foot water at low-water, but there is seventeen or eighteen fathom between that and the Shore: Marks of Alborough Knapes. The thwart Marks for the South end of it, is Alborough-Church W.N.W. for the North end of it, the same Church W. S. W. The longst mark for it, is Orford-Church and Castle one in another, going right upon it; but keeping them open, a great Sayls breadth one off another on each side, carrieth you clear, either without or within the Sand. From the Sonk to the Long-Sand, and so to the North-Foreland. When the Naze-sand doth bear North-west by West, you may hale up East, and East by South, and E.S.E. being careful to keep the Lead, and to look out for the Ripling of the Sand, and bear off and on from it in se∣ven or eight fathom; and being below that in eleven fathom, then if you have a Neap-tyde, you may steer for the Long-sand-head; but with a Flood, and an East wind, or northerly wind, you must steer E. S. E. or South-east, till you come to fourteen or fifteen fathom, durty owsey Ground; then steer S. S. E. for a good distance, for you have Pits of twenty fathom, and fourteen or fifteen fathom; but having a continuing depthing of 18, 19, 20, or 21 fathom, and stony ground, then you may assure your self that you are without the Long-sand, and may steer S. S. W. with the Foreland, and South-west by South. To sayl alongst the Coast by Albo∣rough, Dunwich, and Covehith. The Coast lyeth North by East, somewhat easterly, and South by West, somewhat westerly; from Covehith to Leystaff, North and South, two leagues. Between Dunwich and Covehith lyeth the Haven of Southwold, South∣wold. which is a small Creek; and a little within it, divideth it self into three parts; upon the northermost Arm ly∣eth Southwold; upon the middlemost, Walderswick; and upon the southermost Dunwich: Dunwich. Covehith. Covehith hath a high sharp Steeple; thwart of this Steeple lyeth a Bank not far from the Land, which falleth almost dry at low∣water, but at half flood you may sayl through between the Land and it in two fathom; upon the outer-side it is very steep, so that you cannot come nearer it than in nine or ten fathom: When the Steeple of Covehith is W.N.W. from you, then you are to the southward of the Bank; and when the Steeple of Covehith is South-West by West from you, then you are to the north∣ward of it two leagues. To the northward of Cove∣hith lyeth Leystaff, Leystaff. and two leagues to the northward of that, lyeth Yarmouth; the Steeple is a high sharp Steeple, and standeth a great Musquet-shot within the Land from the Houses, so that in sayling alongst, you may bring the Steeple on both sides of the Houses. Off from Leystaff, beginneth the Bank called the Holms of Yarmouth, and lyeth along to the northward; Holms. past Yarmouth, until you come thwart of Winterton, Winterton there goeth divers Channels through them, which you may sayl through upon divers Marks for those that are there acquainted; you may sayl within these Banks, off from Leystaff, until you are past Winterton. To sayl within the Banks of Yarmouth. If you will sayl through from before Leystaff within these Banks, then look out for the Light-houses which stand by Leystaff, which are two little white Houses, the one standeth beneath upon the Shingles on the Sea∣side, and the innermost upon a little Hommock, some∣what farther within the Land; when you come to the southward, then they shew themselves to the northward of the Town, but come at last thwart of it. In the night there is alwayes fire on them. To sayl in there also by night, Bring these foresaid Light-houses North-west by North, or somewhat more northerly from you, and sayl in right with them, either by Night or by Day; when the Church of Leystaff cometh to the southward of the Town, over a Coun∣trey House by the Water-side, then you come against the Channel, there is no more than three fathom at
chart A Chart of the North Coast of England from Yarmought to Cocket Island. Describing all the Roads avens and Harbors Depths and Soundings, the Courses and distances of one Place from Another Newly Corroded and Published by Iohn Seller. And are to be Sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Marriners Compass at the chart A Description of the East Coast of Scotland Shewing all the Bayes Roads havens Harbors depths and Soundlings, Courses & distances of places one the said Coasts Newly Corrected and Published by Iohn Seller. And are to be Sold at his Shopp at Signe of the Marrinors Compass at the Hermitage stayrs in Wapping.
low water. Keep these foresaid Light-houses one in the other, or bring the innermost rather a little to the northwards of the outermost, to avoid a little Flat which lyeth to the South side of the Channel: But the Channel is indifferent wide, run in until you come a∣gainst it, in two fathom and a half, or two fathom, as near as you will or can; then go up northward alongst by the Shore, you shall then (having sayled a little to the northward) meet with a Flat, whereupon remain∣eth at low-water less than two fathom; you must anchor before that Flat, with laden Ships, and stay for high∣water; it floweth there about eight foot up and down: As soon as you are over the Flat, it will be five, six, and seven fathom deep; edge then to the shore, and sayl towards it, and you come before the Brew-house; there is a Road where you may anchor in five or six fathom; from thence northward, towards Yarmouth, alongst the Shore, is all over good anchoring, and good ground. About a mile, Yarmouth Haven. or somewhat more, to the southward of the Town of Yarmouth, it hath two wooden Heads, you must sayl in between them both, against the highest water, when the strength of the Flood is spent; at half∣flood it is dangerous, because of the strong Tyde, which shall forcibly carry you into the Bight against the Shore; it is also best to carry your Ship in alongst the South-head, for there it is deepest: At Yarmouth, in the Road, men do commonly anchor to the northward of the Haven, right over thwart the Town, in five, six, seven, or eight fathom: The nearer you anchor to the Sands, the deeper water you shall have, but all good Sand, and soft Ground. To sayl into Yarmouth-Road through the Holms. If you sayl into the Road of Yarmouth, then bring the sharp little Steeple that standeth to the northward of Yarmouth, within the Land over the broad Castle; or, bring the Mill to the North side of the Town: Keep these Marks so standing, and go in W. N. W. you shall find in this Channel no less than eight or nine fathom at half-flood. This Channel is called St. Nicholas Channel, St. Nicho∣las Chan∣nel. on the North side it is deepest; being come in, the Road is right before the Town, in five or six fathom. Thwart, or over against the Haven of Yarmouth, go∣eth also a Channel through the Holms: To sayl in there, coming from the southwards, Bring the Souton over the North side of the Haven, between the great Tree, and that flat little House or Castle, and sayl in right with them, and keep these Marks so standing within the Holms; within them lyeth a Flat on the Starboard∣side, and a little northward of the Haven, called the Middle-ground; you may sayl about on both sides, the inner side in five fathom, but toward the Holms, or to∣ward the eastward of it, in eight or nine fathom. From Yarmouth to Winterton, the Coaft lyeth North by West, and North-west, two leagues. To sayl from Yarmouth through the Sands. If you sayl from Yarmouth through within to the northwards, sayl alongst by the Land, and keep the sounding of the Shore in five, six, or seven fathom, until you have the a Light-houses (which stand a little to the northwards of Castor) one in the other, Castor. and then sayl in right with them, either by day or night, (in the night there is fire in them) and then shall you run over a Flat without the Buoy, which lyeth upon the Tayl of the Sand called the Barber; Barber. sayl boldly in with the a∣foresaid Light-houses, until you come again near the Shore in five or six fathom; being come by the Shore, run again alongst by it, and keep the Sounding as be∣fore, till you come before Winterton. depictions of the land Thus sheweth the Land from Orfordness to Wintertonness. Orfordness. Alborough. Dunwich. Walderswick. Sowl. Thus sheweth the Coast of England, between Orfordness and Sowl-Haven. Sowl. Covehith. Leystaff. Thus sheweth the Land between Sowl and Leystaff. Leystaff. Yarmouth. Winterton. Thus sheweth the Coast betwixt Leystaff and Winterton. To sayl by Wintertonness. This Ness formerly hath been very shoal and dange∣rous, but now it is worn away, so that Ships may run between the Ness and the Main, and you will have three fathom water at half-flood; but if you sayl without the Ness, there is a Channel between it and a Middle∣ground; and the Marks to carry you through, are, to bring the two small Light-houses one into another, and keep the great Light-house South of you, so you will keep in the best of the Channel. To sayl from Wintertonness to Stamford. First, You must steer North, and North by East, and borrow on the Shore in six or seven fathom, until you come in the Mid-way between Alborough and Dun∣wich, where you must give the Shore more birth, and come no nearer than five or fix fathom; and so you may borrow on the Shore, till you come between Southwold and Covehith; and when Covehith Church is West, you are then thwart of the South end of the Bernard, it lyeth North-east into the Sea; Bernard. and to go clear of the North-east end of it, keep Southwold Stee∣ple open of the South end of the Cliff, until you bring
open to the northwards of the  there way you steer with the Town of Leystaff,  the Light-houses in one, to go within the , but to go without the Holm-head, keep the  beacons one in another, or (if you can see i)  Goulstone Steeple open and shut of the Waters-E and Beach-end, and so you may go in the best: Also upon the Ebb, if occasion serves, you may bor∣row into four a hom of the North end of the Bernard or Newcome, (for they point both together) and having Pagfield-Church West, you may go in with the Shore, or you may go off into 11 or 12 fathom-water as you please; and to go through the Stamford, bring the top of the Terret (on the Clock-house) over the white House in the midst of the Town. To sayl through Yarmouth-Roads to the Northwards. First, To turn between the Cork-Sand and the Shore, come no nearer the Sand than five or six fa∣thom; but on the Shore you may borrow in four fa∣thom, Castorness it need be, and so you may keep until you come to Castorness, and so run until the two Light-houses be both into one; the shoalest of the Ness is a Masquet∣shot to the northwards of the Light-houses; the Spit lyeth off the Shore, and on the Cork you may borrow into six fathom, and on the Holms in ten fathom, for it is all steep too; and the shoalest of Wintertonness, is when the Steeple is South-west. Being thwart of the Steeple, a mile off the Shore, lyeth a Shoal, whereon is but two fachom and a half at low-water, but within or without there is six or seven fathom. Being at Haseborough, your course with Flambrough∣head is North-west and South east, as you take the Tyde, (for the Flood setteth over Burna-flat, and the Ebb cross to the Sea) and being so far to the North∣west as you can see Haseborough-Steeple, (which is the highest Steeple on all the Coast, and riseth out of the water) you shall have ten fathom water; and when you have it S.S.E. then Cromer Steeple will be S.S.W. and being in this course, half way over the Well, you shall have sometimes seven or eight fathom, and some∣times more. From Flambrough-head to New-Castle, the course is North-west, or W.N.W. but if you keep the Shore, the course is more northerly. Directions for St. Nicholas-Gat and Yarmouth-Road. From Alborough-bay, your course to Yarmouth-sands is North by East; and when you are thwart the South end of Holm-head, you shall have 17 or 18 fathom wa∣ter, which is directly thwart of Leystaff; and being past that, you may borrow upon the Sand in 7, 8, or 9 fathom water, until you have brought Goulston-steeple, which is the southermost Steeple of the two, upon the North Peer of Yarmouth; and steer with those Marks one over the other, till you come to six or seven fathom water upon the Shore; and then bearing to the north∣ward, anchor at the South end of Yarmouth, or before, as you shall think convenient, in 6, 7, 8, or 9 fathom water; from whence, if you are bound to the north∣ward, and would go over Castorness, steer alongst the  in 5, 6, or 7  the back of the Barber-Sand,  you have brought the Light-houses one over another; Cockle. and then bea within the Buoy of the Cockle, borrowing upon the Main in 6, 5, or 4 fathom, until you come thwart of Winterton, and that depth will lead you until you come within the Middle-ground, that th not above twelve foot wa∣ter: And when you have brought Winterton Light-houses S.S.W. from you, you may steer ot N. N. E. until you come to 8 or 9 fathom water, and then you may be sure you are without the Ness, and may steer alongst the Coast, or direct your course as you have the Wind. But if you be in Yarmouth Road with a Ship that draweth 17 or 18 foot water, your best course is to go to the northward, betwen the Cockle and Scroby. Marks of the Channel are as follows. You must bring the southermost round Tower of Yarmouth to bear with the two southermost Windmills; To sayl between the Cockle & Scrty. and so run, until you bring the said Tower open of the Mills, the breadth of the Tower; and so steer into the northward with that mark, which will carry you out be∣tween the two Sands. Also there is another nearer mark, which is there∣fore better, (but they come all to one) which is; The Wind-mill that stands on the North-west part of the Town, a little Sayls breadth to the westward of the North-west Tower of Yarmouth, it sheweth like unto a Dove-house; this mark will lead to the northwards, and you shall not have less than six or seven fathom, un∣til you come to the Sea-heads, which is a Shoal that lyeth thwart between the two Sands, on which there is not above four fathom, or four fathom and a half at low-water; and when the Wind-mills come one upon another, then you enter upon the South part of the Shoal, which will continue without deepning or shoal∣ing, until Winterton-Church and the Light-house be one in the other, and then you may presently come into deeper water, and may steer away unto the north∣ward North-west, or North-west by West, or North-west by North, and this course shall carry you clear within the Rock that lyeth E.N.E. and W.S.W. from Winterton, on which you shall not find fifteen foot at low-water in some places. If you be coming from the northward, and would go into this Channel, follow this direction: To the North-west of Haseborough you shall see a low flat Church, keep that a Sayls breadth off Haseborough-Cliff, and steering directly with this Mark, will bring you in∣to the Channel before mentioned. Yarmouth-Road. To bring you into Yarmouth-Road, and to know the right Church, when it is open and shut of the Cliff of Haseborough, is this: When Haseborough-Church doth bear North-west by West from you, and steering away South-east by East, will bring you into the Marks and Channel aforesaid, and within all the Over-falls that lie short of Wintertenness. From Winterton to Haseborough-Point, the course is North-west three leagues. From Haseborough to Cromar, the Coast lyeth North-west, and West by North, and W.N.W. 3 or 4 leagues.
Thus sheweth the Land between Winterton and Cromer. Winterton. Mock-Beggers-Hall. Thus sheweth the Land to the northwards of Winterton, as far as Haseborough, as you sayl by it. Castor. Haseborrough. Thus sheweth the North Coast of England, betwixt Yarmouth and Cromer, when you sayl through within the Banks. Castor. Winterton. Haseborrough. Cromer. These three Figures belong to each other. The Land lyeth from Cromer to Bornham, first, W. N. W. and West by North; and then West, and West by South, nine or ten leagues. Thwart of Mock-beg∣gars-Hall, not far from the Shore, lyeth a little Flat, where no Ship can go over, but you may come within six or seven fathom of it; you may also run betwixt it and the Land in two fathom water. To sayl into Blakney. From Cromer unto Blakney it is two or three leagues. At Blakney standeth a high Steeple, which you may see alongst far over the Land; when it cometh to the little Steeple, then you have the first buoy of the Chan∣nel, which lyeth at the South end of the Pole, which is a Sand at the West end of the Channel of Blakney; go from the first Buoy to the other, and so alongst by them, until you come within the Haven; this is a Tyde-Haven, and is dry at low-water. To sayl into Wells. Four leagues to the westward of Blakney lyeth Wells; betwixt them both the aforesaid Shore, Pole and Piper. called the Pole and Piper: There is a Shoal that lyeth far off from the Land; at the West end of which, goeth in the Chan∣nel of Wells; The Beacons that you sayl by, stand all alongst by the Piper; when Hoebrom beareth E. S. E. from you, and the Trees against the Steeple, then you may sayl open into the Haven of Wells. Directions for Lin-Deeps, between Win∣tertonness and the Spurn-head. From Wintertonness to Flamborrough-head, the course is North-West, and North-west by North, as the wind is. In which course, when you come to the Well which is near about Blakney S.S.W. and South-west by South from you, there you have divers Overfalls, upon some of them there is not above 13 or 14 foot at low-water, and are very short Knowls; many men are of opinion, that it is Land grown up about some Vessels that have been sunk, as they were coming from New-Castle in Queen Elizabeths dayes, and since; so that it is very dangerous for a Ship that draweth 16 or 17 foot water to go through the Well, for no man can shape a course to be certain to go through the Well, escaping the O∣verfalls, they being so many, and lying so scattered in your course, between Flamborrough and Winterton; but in your W. N. W. and E. S. E. courses, between the Spurn and Norfolk-Coast, there is no fear of Overfalls, for in that course you shall have eight or ten fathom, a certain depth for three or four leagues together. Between Wells and Bornham there lyeth a Bank, you may ride under it in five or six fathom; he that will sayl into Bornham, must go in at high-water, and bring the Steeple against the Block-house, and so sayl in by the Beacons, leaving them on the Larboard-side. These are all the Tyde-Havens. Bornham. From Bornham to Chappel-Land, the course is W.S.W. two leagues; to the northward of it lyeth the Sonk, which is a Sand that is dry at low-water; you may sayl about it on both sides of the Sonk to Lin. To sayl to the eastern Channel of Lin. To sayl in here, You must go to the eastward of the Sonk, and bring that Wood over the Point of Chappel-Land East from you, then go in S. S. W. and by little and little more easterly, until you come about the Point; there the Buoys and Beacons shall shew the way. When you come about the Point, you may run through the Sand into the northward Channel, and sayl out again by the same into the Sea by the Buoys and Marks thereof: This northward Channel lyeth North-east, and North-east by North, and is very well Buoy'd and Beacon'd. You may also sayl into the westward of the Sonk, South by East alongst by it, and so run into the first Buoy; from thence alongst by the Beacons into Lin, be∣fore the Town, when you come from the eastward, you may run through within the Sonk alongst by the Chappel-Land South by West into the aforesaid Buoy. To sayl from Cromer to Blakney into Boston-Deep. To sayl from Cromer or Blakney into Boston-deep, You must go West by North till you come by the Land be∣tween Wells and Bornham, right against which lyeth a Bank called Burnham-flats, North into the Sea a league, Burnham∣slats. which at low-water lyeth dry in divers places; you may run the aforesaid course (when you are by Cromer or Blackney, a little without the Land) and may go to the northward of this Bank, at high-water, you may well
go over it. The ground on the North side goeth up slat and plain, run boldly to it without fear, until you come into three or four fathom; so that he which useth his Lead can take no hurt by it; but on the inner-side (that is, on the South-side) it is very steep, and as soon as you are over the shoalest, you shall suddenly get deep water, and good sandy ground; within it is good riding for easterly winds. To sayl to Boston-deep, within Boston-Knock. First, You must keep the Sounding of the Shore in four or five fathom, till the Point of Legerness be N. N. W. from you, between the Shore and the Knock; in the midst of the Channel it is five fathom, but is dry at low-water; when Legerness is W. N. W. from you, then go on South-west through between the Knock and the Shoal, (which shooteth off from the westward of Legerness) until you get again the depth of six or se∣ven fathom. In this going over, there is but two fa∣thom at low-water, but it floweth there about five fa∣thom up and down; being over it, go on South-west alongst between the Long-sand and the Shoal, which lyeth off from the Shore, it is between 9 and 10 fathom deep; you may sound on both sides (as well the Shoal that lyeth off from the Land, as the Long-sand) in five fathom; but the Flats are somewhat steeper then the Long-sand. To sayl without Boston-Knock into Boston-Deep. To sayl without Boston-Knock in Boston-Deep, coming (as aforesaid) to the West-Land, you must look out for the Steeple of Ingold-Mills, standing somewhat to the northward of Legerness, bring them one in the other, and then they shall bear about N. N. W. from you; keep them one in the other, and go on S. S. E. until the Trees of the Point be West of Legerness: Come without the Point of the Ness, and then you may run through between Boston-Knock; when the a∣foresaid Trees come a hand-spikes length to the east∣ward of the Point of Legerness, then go on South-west, and you may run right into the deep between Boston-Knock and Long-sand; and so you shall find between the Knock and the Point of Long-sand, five fathom; being past the Knock, it will be 8, 9, or 10 fathom deep. Other directions for Boston-Deep. If you will sayl out of the Sea into Boston-deep, Then bring the aforesaid Trees a hand-spikes length without the Point at Legerness, which shall then bear from you about N. N. W. sayling right with them, until the high-land within Legernesi or Winfleet, being to come even without the Ness, which shall then bear from you somewhat more northerly than West, then you are within the Point of the Long-sand; or else there stands three little Houses on the Sea-side, about half-wayes between Legerness and Ingold-Mills; when they come to be North-west from you, and the aforesaid Trees without the Point, then you are also within the Point of Long-sand; go on then South-west between Bo∣ston-Knock and Long-sand as aforesaid. A little past Legerness lyeth a Shoal or Flat, about the midst in the Fair-way, but nearest to the Long-sand; when the Trees upon the Point to the southward of Winfleet come into the second Valley of the high-land within Winfleet, then you are right thwart of this Shoal; edge therefore to one side or other, (rather towards the Shoal it is widest) keep boldly the sounding of the Shoal, and run South-west alongst by it, until the Steeple of Boston come over the Steeple of Butterwyle, (which is also a flat Steeple, but smaller than that of Boston) standing in a Wood; thwart of it runneth a Shoal somewhat without the Point; being past it, go W.S.W. all alongst the aforesaid Shoal, until the great Steeple of Boston come over the second Mill; there is good anchoring by the West Shore in five fathom at low-water; but he that cometh at low-water, must an∣chor and stay for his Tyde until half flood, for before you cannot sayl further in from thence, and you shall not find more than two fathom upon the shoalest place, and so the Deep lyeth in along the Beacons about South, to the third Beacon; being past that W. S. W. and then by little and little more westerly and norther∣ly, but run all alongst by the Beacons, leaving them on the Starboard-side at least North to the River. Upon the Point of the River standeth a Sheep-House, before you pass by, it seemeth as if there were no opening, by reason it is all Green Land, and even; run in by it all alongst by the Land, being past, the Ri∣ver doth open it self; and being come within the Point, you must run in between the Dikes a league, until you come before the Town. In the River it is half flood before it is every where deep enough; when you come a little within the Houses of the Town on the Larboard-side, there you must let fall your An∣chor, and stay until the Water begin to fall, then you have Flood enough to drive you to the Key, there you must make fast with a Cable; it doth not begin to ebb there until the water be fallen three foot. An East and West Moon makes in Boston-deep the highest-water; but before the Town an East by South, and an E.S.E. Moon. To sayl out of the Deep. He that cometh from Boston, and would sayl out through the Deep with an high-water, let him look out for the aforesaid high Island within Legerness; when that cometh behind Legerness, then he may boldly set his course whither he intends, either to the Eastward, North-eastward or Northward, there is nothing that can hurt you. From Legerness to Humber is about seven leagues North and South between them; about a league to the southward of Humber lyeth a place called Salt-fleet-Haven, a little to the northward of a sharp Steeple, called Wilgrip-steeple, thwart of the aforesaid Salt-fleet-Haven, about a mile from the Shore, lyeth a Sand, which at low-water falleth almost dry; you must run without it, and leave it towards the Land, yet upon oc∣casion you may venture to sayl within it. Directions to sayl into Humber, and so to Hull. If you will go into Humber, coming from the north∣ward, be sure to keep so far off the Spurn shore, as that you may be in six or seven fathom water, and that depth will lead you without the Stone-bank, that lies a great distance from the Land; and when you are so far that you have brought Patrington Church up to the Spurn, then must you bear in West, and West by North, and W.N.W. This Church standeth up in the Bay to the N. N. W. of the Spurn, having a high Spire Steeple; being within the Spurn, you may edge into the north∣ward, and ride very well with a North-east, or E.N.E. Wind; or steer West by North towards the buoy of the Sand called the Bull, in seven or eight fathom water: Bull. The thwart marks of the said buoy, is a House upon the West end of the Cliff of Clayness, and from thence to Grimsby-Road, and anchor a little below the Beacon. Grimsby-Road.
chart A Chart of the NORTH SEA By John Seller Hydrographer to the King. And are to be sold at his shop at the Hermitage in Wapping
chart THE River of Humber Described by Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most excellent Majestie THE RIVER OF TYNE Described by Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie Cum privilegio
To sayl into Humber coming from the Southward. If you are bound into Humber, coming from the southward, Then you must keep Patrington Spite Stee∣ple, open a Sayls breadth off the Point of the Spurn, and steer in with that mark until you come to Burcum∣beacon; Sonk. your course up towards Hull, is N. N. W. or you may borrow off and on upon the Sonk (which is a Sand that lyeth on the North side of the River, almost as far down as the Spurn) in four or five fathom water, according as the Tyde is in height; but between the Sonk and the Southward, there lyeth many Banks and Over-falls, but of a fathom, or a fathom and a half wa∣ter; there are Shoals and Silver-pits in the Channel; one of them is very dangerous, which lyeth thwart the buoy of the Bull, Bull. a little short of that and Burcum-bea∣con, on which Bank, or Middle-ground, a New-Castle Ship was lost that drew not above thirteen foot water: Therefore to avoid this, be careful to keep the South∣side: but above Burcum-beacon there lyeth two or three Over-falls a good way off from the Shore; if you come up so far as to bring Pauls Tower open of the red Cliff to the castwards, then you are clear, or about the tayl of the Sonk, then you may steer right over with the Town of Paul, and anchor there if you please near the Town, but there runs a great Tyde. When you come almost the length of the foul Holms, which lyeth on the North side of Humber, a little be∣low Pauls high Cliff, there is a Church, which on the North side also you will see; also you will see it a little open to the eastward of a little Wood, and when you bring it within the East of the Wood, you are then in the Narrow right thwart of them; then run up W.N.W. until you bring the Town of Paul just open of the high Cliff, then you may sayl over to the south∣ward, until you bring the Hall (which hath a right white top) right over the South Block-house; and with these Marks you may run almost against the Town, where you may anchor in five or six fathom water. A Table of Soundings and Depths, from the North-Foreland to the Northwards. The Names of the Headlands. How these Parts bear from you. Leagues. Fathom. The Colour of the Ground. North-Fore∣land. West, half a Point Southerly. 5 27 Gravel black peppery Sand. North-Fore∣land. North-West. The Goodwin N. head, dry 1 mile and a half. 3 30 Brown Sand, the North-head of the Goodwin bearing from you W.N.W. a mile and a half, and some of the Sand within two thirds of a mile, red owsie Sand, blown Sand, then will the North, with the South-Poreland, bear South-west from you.   If N. W. by W. 3 31   North-Fore∣land. West by North, Or West by South. 7 23 One cast fine Sand, another shingly ground, and standing thwart the Channel, near thereabouts you will find Banks in 16 fathom, fine Sand and between them 24 fathom, groster ground. North-Fore∣land. W. S. W. 5 23 Small shingly Sand most part of it.   W. S. W. 8 28 Black shingly ground, no Sand. North-Fore∣land. S. W. by W. 12 33 No Sand, but sometimes small Perwinkles.   S. W. by W. 9 30 The same ground is above in 33 fathom. North-Fore∣land. S. W. Westerly. 10 31 Stremy ground, blown Sand, and some shells.   S. W. Westerly. 8 28 Shingly Ground, with small black Sand. North-Fore∣land. S. W. ½ South. 8 18 Stony gross Ground not far from the Knock.   S. W. by S. 7 19 Shingly Ground as big as Beans. N. Foreland. And the Nase-land. S.W. by S. southerly 9 14 Dirty soft ground, which is a league to the north∣wards of the Long sand-head.   S.W. by S. southerly 9 14   Orfordness. N. N. W. 5 or 6 23 Dirty Clay, thick, owsie, black; at both these di∣stances, 5 and 6 leagues off shingly ground.   N. W. by W. 11 28     W. N. W. 10 or 11 27 29 Shingly Ground, with some Sand. Orfordness. West by North. 11 29 Fine red gravelly Sand; small shells.     8 24 Fine peppery black Sand, and some shells.   West by South. 10 28 Red gravelly Sand.     7 25 Shingly small stones, and some shells. Leystaff. West. 29 30 Fine white and black Sand.   West, southerly. 2½ 18 Gross Ground, and stones as big as Beans. Yarmouth. West. 8 29 Fine white Sand. Winterton. West. 8 28 Fine white Sand, and some cast soft Owse.
What Moon maketh High-water at any of these Places. At the North-Foreland, a North and South Moon maketh high water within the Thames; a South by East Moon maketh high-water before the Thames, and Har∣wich, and Orfordness; a S.S.E. Moon maketh high-wa∣ter without the Banks of Yarmouth; and before Cromer a South-east Moon maketh high-water. Between the Banks of Harwich, and the Holms of Yarmouth, it floweth South, and Ebbs North. Thwart of the Banks of Winterton and Cromer, it flows S.S.E. and ebbs N.N.W. Of the Tydes, and setting of the Currents. From the North-Foreland, the Flood runs to the Reculvers, and over the Brakes W.S.W. and West by South. Without, about the Goodwin, towards the Kentish-Knock, the Flood falleth North by West, and N.N.W. There cometh also a flood from the northwards, and meet one another by the Galloper, with a very great rip∣ling and noise, (from which this Bank is called the Gal∣loper) and setteth to the westwards into the Sands and Channels, and also to the Eastward toward Flanders. Between the North-Foreland and Oxfordness, the Stream setteth S.S.E. When you are to the northward of the Galloper, and can reckon no other Ebb than that which runneth a∣long England to the Northwards, the Streams fall there all alongst the Coast. To the Southward of the Galloper, the Ebb setteth to the Southward, and the Flood to the Northward. Courses and Distances of Places, from the North-Foreland to Cocquet-Island. From the North-Foreland to the North end of the Good∣win, the course is East by South, a league and half. From the North-Foreland to the Kentish Knock, North by East, and N.N.E. 4 or 5 leagues. From thence to Orfordness, North, 12 leagues. From the Foreland to the Galloper, N. E. by North, 9 leagues. From the Galloper to Orfordness, N.N.W. 10 leagues. From Alborough to Covehith, North by East, 5 leagues. From Covehith to Leystaff, North, 2 leagues and a half. From Leystaff to Yarmouth, South, 3 leagues. From Winterton to Haseborough, 2 leagues and a half. From Yarmouth to Winterton, N.N.W. 2 leagues and a half. From Cromer to Blakney, N.N.W. 3 or 4 leagues. From Blakney to Bornham, to sayl through within the Sand, West, 6 leagues and a half. From Bornham to Chappel-Land, W.S.W. 2 leagues and a half. From Chappel-Land to Boston-Knock, or the North Point of Boston-Deep, N.W. by North, 5 leagues. From thence to the Spurn, North, and North by West, 6 leagues and a half. From the Spurn to Flamborough-head, N. N. W. 9 leagues. Thwart Courses over Sea. From the North-Foreland to Flushing, East, somewhat northerly, about 26 leagues and a half. From the Foreland to the Mase, E.N.E. or somewhat easterly, 33 leagues. From the Foreland to the Texel, or the Mase-deep, N.E. 45 leagues. From the Naze, or Harwich, to the Maze, East, 29 leagues. From Orfordness to the Texel, E.N.E. 37 leagues. From Yarmouth or Leystaff, to Walcheren or the Weilings, S. E. and S. E. by South, 39 leagues. From the Point of Cromer, or Shield, to the Texel, East, 41 leagues. From the Spurn to the Texel, East by South, and E.S.E. 59 leagues. From Tinmouth to Scutness, N. E. 103 leagues. From Tinmouth to the Naze in Norway, N. E. by East, somewhat easterly, 102 leagues. From Tinmouth to the Scaw, E.N.E. 135 leagues. From Tinmouth to Holy-Island, East by South, somewhat easterly, 106 leagues. A Table shewing what Moon maketh full Sea, and Setting of the Tydes upon the North-Coast of England and Scotland. The Names of the Coasts and Head-lands. What Moon mak∣eth full Sea. How the Tyde sets by the Land. How the Tyde sets seven leagues off the Land. How the Tyde sets nine leagues off the Land, and in the midst of the Chan∣nel. At the Kentish-Knock, Long-sand-head. South-South-East, And South by East. South-South-East. South by East. South by West. At Harwich, Orford∣ness and Haven. S.E. by S. & S.S.E. S.E. by South. North and South. S. S. W. Yarmouth-Road and Haven, — S. E. by South. And S. S. E. S. S. E. North and South. South by West. Winterton. — Cromer and Blakney. E. S. E. East by South. S. E. by East. E. S. E. South by East. E. S. E. S.S.E. and S. by E. South-East. Humber-mouth, Lin, and Boston-deeps. East and West. East by South. E. S. E. S. W. and N.E. Flamborough-head, and Bridlington. W. S. W. East and West. West by North. S. E. by South.
Directions for Piloting a Ship from the Point of the Hope, over the Flats, to the Downs, and from thence to the westward alongst the Coast of England as far as Silly; shewing the Marks for going into the most Emi∣nent Harbours: With a perfect Tyde-Table, shewing what time it is full Sea in all these Ports, and how long; and upon what Point of the Compass the Tyde runneth in the Channel. Directions for sayling from Tilbury-Hope down to the Buoy of the Nower. VVHen you break ground from Tilbury-Hope, if the wind be southerly, keep the South Shore close aboard; but be care∣ful of Blith-sand, which lyeth close to the Kentish-shore; and accordingly observe these Marks to carry you clear of it; Hopeness. If in the day time, keep the Steeple of Tilbury-Church a great Sayls breadth without Hopeness, (alias, Sands-head-point): If in the night, or hazy-weather, keep your Lead, and come not within five fathom at low-water, and seven at high-water, and that depth will carry you clear without Blith-sand, Blith-sand and will lead you down to the Nower-head: But if the Wind be nor∣therly, then you must keep the North Shore, which is steep too, until you come as low as Hole-haven; and so keeping the Soundings aforesaid, you may run down to the Nower, where you may come to an anchor at the East end thereof. Marks. The Marks for to keep you clear of the Sands, is to bring Prickelwel-steeple a Sayls breadth to the eastwards of the Wood that is on the North Shore by the Water-side, and there you may come to an Anchor. To sayl from the Buoy of the Nower to Sheerness up the West-Swale. First, You must steer South-west by West, then W.S.W. till you bring open a low Point upon the Isle of Graen, called Black-stakes, whereon standeth two little Houses; Keep this Point and Sheer-ness one in another, and you will sayl in the best of the Channel, till you come to the Ness, where you will find ten fa∣thom close to it; Cant. you may borrow upon the Cant in four or five fathom, until you come within half a mile to the eastward of the Fort upon Sheerness, Sheerness. from whence runs off a Shoal about a Cables length of which care must be taken of not coming too near the Shore: Be∣ing within the Ness, you may come to an anchor where you please, only the East side is all flar, having but 1, 2, 3, and 4 fathom at low-water. The South side of the Nower-sand is steep too, Nower. in nine and ten fathom close to the Sand; and also near to the Ness is steep too, in 10, 11, and 12 fathom. For to sayl into Quinborough. If you be coming down the River of Thames, and bound for Quinborough, or the River of Medway; and being come to the East end of the Nower-sand, run down to the eastward along that Sand, until you bring Prickelwel-Church, which stands on the Essex-side be∣low Lee, open to the eastward of a thicket of high Trees, that stands to the eastwards of that Church, or the Spire-Steeple on the Island of Sheppy, called Min∣ster-Church, right over the highest part of the red Cliff on the Island; and with any one of these Marks, you may bear over the Tayl of the Nower in three fathom at low-water; and when you come into four or fix fa∣thoms, you must steer right in with Sheerness; but if so be it be clear weather, Marks. there is direct Marks to carry you in, or lead you out, which is the Point of the Island of Grean, which is on the Starboard-side of the River above Sheerness, one open and shut of the other; or if you can see Gillingham-Church, which sheweth white, right under the Point of a high Hill in the Coun∣trey, that maketh it like a Gurnets Nose like Portland: any of these Marks will carry you right in; but a little to the southward of the Tayl of the Nower, there is a Middle-ground in these Marks, on which there is not above fifteen foot water; to avoid which, if the Wind be northerly, then keep alongst the Nower, until you be a quarter of a mile to the southwards of the Beacon, and then bear over into the aforesaid Marks; or if the Wind be southerly, and you are coming from the East∣wards, at low-water, and would go in, then borrow off and on upon the Cant in three fathom and a half, and four fathom, and continually keep your Lead, (if it be thick weather that you cannot see your leading marks) for there lyeth a Spit from the Cant; your thwart mark whereof, is Charlock Trees a little to the eastwards of the falling of the Land of Sheppy from Minster, or that brow of the Hill S. S. E. from you; you must at the first cast of the Lead that you find it shoal, bear round off until you deepen your water again; then borrow on again on that side, and so you may go in in thick weather, or in the night; and when you come near Sheerness, your water will suddenly deepen to 10 or 12 fathom, this is called Sheerness-hole; Sheerness-Hole. and being aboard the Ness, you may anchor where you please; but if you anchor near the Ness, you shall have no less than 16 or 17 fathom, if you be bound up the River of Medway, to shun a Bank of Owze that lyeth on the third part of the Channel, over from the South-west Point of the River that goeth into Quinborough-Creek; and by the same directions you may carry a Ship out of Medway down to the eastwards, or into the River of Thames, or to the northwards. Directions for sayling from the Buoy of the Nower over the Flats, and through the Narrow into the Downs. From the Buoy of the Nower to the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, the course is East, one quarter northerly, and West, one quarter southerly, distant about five miles; betwixt the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, and the Buoy of the Red-sand, lyeth a round Shoal called the Spile, Spile. and bears South from the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, on which shoal there is but six foot at low-water; the Buoy of the Red-sand bears from the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, East, half northerly, and West, half sou∣therly, four miles. If the weather be clear, you may have a direct longst mark that will lead you down directly between
the Oaze-edge, A . and the Red-sand, (viz.) you will see a ound Tree on the Island Grean; keep that Tree in the Valley between the little Hills that are upon the High-lands, next to the westermost end of the Isle of Grean; and this mark so kept will lead you down. The eastermost part of the Red-sand lyeth out with two Tongues, Red-sand. on the northermost of which is placed the Buoy. The Marks for the buoy of the Red sand from the Land, is to bring the Lands-end of Sheppy S. W. and St. Nicholas-Wood in the Gore open of the Reculvers South-east; the Channel goeth in betwixt the Oaze-edge and the Red-sand; The depth betwixt them is 10 and 11 fathom. From the Buoy of the Red-sand to the Buoys of the Spell and Woolpack, the course is N. W. by West, one quarter northerly, and S. E. by South, one quarter sou∣therly over the Flats, where you will have, at low-wa∣ter, on this course 10 foot, and in some holes 15 or 16 foot water. About a quarter of a mile S.E. by South from the East end of the Spaniard, Gilman. lyeth the Gilman, which falls cry at Spring tydes; but if you keep the aforesaid Course you will not come neer it. The Buoy of the Woolpack is the westermost Buoy in the Narrow, on the North side of the Channel, and lyeth on the West Spit of the Woolpack-sand, and bears from the Reculvers-steeple North by West; then have you two little Hills like to two Paps on the upper Land to the southwards, just open and shut of the Reculvers-Steeple. The Buoy of the Spell lyeth on the South side of the Channel, a little to the eastward of the Buoy of the Woolpack; betwixt these Buoys, the Channel is a Ca∣bles length and a half broad, and but nine foot deep at low-water. The Buoy of the Searn is the eastermost Buoy that lyeth on the North side of the Channel, the Steeple of the Reculvers bearing from the said Buoy South by West, then have you a Wind-mill a little open of the Channel of Reculvers-Church. The course upwards from this Buoy through the Narrow, is W.N.W. and downwards it is E. S. E. The longst mark on the Shore, is to bring Brinching∣ton Church right over a Gaul or black Hole in the we∣stern part of the Cliff end. On the North side of a Channel, a little below the Buoy of the Searn, shooteth out a Shoal from Marga∣ret-sand S. E. called the Hook; it runneth so far to the southwards, that it maketh the Channel very narrow. The thwart Marks for this Sand, is to bring Birching∣ton-Steeple into a great Dauk or Valley of a Cliff, then the Steeple will bear from you South-east, five degrees foutherly; the longst Mark, is to bring St. Peters Church upon the West end of the Cliff. The longst Mark to carry you clear of the Hook to the Buoy of the Searn, is to bring St. Peters Steeple over the East side or Cliff of Westgate-bay: You must keep them so, till you bring Birchington Steeple over the Gaul, when you take hold of that mark to go through a little above the Hook, on the South side of the Channel. A little below the Reculvers, lyeth off a Shoal called the Horse, Horse. on which it is very shoal at low-water. The marks to avoid it, is to keep St. Peters Steeple (on the East side of Westgate-bay) a little upon the Cliff, which mark you may use either going up or down. Between the Hook of Margaret-sand, and the Buoy of the Searn, is a good Road for Ships to ride in, called the Gore, Gore. which is useful for Ships when they have not wind and weather to carry them over the Flats. The Marks for the best Riding, Marks for good an∣chorage. Is to bring a Mill (in the midst of a Wood) near the Sea side, and St. Pe∣ters Church in the midst of Westgate-bay together. There is also a shoal called the Middle-ground at the Cliff end, Middle-ground. which lyeth a little below the Hook near the Shore, on the South side, on which there is but four∣teen foot at low-water, and on each side four fathom, being a small narrow Ridge, and lyeth E. N. E. and W. S. W. in longth three quarters of a mile. The Mark to keep you clear, Is to bring St. Peters Church over the East side of Westgate-bay, or to bring the nethermost Tree on the next high Land (to the westward of the Reculvers) a little open to the south∣ward. This is also a good mark for the Hook downwards, or from Margaret Sand upwards. Margaret Sand lyeth before Marget and Westgate∣bay, on the North side of the Channel. The East end of this Sand beareth from Marget Church, North, half westerly. The Mark to go clear of the East end, Is to bring Marget Steeple and the Wind-mill in one. The depths you have along the Sand, as you turn up and down, are at the East end, and so upward, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5 fathom; the greatest part of this Sand dries at low-water. If you be to turn up in the Night, between the Main and Marget-Sand, you shall find, by keeping of your Lead, two Middle-grounds; Middle-grounds. upon the innermost Mid∣dle-ground, you shall have five fathom and a half, and to the southwards of it you shall have 6, 7, or 8 fathom, as the Tyde is high; without the inner Middle-ground you shall have 8, 9, or 10 fathom, and then you shall have seven or eight, as the Tyde is, and without that, nine or ten fathom; and when it comes to shoal again, you may be sure it is on the Sand, and likewise the shoaling on the Main within the inner Middle-grounds; these Middle-grounds do reach up to the Gore; and the farther you come to the westwards, the shoaler, for they tayl unto the Searn and the Dry-sand without it, which is called by some men the Girdler. The Mark to Ride in Marget-Road. The Mark to ride in Marget-Road, Is to bring the Mill and Steeple together, as far off the Shoar as you please to anchor. The greatest part of Marget-sand dries at low-water, from Marget-Town up to the Cliff end: Above Birchington spits off several shoal places that must be taken care of in turning up and down, especially at high-water near Marget; stand no nearer the Shoar than six fathom, and from Westgate-bay up∣ward in five fathom. The Mark to go clear of all the Spits below Marget-Town, (that runs off the Shoar on the North side of Foreland) Is to keep the top of Mar∣get-Steeple open above the Land, and Fairness and Whiteness on the East side of the Foreland. The Gore. The Gore is a Road where Ships use to ride when they have not wind and weather to sayl over the Flats. Marks of the best riding. This Road is to the westward of the Hook of Marget-Sand, and to the eastwards of the Buoy of the Searn. The Mark for it, Is to bring the Mill on the middle of a Wood near the Sea-side, and St. Peters-Church in the middle of Westgate-bay. Westgate-Bay. Westgate-bay is a Road where Ships do use to ride,
chart A CHART of ye NARROW SEAS Newly Corrected by Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie
by reason there is more water and more drift, and bet∣ter ground for anchor-hold then is in the Gore. The Mark for it, Is to bring a Wind-mill on an old House in the middle of the Bay, in seven or eight fathom water. A Description of the Channels. Black-Deeps. The Black-deeps is a Channel that lyeth on the North-West side of the Pan-sands, Pan-sands. Girdler. Long-sand Knock-John. Girdler, and the Long∣sand, and runneth between them and the Shivering-sand, Knock-John, and the Sunk: The westermost part of this Channel is but a mile in breadth, viz. Betwixt the Shivering-sand and the Pan-sands, Shivering-sand. and all along the inside of the Shivering-sand, you will have about ten fathom; and on the outward side, towards the Girdler, several various depths, but none less than seven fathom; and all down the midst of the Channel you will have about fourteen and fifteen fathom, unless it be toward the Sunk, where you will have ten fathom. The nor∣thermost Mouth of this Channel, is near five miles be∣twixt the end of the Sunk and the Long-sand-head. Barrow-Deeps. The Barrow-deeps is a Channel that lyeth betwixt the Shivering-sand, Knock-John, and the East and West-bar∣rows. The North-east entrance into this Channel, is about four miles broad; and at the South-west en∣trance, between the Mouse and the Shivering-sand, it is about three miles. In this Channel there be various depths of water, as seven, eight, and nine fathom; and in the midst of this Channel it is not above two miles broad. The Narrow. The Narrow is that Channel that runs between Mar∣get-sand and the Main, reaching from the North-fore∣land through the Buoys of the Woolpack and the Spell, Woolpack and Spell. in which Channel you will generally have five fathom in the midst at low-water. The Swin. The Swin is a Channel that leadeth from the Buoy of the Middle-ground up to the Buoy of the Nower, ha∣ving generally nine or ten fathom water in the midst of the Channel. The Kings-Channel. The Kings-Channel is a broad Channel that cometh out of the Sea from the northward, and so passing up∣on the South-east side of the Gunfleet, and the North∣west side of the Heaps and Middle-ground, until it com∣eth into the Swin. The Wallet. The Wallet is a Channel that lyeth between the North-west side of the Gunfleet and the Main, entring between the West-Rocks and the Buoy of the Gunfleet, and cometh out again at the Spits. The Spits. The Spits is a Channel that passeth between the North-west end of the Gunfleet, and the Buoy of the Buxey, where at low-water is no more than six or eight foot, and is but a quarter of a mile broad. The marks to come in or out of the Wallet, Is to bring the Steeple of Great-Holland (which is a flat Steeple) into a small Swamp in a red Cliff, and then the Church will bear North, half easterly; and in going in, you may steer North-east by North till your water deepen, and then bear toward the Naze; and the nearer you are to the Gunfleet, the deeper water. Directions to sayl from Margaret-Road to the North-Foreland, and the Marks for both Channels in the Downs. From Marget, steer down alongst the Shore, East, and East by North, as the Wind is, but come no nearer the Shore than in seven or eight fathom, for the Spit of Fairness lyeth far out; but that depth, Fairness. or keeping of Marget Church a mans height above the Land, will carry you clear of it; when you have brought the South-Foreland and the Land of the Downs open, then if the Wind be westerly, Marks to come into the Downs you may steer to the south∣wards alongst the Shore in 5, 6, or 7 fathom, as you have the Tyde under you, or your draught of water, for you shall find divers Banks or Overfalls, where you shall suddenly shoal a fathom, sometimes more, and then deeper again; there is one that lyeth in the stream of five fathom and a half at low-water, on the which there is not above twenty foot: This lyeth something to the northwards of Broad-stairs-Peer; and likewise something to the southward of Broad-stairs, there lyeth another in the Stream of four fathom and a half at low-water, whereon there is not above fourteen foot: Al∣so to the southward of that, right against a green patch that sheweth on the upper part of the Chalk-Cliff, as if it were stained with Green, there is another, on which there is not above ten foot at low-water; these you must be careful to shun, if there be any strong Tyde, they shew themselves by the wasting of the wa∣ter as an Overfal doth; and where it is smoothest, there it is shoalest. This Sand is called the Coleburn. When you are so far to the southward that you can see the red tyled House of Ramsgate open of the Cliff, then you are clear of this Shoal. There is another Shoal to the southwards of this, Mark of the Brake. which some men call the Querns. The thwart Mark for the North-head of the Brake, is St. Lawrence Church which stands above Ramsgate, upon the North Cliff of Ramsgate, one sayls breadth, and the Querns lyeth N.N.W. from that a good Birth, with the said Church, two Ships length or more upon the said Cliff; so that when you come to have the Church but a Ships length upon the Cliff; then if you will come into the Inner Channel, you must sayl in to the Shore by your Lead; if it be thick weather, that you cannot see your leading-mark, (viz.) St. Margaret's Church upon the South-Foreland, right over a Chalk-pit that sheweth white, almost midway between Waymor-Castle and Deal-Castle; or the said Church two Sayls breadth without Deal-Castle, and this Mark will lead you directly through between the Brakes and Querns, Another Mark. and so into the Downs: But if you cannot discern the afore∣said Marks, then there is another nearer Mark, which is Winsberry-Church, and a round Tree not far from the Church, which stands up in the Countrey to the South-westwards of Sandwich; keep that Church and Tree between the two Southermost Steeples of the Town of Sandwich, and this Mark will lead you di∣rectly through the Inner-Channel; and if so be you be forced to turn through, you may stand to the North∣wards, until you bring the Trees to the middle Church, and to the South-eastwards, until you bring the Steeple near unto St. Maries Church, which is the eastermost Church of Sandwich, and so you may turn between the Brake and Querns. The thwart Mark for the North end of the Brake, Thwart Mark of the Brake. is as aforesaid, St. Lawrence Church on the Point of
the North-Cliff, or a Wood end open and shut of the Cliff next Sandwich. For the South end of the Querns, bring the Mill near Ramsgate to the northward of the said Peer. Depths in the Channel, is two and a half, three and a half, and four fathom, the nearer the Brake the deeper. Directions for going into Marget-Peer. If you would go into Marget-Peer, coming down from the westward, A Ledge of Rocks. you must be careful to shun a ledge of Rocks that lie off Marget E. S. E. in the Sea, thwart of the Mouth of the Peer, from the Cliff to the westward; If therefore the Wind be westerly, you must be sure, before you luff over, to be clear of them; if the Wind be easterly, then you may steer alongst by the Beacons on the East-Rocks. If you be to turn up in the Night, between Marget-Sand and the Main, you shall find, by keeping of your Lead, two Middle-Grounds: Upon the Middle-ground next the Shore, you will have five, and five fathom and a half, and to the southward six, seven, or eight fathom, as the Tyde is in height; without you will have eight, nine, and ten fathom, and again seven and eight fa∣thom, and without nine and ten fathom; and when it comes to be shoal, you may be sure it is upon the Sand, and likewise the shoaling of the Main within the Inner Middle-ground. These Middle-grounds reach up to the Gore, Gore. and the further you come to the westwards they shoal, for they tayl unto the Shore, and there dry. From Marget-Town up to Cliff end, above Bir∣chington, spits off several Shoals that must be taken care of, especially at high-water, near Marget; stand no nearer the Shore than six fathom, and from Westgate-bay upward in five fathom. The Marks to go clear of all these Spits of Sands below Marget-Town, that run off the Shore on the North side of the Foreland, Is to keep the top of Mar∣get-Steeple open above the Land, Fairness & Whiteness. and Fairness and Whiteness on the East side of the Foreland. Marks for the North end of the Good∣win-Sands, and other directions for such as may be forced to the South∣wards from the Foreland in the Night. If you be at the North-Foreland, bound for the Downs, and that your Tydes do fall out to be too early or too late to turn into the Downs with the Wind at South-west, or S. S. W. follow these ensuing dire∣ctions; If it be in the morning before day, then be sure to weigh your Anchor in convenient time, that you may be at the North-sands-hand, North-sand-head. at the turning of the Tyde to the southwards. From the Foreland you may steer out with a Flood-tyde, South-east by East, and South-east; or keep the Light of the North-Foreland North-west by North, and this course will lead you out: but for the more certainty, be sure to have your Lead well kept, and then you may borrow off and on with the aforesaid Winds in seven or eight fathom; and steering out in the aforesaid course, you shall come to have the depth suddenly change to fifteen or twenty fathom; then you may hale up close to the southward alongst the back of the Goodwin, which Sand lyeth di∣rectly (I mean the eastermost side of it) S. S. W. and N.N.E. twelve or fourteen fathom, and is not above a Saker shot from the Sand; but if it be in the day time, and that the Wind doth blow so hard that you cannot well tack your Ship to turn through the Gulls, then your Marks to carry you out at the North-sand-head, Is the flat Church upon the Foreland, called St. Peters, a Ships length to the northwards of Broad-stairs Peer∣head; or borrow upon the Sand by the Lead as afore∣said; and so taking the first of the said Tyde without the Sand, you may stand to the South-eastwards, until you bring the South-Foreland West by South from you, South-sand-head. then cast about, and you shall weather the South-sand-head, and be in the Downs-Road before any other Ship that parted with you at the Foreland. To turn through the Gulls; To turn through the Gulls. the Mark for the South-sand-head, (viz.) the longst Mark to go without the Goodwin-sands, coming from the South-westwards, is Foulstone-Steeple open of Dover-Land, or the high Cliff of Dover open of the Foreland: these being shut in, you running right upon it, the directest thwart Mark of the South-sand-head, is Ring-joul Church, Thwart Mark. right over the Valley or Village of Kings-down, and then the Wood end to the northward of the Church will be right over the white mark of the Gulls; running over in this Mark, you shall have three fathom at low-water; but if you keep so far to the southward as to bring the Wood end aforesaid right over the Valley of Kings-down, you shall have five fathom at low-water; and when you have brought the round Grove of Trees on the North-Foreland right over against the Valley of Rams∣gate, then you may be sure you are within the Sand; or if you be turning out, you can keep Deal-Church to the southwards of Sand-down Castle; you may like∣wise steer out with that Mark, and it will carry you clear out: the Sand is flat and fair, shoaling both at the South and North-Head, but steep too on the East side. To sayl through the Gulls. The Gulls is a Channel that runs between the Good∣win-sand and the Brake; and therefore the Marks to bring you through the Downs, going to the northwards, are these; You must keep St. Margets-Church, which stands near the South-foreland, on a piece of Wall that is built near the third Cliff, to the northward of the South-Foreland; Or else to bring the Light-house in the South-Swamp; which Marks will carry you through the Gulls, and in the Fair-way, between the Goodwin and the Brake, into 8, 9, and 10 fathom water; bor∣row on the Brake in seven fathom, and no nearer the Bune-head then ten fathom; Bunt-head and between the Bunt-head and the North-sand-head in eight fathom. Directions to sayl from the North-Fore∣land through the Gulls in the Night. If your ground Tackle should fail you in the Night, riding at the North-Foreland, as very often hath happen∣ed to divers Ships, and that you cannot, by reason of the Wind or Tyde, weather the North-sand-head if you can but see the North-Foreland Light, when you have brought that Light-house to bear from you North-west, or North-west by North, then bear over into eight or nine fathom; and being in that depth, you may be sure it will (steering to the southward S. S. W.) carry you directly through with the Brake, but keeping your Lead carefully, and borrowing no nearer the Brake then five fathom, nor going not without nine fathom, or nine fathom and a half, as you have that Tyde under you; and this course will lead you through without danger.
Directions for Dover-Road, and so to Dongeness, and to the Westward to Beachy, and from thence to the Isle of Wight. The best Ground in Dover-Road, is with the White way to the North-westwards of Dover-Castle, Marks to ride in Do∣ver-Road. or be∣tween that Hill that comes from St. James's Church, which is a flat Steeple to the North end of Dover Town, for a thwart mark, and in what depth you please, from seven, to fourteen fathom; thwart of Foul-stone, in twelve or fourteen fathom, you shall find very good ground; likewise to the eastward of the Ness you may ride in very good ground for a South-west Wind in eight or nine fathom; but if you set sayl with a Lan∣derly Wind, do not come near the Ness, for there lyeth a Bank within the Point of the Ness, Bank near Dongeness that hath not above fourteen foot on it at low-water, in ordinary Tydes; likewise to the westwards of the Ness there lyeth a Bank alongst the Channel that hath not above three fathom and a half at low-water, and within it you shall have seven fathom. Likewise there is another Riff or Spit that doth trend off from the middle of the Ness S. S. E. into the Sea, that is dangerous for a Ship of Draught, if you be coming from the westwards, and borrow close to the Ness with a northerly wind; also if you be bound to the westwards or eastwards with a northerly wind in a Ship of Draught, be not covetous of keeping close to the Land, for between Fairley and Beachy, thwart of the Castle of Pemsy, there lyeth divers Reaches or Overfalls thwart the Channel, very little within the Fair-way; for Beachy bearing from you West by South, half South, and Pemsy Castle N. N. E. from you, there lyeth one that hath not above fourteen foot at low-water, near about the middle of the Channel, six or seven leagues off. Fairley being between the N.N.W. and N.N.E. there lyeth a Bank called the Sow, Sow. on the which in some places there is not above seven fathom; the Fish∣ermen fish under it (who may afright one in thick wea∣ther) under Beachy you may anchor to the eastwards of it against a Village called East-seaford, for a wester∣ly Wind in seven, eight, or nine fathom, thwart of a Town called Seaford, the West Ford of all the Fords; you may bring Beachy in these depths to bear from you, between the South-east by East, and the East by South, ten fathom. A Rock near Bea∣chy. There lyeth a Rock a good Birth from the Shore, thwart of an open Bay to the westwards of Beachy, between the Seven Cliffs and Beachy Point: to avoid this Rock, you must be sure to come no nearer the Shore then nine or ten fathom; yet all a∣longst the Shore, between Seaford and Arundel, you shall find very fair shoaling, especially as far as Shoram, you must stand to the Shore to seven or eight fathom, and good ground for to anchor in, if occasion require, but to the westwards of that it is flat off the Shore a league or two off; you shall not in some places have above six or seven fathom; and South off from Arun∣del, East-bar∣row-head. about six or seven mile from the Shore, there ly∣eth a Bank called the East-barrow-head, which dryeth at low-water, on Spring-Tydes, near upon the length of an Acre of Ground. To avoid this danger, if you are bound to the westwards from Shoram, go S.S.W. into the Sea, until you bring your self into eighteen fathom deep of Water, and then you may boldly steer. W. S. W. and that course in this depth will lead you without the Owers, Owers. you shall have fifteen fathom close by this Shoal; from this to the Owers, it is about two leagues W. S. W. come no nearer unto them than 12 or 14 fathom, and that depth will carry you without the Owers. Between East-borrough-head and the Owers, about half a league North-west from the East-borrough-head, there lyeth a Ledge of Rocks, on the which, at low-water, there is not above six foot. Thwart Mark for the Owers The thwart Mark for the Owers, is Chichester Spire Steeple N.N.W. from you. And for the other side of them, for a longst Mark, The longst Mark. set the Point of Donnose with your Compass, it will bear directly West by South, half South. Donnose W. S. W. is right upon them. To avoid these dan∣gers, if you be coming from the eastwards with a nor∣therly Wind, be sure to keep in eighteen fathom or more: Also if you be coming from the westwards, you must not steer East by North, or keep your self in the above-said depth; some that have been de∣ceived, coming from the westwards, and being close aboard of Donnese, have steered East by North, and E. N. E. not regarding the latter part of the tyde of Flood which sets into the Isle of Wight; they have been in shoal water on the Owers before they thought of them. To sayl into the Camber of Rye. To sayl into the Cambes of Rie, coming from the West, you must keep Beachy from the Point of Fairlee, and run so toward the Ness; then edge up to the west∣wards, and leave the Beacons on the Starboard, until you come before Camber Castle, that standeth upon the souther shindle, there you may anchor in four or five fathom; from thence alongst even unto the Town of Rie, it is all set with Beacons that stand alongst the East Shindle unto the Daries, which at low-water fall dry. Daries. In sayling into Rie, you must leave all the Beacons on the Starboard-side, and run indifferent close alongst by them. The Point of the Ness and Beachy lie W. S. W. and E. N. E. distant seven leagues. Beachy lies by the se∣ven white Clists, the best known Land a man can see any where. To the eastwards of Beachy you may anchor for we∣sterly winds in six or seven fathom, so that the Point be South, and South by West from you. To the westward of the Point of Beachy, thwart the West end of the seven Cliffs, right against the shindle, where men may run alongst into New-Haven; you may also anchor in 7, 8, and 9 fathom. From the said Point lyeth a little Shoal, upon which there is at low-water and Spring-tydes scarce two fa∣thom. To sayl into New-Haven. At the West end of the seven Cliffs lyeth New-Haven, which hath two entrances to be used; Of late there hath been some alterations of this ∣bour, the directions for which are not yet known. the we∣stermost lyeth in by the West Land, and is not navi∣gable but onely by small Vessels; it falleth altogether dry at low-water. The eastermost is commonly best, and lyeth North-west by West in; there is at high-wa∣ter, with a common Tyde, not above seven, and at Spring-tydes fourteen and fifteen foot; within the Ships lie every Tyde dry, except before the Village they remain afloat, where they moor with four Cables fast on two green Shores; upon these entrances you cannot well make any reckoning, for they keep no certain depths, for with southerly winds and stormy weather, they are often cast too with a Shindle, and opened again with a Freeshut. To sayl into Shorum. Shorum is a Tyde-Haven, where is at high-water and Spring-Tydes eighteen foot, but at low-water there
remaineth no more than three foot for it floweth fifteen foot up and down, there is twelve foot at high-water, and three foot at common Tydes. The Town of Shorum lyeth almost a mile within the Haven; Vessels that draw but eight or nine foot, can lie afloat a little below the Town at low-water; or else they lie dry every where, when you come from the Eastwards from Beachy or New-Haven; alongst by the Shore, you may see open into the Haven before you come thwart of it; but coming from the westwards, you shall not see it open, before you come right against it, because the West Point lyeth somewhat farther out than the East Point: from the West Point runneth off a little tayl; but at high-water you may run in alongst over it, otherwise you must run in by the East Shore: upon the East Point stand two Beacons, which you must bring one in the other, and so run in right with them, until you come by the North Shore, and then in alongst by it. To sayl into Arundel. About six leagues to the westward of New-Haven lyeth Arundel, a Tyde-Haven, where a Ship may go in at half-flood; you must go in there by the West Land North-east in: In the entry it is two, and between the Land three fathom at high-water, but within the Haven remaineth at low-water, four and five fathom; there you must anchor before the Village. Between Seaford and Arundel, you will find very good shoalings, especi∣ally as far as Shorum, you may stand to the Shore in se∣ven or eight fathom, and good ground to anchor, if occasion require; but to the westward of that it is flat off the Shore; a league or two off, you shall not have above seven or eight fathom. South of Arundel, about six or seven miles, there ly∣eth a Bank called East-borrough-head, East-Bar∣row-head. which dryeth at low-water, at Spring-tydes near upon a furlong. To avoid this danger, if you be bound to the South∣ward from Shorum, run S. S. W. into the Sea, until you get eighteen fathom, and then you may steer boldly W. S. W. and that course will lead you without the Owers; Close by this Shoal you shall have fifteen fa∣thom. Betwixt the Owers and Portsmouth goeth a great Sound or Haven; with it lyeth the Town of Chichester. Marks to go into the Isle of Wight. If coming from the eastwards you desire to go into the Isle of Wight; then when you have brought the Culvers-Cliff, which is a white Chalk Cliff, without St. Hellens W. N. W. then you may steer in right with it, towards St. Hellens Point; in this course you shall meet divers Overfalls, whereon you water will shoal 1, 2, or 3 fathom; but if you be coming out of Wight with a Flood, bound for the eastwards, then especially the latter part of the Flood, when you are without St. Hellens, steer off S. S. E. and South by East, if the Wind will give you leave, until you have brought the above-said Cliff to bear North-west by West, and North-west, then steer off South-east by East, or South-East, until you come to sixteen or eighteen fathom, a certain depth, before you steer away East by North, for the latter part of the Flood, by reason of the In∣draught of the Isle of Wight, sets in from Donnose North-east by North, and North-east, as far to the eastwards as the Owers. If in the Channel, some five leagues from Donnose, South-east, there is a thwart Ledge, or an Overfall, on which there is not above seven fathom in some places; if any should meet with this Shoal coming into the Channel, it would fright them, for within a league to the westwards of it there is 30 fathom and upwards. Directions for Piloting a Ship in at the East end of the Isle of Wight, and to Portsmouth-Harbour; and also for Hampton-Water. If you come from the eastwards with a northerly Wind, and bound into the Isle of Wight or Portsmouth, after you are come to the westwards of the Shoal called the Owers, as by the aforesaid directions, you may hale in North-west with St. Hellens Point; but do not cover to hale too much to the northwards, for there lyeth a Bank off Long-stone Haven, to the eastwards of the Horse, that hath not above thirteen foot on it at low∣water; but keeping of your Lead in seven or eight fathom, carryeth you clear without it, and will bring you to the South-east end of the Sand called the Horse, Horse. St. Hellens Church South-west by West from you, you may run in in five fathom; and when you have brought the westermost great white Patch or Chalk upon Parch-Down, which is the high Land to the northwards of Portsmouth, a Ships length to the westward of South-Sea-Castle, that standeth upon the Beach, then you may be bold to luff up, for you are then to the West∣wards of the Horse, and steering with that Mark, it will lead you in alongst the Horse, until you come unto the Beach, and so into the Harbour of Portsmouth, keeping alongst close to the Shore, until you come to the Town Walls end; and there you must bear off a little for a Flat that lyeth off from the Shore; this is for an easterly Wind. And if you intend for Stokes-bay, when you have brought the Fire-Beacons on Brown down, which is to the W. N. Westwards of Hazle-Wood Point, within a Ships length without the said Point, then you may bear to the westwards alongst the out-side of the Spit-head, which is the Shoal that lyeth on the West side of the entry of Portsmouth-Haven. If the Wind be westerly or southerly, and that you are coming from the westwards, and would go into St. Hellens-Road, or Stokes-bay, from Donnose to St. Hellens Point, your course is North-east by North, and N. N. E. but borrow no nearer to St. Hellens than six or seven fathom, for the Spit lyeth off a great way; but if it be clear Weather, that you may keep the Ca∣stle (called Sand-down-Castle) open of the Culver-Cliff, that Mark will lead you without the Spit of the Point; and steering alongst in this Mark, until you open St. Hellens Church some four Sayls breadth, or two Ships length open of the Red Cliff within St. Hellens Point, or Port-Sea-Castle, to the eastwards of South-Sea-Castle, then are you clear of the Point, and may steer unto St. Hellens Road North-west; and having brought the Point South by West, or between that and the South by East, you may anchor in seven or eight fathom, very good ground. Note this, That you have no good clear ground all alongst the Island, until you have opened St. Hellens Church as above-said, and have brought the Point to bear from you S. S. W. from St. Hellens Point, to go between Nomans-Land and the Herse; your direct course in, is North-west by North, and North-west; but you have no shoaling upon the South-west side on Nomans-Land, for you shall have sixteen fathom, and the next cast but three. But at the Horse you may stand in ten, nine, or eight fathom; if the strong Tyde be bent, and smooth water, you shall have a great washing of them by the Overfall of the water, or the washing of them both, but especial∣ly on Nomans-Land; if it be clear Weather, there are very good marks to lead you in, which is as follow∣eth: Keep the two Wind-mills on the Downs on the Isle of Wight, that you may see them clear over all the Trees, that are between you and them, but no
more above them then even clear, and this Mark will lead you in; and so up alongst the Island without some Middle-ground that lyeth to the W. S. Westward of the Point of Nomans-Land. Also from St. Hellens Point you have (if it be clear Weather that you can see it) a direct Mark, (viz.) a piece of an old Castle, heretofore called Hazle-Wood-Castle, standing on Gilkeker Point, (which of late is kept white) keep Gosbere Church and that both in one; or this Mark in the middle of the Wood, about the Church, which sheweth with a Valley like a Saddle, and so you may run directly in without fear; or if the Wind be so that you are forced to turn in, then you may turn the said Mark within two Sayls breadth of each end of the Wood; in the middle of the Channel you shall have eighteen fathom Water: and if so be that you bring the said Mark right under the North end of the Wood, you shall run in a Middle-ground near the Horse, that hath not above ten foot on it at low-water, and hard Sand. The thwart Mark of Nomans-Land. The thwart Mark of the northermost point of No∣mans-Land, is the eastermost Wind-mill upon the Isle of Wight, right over the middle of the Valley, that is next to the North-westwards of the Point, to the Northwards of St. Hellens Church; and having brought this Mill on the West side of the said Valley, you may be sure you are to the westward, or with Nomans-Land, and may steer alongst the Island towards Stokes-bay, or the Cows. If you will anchor in Stokes-bay, Marks to anthor in Stocks-bay. bring South-Sea Castle, over the Point of the Beach of Gilkeker for your longst Mark, and the Church of Gosper open be∣tween the Trees; there you shall have very good ground, and twelve fathom deep: If the Wind be westerly, that you are forced to turn up to Stokes-bay or the Cows, you may stand over to the Spt-head into nine, eight, or seven fathom, and towards the Isle of Wight into six or seven fathom; but between Nomans-Land and Ridde, you shall meet with two or three Mid∣dle-grounds, on which you shall have three fathom at low-water, and then six fathom; and over the other two, three fathom, and the like depth between them; and so to the Southward of them, you shall have six fathom not far from the dry Owze off Ridde: but up∣on the northermost Middle-ground of these three, up∣on one place of it, there is not above thirteen foot at low-water. The thwart mark to run upon the height of it, is the westermost white patch of Parch-down right over Hazle-Wood-Castle; and when you are so far to the westwards that you have brought the Grove of Trees on Parch-down, to the eastwards of the aforesaid white Patch, right over Hazle-Wood-Castle, then you shall have three fathom over it at low-water; but if you anchor near the East Point, there you shall have deeper Water, and cannot set sayl to go out so well against Allmountwise side; it is bold and steep too. If coming from the westward, put in by a contra∣ry Wind, and bound for Cat-water, between the Ram∣head and Penley-point, come not too near the Land, for there lyeth a ledge of Rocks, three or four Cables length and more from the Shore, with the Spire Steeple right over a Hedge-Row; also there lyeth a Rock a Cables length from Penley-point; and being past that Point, you may luff into Causon-bay, and anchor there; there is but very little good Ground, except you be far into the Bay. To sayl into Portsmouth. If you go into Portsmouth, you must go within a Stones cast of the Beach, Marks to go into Porsmouth and keep the White Path open to the northward of the Castle, going so near the Beach on the Starboard-side, as that the old Church on Gosper-side may enter on the Point, and so it carries you clear of the Shoals, going in a little with the Gibbet. To sayl within the Wight in thick Weather. If you sayl between the Wight and the Main in thick weather, you may borrow in six fathom off St. Hellens, and steer N.W. by North, and N.N.W. from St. Hellens Point, until you have 12 fathom, and then you steer more westerly as you may find your depth; and come no nearer Nomans-Land than 9 or 10 fathom: in that depth you may keep along the Wight side, if the wind be southerly; but if it be large, you must keep in 14 or 15 fathom, which will be a good birth from both sides; and so steer West by South, or W.S.W. as you find your depth, until you come to the Cows. Note, That being about Stokes-bay, you will have less water; if you grow near to Cows, there you may anchor in 12 or 14 fathom, in the midst of the Channel, where is good Oazy ground. To sayl within the Isle of Wight, com∣ing from the East. If you turn in at the Eastermost end of the Island, to go in the Channel betwixt Nomans-Land and the Chain, you must keep Gilkeker Tower in the middle of Cock-wood, (that is your leading Mark) but if you turn in, you may open it on each end of the Wood, not opening it on either side; you may stand over to the Main in seven or eight fathom, and then about; you must not stand longer towards either shore, than 10, 11, or 12 fathom, for it is steep too, and the next cast you may be aground. From St. Hellens Point, being the eastermost Point of the Isle of Wight, runneth off a Riff E. N. E. two miles into the Sea; when the Culver-Cliff is hid behind the North-east Point of the Island, then are you within this Riff; come no nearer it than seven or eight fathom. Within the Riff, in the Fair-way, Marks of the Horse. between the I∣sland and the Main, lyeth a Shoal called the Horse. The Marks for it are these, When South-Sea-Castle, and a square Steeple within the Land are both in one, then are you thwart of it. The Mark to go clear of it, is to keep Portsmouth-Castle on the West side of the Wood, this Mark will carry you betwixt the Horse and the Main; on it, at low-water, you will have but ten foot; about it is good shoaling, come therefore no nearer than five or six fathom. When St. Hellens Church beareth South-west by West from you, then the South-east end of the Horse bears North-east by North, and the West end North by East from you. To sayl to the westward from St. Hellens. To sayl to the westward from St. Hellens, Keep no nearer the Shore than you can see the Windmills which stand on the High-Land of the Wight, open of the said Land, lest you come on the broad Sand cal∣led Nomans-Land, which lyeth from the Point of Newport-Road eastward alongst the Shore, which fal∣leth dry at low-water, but close aboard of it you will have twelve fathom; when the Town of Ride and the
Windmill which standeth S. S. W. from it, are both in one, then are you thwart the midst of it; if you come so near the Shore that the aforesaid Windmills be hid with the Land, then will you be aground against it; but as long as they are open, you need not fear. Cous-Road is the best Harbour in the Wight; betwixt it and Calshot-Castle lyeth a hard Shoal nearest the North Shore in the Fairway, Brambles called the Brambles, and reacheth as far thwart as Newport; at low-water and Spring-tydes it falleth almost dry; then you may know it by the Seas breaking over it; to avoid which, keep close to the Island until you come into Cows-Road. To sayl into Stokes-Bay. If you go into Stokes-bay, you must leave South-Sea-Castle on Hyant-Wood, or the Wood to the North∣eastward of Portsmouth, and then steer in with the Old Castle that is to the eastward of Stokes-bay, keep∣ing it somewhat on the Starboard-side, and so bear in till you bring the Windmill on Porch-down, half a Sayls breadth to the westwards of the White Cliff, and so you may anchor in the best of the Bay in seven or eight fathom. Also you may go up to the Cows; Cows-Road. if you steer with it, keep the Island side, and anchor with the Castle South-west from you, the fourth part of a mile from the Shore; also you may steer down W. S. W. with Yarmouth-Fore, Yarmouth Road. and anchor S. S. W. from it, half a mile off the Shore in seven fathom. The deep∣est Water between the Cows and Stokes-bay, is fifteen or sixteen fathom, and between the Cows and Hurst-Castle fifteen and eighteen fathom. Also you may anchor with Hurst-Castle South-west by West, Hurst-Castle. half a mile from the Shore, in eight or nine fathom; or W.S.W. it being all good ground. To sayl into Hampton-Water, both from the East and West; and also to be between the Sand called the Brambles and the Main. If coming from the Eastwards, after you are past Brown-down, which is to the westwards of Stokes-bay, borrow upon the Main in three, three and a half, and four fathom, as you have Tyde under you, but three fathom at low-water is the best depth; and steer away North-west by West, and North-west, and ware off and on in that depth, and it will direct you in, if it be in the Night or foggy Weather; but if it be clear that you can see the Town of Hampton, keep also the Town open of the Point of Beach on Hamble-side, by St. Georges Castle; and steering in that Mark, you need not use your Lead, until you come almost unto Calshot-Castle, and the Main of Hamble; there the Spit of Owze lyeth fair off, but fair shoaling upon it; and being above the Castle, you shall have nine or ten fathom, and anchor where you please. If you come from the westward in a Ship of draught, and bound for Hampton-Water, or from out of Cows-Road, you must be careful to keep clear of the Sand called the Brambles, which is a long Sand that lyeth thwart of the Cows-Road, or reacheth from the South∣west Point of the Red-Cliff, on Bully-side, to the eastward of Calshot-Castle, on the which there is not above three foot at low-water; on a Spring-tyde it lyeth two thirds of the Channel from the Island, steer from the Cows-Road North-east by North, and North∣East, until you have brought the whole Town of Hampton open to the eastward of Calshot-Castle; then luff up, or bear right in with Hampton, and you shall go over the Tayl of the Brambles, into two fathom and a half, or three fathom at low-water, and steer in so, keeping Hampton open until you come within the Castle. There is likewise a Channel between the Brambles and the Main for small Ships, but there is not above ten foot at low-water. The leading Marks to carry you in or out in this Channel, is the westermost Wind-mill, or Porch-down, right between to the red Patches of the Cliff, by the Sea-side, near Teachfield-Haven; but there is divers Patches on the said Cliff, so that this Mark may de∣ceive you: therefore look out toward the South-West end of the Wight, towards Yarmouth, there you shall see two Hills made with a Valley between them; al∣so to the eastward of Yarmouth, you shall see, close by the Water-side, a black Hill; bring that Hill in the Valley between the aforesaid Hills, and some∣thing on upon the southermost Hill, and that Mark kept, will lead you through in fourteen foot water at quarter-flood; and when you have brought Hampton open of Calshot-Castle, then you are to the eastward of the Spit of Owze, that lyeth off from the Castle, and may bear in as above-said. Directions to sayl into Pool. A league to the northward of the aforesaid Point, lyeth the Haven of Pool: For to sayl in there, coming about Hand-fast-Point, you must go North-west, or somewhat more northerly, then you may perceive right a-head a high flat Hill, which standeth higher than any other Land thereabouts; keep that betwixt two Shores, and run in right with it; but if you turn in, then spare not your Lead, and run not farther over to the westward than till that flat Hill cometh to the West-Land; when it beginneth to touch, you must about, or else you shall be fast a-ground; when you are about, run no further to the eastwards than that the aforesaid Hill cometh over to the East Sand-hill, Marks to go into Pool. which is a high, gray, sharp Sand-hill, lying at the East side: If you keep these foresaid Marks in this manner, you shall have (going in there at half-flood) water enough; there remaineth in the shoalest ten and eleven foot at low-water; but it floweth there no more than five foot up and down; it floweth there twice in one Tyde. A South-east and North-west Moon maketh there full Sea; also a South by East and North by West Moon maketh high-water; which come to pass by reason of the Fore-ebb that cometh out of the Wight; when you come without the entry, go then N. N. E. on, and keep the Beacons that stand on the East Land on the Starboard from you, and run indifferent close alongst by them; the Shores are on both sides steep, and the Channel is not wide; without the Channel it is shoal or flat. This is Pilots Water. Directions for Portland, and sayling into Weymouth. From the West end of the Wight to the Point of Portland, the course is W. S. W. eleven leagues; but for Donnose West by South thirteen leagues. If you will go to anchor under Portland, Portland-Road. coming from the West, come within a Musquet shot about by the Point of Portland; and being come about the se∣cond Point, whereon the Castle standeth, edge up to the westward until you come before the Castle, and an∣chor there in 7, 8, 9, 10, or 11 fathom, so that the Point of Portland doth lie South by East, and S. S. E. from you; there you shall lie Land-lockt for a South,
and South by East Wind; with a South west, and a S. S. W. Wind, you must be very mindful of the ter∣rible ripling of the Race of Portland, which beginneth a little to the westward of Portland, and endeth a lit∣tle to the westward of St. Albons. The ground in that Race is very uneven and shoal, in some places seven, in others ten, and also fifteen fathom. About a league to the northwards of the Road of Portland, Weymouth lyeth a Town called Weymouth, which hath a Tyde-Haven; before it you may anchor in four or five fathom. To sayl from Portland to Exmouth. From Portland to Exmouth, the course is W. N. W. thirteen leagues; betwixt them both lyeth a little Island close by the Land, Cob-Island. before Lime-haven, called Cob. Before Exmouth, Exmouth. men may ride at the South end of the Shindle which lyeth before the Haven, in seven or eight fathom; so that the Rocks of Tomans-stones do bear South, or South by East from you, there you will have good Ground, and Land-lockt for all winds. Five leagues South, and South by West from Ex∣mouth, lyeth Torbay, and lyeth from Portland West, and West by South, thirteen leagues. For to go into Torbay, Torbay. you must bring the West Point, or the Berry, South by East, or S.S.E. from you, and anchor therein seven or eight fathom; there you shall lie Land-lockt for a South Wind, and South-west Winds. At the North-east end of the Bay, is also a Tyde-Haven called the Tormain; Tormain. before it is good Anchor∣ground, in four or five fathom, according as you would lie near or far from the Shore. To sayl into Dartmouth. Three or four leagues to the westward of Torbay, lyeth the Haven of Dartmouth, which hath a narrow entry lying in betwixt two High-lands; upon each side of the Haven standeth a little Castle; on the West side is a Church on the High-Land called St. Patricks-Church. For to sayl in, coming from the Start, or from the westward, you must run in alongst by the Wester-Land, so far to the eastward, until you bring the Key of the Village (on the East side of the Haven) in the midst of the entry of the Haven, betwixt the two Lands; and you must be very ready with your Boat (if any gust of Wind should come from the High-Land) for to row in; being come in, edge over to the West side before the Brew-House, and anchor there in ten or eleven fathom; or before the Village on the East side where you please. At the East side lyeth a sunken Rock; A sunken Rock. The Marks to avoid it are these, steer in with St. Patricks Church, and bring not the Village which standeth on the West side of the Harbour without the said Church; but keep the outer House of the said Village in the East side of the Chappel, and alwayes in sight without the Bull∣work on the North side by St. Patricks Church, then can you take no hurt of the Rock in the Range by the North Point. Betwixt Dartmouth and the Start, nearest to Dart∣mouth standeth a white Spire Steeple, called Fackman, which is a very good Mark to know Dartmouth by. The Start lyeth from Dartmouth South-west, Start. about three or four leagues: Under the Point of the Start, at the East side, is a good Road for westerly Winds; betwixt the Point and a Church that standeth on the High-Land in ten or eleven fathom, so that the Point lyeth South-west from you. A little to the eastward of the westermost Point of the Start, lyeth a Haven called Salcomb; Salcomb. when you come from the West, it sheweth it self open; the West side of it is ragged, and the East side is sloping down: Close to the West Point lyeth a range of Rocks, there∣fore you must give it a good Birth, and leave the Rocks on the Larboard-side; further you may see all Breaks that may do you hurt; being within, you need not fear either of the Shoals. Upon the Bar, or Shoals of the entry, remaineth at low-water and Spring-tydes, not less than eleven foot; but within it is at least three fathom. To sayl into Plymouth. Seven leagues to the westward of the Start lyeth Ply∣mouth-Sound; Plymouth. at the eastermost East Point of the Sound, lyeth a high round Rock called Mawstone. Mawstone. Be∣tween it and Ram-head lyeth the said Sound N.N.E. it being round and deep. A little to the northward of Ram-head, is a fair Sand∣bay, where you may anchor close under the Land in nine or ten fathom. Two leagues South, a little easterly from Ram-head, Eddy-stone lyeth a Rock above water called Eddy-stone. The Point of Plymouth lyeth from Eddy-stone North by East, and N.N.E. distant about four leagues. In the Sound, by the Land of Plymouth, lyeth a little Island called Sir Francis Drakes Island, which is fast to the West side, with a Riff or Range of Rocks under∣water, so that you must sayl alongst to the eastwards of it, whether you are bound unto Cat-water, or into Hamose, which is the West Harbour. To sayl into Cat-Water. If you will go into Cat-water, Cat-water then run in betwixt the Island and the Point on the East side, in with the Land of Plymouth, until you see Cat-water open on the Starboard of you, go then into the Eastwards, betwixt the Point of Plymouth, and the Point on the Starboard∣side, leaving most part of the Channel on the Star∣board-side, until you come within the Point, and an∣chor there right against the high steep Northern Land; there is at low-water, with extraordinary Tydes, four and five fathom. When you sayl into Cat-water, you must take heed, by giving a good birth to the southern Point of the en∣try, for there lie off the foresaid Point, a Ledge of Rocks under-water, about 2 Cables length off from the Land. Upon the Point of the Ledge lyeth a Buoy, where is at half-flood about twelve foot water; which Buoy you must leave on your Starboard-side going in; and when you have Cat-water altogether open, you may run in to the eastwards, leaving in the entry of the Harbour, two thirds of the Channel on the Starboard∣side, as before is said, because the South Shore is some∣what flat off, there leaving a sandy Bank which reach∣eth to the second Point of the South Shore of Cat-water. A little to the eastward of Drakes Island lyeth a Rock under water, upon which is at low-water not deeper than two fathom. For to sayl within the Land, you may go to the east∣ward or westward of the Rock, according as occasion shall serve. If you will sayl unto Hamose to the westward of the Rocks, Hamose. then take the sounding of the Land in four or five fathom at low-water, and run so by it; until that Fishers-Village (lying to the northwards a little within the Land) come in the West side of the Valley, on the North Shore, then are you to run through between the Island and the Rock; and to the westward of the Rock, upon the Land of Plymouth, within the Island,
standeth a Wall or Hedge; when you see it end-wayes, and the Chappel of the aforesaid Village cometh to the North side of the Valley, and Cat-water cometh open, then do you run over the Rock between the Island and the Main, then may you anchor in 12 and 13 fathom. If you sayl into Hamose, you must run between the Island and the Land of Plymouth, and then run in the midst of the Channel between the two Lands, until the Entry of Hamose be open; then run into the north∣wards, as the Channel leadeth, until you come in a∣bout the West Point, and anchor there in 16, 15, and 12 fathom; in the Narrow is 15, 16, 17, and 20 fa∣thom; between the Island and the Main, 8, 9, and 10 or 12 fathom. From Ram-head West by South five leagues, lyeth Foy; and betwixt them, on the Coast, lyeth a little Island a little to the eastward of Talland-Point, thwart of West-Loee, called Loee-Island; you may anchor to the eastward of the Island in 5 or 6 fathom. To sayl into Foy. Foy is a broad Haven, where a Ship may go in at half-flood; at the East side of the Haven standeth a lit∣tle Church with a Steeple, and on the West side a great white Church with a square Steeple. To sayl into Foy, you must have at least half-flood, and run in amidst the Channel betwixt the two Points; and being come within them, chuse which side you will, but the most water is by the West-Land, between the Stakes and the Square Steeple; being come within the Stakes, (as you come in by the Land) then bear some∣what off presently from the West Shore almost into the middle of the Channel, nearest to the West shore, un∣til you come before the Village, that lyeth on the West side, where is a deep Dock, in which Ships that draw 16 foot may lie afloat at low-water; in the said Dock may four Ships lie. If (when you come by the East-Land) you desire to be in the aforesaid Dock or Pool; then sayl in until you come within the Stakes, and then edge over off from the East-Land, until you come nearest the West-Land, for to avoid a Flat which lyeth by the East Shore alongst the Haven, which beginneth against the first House of the West Village. If it should happen that you could not lead it in with a Sayl, then let fall your Anchor without the Stakes, and warp in with Hau∣sers, until you come unto the aforesaid Pool. You may also sayl so far in, that you may see a Wall on the West side of the Haven, where lyeth a Village behind it, a Ships length to the southward of that Wall, it is good lying by the East-Land, being moored by four Cables; there a Ship may ride afloat that draweth sixteen foot water. You may also sayl further in along by that Swatch that lyeth on the West side, where in the Mill standeth, but come not too near the North Point of the Swatch, for by it lyeth a Rock under-water; being past that, you may moor your Ship in the midst of the Channel; there is best lying for Ships that draw much water. Four leagues South-west by South from Foy, lyeth a Point called Dead-mans-head, Dead∣mans-head and two leagues to the westward of it lyeth the Haven of Falmouth; Dead∣mans-head is a double Land with a round Hill, which to the westwards goeth sloping down, towards the West end standeth a Mill, a sharp spire Steeple, and some little Houses upon the Lead; a little to the westward of it you may see Pendennis-Castle upon a round Hom∣mock on the high-Land; this Land is easie to be known when you come from the West or from the Lizard. Upon the West Point of the Haven of Falmouth, Falmouth. standeth a Castle upon the high-Land called Pendennis; in the Entry, nearest the said West side, lyeth a great Rock above-water; you may sayl in on either side of it; at the inner side of the East Point lie also some Rocks off the Shore; on the East side is deepest wa∣ter, and most room; in going in therefore, give the East Point a large Birth, you will have seven or eight fathom; St. Mauds Castle. keep by the said Shore until you come within St. Mandes Castle. When it is East from you, you will have sixteen or seventeen fathom; but half the Harbour over towards Smithick is but four or five fa∣thom; observe in your going in, to keep the Manacles open and shut on the Point of Falmouth-Castle, and so must you keep it till you shut the Church over Penny-Comquick into the North-east end of the Smithick, and so may you bear over to St. Maudes, and ride with the Castle East, laying one Anchor in eighteen fathom, and the westermost Anchor in four fathom, as you see con∣veniency. For to sayl to the westwards of the foresaid great Rock, you must take the Soundings of the West-land, which the Castle standeth upon, in five or six fathom; being somewhat within the Rock, run towards the West-land; to the westwards of the Rock in the Chan∣nel, is six and seven fathom at half-flood; but in the Channel, to the eastwards of the Rock, seven and eight fathom, as is before mentioned. If when you come before St. Maudes Castle, you would go into Mildrid-Pool, Mildrod-Pool. you must steer over into four or five fathom on the West side, till you shut the Point of the Manacles into the Castle, and open it not for fear of the Point of the Mase on the East side, until you shut Penny-Comquick into the East Point of Smi∣thick; and then steer on the East side into twelve or thirteen fathom, against the middle Hedge end on the East Point of Mildred-Pool, for then you shall have shoal water, but the lower down the deeper. Note that Moagan Church which is above Penny-Comquick, being entred on the southermost House of the said Town, then are you near the South side of the Mase. Four leagues South by West from Falmouth, lyeth the East Point of the Lizard; betwixt them lyeth a Haven called Helford, which Ships do little frequent. At the South side of the Haven lyeth a steep Point, and on the North side a low sharp Point within the Haven; on the South side standeth a Gentlemans House beneath at the Strand, and upon the Hill stand Trees: you must keep these one in the other, and run so amidst the Channel into the entry of the Haven; on the North side stand also two or three Trees; when these come a Ships length to the westward of a little House that stand∣eth in a white sandy Bay; thereupon you may sayl in al∣so amidst the Channel, which is a short Inlet; being come within, you may anchor in 6 or 7 fathom; upon the South side standeth also a sharp Tower, and on the North side a little Castle on the steep Land. To sayl into Mounts-Bay. If you be coming out of Falmouth, bound to the westward as into Mounts-bay with an easterly wind, be not covetous of keeping too near the Lizard Shore, especially at the Manacles, for there be sunken Rocks without the Manacles: To avoid which, open the Land short of them, you shall see a Spire Steeple called St. Keveren; be sure therefore to keep so far off the shore, that you may see all the Spire of the said Steeple above the Land, and so shall you go without them clear of danger until you come to the Lizard point; from whence there lyeth a ledge of Rocks, which all shew themselves at low-water. About five leagues N. W. from the Lizard, lyeth a great Bay called Mounts-bay; on the East side of which is a high Island, whereon standeth a Castle called St.
chart A Description of the Sea Coast of England Newly Corrected by Iohn Seller chart A Chart of the West part of England from Portland to Silly describing all the Roads Havens and Harbors with all the Sands depths and Soundings along the Coast newly Corrected by John Seller And are to be Sold at his Shop at the Signe of the Marrinors Compass at the Hermitage Stayres in Wapping.
Michaels-Mount; to the eastward of which lyeth a great range of Rocks from the Land, a league into the Sea, whereof you must be careful in dark weather. From thence to the southward, towards the Lizard, the Coast is very full of Rocks, but he not far off the shore. For to sayl into Mounts-bay, coming from the Lands∣end, or the Lizard, the Ground is very clear all over, and fine Sand, until you come within a mile of the Shore, between 20 and 23 fathom. To ride at Anchor in Guavas-Lake, You must be so far to the westward, as that you have the Steeple of Paul to bear from you W. N. W. but if being far to the eastward, that the said Church doth stand N. W. by North, somewhat westerly from you, then you have no clear Ground; being near the West-Land, run in from St. Clements-Island, (which lyeth before the Town of Mouse-hole) for it is very clear Ground, then the Castle will be on the Starboard side a great way distant, which Castle is foul round about; being come within St. Clements-Island, you shall see within it a great sandy Bay; anchor there in seven or eight fathom. South-East, and E.S.E. Winds do blow there right open in, for all other Winds you lie there Land-lockt. Four leagues to the westward of Mounts-bay, lyeth the Lands-end of England, which lyeth from the Lizard W.N.W. distant 9 or 10 leagues. Directions to sayl into Silly. Silly is divided into divers Island; alongst the West side lyeth a great multitude of Rocks; you may go in there through divers Channels or Sounds, but the sou∣thermost, St. Maries-Sound. called St. Maries-sound, is the best, being a fair opening of a Channel, but near the midst lie two sunken Rocks; in soul weather you may see the Sea break over them; it is best to leave them on the Lar∣board-side going in, and on the Starboard-side coming out, and go so near the Starboard-shore, as that you may but see the Wind-mill-Sweeps which standeth on the Hill, or that you may almost throw a Stone ashore; and when you come within the Point, luff up round, and come to anchor in sight of the Houses; or when you have brought the Town open of the Valley, leave two thirds of the Harbour on your Larboard-side. Thwart of Smiths-Island lyeth a Ledge of Rocks, called Bartholomen-Ledge; A Ledge of Rocks. when you come to the Block-house that standeth on the Water-side, a Cables length off the Shore, thwart lyeth a sunken Rock, cal∣led the Woolman: Woolman. The leading Mark to go clear of it, is two Rocks which lie on the West side within the Haven; the one (to wit, the innermost) is somewhat greater than the other; if you bring them one in the other, or the northermost a little open to the eastward of the other, so as that you may see between them; keeping them so, sayl right in, then you need not fear the Woolman; Remember that you ride not too near the Island, for it is all foul ground; but upon Crow∣sand, and between that and the northermost Rock, is clear ground; then the Point of St. Maries will bear from you E. S. E. and the Broad-Sound will be open from the South-west by West, to the West by South; but if you will ride near the North-Rock, you shall have it but two Points open, & St. Maries Sound close; but then you shall not get out of St. Maries Sound if the Wind blow at South-west. Smiths-Sound is very dangerous, except a man be forced to it, I would advise him not to make use of the Channel; there is water enough, but it is very narrow, keep therefore in the middle of it; it lyeth North-west. The Ground of Silly is somewhat stony, and some red Shells in it. Directions for sayling in the Channel, betwixt England and France, in thick and dark Weather. If you be sure by your reckoning, height, and depth that you are entred into the Channel to the eastward of the Lizard, be not fearful, but bear over to the Eng∣lish Shore, so that the Wind be at S. S. W. or South by West, until you come to 45 or 46 fathom; then steer away E.N.E. and East by North, and steering so, and keeping your Lead; when you come to be thwart of the Start, you shall have 44 or 43 fathom, and fine white Sand, then are you between 4 and 5 leagues from the Shore: but to be the more certain where you are, when you come to this white Sand, steer away E.N.E. keeping your Lead every hour at least, until you come to 35 fathom, black peppery Sand, then you are right, and may boldly say, that you are some four leagues off the Berry; it bearing from you N. W. by North, then steer away East by North, still wetting your Lead; and when you come to be thwart of Lime, you shall have 33 fathom, fishing ground, and still steering East by North before you come near Portland in the same depth, your ground will be somewhat red like unto green Lime Ballast; continue your course East by North, and when you come near unto Portland, the ground will be small shingle stones; and thwart of Portland, the stones will be as big as Reans or Pease, and 32 or 33 fathom, then are you between 3 and 4 leagues; and still continuing your course, it will carry you so far without Donnose, or the Isle of Wight thwart of St. Albans, you shall have 27 fathom, and thwart of the Body of the Wight 20 fathom, and thwart of Donnose 18 fathom, and so the Owers. Note, That all the Coast between St. Albons and the Owers, there will be little or nothing come up, only dents in the Tallow, and some blown Sand that will crumble between your fingers; but continuing your course, so soon as you are past the Owers, you shall deepen your water to 26 or 30 fathom, small gra∣velly Sand, and fishing Ground; and coming towards Beachy, or thwart of Shorum, in your course, you shall have 36 fathom, and near thwart of Beachy 33 fathom; then steer away E. N. E. being by your judgment past Beacby, then edge or bear over to the Coast of England, still keeping your Lead till you come to 20, 18, or 16 fathom, as the Wind is; and being in 16 fathom, steer away E. N. E. and that Birth will carry you a fair Birth off the Ness: yet although you be in thirteen fathom, your course will carry you without the Ness; and when you draw near unto the Ness, you will find eighteen or twenty fathom, shingly Ground; and continuing still this course, you will come to have 22 fathom, fine white Sand; then you may be sure you are to the east∣ward of the Ness, and may steer away North-east, and North-east by North with the said Foreland; or edge into the Shore in 10, 11, or 12 fathom, and that depth will lead you along the Coast, and will carry you unto the Downs; but coming to be past the South-Foreland, you must borrow upon the Land into six or seven fa∣thom. But if you would pass through on the back side of the Goodwin, from 22 fathom fine white Sand, steer North-east, and North-east by East  or keep your self in eighteen fathom, and you go without the Sand; fourteen fathom goes right with it. Note, That between Foulstone and the North-sand∣head, the Ground is all one.
depictions of the land Thus sheweth the Land on the West-Coasts of England, from the Downs to Silly. Thus sheweth Dover, when you sayl to the westwards of the Vane or Ripraps. Thus sheweth the North-Foreland, when you sayl towards it from the Downs. Thus sheweth Fairlee when you sayl by it. Thus sheweth Fairlee when you sayl from the westwards. Thus sheweth Beachy when you sayl from the West. Thus sheweth Beachy, with the seven Clifts, when you sayl by them coming from the West. Thus sheweth the Island Wight, when you sayl by it, being distant three or four leagues. Thus sheweth St. Albons-Land, with Portland to the westwards, when you sayl by it. Thus sheweth Portland when you come from the West. Thus sheweth Portland when it is North by West, six leagues from you. Thus sheweth Portland when you come from the East. Thus sheweth the Land to the westward of Portland, when you sayl by it. Thus sheweth the Land betwixt Torbay and the Start. The Start. Dartmouth. Torbay. Thus sheweth the Land betwixt Torbay and the Start, when the Start is South-west by West from you. Start. Dartmouth. Torbay. Thus sheweth the Land between Torbay and the Start, when the Start is W.S.W. from you. Torbay. Torbay. Torbay. Torbay. Thus sheweth the Point of Torbay in divers forms, according as you are to the northward or southward of it. This Figure, and the Figure that followeth, belong one to the other, and should joyn where they are marked with the Crosses.
Torbay. Apsom. Thus sheweth Dartmouth, as this Figure and the Figure foregoing expresseth it, when you are right thwart of it, a league or two from the Land, the Land being on both sides of it, as well toward the Start as Torbay, and to the northwards of it. The Start Thus sheweth the Start, being North from you two or three leagues. Thus sheweth the Start, being North seven leagues from you. This open will be shut to when you sayl to the westwards. This open will be shut to when you sayl to the westwards. The Start. Thus sheweth the Start when it is North-east from you, and then the Point goeth flat down. Salcomb. The Start. Thus sheweth the Land to the eastwards of the eastermost Point of the Start towards Salcomb when you sayl by it. Plymouth N.N.W. The Start N.N.W. Thus sheweth the Start, and the Land to the westwards of Plymouth, when the Start is N.N.E. about two leagues, and Plymouth Sound N.N.E. five or six leagues. Mawstone. The Start. Thus sheweth the Land between the Start and Plymouth Sound when you sayl by it. Thus sheweth the High-land to the eastwards of Plymouth. Maker-Church. Thus sheweth the Land of Ramhead, to the northwards of it, when you sayl into Plymouth-Sound. The Deadman. Ramhead. Thus sheweth the Deadman, and the Land to the eastwards of it, when you are thwart of the Deadman, 4 leagues from the Shore. The Deadman when you are thwart it. Thus sheweth the Land to the eastward of Falmouth, when you sayl by it a league from the Shore. Lizard. Falmouth. Deadman. Thus sheweth the Land between the Deadman and the Lizard. Thus sheweth the Lizard when you sayl by it. Lizard. Hilford. Falmouth. Thus sheweth the Land betwixt the Lizard and Falmouth, when you are below Falmouth.
Thus sheweth the Lizard when it is five or six leagues East by North from you. Mounts Bay. The Lizard. Thus sheweth the Lizard, being East from you four or five leagues. Thus sheweth the Land betwixt the Lizard  the Lands-end, when the Lizard lyeth East by North, and Mounts-bay North from you. Lands-end N.N.W. Mounts-bay N.E. by N. and N.N.E. Thus sheweth the Lands-end, and the Land to the eastwards of it, when it is N.N.W. and Mounts-bay N. E. and N.N.E. from you. Thus sheweth the Lands-end, when you come in right with it out of the Sea. Thus sheweth the Lands-end, being East from you. East. The Lands-end of England. Thus sheweth the Lands-end, when it beareth South-east by South, seven or eight leagues from you, and the round Hill to the northwards of the East, then you may see the low Land betwixt them both. Thus sheweth Silly, being E.N.E. from you. Thus sheweth Silly, being South-east from you. Thus sheweth Silly, being East five or six leagues from you. Thus sheweth Silly, being South-west from you. Of the Tydes and setting of the Cur∣rents: As also what Moon ma∣keth High-Water. In Dartmouth or Torbay, a West by South Moon maketh high-water. Thwart the Start, in the Channel, a W.N.W. and S.S.E. Moon. From the Start to Portland, in the midst of the Chan∣nel, the Flood falleth E.N.E. and the Ebb W.S.W. Thwart of Dartmouth, by the Land, the Flood fal∣leth North-east by North, and the Ebb South-west by South. Thwart of Torbay, towards Exmouth in the Bay, the Flood falleth North east by North, and the Ebb S. S. W. In Plymouth and Foy, a West by South, and East by North Moon maketh high-water. Thwart of Foy in the Channel, an E. S. E. Moon. To the Sea-board of Falmouth, an East by South; but in Falmouth-Haven an East by North Moon. At Helford, and at the Lizard by the Land, an E.S.E. and W.N.W. Moon maketh high-water. From Ram-head to the Start, by the Land within the Eddy-stone, the Flood falleth E.S.E. and the Ebb W. N. W. From the Dead-man to Ram-head, the Flood falleth E.N.E. and the Ebb W.S.W. From the Lizard to the Dead-man, North-east and South-west. In the Channel, between the Lizard and the Start, thwart of Foy. the Flood falleth East by North, and the Ebb West by South.
In what Depths you may make the Land. The Start and the Land of Dartmouth, may be seen in 45 fathom. When you have the high Land of Plymouth North from you, you may see it in 50 fathom; it is high dou∣ble Land, and sheweth it self in two Hills: that same double high Land within the Land, you may see it from thwart of Foy, until you come thwart of Dart∣month. The Dead-man you may see in 24 fathom, off from the Lizard to the Start. The Lizard you may see in 55 fathom; there the Ground is white. If you go from the Lizard, either Southerly, Easter∣ly, or Westerly; it is as easie to be known, for if you go Southerly, you will deepen the water, and come in∣to mattered Ground after ten leagues; if you go We∣sterly, you will keep Sand, st ll having deeper Water and finer Sand; if you go Easterly you will have shoaler Water and grosser Sand. If you be thwart of the Start, three leagues from the Shore, you will have 35 fathom, sandy Ground, mixt with dust black like beaten Pepper. The Start being North-west, or thereabouts, and you sayling E. N. E. or East by North, you will have sandy Ground and shoaler Water. Courses and Distances. From Portland to St. Paul de Lyon, South-west by South, 40 leagues. From Portland to ushant, S. W. 53 leagues. From Portland to Exmouth, W.N.W. 13 leagues. From Torbay to Dartmouth, West, somewhat southerly. 3 or 4 leagues. From Dartmouth to the Start, S.W. 3 leagues. From Portland to Torbay, West, somewhat southerly, 13 or 14 leagues. From Portland to Dartmouth, West by South, sixteen leagues. From Portland to the Start, W. S. W. Westerly, 19 leagues. From the Start to the Caskets, E.S.E. 21 leagues. From the Start to the Seven-Isles, South by East, some∣what easterly, 24 leagues. From the Start to St. Paul de Lyon, South by West, southerly, 27 leagues. From to Start to Ram-head, W. N. W. 8 leagues. From Ram-head to Love-Island, W.S.W. 3 leagues. From Love-Island to Foy, West, 2 leagues. From Foy to the Dead-man South-west, and South-west by West, 5 leagues. From the Dead-man to Falmouth, West by South, and W.S.W. 4 leagues. From Falmouth to the Lizard, South by West, 4 leagues. From the Start to the Eddy-stone, West, or a little Northerly, 7 or 8 leagues. From the Eddy-stone to Ram-head, North, a little we∣sterly, 2 leagues. From Ram-head to the Dead-man, W.S.W. 8 leagues. From the Dead-man to the Lizard, S.W. 6 leagues. From the Start to the Lizard, West by South, 20 or 21 leagues. From the Lizard to Garnsey, East by South, 37 leagues. From the Lizard to the Seven Islands, South-east by South. 31 leagues. From the Lizard to ushant, South, 29 leagues. From the Lizard to Cape de Finisterre, South-West, 153 leagues. The same course goeth about five leagues without the Cape. From the Lizard to Teneriff, S.S.W. 466 leagues. From the Lizard to Tercera, 386 leagues. Latitudes.   deg. min. Torbay, 50 42 Dartmouth, 50 37 The Start, 50 27 Ram-head, 50 34 Falmouth, 50 22 Lizard, 50 10 A Tyde Table for the Channel between England and France, from the Island of Silly unto the North-Foreland; shewing what Moon maketh the highest Water upon the Coast and in the Harbours, and how the Tyde doth set, and how long it doth run to the eastward in the Channel. The Names of the Ports or Head-Lands. What Point the Moon is upon to make a full Sea in these Places. Upon what Point of the Compass the Tyde sets to the eastwards in the Channel thwart of these Places. How the Tyde sets in the Channel, 4, 5, or 6 leagues, and near the Land as it lyeth. Silly, Mounts-bay, And on the Lizard. S. W. by W. W. S. W. West by South. E. S. E. North-East. N. E. by East. In Helford, Falmouth Foy and Leme. East by North. E. S. E.   Plymouth, Salcomb, Dartmouth, and Torbay. East and West. S. E. by East. E. by N. & E.N.E. Stdmouth, Exmouth, Lime, Portland, and Weymouth. East by South. South-East.   Pool and Needles. All within the Isle of Wight  And in Ports∣mouth. S. E. by East. In at the Needles, S. E. by East. In Stokes-bay S.E. And on the South side of the Land, S.E. by South; and Donnose S.S.E. E. N. E.
At Hampton-Key within the Ouers. North and South.     Arundel & Shoram. S. E. by S. S. S. E.   At Beachy, Donge∣ness, and Rie. S. E. by South. South and North. South by West. E. N. E. Foulston, Dover, and in the Downs. S. S. E. S. S. W. S. W. by South. N. E. by North. North-East. Between Calice and Dover.   South-West.   On the Bank of the Goodwin-Sand.   South-West by West. North-East by North. North-Foreland. South by East. 5 leag. off W. S. W. N. N. E. & N. by E. An Advertisement. All sorts of Mathematical Instruments and Books are Made and Sold by JOHN SELLER, Hydrographer in Ordi∣nary to the King, at his Shops, at the Hermitage in Wapping, and in Exchange-Alley in Cornhill, London. Several of which follow. Instruments for Navigation. AZimuth Compasses. Meridian Compasses, Variation Com∣passes, Equinoctial Compasses; Inclinatory Needles, for finding the Latitutde of a place without Observations either of the Sun, Moon, or Stars; Davies-Quadrants, Jacob-Staffs, Gunters-Bows, Cross-Staffs, Triangular-Quadrants, Hoods-Bows, Almicanter-Staffs, Semi-Circles, Sinical-Quadrants, Gunters-Rulers, Plain-Scales, Gunters Sliding Pocket-Compasses, Universal Ring-Dyals, Scale-Compasses, Plat-Compasses, Running-Glasses, Nocturnals, Gun∣ters-Sectors; all sorts of Maritine-Charts, Plats, and Draughts. Other Mathematical Instruments. Plain Tables. Theodolite, Circumferenter, Peractor, Gunters-Chain, Water-Level, Surveighing-Scales, Protactor, Gunters-Quadrant, Cube-Dyals and Globe-Dylals; Gaging-Rods, Joynt-Rules of all sorts, Brass-Compasses, Post and Pocket-Dyals, Tele∣scopes, Microscopes, Prospective-Glasses; Burning, Multiplying, and Magnifying-Glasses; Dividers, Globes, Maps of the World, and of particular Countreys; and Atlases of all sorts both for Sea and Land; Metal Concaves. Mathematical Books. The English Pilot, In four Volumns; Describing the Sea-Coasts, Copes, Head-lands, Soundings, Sands, Shoals, Rocks and Dangers; The Bayes, Roads, Harbours, Rivers and Ports in most of the known parts of the World; Shewing the Courses and Distances from one Place to another; Setting of the Tydes and Currents; The Eb∣bing and Flowing of the Sea: With new Tables of the Suns De∣clination; and an Almanack of the Moon; and a large Tyde-Table: Being also furnished with new and Exact Draughts, Charts, and Descriptions, gathered from the latest and best Discoveries that have been made by divers able and experienced Navigators of our English Nation. The Coasting Pilot; Describing the Sea-Coasts; with the Sands, Shoals, Sound∣ings, Rocks and Dangers. The Bayes, Roads, Harbours, Rivers, Ports, Channels, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-marks upon the Coasts of England, Holland, and Flanders; Shewing the Courses and Distances from one place to another; Setting of the Tydes and Currents; The ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and Tables for the Tydes and nature of the Ground; being furnished with large Charts, Draughts, and Descriptions of the Sands and Harbours on the said Coasts. Atlas Maritimus. Containing new and exact Draughts and Descriptions of the Sea-Coasts, Capes, and Head-lands; The Roads, Harbours, Ri∣vers and Ports, &c. Accomodated with the Hydrographical De∣scriptions of the Sea-Coasts in most of the known parts of the World. Atlas Terrestris, Containing variety of choice Maps; and Descriptions of all the Empires, Monarchies, Kingdoms, Principalities, Dominions, Re∣gions, and Countreys in all the known parts of the World. With a Geographical Discourse of each particular Countrey. Atlas Magnae Britaniae, & Hiberniae. Containing particular Maps of all the Counties and Shires in the Kingdom of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Principality of Wales: Accommodated with a Discourse of the Natural Rata∣ties of each County in the same. Atlas Civitatum & Urbium, Containing the Sight and Prospect of the most famous Cities and Towns in the World: With a Discourse of the Original Rise; with the Customs, Manners, and Government of each City. Atlas Coelestis, Containing General and Particular Descriptions and Figures of each Constellation in the Heavens: Also the Faces and Appear∣ances of every Planet and Representation of the three Systems of Ptolomy, Tycho, and Copernicus: With a Discourse relating to the same. Practical Navigation: Or an Introduction to the whole Art, the Second Edition: Containing many Useful and Geometrical Definitions and Pro∣blems. The Doctrine of Plain and Spherical Triangles, Plain Mercator & great Circle-Sayling; Sundry useful Problems in A∣stronomy; the use of Instruments; the Azimuth Compass, Ring-Dyal, Variation-Compass, the Fore-staff, Quadrant-Plow, Cross-Bow-Quadrant, Removing-Quadrant, Nocturnal and Moon-Dyal, the Plain Scale, Gunters-Scale, Sinical-Quadrant, Plain-Chart, Merchaters-Chart, both Globes, the Inclinatory Needle, and the Virtues of the Load-stone; Useful Tables of the Moons Age, of the Tydes, of the Suns Place and Declination, of the Stars right Ascention and Declination, the Latitude and Longitude of Places; New Traverse Tables, and their use in keeping a Reckon∣ing at Sea. The Description and Use of the Triangular-Quadrant. Being a Particular and General Instrument, useful at Land or Sea both for Operation & Observation; more universally useful, porta∣ble, & convenient, than any other yet discovered: With its Uses in Arithmetick, Geometry, Superficial and Solid, Astronomy, Dyal∣ling three wayes, Gaging, Navigation in a method not before used. Memorial Verses on the Ecclesiastical and Civil Calender; with an Epitomy of the Heavenly Motions. Examen Examinatum, or Wings Examination of Astronomia Carolina examined.
chart A Chart of the Channell of Bristoll from Silly to St Dads head in Wales and stretching over to the River of Waterford in Ireland dis∣covering all the Roads  Harbors Depeths and Soundings upon the said Coasts newly Corrected and Published by John Seller And are to be Sold at his Shop at the Signe of the Marrinors Compass at the Hermitage  in Wapping
