9252.2 S101026 99836851 178404
ORDERS AND DIRECTIONS, Together With a Commission for the better Administration of Iustice, and more per∣fect Information of His MAIESTIE; How, and by whom the Lawes and Statutes tending to the reliefe of the Poore, the well ordering and training vp of youth in Trades, and the reforma∣tion of Disorders and disordered persons, are executed throughout the Kingdome: Which His Royall MAIESTIE hath commanded to be Published and Inquired of, by the Body of His Priuie Councell, whom He hath made principall Commissioners for this purpose. Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MA∣IESTIE: And by the Assignes of IOHN BILL. 1630.
woodcut of the English coat of arms, 1630 HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
A Commission to the Lords, and others of the Priuie Councell, for putting in execution of the Lawes and Statutes for reliefe of the poore, punish∣ment of Rogues, and imployment of gifts to charitable vses, &c. CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of England, Scot∣land, France, & Ireland, Defen∣der of the Faith, &c. To the most Reuerend Father
in God, Our right trustie and wel∣beloued Counsellor, GEORGE Lord Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, Primate and Metropolitane of all England. And to Our right trustie and welbeloued Counsellor THOMAS Lord COVENTRIE, Lord Kee∣per of Our great Seale of Eng∣land. And also to the right Reue∣rend Father in GOD, Our right trustie and welbeloued Counsellor, SAMVEL Lord Archbishop of Yorke, Primate and Metropoli∣tane of England.
And likewise to Our right trustie and welbeloued Counsellor RI∣CHARD Lord WESTON, Our high Treasurer of England. And also to Our right trustie and right welbeloued Cousins and Counsellors, EDVVARD Viscount CONVVAY, Lord President of Our Priuy Councell. HENRY Earle of Manche∣ster, keeper of Our Priuy Seale. ROBERT Earle of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlaine of England.
THOMAS Earle of Arun∣del and Surrey, Earle Marshal of England. PHILIP Earle of Pembroke and Mountgomery Lord Cham∣berlaine of Our Houshold. THEOPHILVS Earle of Suffolke, Lord Warden of our Cinque-Ports. EDVVARD Earle of Dorset, Lord Chamberlaine to our dearest Consort the Queene. WILLIAM Earle of Salis∣bury.
WILLIAM Earle of Exester. IOHN Earle of Bridge∣water. IAMES Earle of Carlile. HENRY Earle of Holland. WILLIAM Earle of Ban∣bury. HENRY Earle of Danby. VVILLIAM Earle of Mor∣ton. THOMAS Earle of Kelly.
EDVVARD Viscount Wim∣bledon. DVDLEY Ʋiscount Dorche∣ster one of Our principall Secreta∣ries of State. THOMAS Ʋiscount Went∣worth, Lord President of Our Councell in the North parts. OLIVER Viscount Grandi∣son. HENRY Ʋiscount Falke∣land. And likewise to the Reue∣rend
Father in God Our right tru∣stie and welbeloued Counsellours, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of London. RICHARD Lord Bishop of Winchester. And also to Our right trustie and welbeloued Counsellors, EDWARD Lord Newburgh, Chancellour of our Duchy of Lancaster. Sir THOMAS EDMVNDS, Knight, Treasurer of Our Hou∣shold. Sir HENRY VANE, Knight,
Comptroller of Our Houshold. Sir THOMAS IERMYN, Knight, Vice-Chamberlaine of Our Houshold. Sir ROBERT NAVNTON, Knight, Master of Our Court of Wards and Liueries. Sir IOHN COKE, Knight, one other of Our principall Secre∣taries of State. Sir FRANCIS COTTING∣TON, Baronet, Chancellor of Our Exchequer.
Sir IVLIVS CAESAR, Knight, Master of the Rolles. And Sir WILLIAM ALEXANDER, Knight, gree∣ting. WHereas diuers good Lawes and Statutes, most necessary for these times, haue, du∣ring the happie Reigne of Queene ELIZABETH, and of Our late Father of blessed memorie, and since our comming to the Crowne of England, been with great wise∣dome, peitie, and policie, made and enacted in Parliament, aswell for
the charitable reliefe of aged and impotent poore people, not able by their labours to get their liuings and for the training vp of Youth in honest and profitable Trades and Mysteries, by putting them forth to be Apprentices, as also for the setting to worke of idle persons, who being of abilitie to worke, in some kinde or other, doe neuerthe∣lesse, refuse to labour, and either wander vp and downe the Citie and Countrey begging, or which is worse, maintaine themselues by filching and stealing; And for the punish∣ment of sundry Rogues and Vaga∣bonds, and setting of them to worke: And for the suppressing of that o∣dious
and loathsome sinne of Drun∣kennesse; And the repressing of idle∣nesse, the roote of so many euils: The due execution of which, and the like lawes and Statutes, would preuent and cut off many offences and crimes of high nature. ANd whereas we are infor∣med that the defect of the exe∣cution of the said good and politique Lawes and Constitutions in that behalfe made, proceedeth espicial∣ly from the neglect of duetie in some of Our Iustices of the Peace and o∣ther Officers, Magistrates, and Ministers of the Peace, within the seuerall Counties, Cities and townes
Corporate of this our Realme of England, and Dominion of Wales, to whom the care and trust of seeing the said Lawes to be put in execution, is by the sayd Lawes principally cōmitted, which remissenesse & neglect of duty doth grow and arise from this, That by the most of the sayd Lawes, there are little or no Penalties or Forfcitures at all inflicted vpon the said Iustices of Peace, Magi∣strates, Officers and Ministers for not performing their duties in that behalfe, or if any be, yet partly by reason of the smallnesse thereof, and partly by reason of their power and authoritie in their seuerall pla∣ces,
whereby they hold others vn∣der them in awe, there are few or no Complaints or Informations made of the neglects and want of due execution of the Offices of the said Iustices and other Mini∣sters; and although the care and di∣ligence of our Iudges and Iustices of Assise be neuer so great, yet by rea∣son of the shortnesse of their Assizes and Sessions in euery County, and multiplicitie of businesse, they nei∣ther haue due information of the said neglects, nor in those times, can take such exact courses as were re∣quisite for redresse of such generall abuses and inconueniences so high∣ly importing the publique good of
this Our Realme, by reason whereof the said Justices of Peace, Ma∣gistrates, Officers and Ministers, are now of late in most parts of this Our Kingdome growne secure in their said negligence, and the said politique and necessarie Lawes and Statutes laid aside or little regar∣ded as Lawes of small vse and con∣sequence, whereas vpon the present making of the said Lawes, the same being then duely executed, as also at this day in some Counties and parts of this Our Kingdome, where some Iustices of Peace and other Magistrates doe duely and dili∣gently execute the same, there eui∣dently appeareth great reformati∣on,
benefit and safety to redound to the Commonwealth, And likewise when as there was care taken, and diligence vsed to haue the Lawes concerning charitable vses, wel exe∣cuted, and all pious gifts to bee im∣ployed according to the good intent of the Donors, these poore people were better relieued then now they are: All which We taking into Our Princely care, for the preseruation of the common Peace of this Realme, the performance of mens pious intentions in their gifts of Charitie, and the generall good and quiet of Our Subiects. After long and mature delibe∣ration, finding that there is no bet∣ter
wayes or meanes to haue the said Lawes and Statutes put in full execution, then by committing the trust and ouersight thereof to the speciall care and industrie of cer∣taine persons of principall Place, Dignitie and Order neere vnto Our Person; who vpon their dili∣gent inquirie how the said Lawes and Statutes are put in execution, may be able vpon all occasions from time to time to giue Ʋs particular information thereof, and by their approoued Wisedomes, experience and Iudgements, giue Directions and Instructions from time to time for the better execution of the said Statutes.
Know ye therefore that Wee out of that long experience and full as∣surance Wee haue had of the great integritie, wisedome, fidelitie and industrie of you, and euery of you; Haue constituted, authorized and appointed you to bee Our Commis∣sioners, and by these presents doe constitute, authorise and appoint, and strictly require you, or any foure or more of you Our Commissioners either by examination vpon Oath, or without Oath, or by all and euery such good and lawfull meanes as to you, or any foure or more of you, in your Wisedomes and Iudgements shal seeme conuenient and requisite from time to time from henceforth
to make Inquirie, and thereby to in∣forme your selues how all and euery the Lawes and Statutes now in force, which any way concerne the reliefe of impotent or poore people, the binding out of Apprentices, the setting to worke of poore children, and such other poore people, as be∣ing able or willing to worke, haue no stocke or meanes to imploy them∣selues; The compelling and forcing such lazie & idle persons to worke, as being of bodies able and strong, doe neuerthelesse refuse to la∣bour; the maintenance, gouerne∣ment, and well ordering of houses of Correction and other places for reliefe of poore indigent and
impotent people, the Rating, Col∣lecting, and imployment of all such Summes, as by the Statute of the three and fourtieth of ELIZA∣BETH, are appointed for the re∣liefe of Souldiers and Mariners, the punishment or setting on worke of Rogues and Ʋagabonds: And all Lawes and Statutes now in force for the repressing of Drun∣kennesse and Idlenesse, the refor∣ming of abuses committed in Innes and Alehouses, the abridging of the number of Alehouses, and the well ordering of such as be licensed, the keeping of Watches and Wards duely, and how other publique ser∣uices for God, the King, and the
Common-wealth, are put in practice and executed. To which end and purpose, to you Our Commissioners, or any sixe or more of you, We giue full power and authoritie from time to time hereafter, to giue such Directions and Instructions, and by all other good and lawfull meanes to set downe, and giue such Orders and Directions, as that all and euery the said Lawes and other necessa∣rie Statutes may bee duely and effe∣ctually executed, and the Paines and Penalties thereof leuied and imployed, according to the purport and true meaning of the same Lawes.
And whereas no Nation of the world hath prouided more libe∣rally, or ordeined better Lawes for due imployment of Lands, Goods, and Stockes of money, giuen to cha∣ritable vses, then this Our King∣dome of England hath done: Yet neuerthelesse the said Bounties and charitable Gifts haue not beene im∣ployed according to the minde and intent of the Giuers, by reason of some Deuices, Fraudes, Breach of Trust, Aime at priuate Gaine, and partly by the negligence of those that haue beene trusted to performe the same. Therefore Our Will and ex∣presse Pleasure is, That those Sta∣tutes
of the thirty ninth and fourtie third of Elizabeth, and all other Lawes and Statutes concerning Hospitals, Almes-houses, Meisons de Dieu, and other pious Donati∣ons, Collections, or publike Gifts for the benefit of the Poore, or publike Workes, be strictly inquired and put in execution. And all Deeds of Foundations, Charters, Wills, Deuices, Dispositions of Lands, Goods, Annuities, or Rents, giuen, appointed, or intended to any the Houses aforesaid, or to any cha∣ritable vse or publike Worke, be di∣ligently sought out and discouered, to the end there may bee an imploy∣ment of all the Profits, according to
the Will and Minde of the Do∣nors or Founders. And Wee doe further by these Presents, giue full power and au∣thority vnto you, or any sixe or more of you, to call vnto you for your assistance in the Premisses, when you shall see it needfull, all, or any of Our Iustices of Assize, as often as you shall see cause, and to giue such Directions and Instructions by your Letters, or otherwise, as well to Our said Iustices of Assize, Oyer and Termyner, and Gaole deliuery, for their seuerall Circuits: As also to Our Iustices, Maiors, Bayliffes, and other head Offi∣cers, within Cities and Boroughs,
Clerkes of the Assise and Sessions, and other Officers and Ministers within Our seuerall Counties and Shires of this our Realme of Eng∣land and Dominion of Wales, and the seuerall Diuisions of the same, as to you, or any sixe or more of you in your wisedomes shall seeme meete and requisite, and shall bee agreeable to the Lawes and Sta∣tutes of this Our Realme, for the better execution of the Lawes and Statutes in the time to come. All which Directions, Instructions, and Orders, at any time or times heere∣after so to be made or taken by you, or any sixe or more of you, by force of these presents; Wee Will and
straitly Charge and Commaund by these presents, to bee sincerely and duely from time to time, obeyed, ob∣serued, and kept, by all and euery Officer and Officers, Iustice and Iustices, Person and Persons, to whom it shall appertaine. And We do hereby further will & require you, that you or any foure or more of you, doe from time to time giue vnto Vs particular and true in∣formation of the care and industry of Our Justices of Peace in their seuerall Diuisions, Maiors, Bayliffes, and head Officers, in their seuerall Cities, and Townes Corporate, as vpon the sayd inqui∣rie you shall finde to bee diligent in
putting the said Lawes, Statutes, Orders and Directions in executi∣on, That so by their seruice and your report, they appearing to de∣serue well of their King and Coun∣trey, may receiue not onely good ac∣ceptance at Our hands, but all due incouragement and comfort to con∣tinue in their well doings; And if contrariwise you shall finde any of Our said Iustices of Peace, or other the persons before named to be neg∣ligent and remisse in their seuerall places and duties touching the per∣formance and execution of the said Lawes and Statutes committed to their Charge, or the Orders and Directions giuen by you, or any
sixe of you for the better execution of the said Statutes: Then Our pleasure is, that you doe likewise cer∣tifie the names of such as you shall finde so remisse and negligent, that accordingly order may be taken for their remouing and displacing out of the Commission of the Peace, as men vnworthy of their said Trust and Places; As also deseruing to receiue such further Punishment in Our Court of Starchamber, or otherwise as may be by Law inflict∣ed vpon them. And further wee doe by these Presents giue vnto you, or any sixe or more of you, full power and au∣thoritie to doe and execute all and
euery other lawfull and necessarie Act and Acts, thing and things for the better and more due Execution of the Premisses or any of them, as you or any sixe, or more of you, shall in your Wisedomes and Iudge∣ments thinke to bee fit and conue∣nient. And because you that are at∣tendants vpon Our Person, or o∣therwise imployed in Our Seruices cannot at all times bee in Person in the seuerall Shires of this Our Kingdome, to execute this Our Commission in such sort as wee haue appoynted it: And for that it will be very fit and requisite for you to haue persons of Trust vnder you,
who may faithfully assist you in the execution of this Our Com∣mission. Wee doe therefore giue vnto you for your better Aide and Assistance, and the better performance of this Our Seruice, full power and autho∣ritie from time to time, to Assigne, Appoint and Constitute by your wri∣ting vnder your Hands and Seales or the Hands and Seales of any sixe, or more of you, such suffici∣ent meete persons as you, or any sixe of you, in your discretions shall from time to time thinke fit and ap∣point to bee your Deputies in euery or any Countie, Citie, Borough or towne Corporate of this Our King∣dome
of England, or Dominion of Wales. And Wee doe giue vnto such persons, so to be by you deputed, as∣signed, and appointed, as aforesaid, or to any two, three, or more of them full power and authority to doe and execute in our said Counties, Cities, Boroughs, and Townes Corpo∣rate, as well within Liberties as without; All and euery thing and things, which by vertue of this Our Commission, is to you our principall Commissioners intrusted and com∣mitted, or which you, or any of you Our Commissioners, if you were personally present, might or ought to doe; They your said Deputies
pursuing such Directions and Jn∣structions from time to time as you or any sixe of you shall giue vnto them in writing; And the better to enable them so to doe, you shall de∣liuer to such deputies as you shall make in euery Countie, Citie, or Towne corporate as aforesaid, a duplicate, or true transcript of this Our Commission, subscribed with your hands, or vnder the hands of sixe of you at the least. And Wee doe further by the te∣nour of these presents, will and com∣mand, and doe giue full power and authoritie to Our Lord Chancelour, or Lord Keeper of Our great Seale for the time being, to cause seuerall
Commissions to be made foorth, vn∣der Our great Seale of England, to such persons of trust and quality, as any sixe, or more of you shall from time to time nominate vnto him, and shall so signifie vnto him by writing vnder your hands to the same tenour and effect, in euery materiall thing, as in these Our Letters Patents is expressed, with a clause to bee inser∣ted in euery such Commission and Commissions, commanding such persons so to be nominated, that they certifie all their proceedings there∣vpon to you Our foresaid Commissi∣oners, or to any sixe of you, at such times and places, as you, or any sixe of you shall appoint.
Jn witnesse whereof, Wee haue cau∣sed these Our Letters to bee made Patents: Witnesse Our selfe at Westminster  the fift day of Ianuary, in the sixt yeere of Our Reigne.
Preface. FOr the better admini∣stration of Iustice, and more perfect Informati∣on of His Maiesty, how, and by whom the Lawes and Statutes tending to the reliefe of the poore, and the reformation of dis∣orders and disordered persons are exe∣cuted throughout the Kingdome; His Royall Maiestie hath Commanded this Commission aforesaid, together with these Orders and Directions follow∣ing, to be published by the Body of His Priuie Councell, whom Hee hath made principall Commissio∣ners for this pur∣pose.
ORDERS. I. THAT the Iustices of Peace of euery Shire within the Realme doe diuide themselues, and allot amongst themselues what Iustices of the Peace, and what Hundreds shall attend monethly at some certaine places of the Shire. And at this day and place, the High Constables, Petty-Con∣stables, and Churchwardens, and Ouerseers for the Poore of
those Hundreds, shall attend the said Iustices. And there in∣quirie shall be made, and Infor∣mation taken by the Iustices, how euery of these Officers in their seuerall places haue done their duties in Execution of the Lawes mentioned in the Com∣mission annexed, and what per∣sons haue offended against any of the said Lawes. II. WHere neglect or defect is found in any of the said Officers, in making their Presentments, condigne pu∣nishment to be inflicted vpon
them by the Iustices according to Law. III. WHen offences are pre∣sented at one meeting, then the penalties of the Lawes offended, to bee leauied and brought to the Iustices at their next meeting. IIII. WHen the penalties are leauied, the Iustices are to take care that the same be imployed accordingly as by the Statutes are appointed.
V. FOr incouragement to men that doe informe and pro∣secute others for offending a∣gainst these Lawes or any of them, libertie to bee left to the Iustices of Peace that doe meete to reward the Informer or Prosecutor, out of part of the money leauied vpon his, or their Presentments, or Infor∣mation. Though the Statute doe not prescribe this, yet this is not against the Law that giues the penaltie to the
Poore, which penaltie nor no part thereof would else come vnto the poore but by this meanes. VI. THat the seuerall Iustices of Peace of euery Shire, doe once euery three moneths cer∣tifie an account in Writing to the high Sheriffe of the Coun∣tie, of their proceedings in this way, whom they haue puni∣shed, what they haue leuyed, and how they haue imploy∣ed it.
VII. THat the High Sheriffe within foureteene dayes after this Account deliuered, do send the same ouer to the Iu∣stices of Assize for that County, or to one of them, and the Iu∣stice or Iustices that receiue the same, to certifie it in the begin∣ning of euery Terme next after, to the Lords Commissioners. And if any of the Iustices of Peace shall faile to make such account to the Sheriffe, then the Sheriffe shall certifie such de∣fault to the Lords Commissio∣ners.
VIII. THe Iustices of Assize in e∣uery Circuite, are to en∣quire, and specially to marke, what Iustices of the Peace are carefull and diligent in executi∣on of these Lawes, and the Di∣rections giuen, and who are neg∣ligent and remisse. And what other things of note happen in their Circuits, to make report thereof to the King, vpon their returne from their Circuits e∣uery halfe yeere.
DIRECTIONS. I. THat the Lords of Manors and Towns, take care that their Tenants, and the pa∣rishoners of euery Towne may bee releeued by worke, or otherwise at home, and not suffered to straggle, and beg vp and downe in their pa∣rishes. II. THat Stewards to Lords and Gentlemen, in keeping their
Leetes twice a yeere, doe specially enquire vpon those Articles that tend to the reformation, or punish∣ment of common offences and abu∣ses: As of Bakers and Brewers, for breaking of Assizes: Of Fore∣stallers, and Regraters: Against Tradesmen of all sorts, for selling with vnder weights, or at excessiue prises, or things vnwholesome, or things made in deceipt: Of people, breakers of houses, common theeues, and their Receiuers; haunters of Tauerns, or Alehouses; those that goe in good clothes, and fare well, and none knowes whereof they liue; those that bee night-walkers; buil∣ders of Cottages, and takers in of
Inmates; offences of Ʋictuallers, Artificers, Workemen and Labou∣rers. III. THat the poore children in e∣uery Parish be put forth Ap∣prentices to husbandry, and other handy-crafts, and money to be rai∣sed in the Parishes for placing them, according to the Law; and if any party shall refuse to take the said Apprentice, being put out accor∣ding to the Law; such party as shall refuse to take the said Apprentice, to be bound ouer to the next quarter Sessions, or Assises, and there to be
bound to his good behauiour, or o∣therwise ordered, as shall bee found fit. IIII. THat the Statute of Labou∣rers, for retaining of Ser∣uants, and ordering of Wages, be∣twixt the Seruant and the Ma∣ster be not deluded by priuate Con∣tracts, before they come to the Sta∣tutes, and the common fashion of Essoyning many absent, not to bee allowed of course, as is vsed. V. THat the weekely taxations for reliefe of the Poore, and
other purposes mentioned in the Statute of 43. Eliz. bee in these times of scarcitie raised to higher Rates in euery Parish, then in times to fore were vsed. And Contribu∣tions had from other Parishes, to helpe the weaker Parishes, especi∣ally from those places where depo∣pulations haue beene, some good Contribution to come, for helpe of other Parishes. And where any money or Stocke hath beene, or shall bee giuen to the reliefe of the Poore in any parish, such Gift to be no occasion of lessening the Rates of the Parish.
VI. THat the petty Constables in all Parishes, be chosen of the abler sort of Parishioners, and the office not to bee put vpon the poorer sort, if it may be. VII. WAtches in the night, and Warding by day, and to bee appointed in euery Towne and village, for apprehension of rogues, and vagabonds, and for safety and good order.
VIII. AND because it is found by dayly experience, that the re∣missenesse and negligence of petty-Constables is a greate cause of the swarming of Rogues and Beg∣gers, therefore the high Consta∣bles in their seuerall Diuisions are specially to be charged to looke vnto the petty-Constables, that they vse diligence in their Offices, and the High Constables to present to the Iustices of Peace, the defaults of the petty Constables, for not punish∣ing the Rogues, or not presenting those that are Relieuers of the Rogues and Beggers, the Law
inflicting a Penalty vpon the Con∣stable for not punishing them, and vpon such party as shall releeue them. IX. IF in any Parish there bee found any persons that liue out of Ser∣uice, or that liue idly and will not worke for reasonable wages, or liue to spend all they haue at the Ale∣house, hose persons to bee brought by the High Constables, and petty Constables to the Iustices at their meetings, there to be ordered and punished as shall be found fit.
X. THat the Correction houses in all Counties may bee made adioyning to the common Prisons, and the Gaoler to be made Gouer∣nour of them, that so he may imploy to worke Prisoners committed for small causes, and so they may learne honestly by labour, and not liue idly and miserably long in prison, where∣by they are made worse when they come out then they were when they went in, and where many houses of Correction are in one County, one of them at least to bee neere the Gaole.
XI. THat no man harbour Rogues in their Barnes, or Out∣houseings. And the wandring per∣sons with women and children, to giue account to the Constable or Justice of Peace, where they were marryed, and where their children were Christened; for these people liue like Saluages, neither marry nor bury nor Christen, which licen∣tious libertie makes so many delight to be Rogues and Wanderers.
XII. ANd because the High wayes in all Counties of England are in great decay, partly so growen, for that men think there is no course by the Common Law, or Order from the State to amend the same: And the worke-dayes appointed by the Statute are so omitted, or idly performed, that there comes little good by them. Therefore the Iusti∣ces of Peace at these monethly meetings, are to take speciall care of: and not onely to cause the Sur∣ueyors of the High wayes to pre∣sent the same; but by their owne view, to informe themselues, that
at the next Quarter Sessions after euery meeting, they may present all such neglects, and offences (as vpon their owne view) and the Of∣fenders there to bee pu∣nished according to Law.
¶ Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the KINGS most Excellent MAIESTIE: and by the Assignes of IOHN BILL. M.DC.XXX.
