14783 S122050 99857203 177030
BEN: IONSON his VOLPONE Or THE FOXE. —Simul & iucunda, & idonea dicere vitae. Printed for Thomas Thorppe. 1607.
TO THE MOST NOBLE AND MOST AEQVALL SISTERS THE TWO FAMOVS VNIVERSITIES, FOR THEIR LOVE AND ACCEPTANCE SHEW'N TO HIS POEME IN THE PRESENTATION: BEN: IONSON THE GRATEFVLL ACKNOWLEDGER DEDICATES BOTH IT, AND HIMSELFE. There followes an Epistle, if you dare venture on the length.
THE EPISTLE. NEuer (most aequall SISTERS) had any man a wit so presently excellent, as that it could raise it selfe; but there must come both Matter, Oc∣casion, Commenders, and Fauou∣rers to it. If this be true, and that the Fortune of all Writers doth daily proue it, it be∣houes the carefull to prouide, well, toward these ac∣cidents; and, hauing acquir'd them, to preserue that part of reputation most tenderly, wherein the be∣nefit of a Friend is also defended. Hence is it, that I now render my selfe gratefull, and am studious to iustifie the bounty of your act: To which, though your mere authority were satisfying, yet, it being an age, wherein Poëtry and the Professors of it heare so ill, on all sides, there will a reason bee look'd for in the subiect. It is certaine, nor can it with any fore∣head be oppos'd) that the too-much licence of Poë∣tasters, in this time, hath much deform'd their Mi∣stresse; that, euery day their manifold, and manifest ignorance doth stick vnnaturall reproches vpon her: But for their petulancy, it were an act of the greatest iniustice, either to let the learned suffer; or so diuine a skill (which indeed should not be attempted with vncleane hands) to fall, vnder the least contempt. For if men will impartially, and not à-squint, looke toward the offices, and function of a Poët, they will easily conclude to themselues, the impossibility of any mans being the good Poët, without first being a
good Man. He that is sayd to be able to informe yong-men to all good disciplines, inflame growne∣men to all great vertues, keepe old men in their best and supreme state, or as they decline to child-hood, recouer them to their first strength; that comes forth the Interpreter, and Arbiter of Nature, a Teacher of things diuine, no lesse then humane, a Master in man∣ners; and can alóne (or with a few) effect the busines of Man-kind. This, I take him, is no subiect for Pride, and Ignorance to exercise their railing rhetorique vpon. But, it will here be hastily answer'd, that the Writers of these dayes are other things; that, not onely their manners, but their natures are inuerted; and nothing remaining with them of the dignity of Poët, but the abused name, which euery Scribe v∣surpes: that now, especially in Dramatick, or (as they terme it) Stage-Poëtry, nothing but Ribaldry, Pro∣fanation, Blasphemy, al Licence of offence to God, and Man, is practisd. I dare not deny a great part of this (and am sory, I dare not) because in some mens abortiue Features (and would they had neuer boasted the light) it is ouer-true: But, that all are embarqu'd in this bold aduenture for Hell, is a most vncharita∣ble thought, and, vtterd, a more malicious slander. For my particular, I can (and from a most cleare conscience) affirme that I haue euer trembled to thinke toward the least Prophanenesse; haue loa∣thed the vse of such foule, and vn-washd Baudr'y, as is now made the foode of the Scene: And, howso∣euer I cannot escape, from some, the imputation of
sharpnesse, but that they wil say, I haue taken a pride, or lust to be bitter, and not my yongest Infant but hath come into the world with all his teeth; I would aske of these supercilious Politiques, what Nation, Society, or generall Order, or State I haue prouokd? what publique Person? whether I haue not (in all these) preseru'd their dignity, as mine owne person, safe? My WORKES are read, allow'd, (I speake of those that are intirely mine) looke into them, what broad reproofes haue I vsd: Where haue I bin particular? Where personall, except to a Mimick, Cheater, Baud, or Buffon, creatures (for their insolencies) wor∣thy to be tax'd? or to which of these so pointingly, as he might not, either ingeniously haue cōfest, or wise∣ly dissembled his disease? But it is not Rumour can make mē guilty, much lesse entitle me, to other mens crimes. I know, that nothing cā be so innocently writ, or carried, but maybe made obnoxious to cōstructi∣on; mary, whilst I beare mine innocence about me, I feare it not. Application, is now, growne a Trade with many; and there are, that professe to haue a Key for the deciphering of euery thing, but let wise and noble Persons take heed how they bee too cre∣dulous, or giue leaue to these inuading Interpreters to be ouer-familiar with their fames, who cunningly, & often, vtter their owne virulent malice, vnder o∣ther mēs simplest meanings. As for those, that wil (by faults which charity hath rak'd vp, or cōmō honesty cōceald) make thēselues a name with the Multitude, or (to drawe their rude, and beastly clappes) care
not whose liuing faces they intrench with their pe∣tulant stiles; may they doe it, without a riuall, for mee: I chuse rather to liue grau'd in obscuritie, then share with them, in so preposterous a fame. Nor can I blame the wishes of those graue, and wiser Patriotes, who prouiding the hurts these licentious spirits may do in a State, desire rather to see Fooles, and Diuells, and those antique reliques of Barbaris∣me retriu'd, with all other ridiculous, and exploded follies: then behold the wounds of Priuate men, of Princes, and Nations. For as HORACE, makes Tre∣batius speake, in these —Sibi quisque timet, quanquam est intactus, & odit. And men may iustly impute such rages, if continu'd, to the Writer, as his sports. The encrease of which lust in liberty, together with the present trade of the Stage, in all their misc'line Enterludes, what lear∣ned or liberall soule doth not already abhor? where nothing but the garbage of the time is vtter'd, & that with such impropriety of phrase, such plenty of soloe∣cismes, such dearth of sense, so bold prolepse's, so rackt metaphor's, with brothelry able to violate the eare of a Pagan, and blasphemy, to turne the bloud of a Christian to water. I cannot but be serious in a cause of this nature, wherein my fame, & the reputations of diuerse honest, & learned are the question; when a NAME, so full of authority, antiquity, and all great marke, is (through their insolence) become the lowest scorne of the Age: and those MEN subiect to the pe∣tulancie
of euery vernaculous Orator, that were wont to be the care of Kings, and happiest Monarchs. This it is that hath not onely rap't mee to present in∣dignation, but made mee studious, heretofore, and, by all my actions, to stand of, from them; which may most appeare in this my latest WORKE: (which you, most learned ARBITRESSES, haue seene, iudg'd, & to my crowne, approu'd) wherein I haue labourd, for their instruction, and amendment, to reduce, not onely the ancient formes, but manners of the Scene, the easinesse, the propriety, the innocence, and last the doctrine, which is the principall end of POESY to informe men, in the best reason of liuing. And though my Catastrophe may, in the strict rigour of Comick Law, meete with censure, as turning back to my promise; I desire the learned, and charitable Critick to haue so much faith in me, to thinke it was done off industrye: For with what ease I could haue varied it, nearer his scale (but that I feare to boast my owne faculty) I could here insert. But my special aime being to put the snafle in their mouths, that crie out, we neuer punish vice in our Enter∣ludes &c. I tooke the more liberty; though not with out some lines of example drawne euen in the Anti∣ents themselues, the goings out of whose Comoedies are not alwayes ioyfull, but oftimes, the Baudes, the Seruants, the Riualls, yea and the maisters are mulcted: and fitly, it beeing the offie of a Co∣mick-POET to imitate iustice, and instruct to life, as well as puritie of language, or stirre vp gentle
affections. To which, vpon my next opportunity to∣ward the examining & digesting of my notes, I shall speake more wealthily, and pay the World a debt. In the meane time (most reuerenced SISTERS) as I haue car'd to be thankefull for your affections past, and here made the vnderstanding acquainted with some groūd of your fauors; let me not dispayre their cōtinuance, to the maturing of some worthier fruits: wherein, if my MVSES bee true to me, I shall raise the dispis'd head of POETRY againe, & stripping her out of those rotten and base ragges, wherewith the Times haue adulterated her forme, restore her to her primitiue habite, feature, and maiesty, and ren∣der her worthy to be imbraced, and kist, of all the great and Maister Spirits of our World. As for the vile, and slothfull, who neuer affected an act, worthy of celebration, or are so inward with their owne vi∣cious natures, as they worthely feare her; and thinke it a high point of policie, to keepe her in contempt with their declamatory, and windy inuectiues: shee shall out of iust rage incite her Seruants (who are Ge∣nus iritabile) to spout inke in their faces, that shall eate, farder then their marrow, into their fames; and not CINNAMVS the Barber, with his art, shall be able to take out the brands, but they shall liue, and be read, till the Wretches die, as Things worst deser∣uing of themselues in chiefe, and then of all mankind. From my house in the Black-Friars this 11. of February. 1607.
AD ƲTRAMQVE ACA∣DEMIAM, De BENIAMIN IONSONIO. HIc ille est primus, qui doctum drama BRITANNIS, GRAIORVM antiqua, et LATII monimenta Theatri, Tanquam explorator versans, foelicibus ausis Prebebit: Magnis ceptis Gemina astra fauete. Alterutrâ veteres contenti laude: Cothurnum hic, At{que} pari soccum tractat Sol scenicus arte; Das VOLPONE iocos, fletus SEIANE dedisti. At si IONSONIAS mulctatas limite MVSAS Angustâ plangent quiquam: Ʋos, dicite, contrà, O nimiùm miseros quibus ANGLIS ANGLICA lingua Aut non sat nota est; aut queis (seu trans mare natis) Haud nota omninò: Vegetet cum tempore Vates, Mutabit patriam, fiet{que} ipse ANGLVS APOLLO. E. B.
Amicissimo, & meritissimo BEN: IONSON. QVod arte ausus es hîc tuâ, POETA, Si auderent hominum Dei{que} iuris Consulti, veteres sequi aemularier{que}, O omnes saperemus ad salutem. His sed sunt veteres araneosi; Tam nemo veterum est sequutor, vt tu Illos quòd sequeris nouator audis. Fac tamen quod agis; tuíque primâ Libri canitie induantur horâ: Nam cartis pueritia est neganda, Nascantúrque senes, oportet, illi Libri, queis dare vis perennitatem. Priscis, ingenium facit, labórque Te parem; hos superes, vt & futuros, Ex nostrâ vitiositate sumas, Quâ priscos superamus, & futuros. I. D.
To my friend Mr. IONSON. EPIGRAMME. IONSON, to tell the world what I to thee Am, 'tis Friend. Not to praise, nor vsher forth Thee, or thy worke, as if it needed mee Send I these ri'mes to adde ought to thy worth: So should I flatter my selfe, and not thine; For there were truth on thy side, none on mine. To the Reader. Ʋpon the worke. IF thou dar'st bite this FOXE, then read my ri'mes; Thou guilty art of some of these foule crimes: Which, else, are neyther his, nor thine, but Times. If thou dost like it, well; it will imply Thou lik'st with iudgement, or best company: And hee, that doth not so, doth yet enuie. The auntient formes reduc'd, as in this age The vices, are; and bare-fac'd on the stage: So boyes were taught t' abhorre seene Dronkards rage. T. R.
To my deare friend, Mr. Benia∣min Ionson, vpon his FOXE. IF it might stand with Iustice, to allow The swift conuersion of all follies; now, Such is my Mercy, that I could admit All sorts should equally approue the wit, Of this thy euen worke: whose growing fame Shall raise thee high, and thou it, with thy Name. And did not Manners, and my Loue command Mee to forbeare to make those vnderstand, Whome thou, perhaps, hast in thy wiser doome Long since, firmely resolu'd, shall neuer come To know more then they do; I would haue showne To all the world, the Art, which thou alone Hast taught our tongue, the rules of Time, of Place, And other Rites, deliuer'd, with the grace Of Comick stile, which onely, is farre more, Then any English Stage hath knowne before. But since our subtle Gallants thinke it good To like of nought, that may be vnderstood, Least they should be disprou'd; or haue, at best, Stomacks so raw, that nothing can digest But what's obscene, or barkes: Let vs desire They may continue, simplie, to admire Fine clothes, and strange words; and may liue, in age, To see themselues ill-brought vpon the Stage, And like it. Whilst thy bold, and knowing Muse Contemnes all praise, but such as thou wouldst chuse. F. B.
To my good friend. Mr. Ionson. THE strange new follies of this idle age, In strange new formes, presented on the Stage By thy quick Muse, so pleas'd iudicious eyes; That th' once-admired antient Comoedies Fashions, like clothes growne out of fashion, lay Lock'd vp from vse: vntill thy FOXE birth-day, In an old garbe, shew'd so much art, and wit, As they the Laurell gaue to thee, and it. D. D. To the ingenious Poet. THe FOXE, that eas'd thee of thy modest feares, And earth'd himselfe, aliue, into our eares, Will so, in death, commend his worth, and thee As neyther can, by praises, mended bee: Tis friendly folly, thou maist thanke, and blame, To praise a booke, whose forehed beares thy Name. Then IONSON, onely this (among the rest) I, euer, haue obseru'd, thy last work's best: Pase, gently on; thy worth, yet higher, raise; Till thou write best, as well as the best PLAYES. I. C.
To his deare Friend, Benia∣min Ionson his VOLPONE. COme, yet, more forth, VOLPONE, and thy chase Performe to al length, for thy breath wil serue thee; The Vsurer shal, neuer, weare thy case▪ Men do not hunt to kill, but to preserue thee. Before the bést houndes, thou dost, still, but play; And, for our whelpes, alasse, they yelp in vaine: Thou hast no earth; thou hunt'st the Milke-white way; And, through th'Elisian feilds, dost make thy traine. And as the Symbole of lifes Guard, the HARE, That, sleeping, wakes; and, for her feare, was saf't. So, thou shalt be aduaunc'd, and made a Starre, Pole to all witts, beleeu'd in, for thy craft. In which the Scenes both Marke, and Mystery Is hit, and sounded, to please best, and worst; To all which, since thou mak'st so sweete a cry, Take all thy best fare, and be nothing curst. G. C.
To my worthily-esteemed Mr. Ben: Ionson. VOLPONE now is dead indeed, and lies Exposed to the censure of all eies, And mouth's; Now he hath run his traine, and show'n His subtill body, where he best was knowne; In both Minerua's Cittyes: he doth yeeld, His well-form'd-limbes vpon this open field. VVho, if they now appeare so faire in sight, How did they, when they were endew'd with spright Of Action? Yet in thy praise let this be read, The FOXE will liue, when all his hounds be dead. E. S. To the true Mr. in his Art, B. Ionson. FOrgiue thy friends; they would, but cannot praise, Inough' the wit, art, language of thy PLAYES: Forgiue thy foes; they will not praise thee. Why? Thy Fate hath thought it best, they should enuy. Faith, for thy FOXES sake, forgiue then those Who are nor worthy to be friends, nor foes. Or, for their owne braue sake, let them be still Fooles at thy mercy, and like what they will, I. F.
THE PERSONS OF THE COMOEDYE. VOLPONE, a Magnifico. MOSCA, his Parasite. VOLTORE, an Aduocate. CORBACCIO, an olde Gentleman. CORVINO, a Marchant. AVOCATORI. 4. Ma∣gistrates. NOTARIO, the Register. NANO, a Dwarfe. CASTRONE, an Eunuch. GREGE. POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE, a Knight. PEREGRINE, a Gent-trauailer. BONARIO, a yong Gentleman. FINE MADA. WOVLD-BEE; the Knights wife. CELIA, the Merchants wife. COMMAND ADORI, Officers. MERCATORI. 3. Merchants. ANDROGYNO, a Hermaphrodite. SERVITORE, a seruant. WOMEN. 2. THE ARGVMENT. Volpone, childlesse, rich, faines sick, despaires, Offers his state to hopes of seuerall heyres, Lies languishing; His Parasite receaues Presents of all, assures, deludes: Then weaues Other crosse-plots, which ope' themselues, are told. New tricks for safety, are sought; They thriue: When, bold, Each tempt's th'other againe, and all are sold.
The PROLOGVE. NOw, luck God send vs, and a little wit will serue, to make our PLAY hit; (According to the palates of the season) Here is ri'me, not emptie of reason: This we were bid to credit, from our Poët, Whose true scope, if you would knowe it, In all his Poëmes, still, hath beene this measure, To mixe profit, with your pleasure; And not as some (whose throates their enuie fayling) Crie hoarcely, All he writes, is rayling: And, when his PLAYES come forth, thinke they can flout them, With saying, He was a yeare about them. To these there needes no Lye, but this his creature, Which was, two monthes since, no feature; And, though he dares giue them fiue liues to mend it, 'Tis knowne, fiue weekes fully pen'd it: From his owne hand, without a Co-adiutor, Nouice, Iorney-man, or Tutor. Yet, thus much I can giue you, as a token Of his PLAYES worth, No egges are broken; Nor quaking Custards with feirce teeth affrighted, Wherewith your route are so delighted; Nor hales hee in a Gull, old ends reciting, To stop gappes in his loose writing; With such a deale of monstrous, and forc'd action: As might make Bethlem a faction: Nor made he' his PLAY, for iests, stolne from each Table, But makes iests, to fit his Fable. And, so presents quick Comoedy, refined, As best Criticks haue designed, The Lawes of Time, Place, Persons he obserueth, From no needefull Rule he swerueth. All gall, and coppresse, from his inke, he drayneth, Onelie, a little salt remaineth; Wherewith, hee'll rub your cheekes, till (red with laughter) They shall looke fresh, a weeke after.
THE FOXE. ACT, 1. SCENE. 1. VOLPONE. MOSCA. GOod morning to the Day; and, next, my Gold: Open the shrine, that I may see my Saint. Hayle the worlds soule, and mine. More glad then is The teeming earth, to see the longd-for Sunne Peepe through the hornes of the Caelestiall Ram, Am I, to view thy splendor, darkening his: That lying here, amongst my other hoordes, Shew'st like a flame, by night; or like the Day Strooke out of Chaos, when all darkenes fled Vnto the center. O thou Sonne of Sol, (But brighter then thy father) let me kisse, With adoration, thee, and euery relique Of sacred treasure, in this blessed roome. Well did wise Poets, by thy glorious name, Title that age, which they would haue the best; Thou being the best of things: and far transcending All stile of ioy, in children, parents, friends, Or any other waking dreame on earth. Thy lookes when they to Venus did ascribe, They should haue giu'n her twenty thousand Cupids; Such are thy beauties, and our loues. Deare Saint, Riches, the dombe God, that giu'st all men tongues; That canst doe naught, and yet mak'st men doe all things; The price of soules; euen hell, with thee to boote, Is made worth heauen. Thou art vertue, fame, Honor, and all things else. Who can get thee He shall be noble, valiant, honest, wise, — MOS. And what he will Sir. Riches are in fortune
A greater good, then wisedome is in nature. VOLP. True, my beloued Mosca. Yet, I glory More in the cunning purchasse of my wealth, Then in the glad posession; since I gaine No cowmon way: I vse no trade, no venter; I wound no earth with plow-shares; fat no beasts To feede the Shambles; haue no mills for iron, Oyle, corne, or men, to grinde 'hem into poulder; I blow no subtill glasse; expose no shipps To threatnings of the furrow-faced sea; I turne no moneys, in the publike banke; Nor vsure priuate. MOS. No Sir, nor deuoure Soft prodigalls. You shall ha' some will swallow A melting heire, as glibly, as your Dutch Will pills of butter, and nêre purge for't; Teare forth the fathers of poore families Out of their beds, and coffin them aliue, In some kinde, clasping prison, where their bones May be forth-comming, when the flesh is rotten: But your sweet nature doth abhorre these courses; You loath, the widdowes, or the orphans teares Should washe your pauements; or their pityous cries Ring in your roofes: and beate the ayre, for vengeance. VOLP. Right, Mosca, I do loath it. MOS. And besides, Sir, You are not like a thresher, that doth stand With a huge flaile, watching a heape of corne, And, hungry, dares not taste the smallest graine, But feedes on mallowes, and such bitter herbes; Nor like the merchant, who hath fill'd his vaults With Romagnia, and rich Candian wines, Yet drinks the lees of Lombards vineger: You will not lie in straw, whilst mothes, and wormes Feed on your sumptuous hangings, and soft bedds. You know the vse of riches, and dare giue, now, From that bright heape, to mee, your poore obseruer, Or to your Dwarfe, or your Hermaphrodite,
Your Eunuch, or what other houshold-trifle Your pleasure allowes maint'nance. VOLP. Hold thee, Mosca, Take of my hand; thou strik'st on truth, in all: And they are enuious, terme thee Parasite. Call forth my Dwarfe, my Eunuch, and my Foole, And let 'hem make me sport. What should I do, But cocker vp my Genius, and liue free To all delights, my fortune calls me too? I haue no wife, no parent, childe, allye, To giue my substance too; but whom I make, Must be my heyre: and this makes men obserue me. This drawes newe clients, dayly, to my house, Women, and men, of euery sexe, and age, That bring me presents, send me plate, coyne, iewels, With hope, that when I die, (which they expect Each greedy minute) it shall then returne Ten-fold vpon them; whil'st some, couetous Aboue the rest, seeke to engrosse me, whole, And counter-worke, the one, vnto the other, Contend in gifts, as they would seeme, in loue: All which I suffer, playing with their hopes, And am content to coyne 'hem into profit, To looke vpon their kindnesse, and take more, And looke on that; still, bearing them in hand, Letting the cherry knock against their lips, And, drawe it, by their mouths, and back againe. How now! ACT. 1. SCENE. 2. NANO. ANDROGYNO. CASTRNE. VOLPONE. MOSCA. NOw roome, for fresh Gamsters, who do will you to know, They do bring you neither Play, nor Vniuersity Show; And therefore do intreat you, that whatsoeuer they reherse, May not fare a whit the worse, for the false pase of the verse.
If you wonder at this, you will wonder more, ere we passe, For know, here is inclos'd the Soule of Pithagoras, That Iugler diuine, as hereafter shall follow; Which Soule (fast, and loose, Sir) came first from Apollo, And was breath'd into Aethalides, Mercurius his sonne, Where it had the gift to remember all that euer was done. From thence it fled forth, and made quicke transmigration To goldy-lockt Euphorbus, who was kill'd, in good fashion, At the seege of old Troy, by the Cuckold of Sparta. Hermotimus was next (I finde it, in my Chartâ) To whom it did passe, where no sooner it was missing, But with one Pirrhus, of Delos, it learn'd to go a fishing: And thence, did it enter the Sophist of Greece. From Pithagore, she went into a beautifull peece, Hight Aspasia, the Meretrix; and the next tosse of her Was, againe, of a Whore, she became a Philosopher, Crates the Cynick: (as it selfe doth relte it) Since, Kings, Knights, & Beggars, Knaues, Lords & Fooles gat it, Besides, Oxe, and Asse, Cammel, Mule, Goat, and Brock, In all which it hath spoke, as in the Coblers Cock. But I come not here, to discourse of that matter, Or hs One, Two, or Three, or his great Oath, by Quater, His Musicks, his Trigon, his golden Thigh, Or his telling how Elements shift: but I Would aske, how of late, thou hast suffered translation, And shifted thy coat, in these dayes of Reformation? AND. Like one of the Reformed, a Foole, as you see, Counting all old Doctrine heresie: NAN. But not on thine owne forbid meates hast thou venter'd? AND. On fish, when first, a Carthusian I enter'd. NAN. Why, then thy dogmaticall Silence hath left thee? AND. Of that an obstreperous Lawyer bereft mee. NAN. O wonderfull change! when Sr Lawyer forsooke thee, For Pithagore's sake, what body then tooke thee? AND. A good dull Moyle. NAN. And how? by that meanes, Thou wert brought to allow of the eating of Beanes?
AND. Yes. NAN. But, from the Moyle, into whom did'st thou passe? AND. Into a very strange Beast, by some Writers cal'd an Asse; By others, a precise, pure, illuminate Brother, Of those deuoure flesh, and sometimes one an other: And will drop you forth a libell, or a sanctified lie, Betwixt euery spooneful of a Natiuity Pie. NAN. Now quit thee, for Heauen, of that profane nation; And gently, report thy next transmigration. AND. To the same that I am. NAN. A Creature of delight? And (what is more then a Foole) an Hermaphrodite? Now' pray thee, sweete Soule, in all thy variation, Which Body wouldst thou choose, to take vp thy station? AND. Troth, this I am in, euen here would I tarry. NAN. 'Cause here, the delight of each Sexe thou canst varie? AND. Alas, those pleasures be stale, and forsaken; No, tis your Foole, wherewith I am so taken, The onely one Creature, that I can call blessed: For all other formes I haue prou'd most distressed. NAN. Spoke true, as thou wert in Pithagoras still. This learned opinion we celebrate will, Fellow Eunuch (as behooues vs) with all our wit, and arte, To dignifie that, whereof our selues are so great, and special a part. VOL. Now very, very pretty: Mosca, this Was thy inuention? MOS. If it please my Patron, Not else. VOL. It doth good Mosca. MOS. Then it was Sr. SONG. FOoles, they are the onely Nation Worth mens enuy, or admiration; Free from care, or sorrow-taking, Themselues, and others merry making: All they speake, or do, is sterling. Your Foole, he is your great mans dearling, And your Ladies sport, and pleasure; Tongue, and Bable are his treasure.
His very face begetteth laughter, And he speakes truth, free from slaughter; He's the grace of euery feast, And, sometimes, the cheefest guest: Hath his trencher, and his stoole, When wit shall waite vpon the Foole: O, who would not bee Hee, hee, hee? VOLP. Who's that? away, looke Mosca. MOS. Foole, be gon, 'Tis Signior Ʋoltore, the Aduocate, I know him, by his knock. VOLP. Fetch me my gowne, My furres, and night-caps; say, my couch is changing: And let him intertaine himselfe, a while, Within i' th' gallery. Now, now, my clients Beginne their visitation; Vulture, Kite, Rauen, and gor-Crowe, all my birds of prey, That thinke me turning carcasse, now they come: I am not for 'hem yet. How now? the newes? MOS. A peece of plate, Sir. VOLP. Of what bignesse? MOS. Huge, Massie, and antique, with your name inscrib'd, And armes ingrauen. VOLP. Good, And not a Foxe Stretch'd on the earth, with fine delusiue sleights, Mocking a gaping Crow? ha, Mosca? MOS. Sharpe, Sir. VOLP. Giue me my furres. Why dost thou laugh so, man? MOS. I cannot choose, Sir, when I apprehend What thoughts he has (within) now, as he walks: That this might be the last gift, he should giue; That this would fetch you; if you died to day, And gaue him all, what he should be to morrow; What large returne would come of all his venters; How he should worship'd bee, and reuerenc'd; Ride, with his furres, and foote-cloths; waited on By heards of Fooles, and clients; haue cleare way Made for his moyle, as letter'd as himselfe;
Be cald the great, and learned Aduocate: And then concludes, there's nought impossible. VOLP. Yes, to be learned, Mosca; MOS. O no: rich Implies it. Hood an asse, with reuerend purple, So you can hide his two ambitious eares, And, he shall passe for a cathedrall Doctor. VOLP. My caps, my caps, good Mosca, fetch him in. MOS. Stay, Sir, your ointment for your eyes. VOLP. That's true; Dispatch, dispatch: I long to haue possession Of my newe present. MOS. That, and thousands more, I hope, to see you lord of. VOLP. Thankes, kind Mosca. MOS. And that, when I am lost in blended dust, And hundred such, as I am, in succession — VOLP. Nay, that were too much, Mosca. MOS. You shall liue, Still, to delude these Harpyeis. VOLP. Louing Mosca, 'Tis well, my pillow now, and let him enter. Now, my fain'd Cough, my Pthisick, and my Goute, My Apoplexie, Palsie, and Catarrhe, Helpe, with your forced functions, this my posture, Wherein, this three yeare, I haue milk'd their hopes. He comes, I heare him (vh, vh, vh, vh) ô. ACT. 1. SCENE. 3. MOSCA. VOLTORE. VOLPONE. YOu still are, what you were, Sir. Onely you (Of all the rest) are he, commands his loue: And you do wisely to preserue it, thus, With early visitation, and kinde notes Of your good meaning to him, which, I know, Cannot but come most gratefull. Patron, Sir. Here's Signior Voltore is come— VOLP. What say you? MOS. Sr. Signior Ʋoltore is come, this morning, To visit you. VOLP. I thanke him. MOS. And hath brought A peece of antique plate, bought of St. Marke,
With which he here presents you. VOLP. He is welcome. Pray him, to come more often. MOS. Yes. VOLT. What saies he? MOS. He thankes you, and desires you see him often. VOLP. Mosca. MO. My Patron? VOLP. Bring him neare, where is he? I long to feele his hand. MOS. The plate is here Sr. VOLT. How fare you Sr? VOLP. I thanke you, Signior Voltore. Where is the plate? mine eyes are bad. VOLT. I'm sorry, To see you still thus weake. MOS. That hee is not weaker. VOLP. You are too munificent. VOLT. No Sr. would to heauen, I could as well giue health to you, as that plate. VOLP. You giue Sr. what you can. I thanke you. Your loue Hath tast in this, and shall not be vnanswer'd. I pray you see me often. VOLT. Yes, I shall Sr. VOLP. Be not far from mee. MOS. Do you obserue that Sr? VOLP. Hearken vnto mee, still. It will concerne you. MOS. You are a happy man Sr, know your good. VOLP. I cannot now last long. MOS. You are his heyre Sr. VOLT. Am I? VOLP. I feele mee going, (vh, vh, vh, vh.) I am sayling to my port, (vh vh, vh, vh?) And I am glad, I am so neere my hauen. MOS. Alas, kinde gentleman, well, we must all go. VOLT. But, Mosca. MOS. Age will conquer. VOLT. 'Pray thee heare mee. Am I inscrib'd his heire, for certaine? MOS. Are you? I do beseech you Sr. you will vouchsafe To write me, i'your family. All my hopes, Depend vpon your worship; I am lost, Except the rising Sunne do shine on me. VOLT. It shall both shine, and warme thee, Mosca. MOS. Sr. I am a man, that haue not done your loue All the worst offices, here I weare your keys, See all your coffers, and your caskets lockt, Keepe the poore inuentorie of your iewels, Your plate, and moneyes, am your Steward Sr. Husband your goods here. VOLT. But am I sole heyre?
His body is beholding to such a bad face. VOLP. Who's there? my couch, Away, looke Nano, see: Giue mee my cappes, first— go, enquire. Now, Cupid Send it be Mosca, and with faire returne. NAN. It is the beauteous Madam— VOLP. Would-bee? is it? NAN. The same. VOLP. Now, torment on mee; squire her in: For she will enter, or dwell here for euer. Nay, quickly, that my fit were past I feare A second hell too, that my loathing this Will quite expell my appetite to the other: Would she were takig, now, her tedious leaue. Lord, how it threates mee, what I am to suffer! ACT. 3. SCENE. 4. LADY. VOLPONE. NANO. WOMEN. 2. I thanke you, good Sir. 'Pray you signifie Vnto your Patron, I am here. This band Shewes not my neck inough (I trouble you, Sir, Let me request you▪ bid one of my women Come hether to mee) In good faith, I, am drest Most fauorably, to day, it is no matter, 'Tis well inough. Looke, see, these petulant things, How they haue done this! VOLP. I do feele the Feuer Entring, in at mine eares; O, for a charme, To fright it hence. LAD. Come nearer: Is this curle In his right place? or this? why is this higher Then all the rest? you ha'not wash'd your eies, yet? Or do they not stand euen i'your head? Where's your fellow? call her. NAN. Now, St Marke Deliuer vs: anone, shee'll beate her women, Because her nose is red. LAD. I pray you, view This tire, forsooth; are all things apt, or no? WOM. One haire a little, here, sticks out, forsooth.
LAD. Do's't so forsooth? and where was your deare sight When it did so, forsooth? what now? bird-eyd? And you too? 'pray you both approach, and mend it. Now (by that light) I muse, yo' are not asham'd, I, that haue preach'd these things, so oft, vnto you, Read you the principles, agu'd all the grounds, Disputed euey fitnesse, euery grace, Call'd you to councell of so frequent dressings— (NAN. More carefully, then of your fame, or honor) LAD. Made you acquainted, what an ample dowry The knowledge of these things would be vnto you, Able, alone, to get you Noble husbands At your returne: And you, thus, to neglect it? Besides, you seeing what a curious Nation Th' Italians are, what will they say of mee? The English Lady cannot dresse her selfe; Here's a fine imputation, to our Country: Well, goe your waies, and stay, i'the next roome. This fucus was to course too, it's no matter. Good-Sir, you'll giue 'hem entertaynement? VOLP. The storme comes toward me. LAD. How do's my Volp? VOLP. Troubled with noyse, I cannot sleepe; I dreamt' That a strange Fury entred, now, my house, And, with the dreadfull tempest of her breath, Did cleaue my roofe asunder. LAD. Beleeue me, and I Had the most fearefull dreame, could I remember't— VOLP. Out on my fate; I ha'giu'n her the occasion How to torment mee: shee will tell me hers. LAD. Me thought, the golden Mediocrity Polite, and delicate— VOLP. O, if you do loue mee, No more; I sweate, and suffer, at the mention Of any dreame: feele, how I tremble yet. LAD. Alasse, good soule! the Passion of the heart. Seede-pearle were good now, boild with sirrope of Apples, Tincture of Gold, and Currall, Citron-pills, Your Elicampane roote, Mirobalanes—
VOLP. Ay me, I haue tâne a grasse-hopper by the wing. LAD. Burnt silke, and Amber, you haue Muscadell Good i'the house— VOLP. You will not drinke, and part? LAD. No, feare not that. I doubt, wee shall not get Some English saffron (halfe a dram would serue) Your sixteene Cloues, a little Muske, dri'd Mintes, Buglosse, and barley-meale— VOLP. Shee's in againe, Before I fayn'd diseases, now I haue one. LAD. And these appli'd, with a right scarlet-cloth— VOLP. Another floud of words! a very torrent! LAD. Shall I, Sir, make you a Poultise? VOLP. No, no, no; I'am very well: you neede prescribe no more. LAD. I haue, a little, studied Physick; but, now, I' am all for Musique: saue, i'the forenoones, An houre, or two, for Paynting. I would haue A Lady, indeed, t'haue all, Letters, and Artes, Be able to discourse, to write, to paynt, But principall (as Plato holds) your Musique (And, so do's wise Pithagoras, I take it) Is your true rapture; when there is concent In face, in voice, and clothes: and is, indeed, Our sexes chiefest ornament. VOLP. The Poët, As old in time, as Plato, and as knowing, Say's that your highest female grace is Silence. LAD. Which o'your Poëts? Petrarch? or Tasso? 'or Dante? Guerrini? Ariosto? Aretine? Cieco di Hadria? I haue read them all. VOLP. Is euery thing a cause, to my distruction? LAD. I thinke, I ha' two or three of'hem, about mee. VOLP. The sunne, the sea will sooner, both, stand still, Then her aeternall tongue; nothing can scape it. LAD. Here's Pastor Fidc- VOLP. Professe obstinate silence, That's, now, my safest. LAD. All our English Writers, I meane such, as are happy in th' Italian, Will deigne to steale out of this Author, mainely;
Almost as much, as from Montagnié; He has so moderne, and facile a veine, Fitting the time, and catching the Court-eare. Your Ptrrch is more passionate, yet he, In dyes of Sotti, trusted 'hem, with much: D is hard, and fewe can vnderstand him. But, fr a desperate wit, there's Aeti; Oly, his piurs are a little obscene — You marke mee not? VOLP. Alasse▪ my mind's perturb'd. LAD. Why in such cases we must cure our selues, Make vse of our Philsophie— VOLP. O'ay mee. LAD. And, as we finde our passions do rebell, Encounter 'hem with reason; or diuert 'hem, By guing scope vnto some other humour Of lesser danger: As, in politique bodyes, There's nothing, more▪ doth ouerwhelme the iudgment, And clouds the vnderstanding, then too much Setling, and fixing, and (as 't were) subsiding Vpon one obiect. For the incorporating Of these same outward things, into that part, Which we call mentall, leaues some certaine faces, That stop the organ, and as Plato sayes, Assassinates our knowledge. VOLP. Now, the spirit Of patience helpe me. LAD. Come, in faith, I must Visit you more, a dayes; and make you well: Laugh, and be lusty. VOLP. My good gell saue mee. LAD. There was but one sole man, in all the world, With whom I ere could sympathize; and hee. Would lie you often three, foure houres together, To heare me speake: and be (sometime) so rap't, As he would answer me, quite from the purpose, Like you, and you are like him, iust. Ile discourse (And 't be but only, Sir, to bring you asleepe) How we did spend our time, and loues, together, For some sixe yeares. VOLP. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.
LAD. For we were Coaetanei, and brought vp— VOLP. Some power▪ some fate, some fortune rescue mee. ACT. 3. SCENE. 5. MOSCA. LADY. VOLPONE. GOD saue you, Madam. LAD. Good Sir. VOLP. Mosc? welcome, Welcome to my redemption. MOS. Why, Sir? VOLP. Oh, Rid me of this my torture, quickly there; My Mdam, with the euerlasting voyce: The Bells, in time of pestilence, nêre made Like noyse, or were in that perpetuall motion; The Cock-pit comes not neare it. All my house, But now, steam'd like a bath, with her thicke breath. A Lawyer could not haue beene heard; nor scarse Another Woman such a hayle of words She has let fall. For hells sake, ridd her hence. MOS. Has she presented? VOLP. O, I do not care, I'le take her absence, vpon any price, With any losse. MOS. Madam. LAD. I ha' brought your Pa∣tron A toy, a cap here, of mine owne worke— MOS. Tis well, I had forgot to tell you, I saw your Knight, Where you'ld little thinke it— LAD. Where? MOS. Marry, Where yet, if you make hast you may apprehend him, Rowing vpon the water in a gondole, With the most cunning Curtizan, of Venice. LAD. Is 't true? MOS. Purse 'hem, and beleeue your eyes: Leaue mee, to make your gift. I knew, 'twould take. For lightly, they, that vse themselues most licence, Are still mst iealous. VOLP. Mosca, hearty thanks, For thy quick fiction, and deliuery of mee. Now, to my hopes, what saist thou? LAD. But do you heare, Sir? VOLP. Againe; I feare a paroxisme. LAD. Which way
Row'd they together? MOS. Toward the Rialto. LAD. I pray you, lend me your Dwarfe. MOS. I pray you, take him— Your hopes, Sir, are like happy blossomes, fayre, And promise timely fruict, if you will stay But the maturing; keepe you, at your couch, Corbacci will arriue straight, with the Will: When he is gone, Ile tell you more. VOLP. My bloud, My spirits are return'd; I am aliue: And like your wanton gam'ster, at Primero, Whose thought had whisper'd to him not go lesse, Me thinkes I lie, and drawe—for an encounter. ACT. 3. SCENE. 6. MOSCA. BONARIO. SIr, here conceald, you may here all. But 'pray you Haue patience, Sir; the same's your father, knocks: I am compeld, to leaue you. BON. Do so. Yet, Cannot my thought imagine this a truth. ACT. 3. SCENE. 7. MOSCO. CORVINO. CELIA. BONARIO. VOLPONE. DEath on me! you are come to soone, what meant you? Did not I say, I would send? CORV. Yes, but I feard You might forget it, and then they preuent vs. MOS. Preuent? did ere man hast so, for his hornes? A Courtier would not ply it so, for a place. Well, now there's no helping it, stay here; Ile presently returne. CORV. Where are you, Celia? You know not, wherefore I haue brought you hether? CEL. Not well, except you told mee. CORV. Now, I will:
Hearke hether. MOS. Sir, your father hath sent word, It will be halfe an houre, ere he come; And therefore, if you please to walke, the while, Into that gallery—at the vpper end, There are some bookes, to entertaine the time: And Ile take care, no man shall come vnto you, Sir. BON. Yes, I will stay there; I do doubt this fellow. MOS. There, he is faire inough; he can heare nothing: And, for his father, I can keepe him of. CORV. Nay, now, there is no starting back; and therefore, Resolue vpon it: I haue so decree'd. It must be done. Nor, would I moue't, afore, Because I would auoyd all shifts, and tricks, That might deny mee. CEL. Sir, let mee beseech you, Affect not these strange trialls; if you doubt My chastity, why lock me vp, for euer: Make me the heyre of darkenesse. Let me liue, Where I may please your feares, if not your trust. CORV. Beleeue it, I haue no such humor, I. All that I speake, I meane; yet I am not mad: Not horne-mad, see you? Go too, shew your selfe Obedient, and a wife. CEL. O heauen! CORV. I say it, Do so. CEL. Was this the traine? CORV. I'haue told you reasons; What the Phisitians haue set downe; how much, It may concerne mee; what my ingagements are; My meanes; and the necessity of those meanes, For my recouery: wherefore, if you bee Loyall, and mine, be wonne respect my venture. CEL. Before your honour? CORV. Honour? tut, a breath; There's no such thing, in nature: a mere terme Inuented to awe fooles. What is my gold The worse, for touching? clothes, for being look'd on? Why, this 's no more. An old, decrepite wretch, That ha's no sense, no sinewe; takes his meate With others fingers; onely knowes to gape, When you do scald his gummes; a voice; a shadow;
And, what can this man hurt you? CEL. Lord! what spirit Is this hath entred him? CORV. And for your fame, That's such a ligg; as if I would go tell it, Crie it, on the Piazz! who shall know it? But hee, that cannot speake it; and this fellow, Whose lippes are i' my pocket: saue your selfe, If you'll proclaime 't, you may. I know no other, Should come to knowe it. CEL. Are heauen, and Saints then nothing? Will they be blind, or stupide? CORV. How? CEL. Good Sir, Be iealous stil, aemulate them; and thinke What hate they burne with, toward euery sinne. CORV. I graunt you; if I thought it were a sinne, I would not vrge you. Should I offer this To some young Frenchman, or hot Tuscane bloud, That had read Artine, conn'd all his printes, Knew euery quirke within lusts Laborinth, And were profest Critique, in lechery; And I would looke vpon him, and applaud him, This were a sinne: but here, tis contrary, A pious worke, mere charity, for Physick, And honest politie, to assure mine owne. CEL. O heauen, canst thou suffer such a change? VOLP. Thou art mine honor, Mosca and my pride, My ioy, my tickling my delight: go, bring 'hem. MOS. Please you drawe neare, Sir. CORV. Come on, what— You will not be rebellious? By that light— MOS. Sir, Signior Couino, here, is come to see you, VOLP. Oh. MOS. And, hearing of the consultation had, So lately, for your health, is come to offer, Or rather, Sir, to prostitute— CORV. Thankes, sweete Mosca, MOS. Freely, vna—sk'd, or vn—intreated— COR. Well. MOS. (As the true, feruent instance of his loue) His owne most faire, and proper wife; the beauty, Onely of price, in Veni— CORV. 'Tis well vrg'd. MOS. To bee your comfortresse, and to preserue you.
VOLP. Alasse, I' am past already. 'Pray you, thanke 'him, For his good care, and promptnesse. But for that, Tis a vaine labour, eene to fight, 'gainst heauen; Applying fire to a stone: (uh, uh, uh, uh,) Making a dead leafe grow againe. I take His wishes gently, though; and, you may tell him, What I haue done for him: Mary, my state is hopesse. Will him, to pray for mee; and t'vse his fortune, With reuerence, when he comes to it. MOS. Do you heare, Sir? Go to him, with your wife. CORV. Heart of my father! Wilt thou persist thus? Come. I pray thee, come. Thou seest' tis nothing: Celia. By this hand, I shall grow violent. Come, do't, I say. CEL. Sir, kill mee, rather: I will take downe poyson, Eate burning coales, do any thing— CORV. Be damn'd. (Heart) I will drag thee hence, home, by the haire; Cry thee a strumpet, through the streetes; rip vp Thy mouth, vnto thine eares; and slit thy nose, Like a aw rotchet—Do not tempt mee, come, Yeld, I am loth—(Death) I will buy some slaue, Whom I will kill, and binde thee to him, aliue; And, at my windore, hang you forth: deuising Some monstrous crime, which I, in CAPITAL letters, Will eate into thy flesh, with Aqua-fortis, And burning cor'siues, on this stubborne brest. Now, by the bloud, thou hast incens'd, Ile doo't. CEL. Sir, what you please, you may, I am your Martyr. CORV. Bee not thus obstinate, I ha' not deseru'd it: Thinke, who it is, intreats you. 'Pray thee, sweete; (Good' faith) thou shalt haue iewells, gownes, attires, What thou' wilt thinke, and aske—Do, but, goe kisse him. Or touch him, but. For my sake. At my sute. This once. No? Not? I shall remember this. Will you disgrace mee, thus? Do' you thirst my' vndoing? MOS. Nay, gentle Lady, bee aduis'd. CORV. No, no. She has watch'd her time. God's precious—this is skiruy;
'Tis very skiruie: And you are— MOS. Nay, good, Sir. CORV. An errant Locust, by heauen, a Locust. Whore, Crocodile, that hast thy teares prepar'd, Expecting how thou'lt bid hem flow. MOS. Nay, 'Pray you, Sir, Shee will consider. CEL. Would my life would serue To satisfie— CORV. (S' death) if she would but speake to him, And saue my reputation, 'twere somewhat; But, spightfully to affect my vtter ruine: MOS. I, now you haue put your fortune, in her hands. Why i' faith, it is her modesty, I must quit her; If you were absent, shee would be more comming; I know it: and dare vndertake for her. What woman can, before her husband? 'pray you, Let vs departe, and leaue her, here. CORV. Sweete Celia, Thou mayst redeeme all, yet; Ile say no more: If not, esteeme your selfe as lost,—Nay, stay there. CEL. O God, and his good Angells! whether, whether Is shame fled humane brests? that, with such ease, Men dare put of your honors, and their owne? Is that, which euer was a cause of life, Now plac'd beneath the basest circumstance? And modesty an exile made, for money? VOL. I, in Coruine, and such earth-fed mindes, That neuer tasted the true heau'n of loue. Assure thee, Celia, he that would sell thee, Onely for hope of gaine, and that vncertaine, He would haue sold his part of Paradise For ready money, had he met a Cope-man. Why art thou maz'd, to see mee thus reuiu'd? Rather, applaud thy beauties miracle; 'Tis thy great worke: that hath, not now alone, But sundry times, 'rays'd mee, in seuerall shapes, And, but this morning, like a Mountebanke; To see thee at thy windore. I, before I would haue left my practise, for thy loue, In varying figures, I would haue contended
With the blew Proteus, or the horned Floud. Now, art thou welcome. CEL. Sir. VOLP. Nay, flie mee not; Nor, let thy false imagination That I was bedrid, make thee thinke, I am so: Thou shalt not find it. I am, now, as fresh, As hot, as high, and, in as Iouiall plight, As when (in that so celebrated Scene, At recitation of our Comoedie, For entertayment of the great Valoys) I acted yong Antinoüs; and a racted The eyes, and eares of all the Ladies, present, T' admire each gracefull gesture, note, and footing. SONG. COme, my Celia, let vs proue, While wee can, the sports of loue; Time will not be ours, for euer, He, at length, our good will seuer; Spend not then his guiftes, in vaine. Sunnes, that set, may rise againe: But if, once, we loose this light, 'Tis with vs perpetuall night. Why should wee deferre our ioyes? Fame, and rumor are but toyes. Cannot wee delude the eyes Of a few poore houshold-spies? Or his easier eares beguile, Thus remooued, by our wile? Tis no sinne, loues fruicts to steale; But the sweete thefts to reueale: To be taken, to be seene, These haue crimes accounted beene. CEL. Some serene blast me, or dire lightning strike
This my offending face. VOLP. Why droopes my Celia? Thou hast, in place of a base husband, found A worthy louer: vse thy fortune well, With secrecy, and pleasure. See, behold, What thou art Queene of; not in expectation, As I feede others: but possess'd, and crown'd. See, here, a rope of pearle; and each, more orient Then that the braue Aegiptian Queene carrous'd: Dissolue, and drinke 'hem. See, a Carbuncle, May put out both the eyes of our St Marke; A Diamant, would haue bought Lollia Paulina, When she came in, like star-light, hid with iewells, That were the spoyles of Prouinces; take these, And weare, and loose 'hem: Yet, remaines an Eare-ring To purchase them againe, and this whole State. A Gem, but worth a priuate patrimony, Is nothing: we will eate such at a meale. The heads of parrots, tongues of nightingalles, The braynes of peacocks, and of estriches Shall be our foode: and, could we get the phoenix, (Though Nature lost her kind) she were our dish. CEL. Good Sir, these things might moue a minde affected With such delights; but I, whose innocence Is all I can thinke wealthy, or worth th'enioying, And, which once lost, I haue nought to loose beyond it, Cannot be taken with these sensuall baytes: If you haue conscience— VOLP. 'Tis the Beggers vertue, If thou hast wisdome, heare me Celia. Thy bathes shall be the iuyce of Iuly-flowers, Spirit of roses, and of violets, The milke of vnicornes, and panthers breath Gather'd in bagges, and mixt with Cretan wines. Our drinke shal be prepared gold, and amber; Which we will take, vntill my roofe whirle round With the vertigo: and my Dwarfe shall dance, My Eunuch sing, my Foole make vp the antique.
Whil'st, we, in changed shapes, act Ouids tales, Thou, like Europa now, and I like Ioue, Then I like Mars, and thou like Erycine, So, of the rest, till we haue quite run through And weary'd all the fables of the Gods. Then will I haue thee, in more moderne formes, Attired like some sprightly Dame of France, Braue Tuscan Lady, or proud Spanish Beautie; Sometimes, vnto the Persian Sophies Wife; Or the grand-Signiors Mistresse; and, for change, To one of our most arte-full Curtezans, Or some quick Negro, or cold Russian; And I will meete thee, in as many shapes: Where we may, so, trans-fuse our wandring soules, Out at our lippes, and score vp summes of pleasures, That the curious shall not know, How to tell them, as they flow; And the enuious, when they find What there number is, be pind. CEL. If you haue eares, that will be pierc'd— or eyes, That can be open'd— a heart, may be touch'd— Or any part, that yet sounds man, about you— If you haue touch of holy Saints—or Heauen— Do mee the grace, to let me scape—if not, Be bountifull, and kill mee—you do knowe, I am a creature, hether ill betrayd, By one, whose shame I would forget it were— If you will daigne mee neither of these graces, Yet feede your wrath, Sir, rather then your lust— (It is a vice, comes nearer manlinesse-) And punish that vnhappy crime of nature, Which you miscall my beauty—Flea my face, Or poison it, with oyntments, for seducing Your bloud to this rebellion —Rub these hands, With what may cause an eating leprosie,
E'ene to my bones, and marrow— Any thing, That may dis-fauour mee, saue in my honour— And I will kneele to you, 'pray for you, pay downe A thousand howrely vowes, Sir, for your health— Report, and thinke you vertuous— VOLP. Thinke me cold, Frosen, and impotent, and so report me? That I had Nestor's hernia, thou wouldst thinke. I do degenerate, and abuse my Nation, To play with oportunity, thus long: I should haue done the act, and then haue parlee'd. Yeeld, or Ile force thee. CEL. O, iust God. VOLP. In vaine- BON. Forbeare, foule rauisher, libidinous swine, Free the forc'd lady, or thou dy'st, Impostor. But that I am loath to snatch thy punishment Out of the hand of Iustice, thou shouldst, yet, Be made the timely sacrifice of vengeance, Before this Altar, and this drosse, thy Idoll. Lady, lets quit the place, it is the den Of villany; feare nought you haue a guard: And he, ere long, shall meete his iust reward. VOLP. Fall on mee, roofe, and bury mee in ruine, Become my graue, that wert my shelter. O, I am vn-masqu'd, vn-spirited, vn-done, Betray'd to beggary, to infamy— ACT. 3, SCENE. 8. MOSCA, VOLPONE. WHere shall I runne, most wretched shame of men, To beate out my vn-luckie braines? VOLP. Here, here. What? dost thou bleede? MOS. O, that his well-driu'n sword Had beene so curteous, to haue cleft me downe, Vnto the nauill; êre I liu'd to see
My life, my hopes, my spirits, my Patron, all Thus desperately engaged, by my error. VOLP. Woe, on thy fortune. MOS. And my follies, Sir. VOLP. Thou hast made mee miserable. MOS. And my selfe, Sir. Who would haue thought, he would haue harken'd, so? VOLP. What shall wee doe? MOS. I know not, if my heart Could expiate the mischance, Il'd pluck it out. Will you be pleas'd to hang mee? or cut my throate? And ile requite you, Sir. Let's die like Romanes, Since wee haue liu'd, like Grecians. VOLP. Hearke, who's there? I heare some footing, Officers, the Saffi, Come to apprehend vs! I do feele the brand Hissing, already, at my fore-head: now, Mine eares are boring. MOS. To your couch, Sir, you Make that place good, how euer. Guilty men Suspect, what they deserue still. Signior Corbaccio! ACT. 3. SCENE. 9. CORBACCIO. MOSCA. VOLTORE. VOLPONE. VVHy! how now? Mosca! MOS. O, vndone, amaz'd, Sir. Your sonne (I know not, by what accident) Acquainted with your purpose, to my Patron, Touching your Will, and making him your heire; Entred our house with violence, his sword drawne, Sought for you, call'd you wretch, vnnaturall, Vow'd he would kill you. CORB. Mee? MOS. Yes, and my Patron. CORB. This act, shall disinherit him indeed: Here is the Will. MOS. 'Tis well, Sir. CORB. Right, and well. Be you as carefull now, for me. MOS. My life, Sir, Is not more tenderd, I am onely yours.
CORB. How do's he? will hee die shortly, think'st thou? MOS. I feare He'll out-last May. CORB. To day? MOS. No, last-out May, Sir, CORB. Couldst thou not gi' him a dram? MOS. O by no meanes, Sir. CORB. Nay, Ile not bid you. VOLT. This 's a knaue, I see. MOS. How, Signior Ʋoltore! did he heare mee? VOLT. Parasite. MOS. Who's that? O, Sir, most timely welcome- VOLT. Scarse, To the discouery of your tricks, I feare. You are his, onely? and mine, also? are you not? MOS. Who? I, Sir? VOLT. You, Sir. What deuise is this About a Will? MOS. A plot for you, Sir. VOLT. Come, Put not your foyst's vpon me, I shall sent 'hem. MOS. Did you not heare it? VOLT. Yes, I heare, Corbacci Hath made your Patron, there, his heire. MOS. Tis true, By my deuise, drawne to it by my plot, With hope— VOLT. Your Patron should reciprocate? And, you haue promis'd? MOS. For your good, I did, Sir. Nay more, I told his sonne, brought, hid him here, Where he might heare his father passe the deed; Beeing perswaded to it, by this thought, Sir, That the vnnaturallnesse, first, of the act, And then, his fathers oft disclayming in him, Which I did meane t' helpe on, would sure enrage him To do some violence vpon his parent, On which the Law should take sufficient hold, And you be stated in a double hope: Truth be my comfort, and my conscience, My onely ayme was, to dig you a fortune Out of these two, old, rotten Sepulchers— VOLT. I cry thee mercy Mosca. MOS. Worth your patience, And your grat merit, Sir. And, see the change! VOLT. Why? what successe? MOS. Most happlesse! you must helpe, Sir. Whilst wee expected th' old Rauen, in comes Coruino's wife, sent hether, by her husband—
VOLT. What, with a present? MOS. No, Sir, on visitation; (Ile tell you how, anone) and, staying long, The youth, hee growes impatient, rushes forth, Seizeth the lady, wound's mee, makes her sweare (Or he would murder her, that was his vow) T' affirme my Patron would haue done her rape: Which how vnlike it is, you see! and, hence, With that pretext, hee's gone, t'accuse his father; Defame my Patron; defeate you— VOLT. Where's her husband? Let him bee sent for, streight. MOS. Sir, Ile go fetch him. VOLT. Bring him, to the Scrutinee. MOS. Sir, I will. VOLT. This must be stopt. MOS. O, you do nobly, Sir. Alasse, twas labor'd all, Sir, for your good; Nor was there want of councell, in the plot: But fortune can, at any time, ore throw The proiects of a hundred learned Clearkes, Sir. CORB. What's that? VOLTO, Wilt please you, Sir, to go along? MOS. Patron, go in, and pray for our successe. VOLP. Need makes deuotion: Heauen your labor blesse. ACT. 4. SCENE. 1. POLITIQVE. PEREGRINE. I Told you, Sir, it was a plot: you see What obseruation is. You mention'd mee, For some instructions: I will tell you, Sir, (Since we are met, here, in this height of Venice) Some few perticulars, I haue set downe, Onely, for this meridian, fit to be knowne Of your crude Trauailer, and they are these. I will not touch▪ Sir, at your phrase, or clothes, For they are old. PER. Sir, I haue better. POL. Pardon I meant, as they are Theames. PER. O, Sir, proceed: Ile slander you no more of wit, good Sir. POL. First, for your garbe, it must be graue, and serious,
Vry rescru'd, and lock't; not tell a secret, On any terme, not to your father; scarse A fable, but with with caution; make sure choise Both of yor company, and discourse; beware, You neuer speake a truth— PER. How? POL. Not to stran∣gers, For those be they, you must conuerse with, most; Others I would not know, Sir, but, at distance, So as I still might be a sauer, in 'hem: You shall haue tricks, else, past vpon you, hourely. And then, for your Religion, professe none; But wonder, at the diuersity of all; And, for your part, protest, were there no other But simply the Lawes, o'th' Land, you could content you: Nic: Machiauell, and Monsieur Bodine, both, Were of this minde. Then, must you learne the vse, And handling of your siluer forke, at meales; The mettall of your glasse— These are maine matters, With your Italian, and to know the hower, When you must eat your melons, and your figges. PER. Is that a point of State, too? POL. Here it is, For your Venetian, if hee see a man Preposterous, in the least, he has him straight; Hee has: hee strippes him. Ile acqaint you, Sr, I now haue liu'd here ('Tis some fourteene monthes) Within the first weeke, of my landing here, All tooke me for a Citizen of Venice: I knew the formes, so well— PER. And nothing else. POL. I had read Contarene, tooke mee a house, Dealt with my Iewes, to furnish it with moueables— Well, if I could but finde one man-one man, To mine owne heart, whome I durst trust— I would— PER. What? what, Sir? POL. Make him rich; make him a fortune: He should not thinke, againe. I would command it. PER. As how? POL. With certaine proiects, that I haue: Which, I may not discouer. PER. If I had
But one to wager with, I would lay odds, now, Hee tells me, instantly. POL. One is, (and that I care not greatly, who knowes) to serue the State Of Venice, with red herrings, for three yeares, And at a certaine rate, from Roterdam, Where I haue correspendence. There's a letter, Sent me from one o'th' States, and to that purpose; He cannot write his name, but that's his marke. PER. He is a Chaundler? POL. No, a Cheesemonger. There are some other two, with whome I treate About the same negotiation; And—I wil vndertake it: For, tis thus, Ile do't with ease, I' haue cast it all. Your hoigh Carries but three men in her, and a boy; And she shall make me three returnes, a yeare: So, if there come but one of three, I saue, If two, I can defalke. But, this is now, If my mayne proiect faile. PER Then, you haue others? POL. I should be loath to draw the subtill ayre Of such a place, without my thousand aymes. Ile not dissemble, Sir, where ere I come, I loue to be consideratiue; and, 'tis true, I haue, at my free houres, thought vpon Some certaine Goods, vnto the State of Venice, Which I do call my Cautions: and, Sir, which I meane (in hope of pension) to propound To the great Councell, then vnto the Forty, So to the Ten. My meanes are made already— PER. By whome? POL. Sir, one, that though his place b'obscure, Yet, he can sway, and they will heare him. H'is A Commandadore. PER. What, a common sergeant? POL. Sir, such, as they are, put it in their mouthes, What they should say, sometimes: as well as greater. I thinke I haue my notes, to shew you— PER. Good, Sir. POL. But, you shall sweare vnto mee, on your gentry,
Not to anticipate— PER. I, Sir? POL. Nor reueale A circumstance — My paper is not with mee. PER. O, but, you can remember, Sir. POL. My first is Concerning Tinder-boxes. You must know, No family is, here, without it's boxe; Now Sir, it being so portable a thing, Put case, that you, or I were ill affected Vnto the State: Sir, with it, in our pockets, Might not I go into the Arsenale? Or you? come out againe? and none the wiser? POL. Except your selfe, Sir. POL. Go too, then. I, therefore, Aduertise to the State, how fit it were, That none, but such as were knowne Patriots, Sound louers of their country, should be sufferd T'enioy them in their houses: And, euen those, Seald, at some office, and, at such a bignesse, As might not lurke in pockets. PER. Admirable! POL. My next is, how t'enquire, and be resolu'd, By present demonstration, whether a Ship, Newly arriued from Sorìa, or from Any suspected part of all the Leuant, Be guilty of the Plague: And, where they vse To lie out forty, fifty dayes, sometimes, About the Lazaretto, for their triall; Ile saue that charge, and losse vnto the merchant, And, in an houre, cleare the doubt. PER. Indeede, Sir? POL. Or — I will loose my labour. PBR. 'My faith, that's much. POL. Nay, Sir, conceiue me. 'Twill cost mee, in onions, Some thirty Liu'res— PER. Which is one pound sterling. POL. Beside my water-workes: For this I do, Sir. First, I bring in your ship, 'twixt two brickwalles; (But those the State shall venter) on the one I straine me a fayre tarre-paulin; and, in that, I stick my onions, cut in halfes: the other Is full of loope holes, out at which, I thrust
The noses of my bellowes; and, those bellowes I keepe, with water-workes, in perpetuall motion, (Which is the easi'st matter of a hundred.) Now, Sir, your onion, which doth naturally Attract th' infection, and your bellowes, blowing The aire vpon him, will shew (instantly) By his chang'd colour, if there be contagion; Or else, remaine as faire, as at the first: Now 'tis knowne, tis nothing. PER. You are light, Sir. POL. I would, I had my note. PER. 'Faith, so would I: But, you ha' done well, for once, Sir. POL. Were I false, Or would be made so, I could shew you reasons, How I could sell this State, now, to the Turke; Spight of their Galleys, or their— PER. Pray you, Sir Poll. POL. I haue 'hem not, about mee. PER. That I fear'd. They'are there, Sir? POL. No. This is my Diary, Wherein I note my actions of the day. PER. 'Pray you, let's see, Sir. What is here? Notandum, A Rat had gnawne my spur-lethers; notwithstanding, I put on new, and did go forth: but, first, I threw three beanes ouer the threshold. Item, I went, and bought two tooth-pickes, whereof one I burst, immediatly, in a discourse With a dutch Merchant, 'bout Ragion del stato. From him, I went, and payd a moccinigo, For peecing my silke stockings; by the way, I cheapend sprats: and at St Markes, I vrin'd. 'Faith, these are politique notes! POL. Sir, I do slippe No action of my life, thus, but I quote it. PER. Beleeue me, it is wise! POL. Nay, Sir, read forth. ACT. 4. SCENE. 2. LADY. NANO. WOMEN. POLITIQVE. PEREGRINE. VVHere should this loose. Knight be, trow? sure h'is hous'd. NAN. Why, then he's fast. LA. I, he plaies both, with me:
I pray you, stay. This heate will do more harme To my complexion, then his heart is worth; (I do not care to hinder, but to take him) How it comes of! WOM. My maister's, yonder. LAD. Where? WOM. With a yong Gentleman. LAD. That same's the party, In mans apparell. 'Pray you, Sir, iog my Knight: I will be tender to his reputation, How euer he demerit. POL. My Lady! PER. Where? POL 'Tis shee indeed, Sir, you shall know her. She is, Were she not mine, a Lady of that merite, For fashion, and behauiour; and, for beauty I dust compare— PER. It seemes, you are not iealous, That dare commend her. POL. Nay, and for discourse— PER. Beeing your wife, shee cannot misse that. POL. Ma∣dame, Here is a Gentleman, 'pray you, vse him, fayrely, He seemes a youth, but he is- LAD. None? POL. Yes, one Has put his face, as soone, into the world— LAD. You meane, as early? but to day? POL. How's this? LAD. Why in this habit, Sir, you apprehend mee. Well Mr. Would-bee, this doth not become you; I had thought, the odour, ir, of your good name, Had beene more precious to you; that you would not Haue done this dire massacre, on your honour; One of your grauitie, and ranke, besides: But, Knights, I see, care little for the oath They make to Ladies; chiefely, thir owne Ladies. POL. Now by my Spurres (the Symbole of my Knight-hood) (PER. Lord! how his brayne is humbled, for an oath) POL. I reach you not. LAD. Right. Sir, your politie May beare it through, thus. Sir, a word with you. I would be loath, to contest, publikely, With any Gentlewóman; or to seeme Froward, or violent (as the Courtier sayes) It comes to neare rusticity, in a Lady, Which I would shun, by all meanes: and, how-euer
I may deserue from Mr Would-bee, yet, T'haue one fayre Gentlewóman, thus, be made Th'vnkind instrument, to wrong another, And one she knowes not; I, and to perseuer: In my pore idgement, is not warranted From being a soloecisme in our sexe, If not in manners. PER. How is this! POL. Sweete Ma∣dame, Come nearer to your ayme. LAD. Mary, and will, Sir. Since you prouoke me, with your impudence, And laughter of your light land-Syren, here, Your Sporus, your Hermaphrodite— PER. What's here? Poëtique fury, and Historique stormes? POL. The Gentleman, beleeue it, is of worth, And of our Nation. LAD. I, your white-Friars nation? Come, I blush for you, Mr. Would-bee, I; And am asham'd, you should ha' no more forehead, Then, thus, to be the Patron, or Saint George To a lewd harlot, a base fricatrice, A female deuill, in a male out-side. POL. Nay, And you be such a one! I must bid, adieu To your delights. The case appeares too liquide. LAD. I, you may carry't cleare, with your State-face; But, for your Carniuale Concupiscence, Who here is fled, for liberty of conscience, From furious persecution of the Marshall, Her will I disc'ple. PER. This is fine, I' faith! And do you vse this, often? is this part Of your wits exercise, 'gainst you haue occasion? Madam— LAD. Go to, Sir. PER. Do you heare mee, Lady? Why, if your Knight haue set you to begge shirts, Or to inuite me home, you might haue done it A nearer way, by farre: LAD. This cannot worke you, Out of my snare. PER. Why? am I in it, then? Indeede, your husband told mee, you were fayre,
And so you are; onely, your nose enclines (That side, that's next the Sunne) to the Queene-apple: LAD. This cannot be indur'd, by any patience. ACT. 4. SCENE. 3. MOSCA. LADY. PEREGRINE. WHat's the matter, Madame? LAD. If the Senate Right not my quest, in this; I will protest 'hem, To all the world, no Aristocracye. MOS. What is the iniurie, Lady? LAD. Why, the caller, You told mee of, here I haue tâne disguis'd. MOS. Who? this? What meanes your Ladiship? The crea∣ture I mention'd to you, is apprehended, now, Before the Senate, you shall see her— LAD. Where? MOS. Ile bring you to her. This yong Gentleman I saw him land, this morning, at the Port. LAD. Is 't possible! how has my iudgement wander'd? Sir, I must, blushing, say to you, I haue err'd. And plead your pardon. PER. What! more changes, yet? LAD. I hope, you ha' not the malice to remember A Gentlewómans passion. If you stay, In Venice, here, please you to vse mee, Sir— MOS. Will you goe, Madam? LAD. 'Pray you, Sir, vse mee. In faith, The more you vse mee the more I shall conceiue, You haue forgot our quarrell. PER. This is rare! Sir Politique Would-be? No, Sir Politique Baud. To bring me, thus, acquainted with his wife! Well, wise Sir Pol: since you haue practis'd, thus,
MOS. without a partner Sr. confirmde this morning; The waxe is warme yet, and the inke scarse dry Vpon the parchment: VOLT. Happy, happy mee! By what good chance, sweete Mosca? MOS. Your desert Sir; I know no second cause. VOLT. Thy modesty Is loath to know it; well, we shall requite it. MOS. He euer lik'd your course Sr. that first tooke him. I, oft, haue heard him say, how he admir'd Men of your large profession, that could speake To euery cause, and things mere contraries, Till they were hoarse againe, yet all bee Law; That, with most quicke agility, could turne, And returne; make knots, and vndoe them; Giue forked councell; take prouoking gold On eyther hand, and put it vp: These men, He knewe, would thriue, with their humility. And (for his part) he thought, he should be blest To haue his heyre of such a suffering spirit, So wise, so graue, of so perplex'd a tongue, And loud withall, that would not wag, nor scarce Lie still, without a fee; when euery word Your worship but lets fall, is a Cecchine. Who's that? One knockes, I would not haue you seene Sr. And yet—pretend you came, and went in hast; Ile fashion an excuse. And, gentle Sir, When you do come to swim, in golden lard, Vp to the armes, in honey, that your chin Is borne vp stiffe, with fatnesse of the flood, Thinke on your vassall; but remember mee: I ha' not beene your worst of clients. VOLT. Mosca— MOS. When will you haue your inuentory brought, Sr Or see a coppy of the Will? Anone, Ile bring 'hem to you Sir. Away, be gon, Put businesse i' your face. VOLP. Excellent Mosca! Come hither, let me kisse thee. MOS. Keepe you still Sir.
Here is Corbaccio. VOLP. Set the plate away, The Vulture's gone, and the old Rauen's come. ACT. 1. SCENE. 4. MOSCA. CORBACCIO. VOLPONE. BEtake you, to your silence, and your sleepe: Stand there, and multiply. Now, shall we see A wretch, who is (indeed) more impotent, Then this can fayne to bee; yet hopes to hop Ouer his graue. Signior Corbaccio, Yo' are very welcome, Sir. CORB. How do's your Patron? MOS. Troth as he did, Sir, no amends. CORB. What? mendes hee? MOS. No, Sir: he is rather worse. CORB. That's well. Where is hee? MOS: Vpon his couch Sir, newly fall'n a sleepe. CORB. Do's hee sleepe well? MOS. No winke, Sir, all this night, Nor yesterday, but slumbers. CORB. Good. He should take Some counsell of Physitians: I haue brought him An Opiate here, from mine owne Doctor— MOS. He will not heare of drugs. CORB. Why? I my selfe Stood by, while 't was made; saw all th'ingredients: And know, it cannot but most gently worke. My life for his, 'tis but to make him sleepe. VOLP. I, his last sleepe, if he would take it. MOS. Sir. He ha's no faith in Physick: CORB. 'Say you? 'say you? MOS. He has no faith in Physick: He do's thinke Most of your Doctors are the greater danger, And worse disease, t'escape. I often haue Heard him protest, that your Physitian Should neuer be his heyre. CORB. Not I his heyre? MOS. Not your Physitian, Sir. CORB. O, no, no, no, I do not meane it. MOS. No Sir, nor their fees
He cannot brooke: He sayes, they flea a man, Before they kill him. CORB. Right, I conceiue you. MOS. And then, they doe it by experiment; For which the Law not onely doth absolue 'hem, But giues them great reward: And, he is loath To hire his death, so. CORB. It is true, they kill, With as much licence, as a Iudge. MOS. Nay more; For he but kills, Sir, where the Law condemnes, And these can kill him, too; CORB. I, or mee: Or any man. How do's his Apoplexe? Is that strong on him, still? MOS. Most violent. His speech is broken, and his eyes are set, His face drawne longer, then t'was wont— CORB. How? how? Stronger, then he was wont? CORB. No, Sir: his face Drawne longer, then t'was wont. CORB. O, good. MOS. His mouth Is euer gaping, and his eye-lids hang. CORB. Good. MOS. A freezing numnesse stiffens all his ioynts, And makes the colour of his flesh like lead. CORB. 'Tis good. MOS. His pulse beats slow, and dull. CORB. Good symptomes, still. MOS. And, from his braine— CORB. Ha? how? not from his braine? MOS. Yes, Sir, and from his braine— CORB. I conceiue you, good. MOS. Flowes a cold sweat, with a continuall rhewme, Forth the resolued corners of his eyes. CORB. Is't possible? yet I am better, ha! How do's he, with the swimming of his head? MOS. O, Sir tis past▪ the Scotomy; he, now, Hath lost his feeling, and hath left to snort: You hardly can perceiue him, that he breaths. CORB. Excellent, excellent, sure I shall out last him: This makes me yong againe, a score of yeares. MOS. I was a cōming for you, Sr. CORB. Has he made his Wil? What has he giu'n me? MOS. No, Sir. CORB. Nothing? ha?
MOS. He has not made his Will, Sir. CORB. Oh, oh, oh. But what did Ʋoltore, the Lawyer, here? MOS. He smelt a carcasse Sir, when he but heard My maister was about his Testament; As I did vrge him to it, for your good— CORB. He came vnto him, did he? I thought so. MOS. Yes, and presented him this peece of plate. CORB. To be his heire? MOS. I do not know Sir. CORB. True, I know it too, MOS. By your owne scale, Sir. CORB. Well, I shall preuent him, yet. See Mosca, looke, Here, I haue brought a bag of bright Cecchines, Will quite weigh downe his plate. MOS. Yea marry, Sir. This is true Physick, this your sacred Medicine, No talke of Opiates, to this great Elixir. CORB. 'Tis Aurum palpabile, if not potabile. MOS. It shall be minister'd to him, in his boule? CORB. I, doe, doe, doe. MOS. Most blessed Cordiall, This will recouer him. CORB. Yes, doe, doe, doe. MOS. I thinke, it were not best, Sir. CORB. What? MOS. To recouer him. CORB. O, no, no, no; by no meanes. MOS. Why, Sir. this Will worke some strange effect, if he but feele it. CORB. Tis true, therefore forbeare; Ile take my venter: Giue mee't againe. MOS. At no hand, pardon mee; You shall not doe your selfe that wrong Sr. I Will so aduise you, you shall haue it all. CORB. How? MOS. All Sr. 'tis your right, your own; no man. Can claime a part: 'tis yours, without a riuall, Decre'd by destiny. CORB. How? how, good Mosca? MOS. Ile tell you Sr. This fit he shall recouer; CORB. I do conceiue you. MOS. And, on first aduantage Of his gain'd sense, will I re-importune him Vnto the making of his Testament: And shew him this. CORB. Good, good. MOS. 'Tis better yet, If you will heare, Sir. CORB. Yes, with all my heart. MOS. Now, would I councell you, make home with speed;
There, frame a Will; whereto you shall inscribe My maister your sole heyre. CORB. And disinherit My sonne? MOS. O Sir, the better: for that colour Shall make it much more taking. CORB. O, but colour? MOS. This Will Sir, you shall send it vnto me. Now, when I come to inforce (as I will do) Your cares, your watchings, and your many prayers, Your more then many gifts, your this dayes present, And, last, produce your Will; where (without thought, Or least regard, vnto your proper issue, A sonne so braue, and highly meriting) The streame of your diuerted loue hath throwne you Vpon my maister, and made him your heyre: He cannot be so stupide, or stone dead, But, out of conscience, and mere gratitude— CORB. He must pronounce me, his? MOS. 'Tis true. CORB. This plot Did I thinke on before. MOS. I do beleeue it. CORB. Do you not beleeue it? MOS. Yes Sir. CORB. Mine own proiect. MOS. Which when he hath done, Sir. CORB. Publish'd me his heire? MOS. And you so certaine, to suruiue him. CORB. I. MOS. Beeing so lusty a man. CORB. 'Tis true. MOS. Yes Sir, CORB. I thought on that too. See, how he should be The very organ, to expresse my thoughts! MOS. You haue not onely done your selfe a good, CORB. But multiplied it on my sonne? MOS. 'Tis right, Sir. CORB. Still, my inuention. MOS. 'Lasse Sir, heauen knowes, It hath beene all my study, all my care, (I'eene grow grey withall) how to worke things— CORB. I do conceiue, sweet Mosca. MOS. You are he, For whom I labour, here. CORB. I, doe, doe, doe: Ile straight about it. MOS. Rooke go with you, Rauen. CORB. I know thee honest. MOS. You do lie, Sir. CORB. And— MOS. Your knowledge is no better then your eares, Sir.
CORB. I do not doubt, to be a father to thee. MOS. Nor I, to gull my brother of his blessing. CORB. I may ha my youth restor'd to mee, why not? MOS. Your worship is a precious asse. CORB. What sai'st thou? MOS. I do desire your worship, to make hast, Sir. CORB. 'Tis done, 'tis done, I go. VOLP. O, I shall burst; Let out my sides, let out my sides— MOS. Containe Your fluxe of laughter, Sir; you know, this hope Is such a baite, it couers any hooke. VOLP. O, but thy working, and thy placing it! I cannot hold; good rascall, let me kisse thee: I neuer knew thee, in so rare a humor. MOS. Alas Sir, I but do; as I am taught; Follow your graue instructions; giue 'hem words; Powre oyle into their eares: and send them hence. VOLP. 'Tis true, 'tis true. What a rare punishment Is auarice, to it selfe? MOS. I, with our helpe, Sir. VOLP. So many cares, so many maladies, So many feares attending on old age, Yea, death so often call'd on, as no wish Can be more frequent with 'hem, their limbes faint, Their senses dull, their seeing, hearing, going All dead before them; yea, their very teeth, Their instruments of eating, failing them: Yet this is reckon'd life! Nay, here was one, Is now gone home, that wishes to liue longer! Feeles not his gout, nor palsy, faines himselfe Yonger, by scores of yeares, flatters his age, With confident belying it, hopes he may With charmes, like Aeson, haue his youth restor'd, And with these thoughts so battens, as if Fate Would be as easily cheated on, as he, And all turnes ayre! Who's that, there, now? a third? MOS. Close, to your couch againe: I heare his voice.
It is Coruino, our spruce merchant. VOLP. Dead. MOS. Another bout, Sir, with your eyes, Who's there? ACT. 1. SCENE. 5. MOSCA. CORVINO. VOLPONE. SIgnior Coruino! come most wisht for! O, How happy were you, if you knew it, now! CORV. Why? what? wherein? MOS. The tardie houre is come, Sir. CORV. He is not dead? MOS. Not dead, Sir, but as good; He knowes no man. CORV. How shall I do then? MOS. Why sir? CORV. I haue brought him, here, a Pearle. MOS. Perhaps, he has So much remembrance left, as to know you, Sir; He still calls on you, nothing but your name Is in his mouth: Is your Pearle orient, Sir? CORV. Ʋenice was neuer owner of the like. VOLP. Signior Coruino. MOS. Hearke. VOLP. Signior Coruino. MOS. 'He calls you, step and giue it him. H'is here, Sir, And he has brought you a rich Pearle. CORV. How doe you Sir? Tell him, it doubles the twelfe Caract. MOS. Sir, He cannot vnderstand, his hearing's gone; And yet it comforts him, to see you— CORV. Say, I haue a Diamant for him, too. MOS. Best shew't Sir, Put it into his hand; 'tis onely there He apprehends: He has his feeling, yet. See, how he graspes it! CORV. 'Lasse, good gentleman! How pittifull the sight is! MOS. Tut, forget Sir. The weeping of an heyre should still be laughter, Vnder a visor. CORV. Why? am I his heyre? MOS. Sir, I am sworne, I may not shew the Will, Till he be dead: But, here has beene Corbaccio,
Here has beene Voltore, here were others too, I cannot nomber 'hem, they were so many, All gaping here for legacyes; but I, Taking the vantage of his naming you, (Signior Coruino, Signior Coruino,) tooke Paper, and pen, and ynke, and there I ask'd him, Whom he would haue his heyre? Coruino: Who Should be executor, Coruino: And, To any question, he was silent too, I still interpreted the noddes, he made, (Through weakenesse) for consent: and sent home th'others, Nothing bequeath'd them, but to crie, and curse. CORV. O, my deare Mosca. Do's he not perceiue vs? MOS, No more then a blinde harper. He knowes no man, No face of friend, nor name of any seruant, Who't was that fed him last, or gaue him drinke: Not those, he hath begotten, or brought vp Can he remember. CORV. Has he children? MOS. Bastards, Some dozen, or more, that he begot on beggars, Gipseys, and Iewes, and Black-moores, when he was drunke. Knew you not that Sir? 'Tis the common fable. The Dwarfe, the Foole, the Eunuch are all his; H' is the true father of his familie, In all, saue mee: but he has giu'n 'hem nothing. CORV. That's well, that's well. Art sure he does not heare vs? MOS. Sure Sir? why looke you, credit your owne sense. The Poxe approch, and adde to your diseases, If it would sende you hence the sooner, Sir. For, your incontinence, it hath deseru'd it Throughly, and throughly, and the Plague to boot. (You may come neere, Sir) Would you would once close Those filthy eyes of yours, that flowe with slime, Like two frog-pits; and those same hanging cheekes, Couer'd with hide, in steede of skinne: (nay helpe, Sir) That looke like frozen dish-clouts, set on end. CORV. Or, like an old smoak'd wall, on which the raine
Ran downe in streakes. MOS. Excellent, Sir, speake out; You may be lowder yet: A Culuering, Discharged in his eare, would hardly bore it. CORV. His nose is like a common sewre, still running; MOS. Tis good: and, what his mouth? CORV. A very draught. MOS. O stop it vp— CORV. By no meanes; MOS. 'Pray you let mee. Faith, I could stifle him, rarely, with a pillow, As well, as any woman, that should keepe him. CORV. Do as you will, but Ile be gone. MOS. Be so; It is your presence makes him last so long. CORV. I pray you, vse no violence. MOS. No, Sir? why? Why should you be thus scrupulous? 'pray you, Sir. CORV. Nay, at your discretion. MOS. Well, good ir, be gone. CORV. I will not trouble him now, to take my Pearle? MOS. Puh, nor your Diamant. What a needelesse care Is this afflicts you? Is not all, here yours? Am not I here? whom you haue made? your creature? That owe my beeing to you? CORV. Gratefull Mosca: Thou art my friend, my fellow, my companion, My partner, and shalt share in all my fortunes. MOS. Excepting one. CORV. Whats that? MOS. Your gallant wife, Sir. Now, is he gone; we had no other meanes, To shoote him hence, but this. VOLP. My diuine Mosca! Thou hast to day out-gone thy selfe. Who's there? I will be troubled with no more. Prepare Me musicke, dances, banquets, all delights; The Turke is not more sensual, in his pleasures, Then will Ʋolpone. Let me see, a Pearle? A Diamant? Plate? Cecchines? good mornings purchase; Why this is better then rob Churches, yet: Or fat, by eating (once a mon'th) a man. Who is 't? MOS. The beauteous Lady Would-bee, Sir.
Wife, to the English Knight, Sir Politique Would-bee, (This is the stile, Sir, is directed mee) Hath sent to know, how you haue slept to night, And if you would be visited. VOLP. Not, now. Some three houres, hence— MOS. I told the Squire, so much. VOLP. When I am high with mirth, and wine; then, then. 'Fore heauen, I wonder at the desperate valure Of the bold English, that they dare let loose Their wiues, to all encounters! MOS. Sir, this Knight Had not his name for nothing, he is politique, And knowes, how ere his wife affect strange ayres, She hath not yet the face, to be dishonest. But had she Signior Coruino's wiues face— VOLP. Has she so rare a face? MOS. O Sir, the wonder, The blazing Starre of Italy; a wench O'the first yeare, a beauty, ripe, as haruest! Whose skinne is whiter then a Swan, all ouer! Then siluer, snow, or lillies! a soft lip, Would tempt you to eternity of kissing! And flesh, that melteth, in the touch, to bloud! Bright as your gold, and louely, as your gold! VOLP. Why had not I knowne this, before? MOS. Alas, Sir. My selfe, but yesterday, discouer'd it. VOLP. How might I see her? MOS. O, not possible; Shee's kept as warily, as is your gold: Neuer do's come abroad, neuer takes ayre, But at a windore. All her lookes are sweet, As the first grapes, or cherries; and are watch'd As neare, as they are. VOLP. I must see her— MOS. Sir, There is a guard, of ten spies thick, vpon her; All his whole houshold: each of which is set Vpon his fellow, and haue all their charge, When he goes out, when he comes in, examin'd. VOLP. I will go see her, though but at her windore.
MOS. In some disguise, then? VOLP. That is true, I must Maintaine mine owne shape, still, the same: we e'll thinke. ACT. 2. SCENE. 1. POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE. PEREGRINE. SIr, to a wise man, all the world's his soile. It is not Italy, nor France, nor Europe, That must bound me, if my Fates call me forth. Yet, I protest, it is no salt desire Of seeing Countries, shifting a Religion, Nor any dis-affection to the State Where I was bred, (and, vnto which I owe My dearest plots) hath brought me out; much lesse, That idle, antique, stale, grey-headed proiect Of knowing mens mindes, and manners, with Vlisses: But, a peculiar humour of my wiues, Layd for this height of Ʋenice, to obserue, To quote, to learne the language, and so forth— I hope you trauell, Sir, with licence? PER. Yes▪ POL. I dare the safelier conuerse— How long, Sir, Since you left England? PER. Seauen weekes. POL. So lately! You ha' not beene with my Lord Ambassador? PER. Not yet, Sir. POL. 'Pray you, what newes, Sir, vents our climate? I heard, last night, a most strange thing reported By some of my Lords followers, and I long To heare, how't will be seconded! PER. What was't, Sir? POL. Marry, Sir, of a Rauen, that should build In a ship royall of the Kings. PER. This fellow Do's he gull me, trow? or is gull'd? your name Sir? POL. My name is Politique Would-bee. PER. O, that speaks him. A Knight, Sir? POL. A poore Knight▪ Sir. PER. Your Lady Lies here, in Ʋenice, for intelligence
Of tires, and fashions, and behauiour, Among the Curtizans? the fine Lady Would-be? POL. Yes; Sir; the spider, and the bee, oft times, Suck from one flower. PER. Good Sir Politique! I crie you mercy; I haue heard much of you: Tis true, Sir, of your Rauen. POL. On your knowledge? PER. Yes, and your Lions whelping, in the Tower. POL. Another whelpe? PER. Another, Sir. POL. Now heauen! What prodigies be these? The Fires at Berwike! And the new Starre! these things concurring, strange! And full of omen! Saw you those Meteors? PER. I did Sir. POL. Fearefull! Pray you Sir, confirme me, Were there three Porcpisces seene, aboue the Bridge, As they giue out? PER. Sixe, and a Sturgeon, Sir. POL. I am astonish'd. PER. Nay Sir, be not so; Ile tell you a greater prodigie, then these— POL. What should these things portend! PER. The very day (Let me be sure) that I put forth from London, There was a Whale discouer'd, in the riuer, As high as Woollwich, that had waited there (Few know how many moneths) for the subuersion Of the Stode-Fleete. POL. Is't possible? Beleeue it, 'Twas either sent from Spaine, or the Arch-duke, Spinola's Whale, vpon my life, my credit; Will they not leaue these proiects? Worthy Sir, Some other newes. PER. Faith, Stone, the Foole, is dead; And they do lack a tauerne-Foole, extremely. POL. Is Mass' Stone dead? PER. H' is dead Sir; why? I hope You thought him not immortall? O this Knight (Were he well knowne) would be a precious thing To fit our English Stage: He that should write But such a fellow, should be thought to faine Extremely, if not maliciously. POL. Stone dead? PER. Dead. Lord! how deepely Sir you apprehend it? He was no kinsman to you? POL. That I know of. Well! that same fellow was an vnknowne Foole.
PER. And yet you know him, it seemes? POL. I did so, Sir. I knew him one of the most dangerous heads Liuing within the State, and so I held him. PER. Indeed Sir? POL. While he liu'd, in action. He has receiu'd weekely intelligence, Vpon my knowledge, out of the Low Countries, (For all parts of the world) in cabages; And those dispens'd, againe, to Ambassadors, In oranges, musk-melons, apricocks, Limons, pome-citrons, and such like: sometimes, In Colchester-oysters, and your Selsey-cockles. PER. You make me wonder! POL. Sir, vpon my knowledge. Nay, I, haue obseru'd him, at your publique Ordinary, Take his aduertisement, from a Traueller (A conceald States-man) in a trencher of meate; And, instantly, before the meale was done, Conuay an answer in a tooth-pick. PER. Strange! How could this be, Sir? POL. Why, the meate was cut So like his character, and so layd, as he Must easily read the cipher. PER. I haue heard, He could not read, Sir. POL. So, 'twas giuen out, (In pollitie,) by those, that did imploy him: But he could read, and had your languages, And to't, as sound a noddle- PER. I haue heard, Sir, That your Babiuns were spies; and that they were A kinde of subtle Nation, neare to China: POL. I, I, your Mamuluchi. Faith, they had Their hand in a French plot, or two; but they Were so extremely giuen to women, as They made discouery of all: Yet I Had my aduises here (on wensday last) From one of their owne coat, they were return'd, Made their relations (as the fashion is) And now stand faire, for fesh imployment. PER. 'Hart! This Sir Poll: will be ignorant of nothing. It seemes Sir, you know all? POL. Not all Sir. But,
I haue some generall notions; I do loue To note, and to obserue: Though I liue out, Free from the actiue torrent, yet I'ld marke The currents, and the passages of things, For mine owne priuate vse; and knowe the ebbes, And flowes of State. PER. Beleeue it, Sir, I hold My selfe, in no small tie, vnto my fortunes, For casting mee thus luckely, vpon you; Whose knowledge (if your bounty equall it) May do me great assistance, in instruction For my behauiour, and my bearing, which Is yet so rude, and raw— POL. Why? came you forth Empty of rules, for trauayle? PER. Faith, I had Some common ones, from out that vulgar Grammar, Which hee, that cri'd Italian to mee, taught mee. POL. Why, this it is, that spoiles all our braue blouds, Trusting our hopefull gentry vnto Pedants, Fellowes of out-side, and mere barke. You seeme To be a gentleman, of ingenuous race— I not professe it, but my fate hath beene To be, where I haue beene consulted with, In this high kinde, touching some great mens sonnes, Persons of bloud, and honor— PER. Who be these, Sir? ACT. 2. SCENE. 2. MOSCA. POLITIQVE. PEREGRINE. VOLPONE, NANO. GREGE. VNder that windore, there't must be The same: POL. Fellowes, to mount a banke! Did your instructer In the deare Tongues, neuer discourse to you Of the Italian Montebkes? PER. Yes, Sir. POL. Why, Here shall you see one. PER. They are Quack-saluers, Fellowes, that liue by venting oyles, and drugs? POL. Was that the character hee gaue you of them?
PER. As I remember. POL. Pittie his ignorance. They are the onely-knowing men of Europe, Great, generall Schollers, excellent Phisitians, Most admir'd States-men, profest Fauorites, And cabinet-Councellors, to the greatest Princes: The onely Languag'd-men, of all the world. PER. And, I haue heard, they are most lewd impostors; Made all of termes, and shreds; no lesse beliers Of great-mens fauors, then their owne vile med'cines; Which they will vtter vpon monstrous othes: Selling that drug, for two pence, ere they part, Which they haue valew'd at twelue Crownes, before. POL. Sir, calumnies are answer'd best with silence; Your selfe shall iudge. Who is it mounts, my friends? MOS. Scoto of Matua, Sir. POL Is 't hee? nay, then Ile proudly promise, Sir, you shall behold Another man, then has beene phant'sied, to you. I wonder, yet, that hee should mount his banke Here, in this nooke, that has beene wont t'appeare In face of the Piazza! Here, he comes. VOLP. Mount Zany, GRE. Follow, follow, follow, follow, follow. POL. See how the people follow him! hee's a man May write 10000. Crownes, in Banke, here. Note, Marke but his gesture; I do vse to obserue The state hee keepes, in getting vp! PER. Tis worth it, Sir. VOLP. Most noble Gent: and my worthy Patrons, it may seeme strange, that I, your Scoto Mautuano, who was euer wont to fixe my Banke in face of the publike Piazza, neare the shelter of the portico, to the Procuratia, should, now (after eight months absence, from this illustrous Citty of Venice) humbly retire myselfe, into an obscure nooke of the Piazza; POL. Did not I, now, obiect the same? PER. Peace, Sir. VOLP. Let me tel you: I am not (as your Lombard Prouerbe sayth) cold on my feete, or content to part with my commodities at a cheaper rate, then I accustomed; looke not for it. Nor, that the calumnious reports of that impudent detractor, and shame to our profession,
(Alessandro Buttone, I meane) who gaue out, in publike, I was con∣demn'd a 'Sforzato to the Galleys, for poysoning the Cardinall Bem∣boos— Cooke, hath at all attached, much lesse deiected mee. No, no, worthie Gent: (to tell you true) I cannot indure, to see the rable of these ground Ciarlitani, that spread their clokes on the pauement, as if they meant to do feates of actiuitie, and then come in, lamely, with their mouldy tales out of Boccacio, like stale Tabarine, the Fabulist: some of them discoursing their trauells, and of their tedious capti∣uity in the Turkes Galleyes, when indeed (were the truth knowne) they were the Christians Galleyes, where very temperately, they eate bread, & drunke water, as a wholesome pennance (enioyn'd them by their Confessors) for base pilferies. POL. Note but his bearing, and contempt of these. VOLP. These turdy-facy-nasty-patie-lousie-farticall rogues, with one poore groats-worth of vnprepar'd antimony, finely wrapt vp in seuerall 'Scartoccios, are able, very well, to kill their twenty a weeke, and play; yet these meagre steru'd spirits, who haue halfe stopt the or∣gans of their mindes with earthy oppilations, want not their fauou∣rers among your shriuel'd, sallad-ating Artizans: who are ouer∣ioy'd, that they may haue their halfeperth of Physick, though it purge 'hem into another world, makes no matter. POL. Excellent! ha you heard better Language, Sir? VOLP. Well, let 'hem go. And Gentlemen, honourable Gentlemen, know, that for this time, our Banque, being thus remou'd from the clamours of the Canaglia, shall be the Scene of pleasure, and de∣light; For I haue nothing to sell, little or nothing to sell: POL. I told you, Sir; his ende. PER. You did so, Sir. VOLP. I protest, I, and my sixe seruants, are not able to make of this pretious liquor, so fast, as it is fetch'd away from my lodging, by Gen∣tlemen of your Citty; Strangers of the Tèrra-ferma; worshipful Mer∣chants; I, and Senators too: who, euer since my arriuall, haue detained mee to their vses, by their splendidous liberalities. And worthily. For what auayles your rich man to haue his magazines stuft with Mos∣cadelli, or the purest grape, when his Physitians prescribe him (on paine of death) to drinke nothing but water, cocted with Anise-seeds? O health! health! the blessing of the rich, the riches of the poore!
who can buy thee at to deare a rate, since there is no enioying this world, without thee? Be not then so sparing of your purses, honorable Gentlemen, as to abridge the naturall course of life— PER. You see his ende? POL. I, is't not good? VOLP. For, when a humide Fluxe, or Catarrhe, by the mutability of ayre, falls from your head, into an arme or shoulder, or any other part; take you a Duckat, or your Cecchine of gold, and applie to the place affected: see, what good effect it can worke. No, no, 'tis this blessed Vnguento, this rare Extraction, that hath onely power to disperse all malignant humors, that proceede, either of hot, cold, moist or windy causes— PER. I would he had put in dry to. POL. 'pray you, obserue. VOLP. To fortifie the most indigest, and crude stomacke, I, were it of one, that (through extreame weakenesse) vomited bloud, applying onely a warme napkin to the place, after the vnction, and fricace; For the Vertigine, in the head, putting but a drop into your nostrills, likewise, behind the eares; a most soueraigne, and approoued remedy. The Mall-caduco, Crampes, Convulsions, Paralysies, Epilepsies, Tremor-cordia, retired-Nerues, ill Vapours of the spleene, Stop∣pings of the Liuer, the Stone, the Strangury, Hernia ventosa, Ili∣aca passio; stops a Disenteria, immediatly; easeth the torsion of the small guts: and cures Melancolia hypocondriaca, being taken and applyed, according to my printed Receipt. For, this is the Physitian, this the medicine; this councells, this cures; this giues the direction, this works the effect: and (in summe) both together may be term'd an abstract of the theorick, and practick in the Aesculapian Art. 'Twill cost you eight Crownes. And, Zan Fritada, 'pray thee sing a verse, extempore, in honour of it. POL. How do you like him, Sir? PER. Most strangely, I! POL. Is not his language rare? PER. But Alchimy, I neuer heard the like: or Broughtons bookes. SONG. HAd old Hippocrates, or Galen, (That to their bookes put med'cines all in)
But knowne this secret, they had neuer (Of which they will bee guilty euer) Beene murderers of so much paper, Or wasted many a hurtlesse taper: No Indian drug had ere beene famed, Tabacco, Sassafras not named; Ne yet, of Guacum one small stick, Sir, Nor Raymund Lullies greate Elixir. Ne, had beene knowne the danish Gonswart. Or Paracelsus, with his long-sword. PER. All this, yet, will not do, eight Crownes is high. VOLP. No more; Gentlemen, if I had but time to discourse to you the miraculous effects of this my oyle, surnamed oglio del Scoto, with the count-lesse Catalogue of those I haue cured of th'aforesayd, and ma∣ny more diseases, the Pattents and Priuiledges of all the Princes, and Common-wealthes of Christendome, or but the depositions of those that appear'd on my part, before the Signiry of the Sanitâ, and most learned Colledge of Physitians; where I was authorized, vpon notice taken of the admirable vertues of my medicaments, and mine owne excellency, in matter of rare, and vnknowne secrets, not onely to disperse them publiquely in this famous Citty, but in all the Territories, that happely ioy vnder the gouernment of the most pious and magnificent States of Italy. But may some other gallant fellow say, O, there be diuers, that make profession to haue as good, and as ex∣perimented receipts, as yours: Indeed, very many haue assay'd, like Apes, in imitation of that, which is really, and essentially in mee, to make of this oyle; bestow'd great cost in furnaces, stilles, alembekes, continuall fires, and preparation of the ingredients, as indeede there goes to it sixe hundred seuerall Simples, beside, some quantity of humane fat, for the conglutination, which we buy of the Anatomistes; But, when these Practitioners come to the last decoction, blow, blow, puff, puff, and all flies in fumo: ha, ha, ha. Poore wretches! I rather pitty their folly, and indiscretion, then their losse of time, and money; for those may be recouer'd by industry: but to be a Foole borne is a disease incurable. For my selfe, I alwaies from my youth haue
indeauor'd to get the rarest secrets, and booke them; eyther in ex∣change, or for money; I spared nor cost, nor labour, where any thing was worthy to be learned. And Gentlemen, honourable Gentlemen, I will vndertake (by vertue of Chymicall Art) out of the honourable hat, that couers your head, to extract the foure Elements; that is to say, the Fire, Ayre, Water, and Earth, and returne you your felt, without burne, or staine. For, whil'st others haue beene at the bal∣loo, I haue beene at my booke: and am now past the craggy pathes of study, and come to the flowrie plaines of honour, and reputation. POL. I do assure you, Sir, that is his ayme. VOLP. But, to our price. PER. And that withall, Sir. Poll. VOLP. You all know (honourable Gentlemen) I neuer valew'd this ampulla, or violl, at lesse then eight Crownes, but for this time, I am content, to be depriu'd of it for sixe; sixe Crownes is the price; and lesse, in curtesie, I know you cannot offer mee; take it, or leaue it, how∣soeuer, both it, and I am at your seruice. I aske you not, as the valew of the thing, for then I should demand of you a thousand Crownes, so the Cardinalls Montalto, Fernese, the great Duke of Tuscany, my Gossip, with diuers other Princes haue giuen me; but I despise money: only to shew my affection to you, honorable Gentlemen, and your illustrous State here, I haue neglected the messages of these Princes, mine owne offices, fram'd my iourney hither, onely to present you with the fruicts of my trauells. Tune your voyces once more, to the touch of your instruments, and giue the honorable assembly some delight∣full recreation. PER. What monstrous, and most painefull circumstance Is here, to get some three, or foure Gazets? Some three-pence, i'th whole, for that 'twill come too. SONG. YOu that would last long, list to my song, Make no more coyle, but buy of this oyle. Would you be euer faire? and yong? Stout of teeth? and strong of tongue? Tart of palat? quick of eare?
Sharpe of sight? of nostrill cleare? Moist of hand? and light of foot? (Or I will come neerer to't) Would you liue free from all diseases? Do the act, your mistres pleases; Yet fright all aches from your bones? Here's a med'cine, for the nones. VOLP. Well, I am in a humor (at this time) to make a present of the small quantity my coffer containes: to the rich, in courtesie, and to the poore, for Gods sake. Wherefore, nowe marke; I ask'd you sixe Crownes, and sixe Crownes, at other times, you haue payd mee; you shall not giue mee sixe Crownes, nor fiue, nor foure, nor three, nor two, nor one; nor halfe a Duckat; no, nor a Muccinigo: six pence it will cost you, or sixe hundred pound—expect no lower price, for by the banner of my front, I will not bate a bagatine, that I will haue, onely, a pledge of your loues, to carry something from amongst you, to shew, I am not contemn'd by you. Therefore, now, tosse your handker∣chiefes, chearefully, chearefully; and bee aduertised, that the first heroique spirit, that deignes to grace mee, with a handkerchiefe, I will giue it a little remembrance of something, beside, shall please it better, then if I had presented it with a double Pistolet. PER. Will you be that heroique Sparke, Sir Pol? O see! the windore has preuented you. VOLP. Lady, I kisse your bounty; and, for this timely grace, you haue done your poore Scoto of Mantua, I will returne you, ouer and aboue my oyle, a secret, of that high, and inestimable nature, shall make you for euer enamour'd on that minute, wherein your eye-first descended on so meane, yet not altogether to be despis'd an obiect. Here is a Poul∣der, conceal'd in this paper, of which, if I should speake to the worth, nine thousand volumes were but as one page, that page as a line, that line as a word; so short is this Pilgrimage of man (which some call Life) to the expressing of it: would I reflect on the price? why, the whole VVorld were but as an Empire, that Empire as a Prouince, that Prouince as a Banke, that Banke as a priuate Purse, to the purchase of it. I will, onely, tell you; it is the Poulder, that made
Venus a Goddesse (giuen her by Apollo) that kept her perpetu∣ally yong, clear'd her wrincles, firm'd her gummes, fill'd her skinne, colour'd her hayre; From her, deriu'd to Helen, and at the sack of Troy (vnfortunately) lost: Till now, in this our age, it was as happily recouer'd, by a studious Antiquary, out of some ruines of Asia, who sent a moyetie of it, to the Court of France (but much sophisticated) wherewith the Ladyes there, now, colour their hayre. The rest (at this present) remaines with mee; extracted, to a Quintessence: so that, where euer it but touches, in youth it perpetually preserues, in age re∣stores the complexion; seats your teeth, did they dance like Virginall iacks, firme as a wall; makes them white, as Iuory, that were black, as— ACT. 2. SCENE. 3. CORVINO. POLITIQVE. PEREGRINE. BLoud of the deuill, and my shame! come downe, here; Come downe: No house but mine to make your Scene? Signior Flaminio, will you downe, Sir? downe? What is my wife your Franciscina? Sir? No windores on the whole Piazza, here, To make your properties, but mine? but mine? Hart! ere to morrow, I shall be new christen'd, And cald the Pantalone di Besogniosi, About the towne. PER. What should this meane, Sir Poll? POL. Some trick of State, beleeue it. I will home. PER. It may be some designe on you: POL. I knowe not. Ile stand vpon my gard. PER. 'Tis your best, Sir. POL. This three weekes, all my aduises, all my letters They haue beene intercepted. PER. Indeed, Sir?
Best haue a care. POL. Nay so I will. PER. This Knight, I may not loose him, for my mirth, till night. ACT. 2. SCENE. 4. VOLPONE. MOSCA. O I am wounded. MOS. Where, Sir? VOLP. Not without; Those blowes were nothing: I could beare them euer. But angry Cupid, boulting from her eyes, Hath shot himselfe into me, like a flame; Where, now, he flings about his burning heat, As in a furnace, some ambitious fire, Whose vent is stopt. The fight is all within mee. I cannot liue, except thou helpe me, Mosca; My liuer melts, and I, without the hope Of some soft ayre, from her refreshing breath, Am but a heape of cinders. MOS. 'Lasse, good Sir, Would you had neuer seene her. VOLP. Nay, would thou Had'st neuer told me of her. MOS. Sir 'tis true; I do confesse, I was vnfortunate, And you vnhappy: but I' am bound in conscience. No lesse then duety, to effect my best To your release of torment, and I will, Sir. VOLP. Deare Mosca, shall I hope? MOS. Sir, more then deare, I will not bidd you to dispaire of ought, Within a humane compasse. VOLP. O, there spoke My better Angell. Mosca, take my keyes, Gold, plate, and iewells, all's at thy deuotion; Employ them, how thou wilt; nay, coyne me, too: So thou, in this, but crowne my longings. Mosca? MOS. Vse but your patience. VOLP. So I haue. MOS. I doubt not But bring successe to your desires. VOLP. Nay, then, I not repent me of my late disguise.
MOS. If you can horne him, Sir, you neede not. VOLP. True: Besides, I neuer meant him for my heyre. Is not the colour of my beard. and eye-browes, To make me knowne? MOS. No iot. VOLP. I did it well. MOS. So well, would I could follow you in mine, With halfe the happinesse; and, yet, I would Escape your Epilogue. VOLP. But, were they gull'd With a beleefe, that I was Scoto? MOS. Sir, Scoto himselfe could hardly haue distinguish'd; I haue not time to flatter you, wee'll part: And, as I prosper, so applaud my art. ACT. 2. SCENE. 5. CORVINO. CELIA. SERVITORE. DEath of mine honour, with the citties Foole? A iugling, tooth-drawing, prating Montebanke? And, at a publique windore? where whil'st hee, With his strain'd action, and his dole of faces, To his drug-Lecture drawes your itching eares, A crewe of old, vn-mari'd, noted lechers, Stood leering vp, like Satyres; and you smile, Most graciously? and fanne your fauours forth, To giue your hote Spectators satisfaction? What; was your Montebanke their call? their whistle? Or were you' enamour'd on his copper rings? His saffron iewell, with the toade-stone in't? Or his imbroydred sute, with the cope-stitch, Made of a herse-cloath? or his old tilt-feather? Or his starch'd beard? well; you shall haue him, yes. He shall come home, and minister vnto you The fricace, for the Mother. Or, let me see, I thinke, you' had rather mount? would you not mount? Why, if you'll mount, you may; yes truely, you may: And so, you may be seene, downe to' th' foote.
Get you a citterne, Lady Vanity, And be a Dealer, with the Vertuous Man; Make one: Ile but protest my selfe a cuckold, And saue your dowry. I am a Dutchman, I; For, if you thought me an Italian, You would be damn'd, ere you did this, you Whore: Thou'ldst tremble, to imagine, that the murder Of father, mother, brother, all thy race, Should follow, as the subiect of my iustice. CEL. Good Sir, haue pacience. CORV. What couldst thou propose Lesse to thy selfe, then, in this heate of wrath, And stung with my dishonour, I should strike This steele vnto thee, with as many stabs, As thou wert gaz'd vpon with goatish eyes? CEL. Alas Sir, be appeas'd; I could not thinke My beeing at the windore should more, now, Moue your impatience, then at other times: CORV. No? not to seeke, and entertaine a parlee; With a knowne knaue? before a multitude? You were an Actor, with your handkercheife; Which he, most sweetly, kist in the receipt, And might (no doubt) returne it, with a letter, And point the place, where you might meete: your sisters, Your mothers, or your aunts might serue the turne. CEL. VVhy, deare Sir, when do I make these excuses? Or euer stirre, abroad, but to the Church? And that, so seldome— CORV. VVell, it shall be lesse; And thy restraint, before, was liberty, To what I now decree: And therefore, marke mee. First, I will haue this baudy light damn'd vp; And, till't be done, some two, or three yards of, Ile chalke a line: ore which, if thou but (chance To) set thy desp'rate foote; more hell, more horror, More wilde, remorcelesse rage shall seize on thee, Then on a Coniurer, that had heed-lesse left,
His Circles saftie, ere his Deuill was layd. Then, here's a lock, which I will hang vpon thee; And, now I thinke on't, I will keepe thee back-wards; Thy lodging shall bee back-wards; thy walkes back-wards; Thy prospect-all be back-wards; and no pleasure, That thou shalt know, but back-wards: Nay, since you force My honest nature, know, it is your owne Being to open, makes me vse you thus. Since you will not containe your subtill nostrills In a sweete roome, but, they must snuffe the ayre Of ranke, and sweaty passengers— One knocks. Away, and be not seene, paine of thy life; Not looke toward the windore: if thou dost— (Nay stay, heare this) let me not prosper, Whore, But I will make thee an Anatomy, Dissect thee mine owne selfe, and read a lecture Vpon thee, to the citty, and in publique. Away. Who's there? SER. 'Tis Signior Mosca, Sir. ACT. 2. SCENE. 6. CORVINO. MOSCA. LEt him come in, his master's dead: There's yet Some good, to helpe the bad. My Mosca, welcome; I gesse your newes. MOS. I feare, you cannot, Sir. CORV. Is't not his death? MOS. Rather, the contrary. CORV. Not his recouery? MOS. Yes, Sir, CORV. I am curt, I am bewitch'd, my crosses meete to vexe mee. How? how? how? how? MOS. Why, Sir, with Scoto's oyle; Corbaccio, and Ʋoltore brought of it, Whilst I was busy in an inner roome — COR. Death! that damn'd Mountebanke; but, for the Law, Now, I could kill the raskall: 't cannot bee, His oyle should haue that vertue. Ha' not I Knowne him a common rogue, come fidling in
To th' Osteria, with a tumbling whore, And, when he ha's done al his forc'd tricks, beene glad Of a poore spoonefull of dead wine, with flies in t? It cannot bee. All his ingredients Are a sheepes gall, a rosted bitches marrow, Some fewe sod earewigs pounded caterpillers, A little capons grease, and fasting spitle: I know hem, to a dram. MOS. I know not, Sir, But some on't, there they pour'd into his cares, Some in his nostrills, and recouer'd him; Applying but the fricace. CORV. Pox o' that fricace. MOS. And since to seeme the more officious, And flatt'ring of his health, there, they haue had (At extreme fees) the Colledge of Physitians Consulting on him how they might restore him; Where, one would haue a cataplme of spices, Another a flead Ape clapt to his brest, A third would ha'it a Dog, a fourth an oyle With wild Cats skinnes: At lst, they all resolu'd That, to preserue him, was no other meanes, But some yong woman must be streight sought out, Lusty, and ful of iuice, to sleepe by him; And, to this seruice (most vnhappily, And most vnwillingly) am I now imploy'd, Which, here, I thought to pre-acquaint you with, For your aduise, since it concernes you most, Because, I would not do that thing might crosse Your ends, on whome I haue my whole dependance, Sir: Yet if I do it not, they may delate My slacknesse to my Patron, worke me out Of his opinion; and there, all your hopes, Venters, or whatsoeuer, are all frustrate. I do but tell you, Sir. Besides, they are all Now striuing, who shall first present him. Therefore— I could intreate you, breefly, conclude some-what: Preuent 'hem if you can. CORV. Death to my hopes!
This is my villanous fortune! best to hire Some common Cutezan? MOS. I, I thought on that, Sir. But they are all so subtle, full of art, And age againe doting, and flexible, So as—I cannot tell—we may perchance Light on a queane, may cheate vs all. CORV. Tis true. MOS. No, no: it must be one, that has no tricks, Sir, Some simple thing, a creature, made vnto it; Some wench you may command. Ha' you no kinswoman? Gods so-Thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, Sir. One o' the Doctors offer'd, there, his daughter. CORV. How! MOS. Yes, Signior Lupo, the Physitian, CORV. His daughter? MOS. And a virgin, Sir. Why? Alasse He knowes the state of 's body, what it is; That naught can warme his bloud Sir, but a feuer; Nor any incantation raise his spirit: A long forgetfullnesse hath seiz'd that part. Besides, Sir, who shall know it? some one, or two. CORV. I pray thee giue mee leaue: If any man But I had had this luck-The thing in t selfe, I know, is nothing— Wherefore should not I As well command my bloud, and my affections, As this dull Doctor? In the point of honor, The cases are all one, of wife, and daughter. MOS. I heare him comming. CORV. She shall doo 't: Tis done. Slight, if this Doctor that is not engag'd, Vnlesse't bee for his councell (which is nothing) Offer his daughter, what should I, that am So deepely in? I will preuent him, wretch! Couetous wretch! Mosca, I haue determin'd. MOS. How Sir? CORV. Weell make all sure. The party, you wot of, Shall be mine owne wife, Mosca. MOS. Sir. The thing, (But that I would not seeme to councell you) I should haue motion'd to you at the first: And, make your count, you haue cut all their throtes. Why! Tis directly taking a possession!
And, in his next fit, we may let him go. 'Tis but to pul the pillow, from his head, And he is thratled: 't had beene done, before, But for your scrupulous doubts. CORV. I, a plague on't, My conscience fooles my wit. Well, Ile be briefe, And so be thou, least they should be before vs: Go home, prepare him, tell him, with what zeale, And willingnesse, I do it; sweare it was, On the first hearing, (as thou mayst do, truely) Mine owne free motion. MOS. Sir, I warrant you, Ile so possesse him with it, that the rest Of his steru'd clients shall be banisht, all; And onely you receiu'd. But come not, Sir, Vntill I send, for I haue something, else To ripen, for your good (you must not know't) CORV. But do not you forget to send, now. MOS. Feare not. ACT. 2. SCENE. 7. CORVINO. CELIA. WHere are you, wife? my Celia? wife? what, blubbering? Come, drye those teares. I thinke, thou thought'st mee in earnest? Ha? by this light, I talk'd so but to trie thee. Me thinkes, the lightnesse of the occasion Should ha' confirm'd thee. Come, I am not iealous: CEL. No? COR. Faith, I am not I, nor neuer was: It is a poore, vnprofitable humor. Do not I know, if women haue a will, They'll doo 'gainst all the watches, o' the world? And that the feircest spies, are tam'd with gold? Tut, I am confident in thee thou shalt see't: And see, Ile giue thee cause too, to beleeue it. Come, kisse mee. Go, and make thee ready straight, In all thy best attire, thy choicest iewells,
Put 'hem all on, and, with 'hem, thy best lookes: VVe are inuited to a solemne feast, At old Volpone's, where it shall appeare How far I am free, from iealousie, or feare. ACT. 3. SCENE. 1. MOSCA. I Feare, I shall begin to grow in loue With my deare selfe, and my most prosp'rous parts, They do so spring, and burgeon; I can feele A whimsey i' my bloud: (I know not how) Successe hath made me wanton. I could skip Out of my skinne, now, like a subtill snake, I am so limber. O! Your Parasite Is a most pretious thing, dropt from aboue, Not bred 'mong'st clods, and clot-poules, here on earth. I muse, the Mysterie was not made a Science, It is so liberally profest! Almost, All the wise world is little else, in nature, But Parasites, or Sub-parasites. And, yet, I meane not those, that haue your bare Towne-art, To know, who's fit to feede 'hem; haue no house, No family, no care, and therefore mould Tales for mens eares, to baite that sense; or get Kitchin-inuention, and some stale receipts To please the belly, and the groine; nor those, With their Court-dog-trickes, that can fawne, and fleere, Make their reuenue out of legges, and faces, Eccho my-Lord, and lick away a moath: But your fine, elegant rascall, that can rise, And stoope (almost together) like an arrow; Shoote through the aire, as nimbly as a starre; Turne short, as doth a swallow; and be here, And there, and here, and yonder, all at once;
Present to any humour, all occasion; And change a visor, swifter, then a thought. This is the creature, had the art borne with him; Toyles not to learne it, but doth practise it Out of most excellent nature: And such sparkes, Are the true Parasites, others but their Zani's. ACT. 3. SCENE. 2. MOSCA. BONARIO. WHo's this? Bonario? old Corbaccio's sonne? The person I was bound to seeke. Fayre Sir, You are happ'ly met. BON. That cannot be, by thee. MOS. Why Sir? BON. Nay 'pray thee know thy way, and leaue me; I would be loath to inter-change discourse, With such a mate, as thou art MOS. Curteous Sir. Scorne not my pouerty. BON. Not I, by heauen, But thou shalt giue mee leaue to hate thy basenesse. MOS. Basenesse? BON. I Answer me, Is not thy sloth Sufficient argument? thy flattery? Thy meanes of feeding? MOS. Heauen, be good to me. These imputations are too common, ir, And easly stuck on vertue, when shee's poore; You are vnequall to me, and how ere Your sentence may be righteous yet you are not, That ere you know me, thus, proceed in censure: St. Marke beare witnesse 'gainst you, 'tis inhumane. BON. What? do's he weepe? the signe is soft, and good; I do repent mee, that I was so harsh. MOS. 'Tis true, that sway'd, by strong necessity, I am enforc'd to eate my carefull bread With to much obsequy; 'tis true, beside, That I am faine to spin mine owne poore rayment, Out of my mere obseruance, being not borne,
To a free fortune: but that I haue done Base offices, in rending friends asunder, Diuiding families, betraying councells, Whispering false lies, or mining men with prayses, Train'd their credulitie with periuries, Corrupted chastity, or am in loue With mine owne tender ease, but would not rather Proue the most rugged, and laborious course, That might redeeme, my present estimation; Let me here perish, in all hope of goodnesse. BON. This cannot be a personated passion. I was too blame, so to mistake thy nature; 'Pray thee forgiue mee: and speake out thy bus'nesse. MOS. Sir, it concernes you; and though I may seeme, At first, to make a maine offence, in manners, And in my gratitude, vnto my maister, Yet, for the pure loue, which I beare all right, And hatred of the wrong, I must reueale it. This very houre, your father is in purpose To disinherit you— BON. How? MOS. And thrust you forth, As a mere stranger to his bloud; tis true, Sir: The worke no way ingageth mee, but, as I claime an interest in the generall state Of goodnesse, and true vertue, which I heare T'abound in you: and, for which mere respect, Without a second ayme, Sir, I haue done it. BON. This tale hath lost thee much of the late trust, Thou hadst with me; it is impossible: I know not how to lend it any thought, My father should be so vnnaturall. MOS. It is a confidence, that well becomes Your piety; and form'd (no doubt) it is, From your owne simple innocence: which makes Your wrong more monstrous, and abhor'd. But, Sir, I now, will tell you more. This very minute,
Is is, or will be doing: And, if you Shall be but pleas'd to goe with me, Ile bring you, (I dare not say where you shall see, but) where Your eare shall be a witnesse of the deed; Heare your selfe written Bastard; and profest The common issue of the earth. BON. I'm maz'd. MOS. Sir, if I do it not, draw your iust sword, And score your vengeance, on my front, and face; Marke me your villayne: You haue too much wrong, And I do suffer for you, Sir. My heart Weepes bloud, in anguish— BON. Lead. I follow thee. ACT. 3. SCENE. 3. VOLPONE. NANO. ANDROGYNO. CASTRONE. MOsca stayes long, me thinkes. Bring forth your sports And helpe, to make the wretched time more sweete. NAN. Dwarfe, Foole, and Eunuch, well mett here wee be. A question it were now, whether of vs three, Being, all, the knowne delicates, of a rich man, In pleasing him, claime the precedency can? CAS. I claime for my selfe. AND. And, so doth the Foole. NAN. Tis foolish indeed: let me set you both to schoole. First, for your Dwarfe, hee's little, and witty, And euery thing, as it is little, is pritty; Else, why do men say to a creature (of my shape) So soone as they see him, it's a pritty little Ape? And, why a pritty Ape? but for pleasing imitation Of greater mens action, in a ridiculous fashion. Beside, this feat body of mine doth not craue Halfe the meat, drinke, and cloth, one of your bulkes will haue. Admit, your Fooles face be the Mother of laughter, Yet, for his braine, it must alwaies come after: And, though that do feede him, it's a pittifull case,
Vpon my freshman-ship, Ile trie your salt-head, What proofe it is against a counter-plot. ACT. 4. SCENE. 4. VOLTORE. CORBACCIO. CORVINO. MOSCA. VVEll, now you know the carriage of the businesse, Your constancy is all, that is requir'd Vnto the safety of it. MOS. Is the lie Safely conuai'd amongst vs? Is that sure? Knowes euery man his burden? CORV. Yes. MOS. Then, shrinke not. CORV. But, knowes the Aduocate the truth? MOS. O, Sir, By no meanes. I deuis'd a formall tale, That salu'd your reputation. But, be valiant, Sir. CORV. I feare no one, but him; that, this his pleading Should make him stand for a co-heie— MOS. Co-halter, Hang him: wee will but vse his tongue, his noise, As we do Croakers, here. CORV. I, what shall he do? MOS. When we ha'done, you meane? CORV. Yes. MOS. Why, wee'll thinke, Sell him for Mummia, hee's halfe dust already. Do not you smile, to see this Buffalo, How he do's sport it with his head?— I' should If all were well, and past. Sir, onely you Are hee, that shall enioy the crop of all, And these not know for whome they toile. CORB. I, peace. MOS. But you shall eate it. Much. Worshipfull Sir, Mercury sit vpon your thundring tongue, Or the French Hercules, and make your language As conquering as his club, to beate along, (As wth a tempest) flat, our aduersaries; But, much more, yours, Sir. VOLT. Here they come, ha' done.
MOS. I haue another witnesse, if you neede, Sir, I can produce. VOLT. Who is it? MOS. Sir, I haue her. ACT. 4. SCENE. 5. AVOCATORI. 4. BONARIO. CELIA. VOLTORE. CORBACCIO. CORVINO. MOSCA. NOTARIO. COMMANDADORI. THe like of this the Senate neuer heard of. AVOC. 2. Twil come most strange to them, whē we report it. AVOC 4. 'The Gentlewoman has beene euer held Of vn-reproued name. AVOC. 3. So has the youth. AVOC. 4. The more vnnaturall part that of his father. AVOC. 2. More, of the husband. AVOC. 1. I not know to giue His act a name, it is so monstrous! AVOC. 4. But the Impostor, he is a thing created T'exceed example! AVOC. And all after times! AVOC. 2. I neuer heard a true voluptuary Discrib'd, but him. AVOC. 3. Appeare yet those were cited? NOTA. All, but the old Magnifico, Ʋolpone. AVOC. 1. Why is not hee here? MOS. Please your Father∣hoods, Here is his Aduocate. Himselfe's, so weake, So feeble— AVOC. 4. What are you? BON. His Parasite, His Knaue, his Pandar—I beseech the Court, He may be forc'd to come, that your graue eies May beare strong witnesse of his strange impostures. VOLT. Vpon my faith, and credit, with your vertues, Hee is not able to endure the ayre. AVOC. 2. Bring him, howe euer. AVOC. 3. We will see him. AVOC. 4. Fetch him. VOLT. Your Father-hoodes fit pleasures be obey'd, But sure, the sight will rather mooue your pittyes, Then indignation; may it please the Court, In the meane time, hee may be heard in me:
I know this Place most voide of preiudice, And therefore craue it, since we haue no reason To feare our truth should hurt our cause. AVOC. 3. Speake free. VOLT. Then know, most honor'd Fathers, I must now Discouer, to your strangely' abused eares, The most prodigious, and most frontlesse piece Of solid impudence, and trechery, That euer vicious Nature yet brought forth To shame the State of Ʋenice. This lewd woman (That wants no artificiall lookes, or teares, To helpe the visor, she has now put on) Hath long beene knowne a close adultresse, To that lasciuious youth there, not suspected, I say, but knowne; and taken, in the act, With him; and by this man, the easie husband, Pardon'd: whose timelesse bounty makes him, now, Stand here, the most vnhappy, innocent person, That euer mans owne vertue made accus'd. For these, not knowing how to owe a gift Of that deare grace, but with their shame; being plac'd So' aboue all powers of their gratitude, Began to hate the benefit; and, in place Of thankes, deuise t' extirpe the memory Of such an act: wherein, I pray your Father-hoods, To obserue the malice, yea, the rage of creatures Discouer'd in their euils; and what heart Such take, euen, from their crimes. But that, anone, Will more appeare. This Gentleman, the father, Hearing of this foule fact, with many others, That dayly strooke at his too-tender eares, And, grieu'd in nothing more, then that he could not Preserue himselfe a parent (his sonnes ills Growing to that strange floud) at last decreed To dis-inherit him. AVOC. 1. These be strange turnes! AVOC. 2. The yong mans fame was euer faire, and honest. VOLT. So much more full of danger is his vice,
That can beguile so, vnder shade of vertue. But as I said (my honour'd Sires) his father Hauing this setled purpose, (by what meanes To him betray'd, we know not) and this day Appointed for the deed, that Parricide, (I cannot stile him better) by confederacy Preparing this his Paramour, to bee there, Entred Volpone's house (who was the man Your Father-hoods must vnderstand, design'd For the inheritance) there, sought his father; But, with what purpose sought he him, my Sires? (I tremble to pronounce it, that a sonne Vnto a father, and to such a father Should haue so foule, felonious intent) It was, to murder him. When, being preuented By his more happy absence, what then did hee? Not check his wicked thoughts; no, now new deedes: (Mischiefe doth euer ende, where it begins) An act of horror, Fathers! he drag'd forth The aged Gentleman, that had there lien, bed-rid, Three yeares, and more, out off his innocent couch, Naked▪ vpon the floore, there left him; wounded His seruant in the face; and, with this strumpet The stale to his for'gd practise, who was glad To be so actiue, (I shall here desire Your Father-hoods to note but my collections, As most remarkable) thought, at once, to stop His fathers ends; discredit his free choise, In the old Gentleman; redeeme themselues, By laying infamy, vpon this man To whome, with blushing, they should owe their liues. AVOC. 1. What proofes haue you of this? BON. Most honour'd Fathers, I humbly craue, there be no credite giuen To this mans mercenary tongue. AVOC. 2. Forbeare.
BON. His soule moues in his fee. AVOC. 3. O, Sir. BON. This fellow, For six sols more, would pleade against his Maker. AVOC. 1. You do forget your selfe. VOLT. Nay, nay, graue Fathers, Let him haue scope; can any man imagine That hee will spare 'his accuser, that would not Haue spar'd his parent? AVOC. 1. Well, produce your proofes. CEL. I would, I could forget, I were a creature. VOLT. Signior Corbaccio. AVOC. 4. What is hee? VOLT. The father. AVOC. 2. Has he had an oath? NOT. Yes. CORB. What must I doe now? NOT. Your testimony's crau'd. CORB. Speake to the knaue? Ile ha' my mouth, first, stopt with earth; my heart Abhors his knowledge: I disclaime in him. AVOC. 1. But, for what cause? CORB. The mere portent of nature. Hee is an vtter stranger, to my loynes. BON. Haue they made you to this? CORB. I will not heare thee, Monster of men, swine, goate, wolfe, Parricide, Speake not, thou viper. BON. Sir, I will sit downe, And rather wish my innocence should suffer, Then I resist the authority of a father. VOLT. Signior Coruino. AVOC. 2. This is strange! AVOC. 1. Who's this? NOT. The husband. AVOC. 4. Is he sworne? NOT. Hee is. AVOC. 3. Speake then. CORV. This woman (please your Father-hoods) is a whore, Of most hot exercise, more then a partrich, Vpon record— AVOC. 1. No more. CORV. Neighes, like a gennet. NOT. Preserue the honour of the Court. CORV. I shall, And modesty of your most reuerend eares.
And, yet, I hope that I may say, these eyes Haue seene her glew'd vnto that peece of Cedar; That fine well-timber'd gallant: and that, here, The letters may be read, thorough the horne, That make the story perfect. MOS. Excellent, Sir. CORV. There is no harme in this, now, is there? MOS. None. CORV. Or if I said, I hop'd that she were onward To her damnation, if there be a hell Greater then whore, and woman; a good Christian May make the doubt. AVOC. 3. His griefe hath made him fran∣tique. AVOC. 1. Remoue him, hence. AVOC. 2. Looke to the wo∣man. CORV. Rare! Prettily fain'd! againe! AVOC. 4. Stand from about her. AVOC. 1. Giue her the ayre. AVOC. 3. What can you say? MOS. My wound (May't please your wisdomes) speakes for mee, receiu'd In ayde of my good Patron, when he mist His sought for father, when that well-taught dame Had her Qu: giuen her, to crie out a rape. BON. O, Most lay'd impudence! Fathers. AVOC. 3. Sir, be silent, You had your hearing free, so must they theirs. AVOC. 2. I do begin to doubt th' imposture, here. AVOC. 4. This woman, has too many moodes. VOLT. Graue Fathers, She is a creature, of a most profest, And prostituted lewdnesse. CORV. Most impetuous, Vnsatisfied, graue Fathers. VOLT, May her faynings Not take your wisdomes: but, this day, she bayted A stranger, a graue Knight, with her loose eyes, And more lasciuious kisses. This man saw 'hem Together, on the water, in a Gondola. MOS. Here is the Lady herselfe, that saw 'hem too, Without; who, then, had in the open streetes Pursew'd them, but for sauing her Knights honour.
AVOC. 1. Produce that Lady. AVOC. 2. Let her come. AVOC. 4. These things They strike, with wonder! AVOC. 3. I am turn'd a stone! ACT. 4. SCENE. 6. MOSCA. LADY. AVOCATORI. &c. BEe resolute, Madam. LAD. I, this same is shee. Out, thou Chameleon harlot; now, thine eyes Vie teares with the Hyaena: darst thou looke Vpon my wronged face? I crie your pardons. I feare, I haue (forgettingly) transgrest Against the dignity of the Court— AVOC. 2. No, Madame. LAD. And beene exorbitant— AVOC. 4. You haue not, Lady. AVOC. 4. These proofes are strong. LAD. Surely, I had no purpose, To scandalize your Honors, or my sexes. AVOC. 3. We doe beleeue it. LAD. Surely, you may be∣leeue it. AVOC. 2. Madame, wee doe. LAD. Indeede, you may; my breeding Is not so course— AVOC. 4. Wee know it. LAD. To offend With pertinacy— AVOC. 3. Lady. LAD. Such a pre∣sence; No, surely. AVOC. 1. Wee well thinke it. LAD. You may thinke it. AVOC. 1. Let her o'recome. What witnesses haue you, To make good your report? BON. Our consciences: CEL. And heauen, that neuer fayles the innocent. AVOC. 4. These are no testimonies. BON. Not, in your Courts, Where multitude, and clamour, ouercomes. AVOC. 1. Nay, then you do waxe insolent. VOLT. Here, here, The testimony comes, that will conuince,
And put to vtter dumbnesse, their bold tongues. See here, graue Fathers, here's the Rauisher, The Rider on mens wiues, the great Impostor, The grand Voluptuary: Do you not thinke, These limbes should affect Vnery? or these eyes Couet a concubine? 'Pray you, marke these hands, Are they not fit to stroke a Ladies brests? Perhaps, he doth dissemble. BON. So he do's. VOLT. Would you ha 'him tortur'd? BON. I would haue him prou'd. VOLT. Best trie him, then, with goades, or burning Irons; Put him to the strappado; I haue heard, The Rack hath cur'd the goute; faith, giue it him, And helpe him of a malady, bee courteous: Ile vndertake, before these honor'd Fathers, He shall haue, yet, as many left diseases, As she has knowne adulterers, or thou strumpets. O, my most equall Hearers, if these deedes, Acts of this bold, and most exorbitant straine, May passe with suffrance; what one Cittizen, But owes the forfeit of his life, yea fame, To him that dares traduce him? Which of you Are safe, my honord Fathers? I would aske (With leaue of your graue Father-hoods) if their plot Haue any face, or colour like to truth? Or if, vnto the dullest nostrill, here, It smell not ranke, and most abhorred slaunder? I craue your care of this good Gentleman, Whose life is much indanger'd, by their fable; And, as for them, I will conclude with this, That vicious persons when they are hot, and flesh'd In impious acts, their constancy abounds: Damn'd deedes are done with greatest confidence. AVOC. 1. Take 'hem to custody, and seuer them. AVOC. 2. Tis pitty, two such prodigies should liue. AVOC. 1. Let the old Gentleman be return'd, with care;
I'am sory, our credulity wrong'd him. AVOC. 4. These are two creatures! AVOC. 3. I haue an earthquake in me! AVOC. 2. Their shame (euen in their cradles) fled their faces. AVOC. 4. You' haue done a worthy seruice to the State, Sir, In their discouery. AVOC. 1. You shall heare, ere night, What punishment the Court decrees vpon 'hem. VOLT. Wee thanke your Father-hoods. How like you it? MOS. Rare. I'ld ha' your tongue, Sir, tipt with gold, for this; I'ld ha' you be the heyre to the whole Citty; The earth I'ld haue want men, ere you want luing: They' are bound t' erect your Statue, in St Markes. Signior Coruino, I would haue you goe, And shew your selfe, that you haue conquer'd. CORV. Yes. MOS. It was much better, that you should professe Your selfe a cuckold, thus; then that the other Should haue beene prou'd. CORV. Nay I consider'd that; Now it is her fault: MOS. Then, it had beene yours. CORV. True, I do doubt this Aduocate, still. MOS. I' faith, You need not, I dare ease you of that care. CORV. I trust thee, Mosca. MOS. As your, owne soule, Sir. CORB. Mosca. MOS. Now for your businesse, Sir. CORB. How? ha' you busines? MOS. Yes, yours, Sir. CORB. O, none else? MOS. None else, not I. CORB. Be carefull, then. MOS. Rest you, with both your eies, Sir. CORB. Dispatch it, MOS. Instantly. CORB. And looke, that all, What-euer, bee put in, iewells, plate, moneyes, House-holdstuffe, bedding, curtines. MOS. Curtine-rings, Sir. Onely, the Aduocates fee must be deducted. CORB. Ile pay him, now: you'll be too prodigall. MOS. Sir. I must tender it. CORB. Two Cecchines is well?
MOS. No, sixe, Sir. CORB. 'Tis too much. MOS. He talk'd a great while, You must consider that, Sir. CORB. Well, there's three— MOS. Ile giue it him. CORB. Doe so, and there's for thee. MOS. Bountifull bones! What horride strange offence Did he commit 'gainst nature, in his youth, Worthy this age? You see, Sir, how I worke Vnto your ends; take you no notice. VOLT. No, Ile leaue you. MOS. All, is yours; the Deuill, and all, Good Aduocate. Madame, I'le bring you home. LAD. No, Ile go see your Patron. MOS. That you shall not: Ile tell you, why. My purpose is, to vrge My Patron to reforme his Will; and, for The zeale, you 'haue shew'n to day, whereas before You were but third, or fourth, you shall be now Put in the first; which would appeare as beg'd, If you be present. Therefore— LAD. You shall sway mee. ACT. 5. SCENE. 1. VOLPONE. WEll, I am here; and all this brunt is past: I nêre was in dislike with my disguise, Till this fled moment; here, 'twas good, in priuate, But, in your publike, Caue, whil'st I breath. 'Fore God, my left legge 'gan to haue the crampe; And I apprênded, straight, some power had strooke mee With a dead Palsey: Well, I must be merry, And shake it off. A many of these feares Would put mee into some villanous disease, Should they come thick vpon mee: Ile preuent 'hem. Giue mee a boule of lusty wine, to fright This humor from my heart; (Hum, hum, hum) 'Tis almost gone, already: I shall conquer.
Any deuise, now, of rare, ingenious knauery, That would possesse mee with a violent laughter, Would make mee vp, againe: So, so, so, so. This heate is life; 'tis blood, by this time: Mosca! ACT. 5. SCENE. 2. MOSCA. VOLPONE. NANO. CASTRONE. HOw now, Sir? do's the day looke cleare againe? Are we recouerd? and wrought out of error, Into our way? to see our path, before vs? Is our trade free, once more? VOLP. Exquisite Mosca! MOS. Was it not carry'd learnedly? VOLP. And stoutly. Good wits are greatest in extremities. MOS. It were a folly, beyond thought, to trust Any grand act vnto a cowardly spirit: You are not taken with it, enough, mee thinkes? VOLP. O, more, then if I had enioy'd the wench: The pleasure of all wóman-kind 's not like it. MOS. Why, now you speake, Sir. We must, here be fixt; Here, we must rest; this is our maister-peice; We cannot thinke, to goe beyond this. VOLP. True. Thou'hast playd thy prise, my precious Mosca. MOS. Nay Sir, To gull the Court— VOLP. And, quite diuert the torrent, Vpon the innocent. MOS. Yes, and to make So rare a Musiqu, out of Discordes— VOLP. Right. That, yet, to mee 's the strangest! how th'hast borne it! That these (being so diuided 'mongst them selues) Should not sent some-what, or in mee, or thee, Or doubt their owne side. MOS. True. They will not see't; Too much light blinds 'hem, I thinke: each of 'hem Is so possest, and stuft with his owne hopes, That any thing, vnto the contrary, Neuer so true, or neuer so apparent,
Neuer so palpable, they will resist it— VOLP. Like a temptation of the Deuill. MOS. Right Sir. Merchants may talke of trade, and your great Signiors Of land, that yeelds well; but if Italy Haue any glebe, more fruictfull, then these fellowes, I am deceiu'd. Did not your Aduocate rare? VOLP. O, my mst honor'd Fathers, my graue Fathers, Vnder correction of your Father-hoods, What face of truth is, here? If these strange deedes May passe, most honour'd Fathers—I had much a doe To forbeare laughing. MOS. 'T seem'd to mee, you sweate, Sir. VOLP. In troth, I did a little. MOS. But confesse, Sir, Were you not daunted? VOLP. In good faith, I was A little in a mist; but not deiected: Neuer, but still my selfe. MOS. I thinke it, Sir. Now (so truth helpe mee) I must needes say this, Sir, And, out of conscience; for your Aduocate: He' has taken paynes, in faith, Sir, and deseru'd, In my poore iudgement, I speake it, vnder fauour, Not to contrary you, Sir, very richly— Well—to be cosend. VOLP. 'Troth, and I thinke so too, By that I heard him, in the latter ende. MOS. O, but before, Sir; had you heard him, first, Draw it to certaine heads, then aggrauate, Then vse his vehement figures— I look'd stil, When he would shft a shirt; and, doing this Out of pure loue, no hope of gaine— VOLP. 'Tis right. I cannot answer him, Msca, as I would, Not yet; but, for thy sake, at thy intreay, I will beginne, euen now, to vexe 'hem all: This very instant. MOS. Good, Sir. VOLP. Call the Dwarfe. And Eunuch, forth. MOS. Castrone, Nano. NAN. Here. VOLP. Shall we haue a Iig, now? MOS. What you please, Sir. VOLP. Goe, Streight, giue out, about the streetes, you two,
That I am dead; doe it, with constancy, Sadly, do you heare? impute it to the griefe Of this late slander. MOS. What doe you meane Sir? VOLP. O, I shall haue, instantly, my Vulture, Crow, Rauen, come flying hither (on the newes) To peck for carrion, my shee-Wolfe, and all, Greedy, and full of expectation — MOS. And then, to haue it rauish'd from their mouths? VOLP. 'Tis true, I will ha' thee put on a gowne, And take vpon thee, as thou wert mine heire; Shew 'hem a Will; Open that chest, and reach Forth one of those, that has the Blankes. Ile straight Put in thy name. MOS. It will be rare, Sir. VOLP. I When they e'ene gape, and finde themselues deluded, MOS. Yes. VOLP. And, thou vse them skiruily. Dispatch, Get on thy gowne. MOS. But, what, Sir, if they aske After the body? VOLP. Say, it was corrupted, MOS. Ile say▪ it stunke, Sir; and was faine t' haue it Coffin'd vp instantly, and sent away. VOLP. Any thing, what thou wilt. Hold, heres my Will. Get thee a cap, a count-booke, pen and inke, Papers afore thee; fit, as thou wert taking An inuentory of parcells: Ile get vp, Behind the curtine, on a stoole, and hearken; Sometime, peepe ouer; see, how they do looke; With what degrees, their bloud doth leaue their faces; O, 'twill afford me a rare meale of laughter. MOS. Your Aduocate will turne starke dull, vpon it. VOLP. It will take of his Oratories edge. MOS But your Clarissimo, old round-backe, hee Will crumpe you, like a hog-louse, with the touch. VOLP. And what Coruino? MOS O, Sir, looke for him, To morrow morning, with a rope, and a dagger, To visite all the streetes; he must runne madd. My Lady too, that came into the Court,
To beare false witnesse, for your Worship. VOL. Yes, And kist mee 'fore the Fathers; when my face Flow'd all with oyles. MOS. And sweate—Sir. Why, your gold Is such another med'cine, it dries vp All those offensiue sauors! It transformes The most deformed, and restores 'hem louely, As't were the strange oëticall Girdle. IOVE Could not inuent, t' himselfe, a shroud more subtle, To passe Acrisius guardes. It is the thing Makes all the world her grace, her youth, her beauty. VOL. I thinke, she loues me. MOS. Who? the Lady, Sir? Shee's iealous of you. VOL. Do'st thou say so? MOS. Hearke, There's some, already. VOL. Looke. MOS. It is the Vul∣ture: Hee has the quickest sent. VOLP. Ile to my place, Thou, to thy posture, MOS. I am set. VOLP. But, Mosca, Play the Artificer now, torture 'hem, rarely. ACT. 5. SCENE. 3. VOLTORE. MOSCA. CORBACCIO. CORVINO. LADY. VOLPONE. HOw now, my Mosca? MOS. Turkie Carpets, nine— VOLT. Taking an inuentory? that is well. MOS. Two Sutes of bedding, Tissen— VOLT. Where's the Will? Let me read that, the while. CORB. So, set me downe: And, get you home. VOLT. Is he come, now, to trouble vs? MOS. Of Cloth of gold, two more— CORB. Is it done, Mosca? MOS. Of seuerall vellets, eight— VOLT. I like his care. CORB. Dost thou not heare? CORV. Ha? is th' houre come, Mosca? VOLP. I, now, they muster. CORV. What do's the Aduocate, here?
Or this Corbaccio? CORB. What doe these here? LAD. Mosca? Is his thred spunne? MOS. Eight Chests of Linnen— VOLP. O, My fine Dame would bee, too! CORV. Mosca, the Will, That I may shew it these, and rid hem hence. MOS. Six Chests of Diaper foure of Damaske—There. CORB. Is that the Will? MOS. Downe-Beds, and Boulsters— VOLP. Rare! Bee busie still. Now, they begin to flutter: They neuer thinke of me. Looke, see, see see! How their swift eies runne ouer the long deed, Vnto the Name, and to the Legacies, What is bequeath'd them, there— MOS. Ten Sutes of Han∣ging— VOLP. I, i' their garters, Mosca. Now, their hopes Are at the gaspe. VOLT. Mosca the heire? CORB. What's that? VOLP. My Aduocate is dumbe, Looke to my Merchant, Hee has heard of some strange storme, a ship is lost: He faintes My Lady will swoune. Old Glazen-eies, He hath not reach'd his dispaire, yet. CORB. All these Are out of hope, I'am sure the man. CORV. But, Mosca— MOS. Two Cabinets. CORV. Is this in earnest? MOS. One Of Ebony— CORV. Or, do you but delude mee? MOS. The other, Mother of Pearle—I am very busie. Good faith, it is a fortune throwne vpon me - Item, one Salt of Agai—not my seeking. LAD. Do you heare, Sir? MOS. A perfum'd Boxe— 'pray you forbeare, You see I am troubled—made of an Onyx— LAD How! MOS. To morrow, or next day, I shall be at leasure, To talke with you all. CORV. Is this my large hopes issue? LAD. Sir, I must haue a fayrer answere. MOS Madame? Mary, and shall: 'pray you, fairely quit my house.
Nay, raise no tempest with your lookes; but, hearke you: Remember, what your Ladyship offerd mee, To put you in, an heire; go to, thinke on't. And what you said, eene your best Madames did For maintaynance, and why not you? Inough. Go home, and vse the poore Sir Poll. Your Knight, well; For feare I tell some riddles; Go, be melancholique. VOLP. O, my fine Deuill! CORV. Mosca, 'pray you a word. MOS. Lord! will not you take your dispatch hence, yet? Me thinkes (of all) you should haue beene th' example. Why should you stay, here? with what thought? what pro∣mise? Heare you; do not you know, I know you an asse? And, that you would; most faine, haue beene a wittoll, If fortune would haue let you? that you are A declar'd cuckold, on good termes? This Pearle, You'll say, was yours? right. This Diamant? Ile not deny't, but thanke you. Much here, else? It may be so. Why, thinke that these good workes May helpe to hide your bad: Ile not betray you, Although you be but extraordinary, And haue it onely in title, it sufficeth. Go home; be melancholique, too: or mad. VOLP. Rare Mosca! how his villany becomes him. VOLT. Certaine, he doth delude all these, for mee. CORB. Mosca the heire? VOLP. O, his fowre eies haue found it. CORB. I'am cosen'd, cheated, by a Parasite-slaue; Harlot, t'hast gul'd mee. MOS. Yes, Sir. Stop your mouth, Or I shall draw the only tooth, is left. Are not you he, that filthy couetous wretch, With the three legges, that, here, in hope of prey, Haue, any time this three yeare, snuft about, With your most grou'ling nose; and would haue hir'd Mee, to the pois'ning of my Patron? Sir?
Are not you he, that haue, to day, in Court, Profess'd the dis-inheriting of your sonne? Periur'd your selfe? goe home, and die, and stinke; If you but croake a sillable, all comes out: Away, and call your porters, go, go stinke. VOLP. Excellent varlet! VOLT. Now, my faithfull Mosca, I finde thy constancie. MOS. Sir? VOLT. Sincere. MOS. A Table Of Porphiry—I mar'le, you'll be thus troublesome. VOL. Nay, leaue off now, they are gone. MOS. Why? who are you? What? who did send for you? O'crie you mercy, Reuerend Sir: good faith, I am grieu'd for you, That any chance of mine should thus defeate Your (I must needs say) most deseruing trauailes: But, I protest, Sir, it was cast vpon me, And I could, almost, wish to be without it, But, that the will o'th' dead must be obseru'd. Mary, my ioy is, that you need it not, You haue a gift, Sir, (thanke your education) Will neuer let you want, while there are men, And malice to breed causes. Would I had But halfe the like, for all my fortune, Sir. If I haue any sutes (as I do hope, Things being so easie, and direct, I shall not) I will make bold with your obstreperous aide, (Conceiue me) for your fee, Sir. In meane time, You, that haue so much law, I know ha' the conscience, Not to be couetous of what is mine. Good Sir, I thanke you, for my plate; 'twill helpe To set vp a yong man. Good faith, you looke As you were costiue; best goe home, and purge, Sir, VOLP. Bid him, eate lettice well: my witty mischiefe, Let me embrace thee. O, that I could now Transforme thee to a Venus—Mosca, goe, Streight, take my habite of Clarissimo,
And walke the streets; bee seene, torment 'hem more: Wee must pursew, as well as plot. Who would Haue lost this feast? MOS. I doubt, it will loose them. VOLP. O, my recouery shall recouer all, That I could now but thinke on some disguise, To meete 'hem in: and aske 'hem questions. How I would vexe 'hem still, at euery turne? MOS. Sir, I can fit you. VOLP. Canst thou? MOS. Yes. I knowe One o'the Commandadori, Sir, so like you, Him will I streight make drunke, and bring you his habite. VOLP. A rare disguise, and answering thy braine! O, I will be a sharpe disease vnto 'hem. MOS. Sir, you must looke for curses— VOLP. Till they burst; The FOXE fares euer best, when he is curst. ACT. 5. SCENE. 4. PEREGRINE. MERCATORI. 3. WOMAN. POLITIQVE. AM I inough disguis'd? MER. 1. I warrant you. PER. All my ambition is to fright him, onely. MER. 2. If you could ship him away, twere excellent, MER. 3. To Zant, or to Alepo? PER. Yes, and haue's Aduentures put i' th' Booke of voyages, And his guld story registred, for truth? Well, Gentlemen, when I am in, a while; And that you thinke vs warme in our discourse, Know your approaches. MER. 1. Trust it, to our care. PER. 'Saue you faire Lady. Is Sir Poll. within? WOM. I do not know, Sir. PER. 'Pray you, say vnto him, Here is a merchant, vpon earnest businesse, Desires to speake with him. WOM. I will see, Sir. PER. 'Pray you. I see, the Family is all female, here. WOM. Hee sai's, Sir, hee has waighty affaires of State,
That now require him whole; some other time, You may possesse him. PER. 'Pray you, say againe, If those require him whole; these will exact him, Whereof I bring him tidings. What might bee His graue affaire of State, now? how, to make Bolognian sauseges, here, in Venice, sparing One o' th' Ingredients. WOM. Sir, he sai's, he knowes By your word tidings, that you are no States-man, And therefore, wills you stay. PER. Sweet, 'pray you returne him, I haue not read so many Proclamations, And studied them, for words, as hee has done— But, here he deignes to come. POL. Sir! I must craue Your courteous pardon; There hath chanc'd (to day) Vnkinde disaster, 'twìxt my Lady, and mee: And I was penning my Apologie To giue her satisfaction, as you came, now. PER. Sir, I am greiu'd, I bring you worse disaster; The Gentleman, you met at th' Port, to day, That told you, he was newly arriu'd— POL. I, was A fugitiue- Punke? PER. No, Sir, a Spie, set on you, And hee has made relation to the Senate, That you profest to him, to haue a plot, To sell the State of Venice, to the Turke. POL. O' mee. PER. For which, warrants are sign'd by this time, To apprehend you, and to search your study, For papers— POL. Alasse, Sir. I haue none, but notes, Drawne out of Play-bookes— PER. All the better, Sir. POL. And some Essayes. What shall I doe? PER. Sir, Best Conuay your selfe▪ into a Sugar-Chest; Or, if you could lie round, a Frayle were rare: And I could send you, aboard POL. Sir, I but talk'd so, For discourse sake, merely. PER. Hearke, they are there▪ POL. I am a wretch, a wretch. PER. What, will you doe Sir? Ha you nere a Curren-Butt to leape into?
They'll put you to the Rack, you must be sodaine. POL. Sir, I haue an ingine— MER. 3. Sir Politique Would-be? MER. 2. Where is hee? POL. That I haue thought vpon, be∣fore time. PER. What is it? POL. I shall nêre indure the torture. Mary, it is, Sir, of a Tortoyse-shell, Apted, for these extremities: 'Pray you Sir, helpe mee. Here, I' haue a place, Sir, to put back my leggs, Please you to lay it on, Sir, with this cap, And my black gloues, Iie lie, Sir, like a Tortoyse, Till they are gone, PER. And, call you this an ingine? POL. Mine owne deuise— Good Sir, bid my wiues women To burne my papers. MER. 1. Where's hee hid? MER. 3. we must, And will, sure, finde him. MER. 2. Which is his study? MER. 1. What Are you, Sir? PER. I'am a merchant, that came here To looke vpon this Tortoyse. MER. 3. Howe? MER. 1. St Marke! What Beast is this? PER. It is a Fish. MER. 2. Come out, here. PER. Nay, you may strike him, Sir, and tread vpon him: Hee'll beare a cart. MER. 1. What, to runne ouer him? PER. Yes. MER. 3. Letts iumpe, vpon him; MER. 2. Can hee not goe? PER. He creepes Sir. MER. 1. Letts see him creepe PER. No, good Sir, you will hurt him. MER. 2. (Heart) Ile see him creepe; or prick his gutts. MER. 3. Come out, here. PER. 'Pray you, Sir, (creepe a little) MER. 1. Forth. MER. 2. Yet furder. PER. Good Sir. (creepe) MER. 2. Wee'll see his leggs. MER. 3. Gods 'so hee has garters! MER. 1. I, and gloues! MER. 2. Is this▪
Your fearefull Tortoyse? PER. Now, Sir Poll. Wee are euen; For your next proiect, I shall bee prepar'd: I am sory, for the funerall of your notes, Sir. MER. 1. 'Twere a rare motion, to be seene in Fleete-street! MER. 2. I, i' the Terme. MER. 1. Or Smithfield, in the Faire. MER. 3. Me thinkes, tis but a melancholique sight! PER. Farewell, most politique Tortoyse. POL. where's my Lady? Knowes she of this? WOM. I know not, Sir. POL. Enquire. O, I shall bee the fable of all feasts; The freight of the Gazetti; ship-boies tale; And, which is worst, euen talke for Ordinaries. WOM My Lady's come most melancholique, home, And say's, Sir, she will straight to sea, for Physick. POL. And I, to shunne, this place, and clime for euer; Creeping, with house, on back: and thinke it well, To shrinke my poore head, in my politique shell, ACT. 4. SCENE. 5. VOLPONE. MOSCA. AM I then like him? MOS. O, Sir, you are hee: No man can seuer you. VOLP. Good. MOS. But, what am I? VOLP. 'Fore heau'n, a braue Clarissimo, thou becom'st it! Pitty, thou wert not borne one. MOS. If I hold My made one, 'twill be well. VOLP. Ile goe, and see What newes, first, at the Court. MOS. Do so. My FOXE Is out on his hole, and, ere he shall re-enter, Ile make him languish, in his borrow'd case, Except he come to composition, with mee: Androgyno, Castrone, Nano. ALL. Here. MOS. Go, recreate your selues, abroad; go, sport: So, now I haue the keies, and am possest. Since hee will, needes, be dead, afore his time,
Ile burie him, or gaine by him; I'am his heyre: And so will keepe me, till he share at least. To cosen him of all, were but a cheat Well plac'd; no man would construe it a sinne: Let his sport pay for't, this is call'd the FOXE-trap. ACT. 5. SCENE. 6. CORBACCIO. CORVINO. VOLPONE, THey say, the Court is set. CORV. We must mainteine Our first tale good, for both our reputations. CORB. Why? mine's no tale: my sonne would, there, haue kild me. CORV. That's true, I had forgot; Mine is, I am sure But, for your Will, Sir. CORB. I, Ile come vpon him, For that, hereafter; now his Patron's dead. VOLP. Signior Coruino! and Corbaccio! Sir, Much ioy vnto you. CORV. Of what? VOLP. The sodaine good, Dropt downe vpon you— CORB. Where? VOLP. (And, none knowes how) From old Ʋolpone, Sir. CORB. Out, errant Knaue. VOLP. Let not your too much wealth, Sir, make you furious. CORB. Away, thou varlet. VOLP Why Sir? CORB. Do'st thou mock me? VOLP. You mock the world, Sir, did you not change Wills? CORB. Out, harlot. VOLP. O! belike you are the man, Signior Coruino? 'faith, you carry it well; You grow not mad withall: I loue your spirit. You are not ouer-leauend, with your fortune. You should ha'some would swell, now, like a wine-fat, With such an Autumne—Did he gi'you all, Sir? CORV. Auoid, you Rascall. VOLP. 'Troth, your wife has shew'ne
Her selfe a very woman; but, you are well, You need not care, you haue a good estate, To beare it out Sir: better, by this chance. Except Corbaccio haue a share? CORV. Hence varlet. VOLP. You will not be a' knowne, Sir: why, 'tis wise, Thus doe all Gam'sters, at all games, dissemble; No man will seeme to winne: here, comes my Vulture, Heauing his beake vp i' the ayre, and snuffing. ACT. 5. SCENE. 7. VOLTORE. VOLPONE. OVt-stript thus, by a Parasite? a slaue? Would run on errands? and make legs, for crums? Well, what Ile do— VOLP. The Court stayes for your wor∣ship. I eêne reioyce, Sir, at your worships happinesse, And, that it fell into so learned hands, That vnderstand the fingering. VOLT. What do you meane? VOLP, I meane to be a sutor to your worship, For the small tenement, out of reparations; That, at the end of your long row of houses, By the Piscaria: It was, in Ʋolpone's time, Your predecessor, êre he grew diseas'd, A handsome, pretty, custom'd▪ baudy-house, As any was in Venice (none disprais'd) But fell with him; His body, and that house Decay'd, together. VOLT. Come, Sir, leaue your prating. VOLP. Why, if your worship giue me but your hand, That I may ha' the refusall; I haue done. 'Tis a meere toy, to you, Sir; candle rents: As your learn'd worship knowes— VOLT. What doe I know? VOLP. Mary, no end of your wealth, Sir, God decrease it. VOLT. Mistaking knaue! what, mockst thou my mis-fortune?
VOLP. His blessing on your heart, Sir, would 'twere more. Now, to my first, againe; at the next corner. ACT. 5. SCENE. 8. CORBACCIO. CORVINO. (MOSCA passant) VOLPONE. SEE, in our habite! see the impudent varlet! CORV. That I could shoote mine eyes at him, like gun∣stones. VOLP. But, is this true, Sir, of the Parasite? CORB. Againe, t'afflict vs? Monster! VOLP. In good faith, Sir, I'am hartily greeu'd, a beard of your graue length Should be so ouer-reach'd. I neuer brook'd That Parasites hayre, mee thought his nose should cosen, There still was somewhat, in his looke, did promise The bane of a Clarissimo. CORB. Knaue— VOLP. Mee thinkes, Yet you, that are so traded i'the world, A witty merchant, the fine bird, Coruino, That haue such morall Emblemes on your name, Should not haue sung your shame; and dropt your cheese: To let the FOXE laugh at your emptinesse. CORV. Sirrah, you thinke, the priuiledge of the place, And your red saucy cap, that seemes (to mee) Nayl'd to your iolt-head, with those two Cecchines, Can warrant your abuses; come you, hither: You shall perceiue, Sir, I dare beate you. Approch. VOLP. No hast, Sir, I do know your valure, well, Since you durst publish what you are, Sir. CORV. Tar∣ry, I'ld speake, with you. VOLP. Sir, another time— CORV. Nay, now. VOLP. O God, Sir! I were a wise man
Would stand the fury of a distracted cuckold. CORB. What! come againe? VOLP. Vpon 'hem, Mosca; saue mee. CORB. The ayre's infected, where he breathes. CORV. Lets flye him. VOLP. Excellent Basiliske! Turne vpon the Vulture. ACT. 5. SCENE. 9. VOLTORE. MOSCA. VOLPONE. WEll, flesh-flie, it is Sommer with you now; Your Winter will come on, MOS. Good Aduo∣cate, 'Pray thee, not rayle, nor threaten out of place, thus; Thoult make a soloecisme (as Madam sayes) Get you a biggen, more: your brayne breakes loose. VOLT. Well, Sir. VOLP. Would you haue mee beate the inso∣lent slaue? Throwe durt, vppon his first good cloathes? VOLT. This same Is, doubtlesse, some Familiar! VOLP. Sir, the Court, In troth, stayes for you. I am madd, a Mule, That neuer read Iustinian, should get vp, And ride an Aduocate. Had you no quirk, To auoide gullage, Sir, by such a creature? I hope▪ you do but iest; he has not done't: This 's but confederacy, to blinde the rest. You are the heyre? VOLT. A strange, officious, Trouble-some knaue! thou dost torment mee. VOLP. I know— It cannot bee, Sir, that you should be cosen'd; 'Tis not within the wit of man, to do it:
You are so wise, so prudent — And, 'tis fit, That wealth, and wisdome still, should go together— ACT. 5. SCENE. 10. AVOCATORI. 4. NOTARIO. COMMANDADORI. BONARIO. CELIA. CORBACCIO. COR∣VINO. VOLTORE. VOLPONE. ARe all the parties, here? NOT. All but the Aduocate. AVOC. 2 And, here he comes. AVOC. Then bring 'hem forth to sentence. VOLT. O, my most honourd Fathers, let your mercy Once winne vpon your iustice, to forgiue — I am distracted— VOLP. What will he do, now? VOLP. O, I know not which to addresse my selfe to, first, Whether your Father-hoods, or these innocents — CORV. Will hee betray himselfe, VOLT. Whome, equal∣ly, I haue abus'd, out of most couetous endes— CORV. The man is mad! CORB. What's that? CORV. Hee is possest. VOLT. For which; now strooke in conscience, here I prostrate My selfe, at your offended feete, for pardon. AVOC. 1. 2. Arise. CEL. O heau'n, how iust thou art! VOLP. I'am caught I' myne owne noose— CORV. Be constant. Sir, nought now Can helpe, but impudence. AVOC. 1. Speake forward. COM. Silence. VOLT. It is not passion in mee, reuerend Fathers, But onely conscience, conscience, my good Sires, That makes me, now, tell trueth. That Parasite, That Knaue hath beene the instrument of all— AVOC. Where is that Knaue? fetch him. VOLP. I go. CORV. Graue Fathers,
This man's distracted, he confest it, now; For, hoping to bee old Volpone's heyre, Who now is dead— AVOC. 3. How? AVOC. 2. Is Volpone dead? CORV. Dead since, graue Fathers— BON. O sure vengeance▪ AVOC. 1. Stay,— Then, he was no deceiuer? VOLT. O, no, none: The Parasite, graue Fathers— CORV. He do's speake, Out of mere enuie, 'cause the seruant's made The thing, he gap't for; please your Father-hoods, This is the truth: though, Ile not iustifie The other, but he may bee somewhere faulty. VOLT. I, to your hopes, as well as mine, Coruinoc But Ile vse modesty. 'Pleaseth your wisdomes To viewe these certaine notes, and but conferre them; As I hope fauour, they shall speake cleare truth. CORV. The Deuill ha's entred him. BON. Or bides in you. AVOC. 4 Wee haue done ill, by a publike Officer, To send for him, if he be heire; AVOC. 2. For whome? AVOC 4. Him, that they call the Parasite. AVOC. 3. 'Tis true; He is a man, of great estate, now left. AVOC. 4. Goe you, and learne his name; and say, the Court Intreates his presence, here: but, to the clearing Of some few doubts. AVOC. 2. This same's a labyrinth! AVOC. 1. Stand you vnto your first report? CORV. My state, My life, my fame— BON. Where is 't? CORV. Are at the stake AVOC. 1. Is yours so too? CORB. The Aduocate's a knave: And has a forked tongue— AVOC. 2. Speake to the point. CORB. So is the Parasite, too. AVOC. 1. This is confu∣sion. VOLT. I do beseech your Father-hoods, read but those;
CORV. And credit nothing, the false spirit hath write It cannot be (my Sires) but he is possest. ACT. 5. SCENE. 11. VOLPONE. NANO. ANDROGYNO. CASTRONE. TO make a snare, for mine owne neck! and run My head into it, wilfully! with laughter! When I had newly scap't, was free, and cleare! Out of mere wantonnesse! ô, the dull Deuill Was in this braine of mine, when I deuis'd it; And Mosca gaue it second: Hè must now Helpe to seare vp this veyne, or we bleed dead. How now! who let you loose? whether go you, now? What? to buy Ginger-bread? or to drowne Kitlings? NAN. Sir, Maister Mosca call'd vs out of dores, And bid vs all go play, and tooke the keyes. AND. Yes. VOLP. Did Maister Mosca take the keyes? why, so! I am farder, in. These are my fine conceipts! I must be merry, with a mischiefe to me! What a vile wretch was I, that could not beare My fortune, soberly? I must ha' my Crotchets! And my Conundrums! well, go you, and seeke him: His meaning may be truer, then my feare. Bid him he, streight, come to me, to the Court; Thether will I; and, if 'the possible, Vn-screw my Aduocate, vpon new hopes: When I prouok'd him, then I lost my selfe. ACT. 5. SCENE. 10. AVOCATORI, &c. THese things can nêre be reconcil'd. He, here, Professeth, that the Gentleman was wrong'd;
And that the Gentlewoman was brought thether, Forc'd by her husband: and there left. VOLT. Most true. CEL. How ready is heau'n to those, that pray. AVOC. 1. But, that Volpone would haue rauish'd her, he holds Vtterly false; knowing his impotence. CORV. Graue Fathers, he is possest; againe, I say Possest: nay, if there be possession, And obsession, he has both. AVOC. 3. Here comes our Officer. VOLP. The Parasite will streight be, here, graue Fathers. AVOC. 4. You might inuent some other name, Sir varlet. AVOC. 3. Did not the Notarie meet him? VOLP. Not, that I know. AVOC. 4. His comming will cleare all. AVOC. 2. Yet it is misty. VOLT. May't please your Father-hoods— VOLP. Sir, the Parasite Will'd me to tell you, that his Maister liues; That you are still the man; your hopes the same; And this was, onely a iest— VOLT. How? VOLP. Sir, to trie If you were firme, and how you stood affected. VOLT. Art 'sure he liues? VOLP. Do I liue, Sir? VOLT. O me! I was too violent. VOLP. Sir, you may redeeme it, They said, you were possest; fall downe, and seeme so: Ile helpe to make it good. God blesse the man! Stop your wind hard, and swell: See, see, see, see! He vomits crooked pinnes! his eyes are set, Like a dead hares, hung in a poulters shop! His mouth's running away! Do you see, Signior? Now, 'tis in his belly! CORV. I, the Deuill! VOLP. Now, in his throate. CORV. I, I perceiue it plaine. VOLP. 'Twill out, 'twill out; stand cleere. See, where it flyes! In shape of a blew toad, with a battes wings!
Do not you see it, Sir? CORB. What? I thinke I doe. CORV. 'Tis too manifest. VOLP. Looke! he comes t' him∣selfe! VOLT. Where am I? VOLP. Take good heart, the worst is past, Sir. You are dis-possest. AVOC. 1. What accident is this? AVOC. 2. Sodaine, and full of wonder! AVOC. 3. If hee were Possest, as it appeares, all this is nothing. CORV. He has beene, often, subiect to these fitts. AVOC. 1. Shew him that writing, do you know it, Sir? VOLP. Deny it, Sir, forsweare it, know it not. VOLT. Yes, I do know it well, it is my hand: But all, that it containes, is false. BON. 3. O practise! AVOC. 2. What maze is this! AVOC. 1. Is hee not guilty, then, Whome you, there, name the Parasite? VOLT. Graue Fathers, No more then, his good Patron, old Volpone. AVOC. 4. Why, hee is dead? VOLT. O no, my honor'd Fathers, Hee liues— AVOC. 1. How! liues? VOLT. Liues. AVOC. 2. This is subtler, yet! AVOC. 3. You sayd, hee was dead? VOLT. Neuer. AVOC. 3. You sayd so? CORV. I heard so. AVOC. 4. Here comes the Gentleman, make him way. AVOC. 3 A stoole. AVOC. 4. A proper man! and, were Ʋolpone dead, A fit match for my daughter. AVOC. 3. Giue him way. VOLP. Mosca, I was almost lost, the Aduocate Had betrayd all; but, now, it is recouer'd: Al's on the henge againe—say, I am liuing. MOS. What busie knaue is this. Most reuerend Fathers, I sooner, had attended your graue pleasures, But that my order, for the funerall Of my deare Patron did require mee— VOLP. (Mosca!) MOS. Whome I intend to bury, like a Gentleman—
VOLP. I, quick, and cosen me of all. AVOC. 2. Still stranger! More intricate! AVOC. 1. And come about, againe! AVOC. 4 It is a match, my daughter is bestow'd. MOS. (Will you gi' mee halfe? VOLP. First, Ile bee hang'd. MOS. I know, Your voice is good, cry not so low'd) AVOC. 1. Demand The Aduocate. Sir, did not you affirme, Volpone was aliue? VOLP. Yes, and he is; This Gent'man told me, so. (Thou shalt haue halfe.) MOS. Whose drunkard is this same? speake some, that knowe him: I neuer saw his face▪ (I cannot now Afford it you so cheape. VOLP. No?) AVOC. 1, What say you? VOLT. The Officer told mee. VOLP. I did, graue Fathers, And will maintayne, he liues, with mine owne life. And that this creature told me. (I was borne, With all good starres my enemies.) MOS. Most graue Fathers, If such an insolence, as this, must passe Vpon me, I am silent: 'Twas not this, For which you sent, I hope. AVOC. 2. Take him away. (VOLP. Mosca.) AVOC. 3. Let him be whipt. (VOLP. Wilt thou betray mee? Cosen me?) AVOC. 3. And taught, to beare himselfe Toward a person of his ranke. AVOC. 4. Away. MOS. I humbly thanke your Father-hoods. VOLP. Soft, soft: whipt? And loose all that I haue? If I confesse, It cannot bee much more. AVOC. 4. Sir, are you mar∣ried? VOLP. They'll bee ally'd, anone; I must be resolute: The FOXE shall, here, vncase. (MOS. Patron.) VOLP. Nay, now, My ruines shall not come alone; your match Ile hinder sure: my substance shall not glew you,
Nor screw you, into a Family. (MOS. Why, Patron!) VOLP. I am Ʋolpone, and this is my Knaue; This, his owne Knaue; This, auarices Foole; This, a Chimaera of Wittall, Foole, and Knaue; And, reuerend Fathers, since we all can hope Nought, but a sentence, let's not now dispaire it. You heare mee breife. CORV. May it please your Father-hoods— COM. Silence. AVOC. 1. The knot is now vndone, by miracle! AVOC. 2. Nothing can be more cleare. AVOC. 3. Or, can more proue These innocent. AVOC. 1. Giue 'hem their liberty. BON. Heauen could not, long, let such grosse crimes be hid. AVOC. 2. If this be held the high way, to get riches, May I be poore. AVOC. 3. This's not the game, but torment. AVOC. 1. These possesse wealth, as sick men possesse Feuers, Which, trulyer, may be sayd to possesse them. AVOC. 2. Disroabe that Parasite. CORV. Mo▪ ho∣nor'd Fathers— AVOC. 1. Can you plead ought to stay the course of Iustice? If you can, speake. CORV. VOLT. We beg fauor, CEL. And mercy. AVOC. 1. You hurt your innocence, suing for the guilty. Stand forth; and, first, the Parasite. You appeare T' haue beene the chiefest minister, if not plotter, In all these leud impostures; and now, lastly, Haue, with your impudence, abus'd the Court, And habite of a Gentleman of Venice, Being a fellow of no birth, or bloud: For which, our sentence is, first thou be whipt; Then liue perpetuall prisoner in our Gallies. VOLT. I thanke you, for him. MOS. Bane to thy woluish na∣ture. AVOC. 1. Deliuer him to the Saffi. Thou, Volpone, By bloud, and ranke a Gentleman, canst not fall Vnder like censure; But our iudgement on thee
Is, that thy substance all be straight confiscate To the Hospitall, of the Incurabl: And, since the most was gotten by imposture, By fayning lme, got, palsey and such diseases, Thou art to he in prison, crampt with irons, Till thou bee'st sick, and lame indeed. Remoue him. VOLP. This is call'd mortifiyng of a FOXE. AVOC. 1. Thou Ʋoliore, to take away the scandale Thou hast giu'n all worthy men, of thy profession, Art banish'd from their Fellowship, and our State. Corbacci, bring him neare. VVe here possesse Thy sonne, of all thy' estate; and confine thee To the Monastery of San' Spirito: Where since thou knew'st not how to liue well here, Thou shalt be learn'd to die well. CORB. Ha! what said he? COM. You shall know anone, Sir. AVOC. Thou Coruino, shalt Be straight imbarqu'd from thine owne house, and row'd Round about Ʋenice, through the grand Canale, Wearing a cap, with fayre, long Asses eares, In steed o hrnes: and so, to mount (a paper Pin'd on thy brest) to the Berlin— CORV. Yes, And, haue mine eyes beat out with stinking fish, Brus d fruit and rotten egges—'Tis well. I 'am glad, I shall not see my shame, yet. AVOC. 1. And to expiate Thy wrongs done to thy wife, thou art to send her Home, to her father, with her dowrie trebled: And these are all your Iudgements—(ALL. Honour'd Fathers.) AVOC. 1. Which may not be reuok'd. Now, you begin When crimes are done, and past, and to be punish'd, To thinke what your crimes are; away, with them. Let all, that see these vices thus rewarded, Take heart, and loue to study 'hem. Mischiefes feed Like beasts, till they bee fat, and then they bleed.
VOLPONE. THe seasoning of a Play is the applause, Now, though the Foxe be punish'd by the lawes, He, yet, doth hope there is no suffring due, For any fact, which he hath done 'gainst you; If there be, censure him: here he, doubtfull, stands. If not, fare Iouially, and clap your hands. THE END.
