18507.209 S100048 99835901 132
March 14. Numb. 23. The Continuation of our Weekly Newes, from the 18. of February to this 14. of March. Containing, amongst other things, these particulars following: The good successe of the King of Sweden in the Land of Meckelburgh, with the names of the Townes he hath lately taken. With divers particulars concerning Monsieur Tilly his preparation and strength to oppose the said King of Sweden. The French Kings Letter to the Court Parliament of Normandy, concerning the restraint of the Queene Mo∣ther, and other of the Nobility of France. Jn French and English. LONDON: Printed for Nath. Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.
Continuation of the weekely Newes. From Berlin, the 3. of February. THe last great and sudden Frost, hath beene cause that the King of Sweden gave over the siege inten∣ded against Landsberg: And having given order for the fortifying of such places as hee hath taken, and left good Garrisons every where, finding no more Imperiall troops to drive out of Pomerania he went backe with his Armie, and having past the River of Oder, entred into the Dukedome of Meckelburgh, where comming unlooked for amongst the Imperialists, (that lye here and there enquartered, and ive upon the Inhabitants, as their masters, having a better resolu∣tion to eat and drinke than to fight) he awakened them with his warlike Musicke of thundering Ordnance and Muskets, most un∣pleasing to them, and there made himselfe master of divers good places and Townes; as, Friedland, Brvndenberg, and Malchin all the Imperialists that are able to escape, flying away as fast as they can leaving every where their booties and goods, which they have these many yeeres robbed, behind them, unto their victorious enemies. As for Tilly, he having written to the States of Silesia, requiring them to receive into their Country such Imperiall forces as hee would send thither, to bee enquartered there, and entertained by contribution untill winter should be past, (promising the number should not exceed 7000. men) and amplifying his Letters with many kind words; and complaints of the wants and miseries of the said Imperiall forces that came out of Pomerania, and other parts thereabouts, to move the said States to compassion; hee received for all that, for all answer, a round denyall, grounded upon impos∣sibilitie,
the people in that Country being scarce able to live with those forces that are already lying upon them and whereof they did hope and expect to be freed very shortly, lest all might come to a ge∣nerall rebellion. Tilly himselfe hath appointed his generall Rendez-vous for the Imperiall Forces at Dessaw, and hath sent some troopes to Franck∣fort on the Oder: But there is small store of victuals and munition to be found for them; and therefore great discontentment amongst them. Out of the Countries of Franconia, Suevia, and those parts, there are now marching many Imperiall troopes towards Pomerania, and from Lindaw there are sent that way 60. Waggons with Munition. But those Imperiall. Souldiers, having lived at ease, without any discipline, are very unwilling to march, where they shall be no lon∣ger commanders over the poore people, and therefore they runne a∣way where they can escape. The Commanders and Officers them∣selves seeme to have no great pleasure to goe; where they will bee forced to use rather their Weapons against the Enemy, than hither∣to they have done amongst those that could not withstand. I cannot expresse in words, how rigorously it is proceeded against those No∣bles and Gentlemen of Franconia, who either themselves or by some friends, brothers or fathers, have in time past served against the House of Austria: Their Lands, houses, and goods being daily ta∣ken from them, by such as come eyther with Commission or Let∣ters of the Emperour, that bestowed the same on them. So that whole Families, their wives and children, are driven out, to seeke where to live, being not suffered to take the least thing with them. The Lord comfort them, and all his distressed people. Extract of a Letter from Francfort, the 12. of February. THere is as yet no certainty, whether or no the Countries of Gu∣lick and Berghen shall be freed from the Troopes that lye there enquartered. The Paltsgrave of Newburgh is still at Bruxels, solli∣citing the Archdutchesse to give order for withdrawing the Spanish and Imperiall forces out of those Countries. But Count Iohn of Nassaw, who commands the Imperialists there (the same that was so long prisoner at Wesell) continueth in his resolution not to march with his forces from thence, unlesse he receive expresse Command∣ment from the Emperour. Meane while the Countries suffer pitiful∣ly, and are altogether ruinated.
The thirteene Cantons of Switzerland have beene assembled at Baden, where they have beene a good while busied, to advise how to make an agreement betwixt those of Zurick and the Bishop of Costance, and the Abbot of S. Gall, who both doe demand the resti∣tution of some Ecclesiasticall goods and Churches from those of Zu∣rick and Berne. But all that consultation came to nothing. The Pro∣testants there have resolved and united themselves so, that they will give no way to the pretences of those Romanists, notwithstanding the injuries and scornfull words, which daily the Papists Priests vt∣ter, both publikely and privately, and not without threatnings a∣gainst them. The Protestant Princes and States, which remaine yet breathing in Germany, are now together at Leipsick, at which Towne the Ele∣ctor of Saxen arrived on the 4. of February last, with a Trayne con∣sisting of 700. horses. And on the same day there arrived also in person the Elector of Brandenburg, accompanied with 250. horses. The Duke of Deuxponts, (a Prince Palatine that in time past was Ad∣ministrator at Heydelberg) being diverted by other occasions from comming himselfe, hath given his power and Commission to the Landgrave of Hessen. All the Protestant Imperiall Cities have sent their Deputies thither; and the Circle of Suevia likewise, as also the Nobility of Franconia. The two Dukes of Meckelburg, (not∣withstanding that they are proscribed by the Emperour, and that the Duke of Friedland hath long since taken their Countrey) having beene invited thither by the Elector of Saxen, are also there. So that now there is great expectation every where, what will be by them resolved and concluded. Extract out of another Letter of the 15. of February. THe King of Sweden past on the 4. of February, stilo novo, over the Bridge at Stettn, with an Army consisting of about sixteene thousand men, horse and foot, and entred into the Dukedome of Meckelburg, where (as we receive good information) he hath taken many places of consequence, especially Matchin, and is come before Gustrow, which was the Princely seat of the Dukes of Meckelburg, and hath, since the taking of the said Country by Walstein (otherwise Duke of Friedland, to whom the Emperour gave that whole Duke∣dome) beene by him, both much fortified and much adorned, by many excellent Artificers, expressely sent thither; as Painters,
Gardners, Architects, &c. The said Duke of Friedland intending to have there his Princely Court and residence. The King of Sweden hath left (besides the Garrisons of such places as he hath taken in Pomerania) behinde him in the March of Brandenburg, an Armie of 9000 men. And Tilly (not knowing what that King intended when he went backe from before Landsberg) gave order for the fortifying of a place called Beskou, and sent many troopes towards Franckfort on the Oder; which troopes doe there, and in all those parts where now they are, commit such insolencies, that it cannot be written: They destroy and spoile all; and although there is but small, or in some places no provision of victuals at all; yet whatsoever they finde, it they are not able to consume the same, or if it is not worth the carrying away, they doe spoile, burne, or other∣wise make it uselesse. The Citie of Strasburg having, upon the summons which the Im∣periall Commissioners made, for the restitution of some Churches and Church-lands, refused to obey, must now already suffer the said Commissioners in three of their Villages, where the Ministers and Schoolmasters are commanded to avoyd these places: their Schooles and Churches are taken, and the Imperiall Armes (the Blacke Eagle) put upon the doores. How the people, or rather the Magistrate will disgest this, time will teach us. The Citie of Franckfort (on the Maine) is also in danger, for ha∣ving refused to receive some Iesuites that came thither by the Com∣mission, they brought with them from the Duke of Baveere, and the Electors of Maints. We expect with great longing, what the Protestants will resolve at Leipsick, where the first proposition was mae on the 10. of Febr. but it is so secret, that I can tell you nothing more, but that we ra∣ther feare their feare, than hope for any generous designes. Extract of another Letter of the 25. of February. IT is certaine that the King of Sweden hath taken the good Towne of New-Brandenburgh, where there lay a Garrison of Imper alists, commanded by Colonell Marezan, who yeelded the said Towne by composition, and went out (delivering the same to that brave King) with six hundred Souldiers, with promise not to serve against the said King these three moneths.
The nowes of this reddition being brought to Treptow, (ano∣ther good Towne in the Dukedome of Meckelberg, and also kept by an Imperiall Garrison) the Imperialists therein fearing to get not so good a condition, fled presently, and so left the Towne for the King, who being speedily advertised thereof, tooke the same also on the same day. And we understand that besides these Townes, hee hath since ta∣ken Malchin, Malchow, Dammin, Garbaw, and other places: So that he is already master of all the Dukedome of Meckelburg, save onely foure (but principall good) Townes; being Wismar, Rostock, Butzow, and Damitz, which is a strong place, and lyeth upon the River of Elbe. What he intendeth now to doe, whether to besiege one of those Townes, or to goe towards Magdenburg, time must teach us: for his intentions are kept in his owne brest. As for Tilly, we understand that he had gathered together eight thousand Imperialists, with whom he marched towards Branden∣burg, to hinder the said Kings comming towards Magdenburg. The Assembly of the Protestants began at Leipsick, and the first proposition hath beene made, but it is kept as yet so secret, that we cannot heare what it consists of. It is written from thence, that amongst other Ambassadours and Deputies, there hath beene admitted an Ambassadour that came from the King of Sweden, and another (whom they call Monsieur de L'isle) from the French King. But it is much marvelled at, that the Cite of Hamburg hath not sent any Deputie thither, seeing Norim∣berg, Franckfort, & divers other such Cities (who are now in greater danger than Hamburg, and have beene warned by divers Electors, and commanded by the Imperiall Commiss oners, not to send any Deputy thither) have notwithstanding sent their Deputies with full power and Commission. Concerning the Countries of Gulick. Cleve, and Berghen, &c. It is now certainely beleeved, that they shall bee freed from all the troopes that lye therein, both of the Spaniards, Imperialists, and the States: Her Highnesle the Infanta having published a Decree at Bruxels, bearing date the 19 of February last, whereby shee signifi∣eth, That upon their stance of the Duke of Newburg, Her Highnesse doth grant unto the Innabitants to raze and breake downe all For∣tifications that of late have beene made in the said lands of Gulicke, Cleve, Bergh, Marcke, Ravenspergh and Ravenstein, except only the
three places that are reserved. And concerning the withdrawing of all Forces and Souldiers in the said Countries, That she had gi∣ven order, that without saile, they all should be drawne out of their Garrisons on the fifth day of March, stilo novo, and shall bee carried quite out of the said Countries, (although the said new fortificati∣ons should not yet be razed) and carry with them onely their pro∣visions and Munitions that belong unto them, leaving behind what they found when they arrived: So that the Countries shall here∣after remaine free and neutrall; It being understood that the States shall likewise withdraw all their For∣ces out of the said Countries, &c. Whe∣ther this hath been performed, we shall shortly heare.
LETTRE DV ROY, &c. MONSIEVR de Frainuille, I'auois occasion d'esperer apres tant depeines & de travaux que i'ay suppor∣tez pour le bien & repos de cét Estat, que i'en r'em∣porterois le fruict que ie m'estois promis: Mais comme i'ay esté sur le poinct de joüir de ces aduanta∣ges, & faire ressenter à mes peuples le soulagement que ie leur ay tousiours voulu procurer: Aucuns factieux ennemis de la tran∣quilité publique, ayans par leurs artifices esloigne d'aupres de moy mon Frere le Duc d'Orleans, & en suitte aigry l'esprit de la Royne Madame ma Mere contre mon Cousin le Cardinal de Riche∣lieu, de telle sorte qu'aucune consideration publique ny particuliere ne la peu ramener, quelque instance ou suplication que i'y aye em∣ployée, Recognoissant combien elle estoit preoccupée par de mauuais conseilz, I'ay estimé à propos afin de l'esloinger de ceux qui artifi∣cieusement les luy pouuoient suggerer, qu'elle s'arrestast pour quel∣que temps en ma ville de Compeigne, attendant que son esprit se puisse adoucir: & mettre en estat de concourir auec la sincerité quelle à faict par le passé au Conseilz que i'auray à prendre à l'ad∣uenir pour le bien de mon Estat: ainsi que vous verrez plus parti∣culierement par la Lettre que i'escris à ma Cour de Parlement, sur laquelle me remettant ie n'adiouteray icy aucre chose si ce n'est pour vous recommander de faire part de cette occasion à ceux de mes seruiteurs que vous iugerez a propos. Sur ce ie prie Dieu qu'il vous dyt Monsieur de Frainuille en sa saincte garde. Escrit a Com∣peigne le 23. Iour de Feurier, 1631. Signé, LOVIS. Et plus bas, PHELYPEAVX. Et seellée d'vn cachet en cire rouge. Et à la superscription, A Monsieur de Frainuille, Conseiller enmon Con∣seil d'estat, & Premier President en na Cour de Parlement de Rouen.
DE PAR LE ROY. NOs AMEZ & feaulx, Comme nous croyons auoir subject d'esperer que tant de trauaux que nous auons depuis quelques années continuelle∣ment suportez pour le bien de cét Estat, que Dieu à soubmis a nostre conduitte, seroient ap∣prouuez & secondez par tous ceux qui sont auprés de nous, Nous auons este bien estonnez lors qu'apres auoir abbattu la rebellion de Rochelle, & de toutes les Villes qui luy ad'he∣roient, Restably la Religion Catholique en toutes les Pro∣uinces de nostre Royaume, secouru par deux fois noz alliez en Italie, & r'emporté des aduantages qui nous mettent en estat de ne deuoir porter enuie a nos predecesseurs, Quelques diuisions domestiques qui ont esté meditées par de mauuis Espritz de quelques particuliers, pendant que nous estions du tout occupez aux grandes affaires dont on à veu le succes. Nous ont empesché de jouir de la tranquilité que nous deui∣ons nous promettre auecraison; & de procurer dans icellè le soulagement que nous desirions à nos subjetz, Recognoissant ce mal, qui nous à esté d'aurant plus sensible qu'il nous priue pour le present du fruict de nos soings & de nos peins, qui n'ont autre fin que la descharge de nostre peuple que nous auons tousiours eu en l'Esprit comme le but de toutes nos a∣ctions, Nous n'auons rien cublié de tout ce qui nous à esté possible pour y apporter remede; Et par ce qu'on auoit aigry la Royne nostre tres-honorée Dame & Mere, contre nostre tres-cher & bien amé Cousin le Cardinall de Richelieu, Il ny a instance que nous n'ayons faicte, priere ny suplication
que nous n'ayons employée, n'y consideration publique & particuliere que nous n'ayons mise en auant pour a∣doucir son Esprit; Nostre dict Cousin recognoissant ce qu'il luy doit par toutes sortes de considerations, à faict tont ce qu'il à peu por sa satisfaction, se soubmettant auec toute l'humilité possible & tous les respectz imaginables à telles loix quelle auroit agreable de luy prescrire; Ce que nous luy aurions offert plusieurs fois de nostre propre bouche, La reve∣rence qu'il à pour elle, la mesme porté jusques à ce poinct, de nous suplier & presser diuerses fois de trouuer bon qu'il se re∣tirast du manimēt de nos affaires; Ce que l'vtilité de ses serui∣ces passez & l'interest de nostre auctorité ne nous à pas seule∣ment permis de penser à luy accorder. Nous n'auons d'autre part rien obmis pour contenter l'Esprit de nostre tres-cher & tres-amé Frere le Duc d'Orleans, jusques à donner à ceux qui ont le principal pouuoir auprés de luy (selon son desir) plus de biens que l'estat de nos finances ne pouuoit porter, Et des honneurs au delà de ce qu'ils deuoient raisonnablemēt se promettre; Mais tout cela n'a pas empesché qu'ils ne l'ay∣ent faict sortir de la Cour, estimans qu'vne personne de sa naissance estant esloignée de nous, au mesme temps que la Royne nostre dicte Dame & Mere y demeureroit, tesmoignāt du mescontentement, Il seroit difficile que nous peussions quelque adresse qu'on y peust apporter conduire nos affaires aux bonnes fins que nous nous proposons pour la prosperité de ce Royaume, sa grandeur, & le bien de nos subjects, Veu principallement les affaires que nous auons encore au dehors. Pour ceste raison estant apres vne longue patience venu en ceste ville de Compiegne, a fin que la Royne, bien intention∣née de soy-mesme, esloignée par ce moyen beaucoup de mauuais Espritz, conspirast plus facilement avec nous, aux moyens justes & raisonnables pour arresterle cours des facti∣ons qui se formoyent en nostre Estat, Ce dont nous l'auons faict suplier par de nos principaux ministres, sans quelle ayt voulu v entendre. NOVS AVONS en fin à nostre grand re∣gret
esté contrainct de tenter vne remede plus puissant à ce mal, que nous auons jusques à present esprouué si rebelle aux plus benigns que nous y auons apportez, Et recongnoissan qu'aucuns des autheurs de ces divisions continuoient à les en∣tretenir, Nous n'auons peu éuiter d'en esloigner quelques vns de nostre Cour, n'y mesme quoy qu'auec vne indicible peine de nous separer pour quelque temps d'elle, pendant le∣quel son Esprit puisse s'adoucir & se remettre en estat de concourir auec la sincerité quelle à faict par le passé aux Conceilz que nous auons à prendre à l'aduenir pour garan∣tirce Royaume des maux qui le menecent, lors qu'il deuoit recueillir le fruit de nos labeurs: Nous esperons que la bonté de son naturel ramenera son esprit, & la reunira bien tost à nous: Nous le demandons à Dieu de tout nostre Coeur, & qu'il benisse les bonnes intentions que nous auons pour cét Estat, ainsi qu'il à faict par le passé. Donné a Compiegne, le 23. jour de Feburier, 1631. Signé, LOVIS. Et plus bas, PHELYPEAVX. Et seellé d'vn cachet encire rouge. Et à la superscription, Anos améz & feaulx Conseillers, les Gens tenans nostre Cour de Parlement de Rouen.
The French King his Letters, &c. Monsieur de Freinuille: WEE had well hoped, that after so great labours and paines which we have undergone for the good and quiet of this State, we should have received such fruit as we promised our selfe. But so it is, that being up∣on the point of enjoying these benefits, and ready to let our people feele the ease and comfort which wee have alwaies studied to procure them: Some factious enemies of the publike peace, having by their sleights estranged our Brother the Duke of Orleans from us, and consequently exasperated the spi∣rit of the Queene our Mother against our Coufin the Cardinall de Richelieu, in such sort that no considerations, either publike or pri∣vate, notwithstanding all intreaties and supplications wee have u∣sed, could any whit move her. And well understanding how deep∣ly she was prepossest with ill counsels, we have thought it fit (to the end she may bee sequestred from such as cunningly might suggest them unto her) that she abide for a while in our Towne of Com∣piegne, untill such time as her spirit bee lenified, and so well setled, that she concur (with the sincerity which heretofore she hath used) to such Counsels as we shall undertake hereafter, for the good of our State. As you shall see more particularly by our Letters written to our Court of Parliament, vnto which referring our selfe, wee will adde nothing here further, but onely to will you that you impart this businesse to such of our Servants as you shall thinke fittest. And so we pray God have you in his keeping. Written at Compeigne, Febr. 23. 1631. Signed, LEWIS. And underneath, PHELYPEAVX. The Superscription, To Monsieur Freinuille, one of our Councellors of State, and Chiefe Pre∣sident in our Court of Parliament at Rouen.
To the Court of Parliament, &c. By the King. TRustie and welbeloved: We supposed we had cause to hope that those many trauels, which for certaine yeeres together we have continu∣ally undergone, for the good of this State, which God hath committed to our charge, should have beene well lik'd and seconded by all them that are about us: Notwithstanding we marvaile much, that ha∣ving brought downe the Rebellion of Rochell, and all other the Townes her adherents; re-established the Catholike Re∣ligion in all Provinces of our Realme, as also twice holpen our Allyes in Italy, and returned with such advantages as have put us in so good plight, that we need not envie any of our predecessors: That now certaine domesticall dissenti∣ons, plotted by the mischievous spirits of some particular men, whilst we were altogether busied in those important affaires whereof we have seene the successe; should hinder us from enjoying that tranquility, which with good reason we might expect, and from procuring thereby that good to our Subjects which we desire. Vnderstanding well this mis∣chiefe, which is so much the more sensible unto us, in that for the present it deprives us of the fruit of all our care and paines, which have never any other ends but the ease of our people, which we have continually in our heart, as the prin∣cipall scope of all our designes. Wee have forgot nothing which hath beene possible on our part to give remedy there∣to.
And because they have exasperated the Queene our most honoured Lady and Mother, against our deare and welbeloved Cousin the Cardinall of Richelieu: There re∣maines no intreaty which we have not made, nor prayer nor supplication which we have not used, nor any consideration publike nor private, which we have not set before her, to as∣swage her spirit: Our said Cousin likewise acknowledging his duty to her in all manner of respects, hath done whatever he could to satisfie her, submitting himselfe with all possible humility and all imaginable respects, to such Lawes as shee her selfe should be pleased to prescribe him; which we have likewise many times offered with our owne mouth: This re∣verence which he hath ever had towards her notwithstan∣ding, she hath divers times prayed and pressed us, that wee would thinke it good to remove him from the mannaging of our affaires, which the utility of his past services, and the in∣terest of our Authority would not so much as permit us to thinke of condescending unto. On the other side, wee have omitted nothing to give content to our most deare and wel∣beloved Brother the Duke of Orleans: insomuch that wee have granted unto them of principall ranke and place about him, (according to his owne desire) more meanes than the state of our Revenue could well beare: And of honours like∣wise, beyond that which with reason they could expect. Notwithstanding all these, they have perswaded him to leave the Court: Adjudging that a Personage of his birth and quality being departed from us, and at such time as the Queene our said Lady and Mother abode there not without testimony of discontent; it would be very hard for us (doe what we can) to bring our affaires to good issue, which wee propose for the prosperity and honour of this Kingdome, and the good of our Subjects; especially, considering the De∣signes which we have yet abroad. For which cause, after long patience, being arrived at this our Towne of Compeigne, to the end that the Queene (who of her selfe is wel-disposed)
being by this meanes sequestred from many bad spirits, may the better concur with us, by all just and reasonable meanes, to stop the course of Factions which arise in our State: which thing we have often prayed her by our principall Servants: notwithstanding she would not hearken thereto. We have therefore, to our great griefe, at last beene constrained to as∣say a more powerfull remedy for this mischiefe, which wee have found hitherto so refractorie to the most gentle Cures we could apply. And understanding that certaine of the Authors of these divisions doe yet continue to cherish them, we could not chuse but sequester some of them from our Court, and to separate our selfe for a while, though with paine unspeakeable, from the Queene our deare Mother, un∣till such time as her spirit be lenified, and she brought to con∣cur, with such sincerity as she hath hertofore done, to those Designes which we are to undertake hereafter, for the secu∣rity of this Kingdome from those mischiefes that threaten it now, at such time as it ought to reape the fruits of our labors: We hope that the goodnes of her nature will shortly reduce her spirit, and re-unite it unto us: Which wee beg of Al∣mighty God with all our heart, and that hee will blesse the good intentions which we have for this State, as he hitherto hath done. Dated at Compeigne, Februar. 23. 1631. Signed LEWIS. And underneath, PHELYPEAVX. Superscribed, To our trusty and wel-beloved Councellours, the members of our Court of Parliament at Rouen. FINIS.
June, 2 Numb. 31. THE CONTINVATION of our weekly Nevves from Forrine parts. ntay amongst divers matters these Particulars following. The preparation of the Duke of Saxony and all the Protestant Princes, and their vnanimous ioyning with the King of Sweden, for the recovery and preservation of theyr Liberties, against the unjust persecution of the Emperour. The great Preparation of the King of SVVEDEN for the performance of some great Designe about the River Elve. The Emperours denunciation of grievous Pu∣nishment against the Citie Newrembergh and all that shall partake with them, by reason they continue in the raising Forces contrary to the Emperours Com∣mand, to which end the Emperor hath given charge to the D. of Bavaria to oppose them with all his power. Two thundring Ploclamations of the Emperours, against all the Protestant Princes of the late Diet at Lypsich, and all those which Ioyne with them. The Malicious inhumane Cruelty offered to the Dead bodies of those which were Martyred at the taking of M∣denburgh, and Tillies causing of Te Deum to be sung for his Bloudy massacring of the innocent Protestants. The late proceeding  both sides in the Low-Countries. LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.
THE CONTINVATION OF our Weekely Newes. From Venice the 24. of May. 1631. COncerning the Peace now, there is no farther question made, since there are no more forces leavied. And besides this, the Governour of Mylan hath faithfully promised within the space of one Moneth, to establish a Generall reformation. The Messenger which is returned from his Emperial Maj. Certifie, that notwithstanding his Maj. did not well like and approve of the agreement made at Cherasco, con∣cerning the Switzers at Suza, and Avigliano. Neverthelesse, he is now willing to stand to, and ratifie the same: to the end, that Jtalie might subsist in Peace and tranquility, and all these broyles and distractions, may be allayed and have a quiet end. And furthermore, that remainder of those Spanish forces in J∣talie, may be brought together, and march toward the lower-Palatinate, there to be enquartered. For all the Forces out of those parts are departed, and are at this present employed, some of them against the King of Sweden, and the rest are marched into the Netherlands, and are employed against the States. From Overlandt the 26. of May. The troupes of Souldiers which late came out of Italy, re∣maine yet in full essence, and are dayly strengthened and aug∣mented. It seemes that whereas formerly, the resolution was to bring them downe toward the Donon, the same no is altered; those Forces shall be employed against the League, contracted by the Protestant Princes and Peeres at Leypsich. Especially, for the defence of the smaller Townes, as Memming and the like. Which at this present are in great danger, and extreamly threat∣ned, if so be they would not yeeld themselves to that League, and receive some of the Protestant forces, that then they shall presently be attached. Hereupon the Imperialists doe not onely expect the rest of their forces, but also certaine thousands more
of Spanish and Italians to ayd and assist them. Wherefore men in these parts are much troubled and perplexed, and take great care how to dispose of all their troupes, and where they shall become, and how they shall be billetted and enquartered. His Maj. the Emperour, hath forewarned us in these parts, not one∣ly to provide for the enquartering of those Spanish and Italian Forces, which are to come, and are now upon the march, but also to find quarter for 25000. other forces, which shall bee newly raised. From Vlm the 25 of May. The Imperiall Forces from Jtalie being 8000. strong are yet hereabouts, they enforme us that certaine thousands more Spa∣nish Forces are shortly to follow them. They intend to blocke up Memmimgen, and will againe re∣duce the same under contribution, and bring it under the Em∣perours Iurisdiction. And for the ensuring of the same, they will lay in some Troupes for Garrison there. And doubtlesse as those of Memmimgen speed, we must look for the same, and not to fare better than our neighbours. Wherefore we of this Citie, the better to defend & guard our selves, we have caused all the trees to be hewen downe, which stood before the Helbergate of this Citie. The Duke of Wirtenbergh with his forces, lyes upon the frontiers. From Berlyn the 27. of May. The foote Forces of the King of Sweden at this present are at Posedan. And his Cavallerie is betweene the Dessaw Sconce, and Posedan. It seemes as we by all circumstances can gather, and conjecture, that his Majesty intends not to enquarter long in these parts. But doe rather thinke that hee will undertake some siedge or other. For his Majesty to that end hath caused many boards and other necessaries to be shipped. And forth of every Regiment he hath taken 400. horse, for to convey the Ordnance, munition, and other Sconce provision. The Lord Feeld-Marshall conducts an Army of 1000. men, which he doth dayly enforce and augment, and levies very strongly to that end. The Forces which were in Pomerania, are now on the march. From Franfort Oder the 29. of May. All things here (God be praised) are in good being, and great and vigilant care is taken for this Citie: great paines day∣ly
is taken about the fortifications of the same. Within this Weeke were brought into this Citie, so many horses of the Im∣perialists, as made up 5. Companies compleat. These horses were taken grafing neare unto great Glogan. The Queenes Majesty of Sweden sent hither lately two Camels richly Laden, to his Maj. with enformation, that God willing shee doth intend shortly to arrive at Wolgast or at Straelzondt her selfe in person. Yesterday here marched by 3. Regiments toward Crossend and farther into Silesia. About Statyn great forces are raised, and the King of Sweden-causes an Army to be assembled to assault the Imperialists which are at Melchim. There are dayly and hourely expected 2000. men from Colbergh to march hither, and also 6000. from Ru∣gen. When these shall be arrived, his Maj. resolves with vio∣lence vehemently to assault Gripswolde, and afterward to con∣duct an Army into Mechelenbergh. From Leypsich the 31. of May. The Prince Elector of Saxony, as also, the Marq. of Brandenbrugh, with their Dukedomes & all their adherents, and Confederates, have yeelded and betaken themselves freely unto the defence & protection of his Maj. of Sweden. The passage of Wirtenbergh is now also granted unto his Maj. At this present here at Leip∣scich are Embassadors of the King of England, the King of Swe∣den, the Prince Elector of Saxonie, and of the Marquis of Bran∣denburgh. And certaine it is that throughout the whole Duke∣dome of Saxonie, the Drum beates, and forces levied openly for his Majestie of Sweden. The Merchants here must contribute to his Princely Excel∣lence of Saxony, 6000. and the rest of the Cittizens of Leipsich, 2000. Florins: and besides this sum, a generall contribution will be raised throughout the whole Dukedome. Magdnburgh by the reason of the late miserable and hide∣ous disaster happened there, is reduced to an heape of stones, being qiute and utterly ruinated. There are not left standing a∣bove 60. or 70. houses about the Walles, and here and there an house at the corner of a Street. His Majestie of Sweden causes a Ship-Bridge to be layd over the River of Elve, at Angert.
From Leypsich the first of June. Last Thursday the Prince Elector of Saxony, departed hence to Torgau, to muster, the new levied forces there, which are certaine thousands strong, he will returne from thence hither a∣gaine. He hath more Patents to levie other forces, both horse and foote. The report here is very strong, that the Generall Tilly hath sent a Legate to our Prince Elector: to acquaint him, that very shortly he doth intend to come himselfe in person, to conferre with his Princely Excellence; declaring farther, that he had ob∣tained good meanes for the contracting of a Peace; which then he would propound unto him. And that he had full authoritie and Commission from his Emp. Maj. which Tilly hath consen∣ted unto. Within Wirtenbergh at this present, are 1500. Souldiers, which were levied for the Duke of Saxony, In their Ensigne they bare this Motto. Though Gods Almighty hand, We doe defend our Land. In other Ensignes which belong to the Forces of the Prote∣stant Princes is comprized this. Not without cause, doe We maintaine this Caus. The Generall Tilly causeth all the Ordnance (which he obtai∣ned in Magdeburgh) to be convayed to Groingen, and hath also given charge and strickt command to two o three hundred Boores or Countrymen, to cast all those Souldiers which were taken Prisoners in the sayd Citie Magdenburgh, with the Car∣kasses of the poore Massacred people, into the river Eive. But his owne Souldiers which were slaie in that expedition, hee yeelded extraordinary honourable buriall. He hath caused the said Prisoners to be strictly examined, to know what is become of their treasure, and where they have hid the same The Gene∣rall doth at this present strike a bridge over the Riuer Elve, to march with an army against the King of Sweden. The army of the King of Sweden is pitcht about Brandenburgh, Ratenan, Nawen, Tremmen, Spandan, & those quarters. The Duke of Saxony, the Marq. of Brandenburgh, and more of the Vnited and Confederate Princes, have given themselves under the Protecti∣on of his Majesty of Sweden, & have yeelded unto him the passage neare unto Wirbergh.
The report is very strong here, that the King of Sweden doth intend to revenge the intollerable usage of the Imperia∣lists at Magdenburgh, he hath some notable exployt in hand, wherefore he hath newly layd a Bridge over the River Elve, neare unto Angermunde. His Emp. Maj. hath denounced Banishment, and sorely threatned the Citie Neurenbergh, because they continue leavy∣ing of forces his Majesty therefore hath delivered the same Ci∣tie to the Duke of Bavaria, and strongly charged the said Duke to persecute those that are belonging unto Neurenburgh with fire and sword: as also all those that adhere unto them. But they regard not these threatnings, but doe proceed strongly with their raising of men. And not onely at Neurenburgh, but through∣out the whole Iurisdictions of all the Protestant Princes. His Majesty of Sweden hath arrested and stayed certaine Mer∣chants at Spancan, who were journeying toward Hamburgh, and required of them fifty thousand Ryxdollers, which they were constrained to pay, because they had in their company an Emperiall Commissarie, who had betaken himselfe into this Company, to be sheltered and so to passe for a Marchant, who otherwise in former time was run from his Majesty of Swedens service, unto the Emperour but now is in hold. From Magdenburgh the 28. of May. All the dead Carkasses are now almost convayed out of this Citie, which have sorely pestered and annoyed us hitherto, and above 2500. Citizens, which were slaine in the fury and burnt, are cast into the River Elve. There were many of them so dis∣sigured with the fire, that it was impossible any way to dis∣cerne them who they were. Yesterday here was sung for Ioy of the taking of this Citie. To Deum Laudamus, and the Ord∣nance of the Citie, three times discharged. The Generall Tilly is at this present here, and is lodged in the 6. Shop-houses with his Concomitants. From Brandenburgh the first of June. The whole Marck even vnto the river Elue, is now quite freed from the Imperialists. Yesterday Doctor Stollman arriued here, who was taken prisoner at the loosing of M∣denburgh with his Sonne. Hee escaped with his Sonne whilst the fire was so exceeding great in the Emperours Army neare
vnto Magdenburgh, but was constrained to swimme through the Riuer Elue, but now is here with his Maiestie of Sweden. Into this Army come dayly some Magdenburgers or other which formerly were imprisoned but now are ransomed. Ye∣sterday were attached the Hamburger goods which were brought from Leypsich betweene Ferberlin and Spandon. A cer∣taine Commissarie of the Emperour named Potau thought to haue passed along currantly with their Marchandizes, but boh he and they were stayd and brought to Spandou The Hambrgers for the releasing of their Commodities haue proferred the Kings Maiestie 80000 Ryxedollers. At Wgst are arriued 5000. men which came out of Swede, and more forces are thence expected dayly. Besides these, 15000 men are also expected from Mulcouia. From Franckfort-Oder the 2. dit. Yesterday were brought in hither 5. Companies of Horse, which our forces tooke from the Imperialists neare unto great Gogau, having defeated the Men. Hence are gone 3. Compa∣nies out of this Citie, as also divers out of other Cities to re∣leeve Crossen, which the Imperialists seeme to ayme at. Here in this Citie are still aboundance of men and amongst the rest 800. sicke Soldiers. His Maiestie of Sweden hath shipt aboue 100. peeces of Ordnance at the Haukll. Some light peeces which may be drawne with one, and two horses. Hee intends doubtlesse some notable enterprise. For in his march he ioynes to euery Regiment 10. Peeces of Ordnance. From Isleven, the 30. o May. The 1. of this Month, the Imperiall Army neare unto Mag∣denburgh, happened on fire in three severall places: which fire did much harme amongst them. But by their losse some fared the better. For Doctor Sman the Swedish Chancellor, escaped from his imprisonment who was imprisoned with the Byshop of Halverstad. This Doctor, and his sonne, and two Gentlemen, Servants to the Marshall Falckenburgh, and one Captaine Cresse, escaped, and are safely arrived at Brandenburgh. There were 400 Children of tender yeares within Magdenburgh; kept two dayes long in the Cathedral Church, which missed their Parents and knew not what was become of them, these poore children in two dayes space, eat no victuals, insomuch that some of them were famished.
The Imperiall Mandat or Decree published against the conclusi∣on and resolution lately taken by the Protestant Electors, Princes and States, assembled at Leipsick. FErdinand, &c. To all and every our and the holy Em∣pires Electors, Princes, spirituall and temporall Prelates, Earles, Barons, Lords, Knights, Marshalls, Captaines, Maiors, Bailiffs, Iudges, Counsellors, Citizens, Communal∣ties, and to all and every our and the Empires Subjects: But more particularly to all Commanders, Colonels, Captaines both of horse and foot, Ensignes, Lievtenants, and to all other Officers, and generally to all Soldiers both foot and horse, of what nation, dignity and condition soever, and in what scr∣vice (out of our Armies) soever they are or may be, unto whom these our Patents and Commandements, or a true copy thereof (which we will have beleeved and obeyed as the Ori∣ginall it selfe) shall appeare, We hereby doe signifie, Wheras by Letters dated the fourth of April last the Elector and Duke of Saxen hath given us notice of a conclusion made by the E∣lectors, States, Counsellors, Ambassadours, Deputies, and Commissioners of such Protestants as were absent, lately as∣sembled at Leipsick, the strangenesse whereof hath much mo∣ved and filled with displeasure our Imperiall heart, since that the said Electors, Princes and States have agreed and bound themselves, quite contrary to our admonitions sent before to the said electour of Saxen, under pretext of an order of Exe∣cution of the Circles, to make a dangerous preparation of Warre; and, without any signification of their number and de∣signes, make now already (as from divers parts we are adver∣tised) in severall Circles, and particularly in our Imperiall Ci∣ties great levies: And whereas it is easie to presume, that at this perillous constitution of the Empire, where the King of Sweden is entered as an enemy and having already taken whole Pomerany, a part of the Mark of Brandenburg, and some places Meckeburg, will daily proceede, and incite other forraine forces to doe much: Where the rebellious Towne of Mag∣denburg is not yet brought to obedience, and where many old dangers doe yet appeare; such a dangerous beginning and in∣tent would tend to hinder (and as it were to bereave us of) all
meanes to maintaine the Warres, now so requisite for the de∣fence and necessity of the holy Empire and States thereof; it would further and advantage the power of the enemies; cause yet a greater confusion, troubles and evils, and withall a farre greater mistrust and hatred amongst this Nation: Yea (un∣lesse it be with all speed withstood) it would bring into the whole Roman Empire of the German Nation (our deare Coun∣try) a new unquenchable fire whereby the same (which these 800 yeeres hath most sweetly flourished) would now at once bee consumed to ashes and wholly overthrowne. Therefore we knowing that our duty requires that, as Roman Emperour we doe prevent all such threatning evills, and that such agree∣ments and unions are not to be made nor suffered without the knowledge, consent and pleasure of the Roman Emperour, who we are, but that they are quite contrary unto the Laws, orders and constitutions of the Empire, and the dehortations and admonitions made by us being prohibited under great and grievous punishments, so that wee intend by no meanes to suffer the same. We doe hereby admonish, will and com∣mand you and every of you, and our expresse will, pleasure and commandement is, that you doe not give nor permit any place of Rendez-vous unto my troopes or souldiers, that are, may or might be levied on the behalfe of the said agreement and conclusion made at Leipsick; Neither grant any of them passage or passe whatsoever, but rather where any shall be met or found, that you beat, destroy, disperse and kill them, as you will answer the contrary at your perils of the punishments expressed in the constitutions of the Empire. And most ear∣nestly we doe require and command you the Colonels, I is vte∣nants Captaines, Ensignes Commanders, and all other Offi∣cers both of horse and foot, and all soldiers of what name, con∣dition and quality soever they are or may be, that already are received and entred, or shall yet enter into service of the said preparation and agreement made at Leipsick, against our knowledge, will and pleasure, and against our dehotations, and the Lawes and Rights of the Empire; and more particu∣larly all those that in any way are subject unto us and the holy Empire upon paine and perils comprehended in the said Im∣periall constitutions, and upon paine to lose all the priviledges,
favours, rights, lands, possessions, and also all rights of Com∣panies, Cities and birth; And such others as are not subject to us nor the Empire, upon paine of death, when and wheresoe∣ver they shall be apprehended. Wee most earnestly and ex∣presly command, to give over and forsake all such service, and in time to come never to returne or enter into the same with∣out our knowledge and permission, under what pretext or colour soever they be required or may be induced: And that you make no excuse of your stay by reason of the oath you may or might be sworne and bound by, since the same in this con∣stitution of time is without force I and we doe hereby and by vertue of our Imperiall power discharge and free you of: And if there should be found some amongst you the said Colo∣nels, Captaines, Ensignes, and other Officers and common sol∣diers of horse or foot, that have entered into any service ei∣ther at home in their owne Country, or abroad amongst the troopes of strangers, they and every of them, that in obedi∣ence to this our Imperiall commandement doe or shall returne from that their service unto our troopes, there to serve us and the Empire, and bring their attestations from our Officers, shall have a generall and speciall pardon, and be received a∣gaine into our Imperiall grace. And we will and command withall you the said Electors, Princes and States, lately thus ar∣rived at Leipsick, not to charge or lay upon your vassals, te∣nants inhabitants, burgers and subjects (in all and every your Countryes, Dominions, Cities, and also all Imperiall Townes and Dominions) any contribution, taxe or subsidy for and on the behalfe of your said levies intended and made against our will and contrary to the constitutions of the Empire; Com∣manding withall, if any such imposition and contribution is or should be required, all you the vassals, tenants, burgers, in∣habitants and subjects aforesaid upon the like and afore men∣tioned paine and upon perill to lose all priviledges, rights, and freedomes above mentoned, not to pay or to deliver the said contribution, but rather o remaine constant and faithfull in those duties you owe to us, as Roman Emperour and Su∣preme head of the hol Roma Empire, and also to shew all fa∣vour and furtherance to him that bringeth this our Imperiall and expresse commandement, that the same may without any
let or molestation bee hung up and published, according to your duty and according to our resolution and gracious and constant intention, that we will not suffer you nor any of you, the Electors, Princes and all others, upon your obedience and duty you shall shew herein, to be troubled or grieved, either by us or others, against the peace of the Religion and Policy. And hereof you are not to faile, but dutifully to obey as you tender our pleasure, and will avoid the punishments and reall executi∣on of the foresaid paine. And this is our expresse will and pleasure. Given at Vienna  the fourteenth day of May, 1631. Extract of severall fresh Letters written out of Germany. THe cruelty used by the Imperialists at the taking of Mag∣denburg (the like no History hath nor could ever make mention of) had indeed troubled many Protestants in Ger∣many, especially the Elector of Saxen found himselfe much perplexed upon the newes thereof, when he likewise was much troubled and urged by an Imperiall Ambassadour and many other Messengers and letters, both from the Emperour and other Catholike Electors and Princes. Howsoever seeing by the example of Magdenburg what he and others of his Profession and Religion have to looke for at their enemies hands and promises, and considering the Imperiall Mandates and Proclamations, published (like a thunder) against the con∣clusion lately taken by him and other Protestant Princes and States assembled at Leipsick; and hearing withall of the doubt and feare divers made of his constancie in the said resolution, he both gave order for the greater speed in the levying of his owne forces and sent also severall Messengers to other Prote∣stant Princes, States and Imperiall Cities, with ample letters, whereby he doth not onely assure them of his constancie and proceeding in the performance of their resolution, But ex∣horteth them also, to make greater haste and to take more care than some of them did hitherto to prepare and defend themselves, representing the great necessity and danger, their enemies extraordinary arming, threatnings and executions would else bring them into. These
letters of his have very much rejoyced and strengthened all the good party, especially Norimberg, Strasburg and other good Townes, the most part whereof are already well provided and armed. But Memming lying some what aside and feeling already those Imperiall forces as came and yet daily come out of Jtaly (which amount to some six or seven thousand thereabouts) neere them, they feare (as being neerest to the danger) the execution might beginne at their Towne, howbeit they have as yet and doe still refuse any fur∣ther contribution and admittance of an Imperiall Garrison, where formerly they were subject unto. The Elector of Saxen hath laid 10. or 12. thousand men up∣on his frontiers and makes great preparation. Tilly marches with an armie of 25000. men up into Germa∣ny, either into the Dukedome of Wimar, as some thinke, or else towards the Country of Hessen (as is most likely) there to de∣feat the forces of the Circle of the Rhine, who have there their Rendezvous, and part whereof have lately defeated some of those Imperiall tsoops that Tilly had sent to hinder their said Reudezvous. The King of Sweden (having firmed a royall Campe, since the Elector of Saxen did not grant him for his surety and re∣treate the Towne of Wittenberg to put his Garrison into, nor passage through his Country) expecteth more forces out of Prussia and from other parts; meane while he hath an armie in Silesia to which he hath sent some troopes for reinforcing and the better to oppose them all against the Jmperialists that in∣tend to besiege Crossen. Some of his Caualrie met lately with five Companies of Crabates that came out of Magdenburg laden with very rich booty they made there, which five Companies were all defea∣ted, and left all their riches (as if they had expresly fetched the same) unto the Swedish troopes. The like good fortune befell lately to the Garrison of Wesell, who met with a convoy that carried much money towards the Spanish Camp, which convoy being also beaten left all the money behinde them in their enemies hands.
From Arnhem the 11 of Iune. Our souldiers of Wesell and the neere adjoyning Garrisons 160 strong, have defeated a Convoy which was going from Culin to Antwerp, they were conducted by those of Rhynberk & Orsoy, & were set upon by our men neere about Deuren. In which exploit our soldiers obtained great booty 150000 Rix∣dolers in specie, much Silke & other rich commoditie, swhere∣with divers Carts were laden. The rest of the bootie besides the readie Coine doth amount to the summe of 250000 Rix∣dollers, this bootie they brought into Wesell last Sunday in the vening and 60 or 70 serviceable horses, and 2 Ensignes. The spanish soldiers fled all of them, onely the waggoners, and some other labouring men opposed our men, and killed 3 or 4 of them, but there was no meanes for them to prevaile. The Governour, Chancellour, & Councell of the Province of Geldria, and the Earldome of Zutphen have prescribed a ge∣nerall day of meeting, the 17 of Iune at Nimmegen, where the whole countrie is to appeare. The 12. of Iune from the Army of his Excellence the Prince of Orange. Whereas his Excell the Prince of Orange, had pitcht Armie at the side of the River Ley before the Citie Bridges the 3 of moneth, each one thought that his Excellence was of intenti∣on to approach & besiege the said Citie. But now it appeares probably that his Excel. was not so minded, for he did not en∣trench himselfe there, but lay with his Army in the field onely. In the meane while certaine Committees were sent out of the said Citie in the name of the 4 parts of Flanders to treat with his Excellēce concerning the contribution which was behind and had long time beene unpayd, insomuch that they gave se∣curitie for entire payment of 10 yeares contribution. Where∣upon his Excell with his whole Army departed, and the verie same night tooke his resting place at Maldegom, where we pas∣sed the 5 of Iune over the river Lieve towards Walichem and from thence toward Eckelo, and Caprick, and the 7 of une re∣turned backe with our whole armie at Watervliet, where his Excell. instantly caused retrenchments to be cast up all along the Holland Dike, for the better ensuring of his armie, so that n
case the spanish forces (which as wee understood had continu∣ally followed us) had come upon us, then had we taken the said Dike for our defence. The 8 of Iune the provision of his Excell, was embarqued, and his horse troopes, being commanded presently as soone as they should be landed to march toward Bergnop Zoome. Ye∣sterday were all the Land, forces shipt, and all the waggons put aboard. The sirelockes in the meane time stood in battle array, and held the watch untill all things were safely embarqued. Thus with the whole traine of our armie wee marched from Ysenayck to Rammkens, & so downwards, sayling many hun∣dred shippes together, & so forsooke the Flemish coasts, which country in this our expedition wee have wholly brought un∣der contribution untill the verie Citie Geudt. His Excellence in this expedition had a verie vigilant regard over his whole armie and a speciall care that all things might be carried verie orderly insomuch that hee caused many of his soldiers to bee hanged for their misdemeanours and insolencies committed against the inhabitants of the Countrie: But the like care was not taken on the other side, for many of our soldiers which did straggle somewhat out of their limits had by them their No∣ses and Eares cut off. Three soldiers wives with a child of 8 yeares were taken by the Flemish and hanged. The same day that we came to Watervliet, the spanish that night arrived at Caprick, but did not shew themselves any neerer unto us So that in this enterprize, wee have not met with our enemie to any purpose, and have found no resistance worthy of relation. Onely wee were informed that the ene∣mie brought his whole armie together, therewith intending to cut off all passages from our armie and hinder the victualls from comming to us. What shall follow hereafter in time we shall acquaint you. From Dort 13. of Iune. The armie of his Excellence the Prince of Orange is returned againe out of Flaunders into these parts. Before this Citie are many ships laden with Ordnance, Munition, provision and all warlike necessaries: Most of the hrsemen were landed at Geer∣truydenbergh, & presently hasted thence to Oosterhut, Gilsen & other villages about Breda. The foot forces sayle all of them
toward the high & lower Swalwe, and Geertruydenbergh, whe∣ther these also will land there the time will manifest. In the meane while here and in divers other places many thousands of loaves are baked for the armie. The countrie people in the countrie of Hensden and Alte∣na, flye with all their goods and moveables from their country habitations into the Cities. Their Excellencies the States have prohibited preaching among the Catholickes in the Villages & Townes belonging to S'hertogenbosch, so that all the Churches are shut up continually. Wee have intelligence from Antwerpe with the last letters, that in the beginning of May the fleet of 25 ships at Lisbona is set sayle, among these are 15 Gallioons with 4000, some sup∣pose they are gone toward Calis Mal ioyne themselves to the Castilian armado, others are  that they are bound for Cabo-verde, there to expect  rest, and so to passe forward to Brasill. His Majestie of France is at S. Germani, a the Queene Mother is arrived at Paris with her whole family or house∣hold: But his Majestie had rather that shee had remained at Moulins: Her guard is now lesse than it hath beene neyther is shee so strongly warded as formerly. The kings brother is still a Nancie, The Lord President Legneux is much condemned, for not counselling his Majesties brother for the best in these differences, The king hath charged the Parliament to call Marshall Marilack in question, which might easily endanger his life, by reason that hee hath committed grosse faults in Champagne, as also in Italy, in warlike affaires. The goes a strong report, that new warres is verie like to ensue betweene th Pope, and the great Duke of Moscovy, concerning the succession in Ʋrbinaet. Notwithstanding the Commander Pinsen his ransome is readie, neverthelesse he is not yet at libertie. Count Henry van∣den Bergh questioning one day with him, what he thought the Prince of Orange his enterprize might bee, hee answered him merrily, His Excellence is wise enough to conceale that from me, knowing that I cannot keepe counsell. The said count Hen∣ry is yet at Venlo with 3 or 4 hundred Marriners, it is thought that he will attempt something or other. FINIS.
