24676 S105227 99840956 176397
❧ CER❧¦TAYNE LITEL TREATIES Set forth by Iohn Veron Se∣nonoys, for the erudition and learnyng, of the symple & ingnorant peopell. ☞ (::) ☜ Walke not in ye statutes of your forfathers, kepe not their orde∣naunces, & defil not your selfes wt their Idolles, for I am the lorde your god. But walke ī my statutys, kepe my lawys & doo them. xx chapi. of Ezechyell. (::)
FYrst: how we maye well & truely answer them, that aske vs, how we know the Byble and the scriptures, to be the worde of god. ii. An exposition of all suche places of ye scriptures, as seme, to adscribe vnto god passiōs of mynde, and humayne lymmes. iii. A decleratiō how the masse crepte in fyrste in to the church, and how cleane contrarye to ye scriptures and holy fathers yt is made a pernitious and dam∣nable Idoll beyng a very snare and nette inuented by ye dynell, to catch mens soules, & now by ye papystes, mayntenyd vpholdē and defendyd to pycke pore mēs pursis.
TO THE VORSIPFULL Mayster Wylliam Kynght Mayster of the assaye of the Kynges mayestes mīte in Southwarke, Iohn Verō wysshyth peace, tranquilite of cōsciēce ī crease of diuī knowledg & ūderstādēg frō the heauēli father, through our lorde Iesu christ. So be it WE are now come to ye, poynt of maddnes, impietie and vngod∣lynes, yt whan wt al reuerence, we should submyte our selfs to ye most holy & sacrid scripturs cōtenid ī ye old & new testamēt, wt in maters of oure religiō, gods worshipīg, & our soulis saluatiō owght only, to haue place, to be hard & obeid We as vnfaihtfull & disobediēt childrē, not knowīg ye voic of our most merciful father yt so louīg∣ly, in hys holy bokes, talketh wt vs, beyng but earthe, ashys, and duste, wyll, with all kynde of
blasphemy, presume & take vpō vs, to cal to atriall, examinatiō and iudgment, that most holly, and euerlastyng spirite of the leuyng god, by whose instyincte and dyuine inspyration, as the blessed a postel saīt Peter saith, the holy mē of god, haue setforth and wrytten the scriptures for our erudition & learnyng. For, I beseche you, to what intēt and porpose, should we at any tyme, whan wt ye playn texts of ye holy Byble, our errours, & peruerse oppynions, ar vtterly ingulate confonded and ouerthrowne, aske by what argumēts, it may be prouyd, that the Byble and the scriptures, be the worde of god, excepte we wold attempte the holy gost? Myght not men, with as good reason, aske and demaund of vs, how we konwe
that ther is but one true vncre∣atid, and eternall god, makere gouernour, & lord of al thnygs? Surely, if we doubte of the one, by god cosequēce we must doubt of the other, For what knoledge so euer, at this present tyme, we haue of ye lyuyng god, that same onely we haue by the scripturs, lefte vnto vs for our coumfort, that by them, we should learne to knowe and worshipe god. Now if we doubte of the scriptu¦res, which ar cōteyned in ye holy Byble, then is the knowledg of god doubtful, and so we ar now in a worse case. than euer the Iues (which neuer doubtyd of the veritee of Moyses bokes) ware. Nowe is the hope of our saluation, through Christ clean taken a waye & bannished from Christen mēs hartes, if ye scrip¦scriptures
begyne to be doubted vpon, and to be called to a trial. For how, I praye you all, that demaunde suche questions, shal we know, that christ is come in to thys world, forthe redemptiō of all man kynde? forsouthe, by the scripturs only, Christ hym selfe saynge: Serche ye ye scrip∣tures, for they be they that doo testify of me. As if he shoulde sayd: Yf ye are in doubte, whe∣ther I be the true. Messias or not, euolue and reade deligētly Moyses and the prophetes, and there shall ye fynde, that I am he, in whome all nations shall be blessed. But or euer wee go any farther I wil (by ther leaue and fauore) aske them, what they do call the worde of god, & what they meane by it? I sup∣pose none other, but that they
wyll call that the worde of god, which instructith and teachyth vs, that there is but one liuing god which beynge wtout begyn∣nyng and endyng dyd creat hea¦uen and earth, and all thynges that are conteyned therin. and at last made man in the state of innocency, which after that he was through hys owne faulte falen, and had broken the com∣mandemente of god, coulde not be restoryd, sauyng onely by the sede of the woman, Iesu christ, the very sonne, bothe of god and man. He onely with hys deathe dyd ouer come death and with hys lyfe dyd reduce and brynge lyfe agayne vnto vs, by whose doctryne and spyrituall lyght, we beyng illumynated? do loue god as a father, feare hym as a ryghtouse iudge, wor¦worshipe
hym in faythe, hope, charyte and innocency of lyffe, as a most holy lord. Of hym, we do loke, for a grantuyte and fre remyssion of all our sinnes. are∣surrection or rysyng a gayne, of our mortall bodyes at the daye of iudgment, and for lyfe euer∣lastyng in the worlde to come. Thys, I thyncke, they wyl saye, is the worde of god. But the scriptures which are comprehē∣dyd in the holy Byble do teache thys. Ergo by good argument, the Byble is the worde of god. And verely whosoeuer holdeth oppinion to the contrarye, he is not of god, but of the deuyl the father of lyes. The dyuell from ye begynnyng, as holy Ambrose saith, dyd study, laboure and endeuore hym selfe, to inuerte, deprauate, and wraste the scrip¦scriptures
of god, to make thē doubtfull and of no autorytye amonge men. which thynge, he dyd fryst by hym selfe, whan he dyd precypytat, and caste head∣lyng our fryste parentes in to all kynde of myserye, and now at thys presente tyme, doythe most busely by hys lymmys, to the vtter subuersion, of Christs gdsspell, if suche blasphemous, questions be suffered to be demā¦dyd. For what they do meane yt so busely demaunde, such questy¦ons, the very blynd and ingno∣raunt; may easely perceyue. If any man, beyng askyd suche a questyon, doythe parchaunce answer, that he knowithe the Byble to be the worde of god, be¦cause that the chyrche hathe a¦lowyd it: streyght ways ast hou¦ghe they had gottē the victory
vyctorye vpon a hunderd thou∣sand of there ennemys they ex∣aulte & leape for ioye, sayeng: that ergo the autorytey of the churche, is aboue the scripturs. Which thyng they go aboute to confyrme by the sayeng of saynt Augustyne, Euangelio non crederem, nisi me ecclesiae catholicae commoueret autorytas. that is to saye: I wolde not be∣leue the gosspell, excepte the au∣torytye of the catholyke chyrche shoulde moue me to yt. These wordes are founde in the boke, that he dyd wrytte agaynst the epystyll of an herytycke called. Manichaus. But I wold, that the meanyng of the autor were better consydered, & loked vpō And surely, it shoulde appeare, y• saynt Augustine dyd speake of that chyrche, which dyd obtem∣obtemperate
and obey y• gospel. Therfore with Auguste hyghe, and excellent wordes, he dothe attrybute and ascrybe vnto the churche not as they do falsly in¦terprete, iudiciall autoriti vpō the gosspell, but the cōmēdation therof. For it folowith in a no∣ther place: Vnto whom I haue obeyd, saynge: Beleue the goss∣pell, why should I not be obedy∣ent vnto them saynge: Beleue not Manicheus? Lo here, thou hast, what commendatiō of the scriptures, Augustyne dyd rea¦ceuye frome the chyrche, and how it dyd moue hym, to gyue, credence to the gosspell. Then it folowith of nessecite, yt ye church dyd beleue the gosspell or she cō∣maūdyd or mouyd hym, to giue creadence to yt. Reade the iii. chapter of hys boke of ye confessy¦cōfessiōs,
& thā shal see yt they do most vngodli, yt go about by this holi mās saiēg, to proue yt ye auto¦ritie of ye church is aboue ye scrip¦tures, which thyng. although I myght well & sufficiētly proue, bothe by his sayenges, & wryt∣ynges, in many & sondry places of his workes, yet because I wil not be to tedious at this time I will omyt thē & com to alater Doctor whiche is called Iohn, Gerson Chāncelour of Paryse, which ded liue in ye yeare of our lorde Mcccc. xxix. He, after yt he dyd proue by the true and holy scripturs yt ye prymatiue church was to be preferred vnto the church, yt was in hys tyme, & yt it was not lawfull neyther for the Bysshope of Rome, nor for the churche to alter and immu∣tate the ordonancys of Christe,
and of hys apostelles, as many men dyd foolishly & doubtingly (for these be his words) affirme and asseuere: incontenentely after dyd brynge in and inferre, that thys sayeng of saynte Au∣gustyne: I wolde not beleue the gosspell, excepte the autorytye of the catholyke churche should moue me to it, owght to be ūder¦standyd of the primatiue chur∣che, whiche is the congregation of them, that dyd see christ, dyd heare hym, and ware wytnessis of all that he dyd or sayde. This ye shall fynd in hys boke of the spirituall lyfe of the soule, the seconde lesson, and seuenth cor∣rollarye. And in an other place he doythe inuerte & turne thys sayeng: I wolde not beleue the gosspell excepte the autorytye of the churche shoulde moue me
to it, after thys maner, sayenge yt may ryght well be sayed also: I wolde not beleue the churche, excepte the autorytye of the gosspell should compel or moue me to yt, Therfore I thyncke that this place of this holy doc∣ture, wyll but slenderly helpe them, that take occasion there∣vpon, to preferre the autoritie of the chyrche, vnto gods word & hys scripturys. Which thing shal. more manifestly appeare, by thys my lyttell treatyse, that I haue here setforthe and inti∣tulyd: How wee may make an∣swere to them, that aske vs how wee knowe the Byble, to be the worde of god. In it I do brefely but with manifeste and playne textys of the scriptures confute them, that aske any suche questi¦ones, or yt by the answere that
is made, do gather that the au∣torytye of the chyrche, is aboue the worde of god and the scrip∣tures. Wherunto I haue addid the exposition of al suche placis of the scriptures, as seme to ad∣scribe vnto god, passiones of mynde, and humayne lymmes. Which wylbe to the symple and ignorant reader, a godly docu∣mente to a voyde, the grosse he∣resie of the Anthropomorphits that by the occasion of suche pla¦cys, beynge peruersly vnderstā∣dyd, dyd hold an oppinyō, y• god in hys diuine essence, hath lym∣mes, as mortal men haue. This heresye dyd fyrst aryse & spryng amonge the solytarye persons or monckes of the desertes and wyldernes of Syrye & Egipte And so by lyttel & lyttel dyd en∣crease emonge them, that att
lenght there was lyke to be great shedyng of bloode for yt. But lately I dyd chāce to read a certayne boke, setforthe by a famous clerke beynge yet a lyue wherein, he dothe go aboute to proue, that god by suche maner of speakynges and phrasys dyd of, fo his merciful kindnes shew vnto mortall men, how and af¦ter what fashyon, they shoulde, make hys image symlytud and lycknes: And to corroborat this his godly sayeng, he dothe alege the xviii. chapiter of Genesys, where the lorde sayth: The cla∣mour of the inhabytoures of Sodome and Gomore, is mul∣tiplyed etc. Thehfore I wyll come downe, and see, whether they haue fulfylyd in dede the clamoure and crye whiche ys ascēded and com vp to me. And
agayne the seuenth of Exodus: I wyll extēd and stretche forth my hand vpon Egypte. To com downe, saythe he, and see, dothe belong to hym, that hath feet, eyes, and handes. More ouer he dothe bryng the holy sayengs of the holi phrophit Dauid, whi¦che in the xvi. psalme sayethe: here my prayer wt thyne eares And in the l. psalme. Turne a¦waye thy face frome my synnes. By the which sayengs (as thys man doth affyrme) god wyllith vs to make a simulachre or lye∣kenes of hym, to ye intente, that we should remembre hym the, better. Is not this (I beseche you, good Christē readers) a godly doctryne? not onely con∣forme and agreable to the here¦sye of the Anthropomorphytys, but also most consonant, to the
pernitius Idolatrye of the Gē∣tills? Oh that whan such thou∣ghts & cogitatiōs com in to our breane, we had alwayes before oure eyes, this sayeng of saynte Paule: Whan they compted, thē selfes wyse, they becam fooles, and turnyde the glorye of the immortall god, vnto an image, made not only after y• similitud of a mortall mane, but also of byrdes. etc. Is not god in the scriptures, callyd a lyon, and a lambe? Why maye we not then, by as good reason, fygure hym, after the lyckenes of a lyon, and of alambe also? In many placis of the olde testament, he doythe forbydde vs to make any grauē image or lyckenes. Fyrst in the xx. of Exodus. Thou shalte not make to thy selfe any geauen i∣mage etc. In ye sixte & xx. of Le∣Leuiticus:
ye shall not make vnto your selfs any image or lic¦kenes. The xx vii. of Deutero∣nomye. Cursyd ys that man, y• makyth any caruyd, and moltē image etc. By suche and many other placys bothe of the olde & newe testamēt, we may gather (for as Lactātius ī hys second hoke of diuine institutions and xix chapiter sayeth There can be no relygyon where any lycke¦nes or image ys. Agayne: The sim̄lachres sayth be, or images do exclude all godlynes) that it is not the wyll of god, that any lyckenes or image for that pourpose and intent yt he dothe aleage (for the scripturys onely are the meanes to put vs in re∣membrance of god to make vs to knowe and worshipe hym) should be amonge vs. And that
in suche placys, as the for sayd learnyd mā dyd brynge for hym selfe, god speaketh vnto vs An∣thropopathos, that is to saye, humano morae, after an humayne sorte and fashyon, submyttyng hym selfe to oure imbecillitye and wekenes, as that most holy doctor saynte Augustyne doeth testifye, in hys booke of the diuine essence, out of the whiche I haue transslatyd the expo∣sitione fo the aboue rehersyd placys, to arme and fence the symple reader a gaynste suche carnall thoughts and immagi∣nations. ye shall haue farther more anexed vnto these a decla∣ration how the Masse crepte in to the church of christ & hath bē made contrarye to ye scriptures and holy fatheres a pernitious and damnable Idoll. Whiche I
haue thought now at this time, that the papystes do hope so ear¦nestly to see theyr adhomynatiō vp agayne and in the same vene¦ration that it hath ben affore, necessarye to be setforth, most so¦rofully lamentyng & bewalyng in my harte, that it is yet of so manye men, agaynst theyr own consciencys knoledge & vnder∣standyng, so styfly maynteynyd vpholden, & defendyd. Verely we do ī this matter wāt ye spirit of that most holi prophet Elias Which if he were emonge vs wolde surely saye: Howe longe halte ye betwen ii oppynyones? If the lorde begod, folowe hym if Ball go after hym. What I do meane by thys, all Christen harts perceaue and vnderstād But surely yt ys a meruelous and a wonderfull case, to se how
ye deuell, hath craftely behauyd hym selfe in thys pageaunt and playe. yt is not vnknowen vnto all christyen men, that the sacra¦ment of the body and bloode of christ, was institutyd of ye lorde to put vs in remembrance that throwgh hys death and passion we ar recōsiled vnto hys father, which at all tymes, for the loue that he beareth to hys sonne, is ready to helpe and succour vs, as hys chyldren and coheyres with hys sonne Iesu Christ. Therfor whā any great plages dyd chaunce vnto the people of god for theyr synnes, or for the tryall of ther faythe, as pestilēc death of theyr frendes & catell vnseasonable wetheres, hunger and famyne etc. the deuell go∣ynge then most craftely about, to brynge them to desperation, &
to persuade them, yt they ware cleane reiectyd caste a waye & for sakē of god: They ware wōt to come all to gether with mour¦nyng and lamentatiō confessīg theyr synnes, and to arme and fense them selfs, agaynst the tē∣tations of the deuyll, which all waies dyd studye, but thē moste esspecialli whā thei war plagīd to pluck a way frō their hartes the hope and truste, that they had in god, through oure lorde and sauyour Iesu christ, dyd reaceyue the pleadge of the atō∣ment, which is betwene vs and god the father. Where vpon by the subtyll crafte of the deuyll & of hys lymmys so many kyn∣des of masses dyd sodaīly sprīg ī y• cōgregatiō of god. As masses for pestilence, for fayre weader, for death of catyll. etc. Whiche
by the byshope of rome and hys Auernalls (I should haue sayd cardynalls) ware inuentid and excogitate, to spoyle wydowes and fatherlesse chyldrē, and to turne the goods of the poure in to theyr syngulare, and pryuat profyte as it shall more playn∣ly appeare in thys declaration of the masse which with the a¦boue rehersyd treaties, I do de¦dycate offer and nūcupate vnto your good maystership, as vnto hym yt with all his harte, louith the worde of god and hys holy scriptures detestith abhorrith & hatyth all vayne superstition I¦dolatrye and deuelysh inuētion with thys rablement, of dome ceremonyes, setforthe onely, by Sathan and hys vngodly myni¦sters to bannysh out frome the cōgregation of the holy saynts
that most wholsome sede of the soule, whiche is the gosspell of Iesu christe, whose holly & dyui¦ne spirite do rule gouerne and guyde you with youre louynge spouse your wyfe in al affayres that ye go aboute, that what so euer ye do, may be to the glory and saluation of your soules. Wrytten at hackeney the yeare of our lorde. M. D. xlviii the xxvi. of Maye. If there come any vnto you, & brynge not thys doctryne, hym receyue not in to your house, ney¦ther byde hym god spede. For he that byddyth hym, god spede, is partaker of his euell dedes ii. Epistell of Iohn.
If Manycheus: Marcyon, Va¦lentinus, or any of the gentylls doythe come to the, sayeng y• ye matter wherof all thynges are made was affore the creatyon: saie vnto him: In ye begīnīg god dyd create heauē & earthe But what if he wyl not beleue ye scrip¦tures? Abhore thou hym after yt as furyous & madde. For he yt wyll not beleue ye creator of all thyngs, & goyth a¦bout to make y• truthe it selfe a lyar what pardon is he wor¦thy to haue etc Io Chrisostū in the ii. homily vpon Genesys. (::) ☞ ❧ ☜
How we may well & truly āswer them, that aske how we know the Byble to be the word of GOD. BE cause that many now a dayes, beynge with many∣fest and playne scripturys conuictyd of errour, not onely wyll not returne, and be couer∣tyd, but moste blasphemously speakyng agaynst the holy and sacryde scriptures, aske, how we know them, to be the worde of god? and if any Christyan man, dothe answere them, that he dothe know and beleue, that they be ye word of god, because yt the churche hath alowyd them by and by do obiecte, that ergo, it is lawfull for the churche or congregation, to set forthe tra∣ditions lawes, and articles of
our faith which ought wt no lesse reuerence to be obseruyd, and kepte than the aboue rehersyd scriptures: I wyll here accor∣dyng to my lytell talent, fyrste and formyst shewe what ye chur¦che of Christ is. Secondarlye, whether it ys lawfull for ye chur¦che, thowgh it hath a lowid and reaceyuid the canonycall scrip∣tures, to adde any thynge vnto them, or to mynnysh any thyng frome them and so to make new lawes and statutes withoute or agaynst the scriptures? The which thyng beīg done, I truste that the blasphemy of suche per¦sons shall be well a batyd. The churche therfore, although out¦wardely it ys taken, for the con¦gregation of all them, yt custō∣mably com together, to preach and heare the gosspell, of Iesu
and also to mynyster & receyue ye sacramēts instytutyd by hym, whether they haue the tru faith or not: yet notwtstandynge, the true churche, ys the cōgregatiō of them onely, which do beleue, truly in Iesu christ, and haue in¦dede hys holy spirite in them: For Paule wryttyng to ye Ephe¦syās saythe: he hath made christ aboue all thynges, the heade of the congregation, whiche ys hys body and fulnesse of hym, that fyllyth all, in all thynges. And to the Corrīthyās he sayth ye are the bodye of christ & hys lymmys, euery man accordyng to hys portion. But he that bele¦uyth not truly in christ, can not be a member of ye body of christ. For he yt belyuith not is alredye condemnyd. And agayne. If a man abydeyth not in me, he is
cast forthe as a braunche, and is wydered, and men gather it, and caste it into the fyer. etc. And also, saynte Paule saythe: he that hathe not the spirite of christ, he is not hys. Therfore they are onely to be coumpted y• church, yt truly beleue in christ, and haue verely hys spyryte in them. To thys may be addyd y• sayeng of Paule, which thus in the epystell to the Ephesyanes descrybyth the true church, and spouse of christ sayeng: Christe so louyd the congregation, that he gaue hym selfe for it, to sanc∣tifye it beyng clensid in the fōn∣tai of water, throwgh ye worde to make it vnto hym selfe, a glo∣ryous congregation, withoute, spotte or wrynckele, or any such thyng, but that it should be holi and with out blame. A lyke des∣description
of the churche shall ye fynde in Esaye the prophyte whiche saythe: O Iherusalem, cytie of the holy one, put one the clothes of thy glorye, for the vn¦cercumsysed and vnclean shall not presume any more to goo through the. Wherfore he that is wtout the true fayth in Christ Iesu, and hath any wrynckele of infydelytye, in hys vncircū∣cysyd harte, thoughe outward∣ly he semeth, to be the chyfe mē∣bre of the churche yet not with, standynge, he can not be a true membre of it. I confesse and graunte, that they that beleue truly in Christe, are subiecte to many infirmities in thys lyfe. Wher fore they haue nede to praye dayly: O LORD clense me frome my hydden synnes. And for gyue vs our trespossys.
Yet not wtstandyng, because yt they beleue in Christ, they haue in christ, through fayth, remys∣syon of theyr synnes, and are re∣putyd and comptyd in the syght of god, for Christes sake, ryght¦tuous, holy and irreprehensibel Therfor as thes ar not for, their infirmityes, reiectyd frome the bodye of christ, which is the con∣gregation, because that they re∣cognyse theyr infyrmyties and beleue yt for Christes sake they are not imputid vnto them, and so euery daye study with ye helpe of the holy gooste to ouer come the deuyll, the world and the flesh. So they that haue theyr hartes vncyrcumcysed, with in¦fydelytye, thoughe outwardely to the world they do seme to bee enduyd with greate holynes & sanctitie, yet not with standyng
because that they want the true fayth in Iesu Christ, yt is to sai, because that they beleue not, y• for christes sake, they haue free remyssyon of theyr synnes, they can not be true members of the cōgregatiō. Now ye haue hard, what the true churche of Christ is. Now let vs se why we do re∣ceaue and admyt ye gosspelles of Mathew, Mark, Luke & Iohn, and other canonical scriptures, but wyl not receaue ye gosspel of Nycodemus, Barnabas and of other suche persones. We shall well and truely answere, that we receaue ye aboue rehersyd, be¦cause that ye true and catholyck churche hath alowid and appro¦uyd them. and agayne that wee do reiecte and refuse the other, because that the true and catho¦lycke churche hathe dysprouyd
and reiected them. For Christe promyssyng to hys congregatiō hys continuall presence saythe: Where ii or iii. shallbe cōgrega∣tyd and assymbled in my name, there I am in the myddeste of them. And whan he shoulde de∣parte bodely from hys churche, he dyd saye: Lo, I wyll be with you allwayes, tyll the consūma¦tion or ende of the world. if ther¦fore Christ ys alwayes present with hys churche: truly whan the congregation, with ye spirite of christ hath iugdyd that some bokes owght to be receauyd & some to be reiectyd, thys iudg¦ment and sentence of the true church of christ, ought to be had in no lesse reputation, owght to be no lesse estymed or regarded than yf Christ had thus decreed and instytuted hym selfe. For
Paule wrytyng of the true and faythfull congregation of god, speaketh on thys maner? The congregation is the pyller of ye lyuyng god, the stablyshement of the veryte and truthe, Who wold not therfore gyue credēce vnto thys true churche appro∣uyng these iiii. bokes of the gos∣pell, and other canonicall scrip∣tures? What shall we saye? Not onely thys true cōgregatiō, but the hypocrytycall churche also, which in thys worlde mynglyd with the true, and hath onely ā outwarde shewe of godlynesse, dyd euer openly approue and a lowe these bokes that wee call canonycall. For in the vnyuer¦sall congregatiō, no man, whe∣ther he was of the fayned mem∣bres or of the true, euer doubtyd of ye verytye of those bokes. And
truly the commune, assent, not onely of the good and faythfull, but also of the wycked and vn¦faythfull, ought to be a weygh∣tye, and infallible wyttenesse, that these bokes are truthe and verytye. Sythe therfore that ye true churche, the spouse of the lyuyng god, hath delyuered vn∣to vs these iiii Euangelystes, wt the other canonycall scriptures let vs so receaue them not as∣though they were delyuered vn¦to vs, by mens handes, but by ye hand of god, & let vs obserue and keape such thynges, as are wrytten in them not as menes dreames, but as ye very oracles and cōmaundementes of god. What then? they wyl parchāuce say vnto me: yf we must receaue the scriptures, because that the churche hath delyuered them
vnto vs, hath not the churche autorytie, to make new decres, to chaunge the scriptures, to alter the commaundements of god, to abrogate the olde and instytute new, yea and to make also new articles, of our fayth which of nessescitye we shoulde embrace, adore, and receaue, as the very oracles and worde of god? No truly for though the autorytie of ye holy and aposto∣lycall churche, is very greate, as that which hath for her head Iesu christ, the sonne of the ly∣uynge god, and ye holy goost, for her scoole master, yet not with standyng, that autorytie is not grauntid vnto the congregatiō to any lybertye agaynst ye word of god, but to obediēce towards god & hys scriptures. A power, I saye, is gyuen to the churche,
but not so free, as many men make yt. It is circūscribyd and with holden, within certayne lymites and boundes. For as christ saythe: The holy gooste, which my father shall sende in my name, wyll teache you all thynges, and bryng all thyngs into your remembrāce, What? indyfferently all thynges, that any manes wyt can imagyne or thyncke? no. But what so euer sayth he, I haue tolde vnto you. Iohu xiiii. The spiryte shall not teache you thynges contrary to the gospell, which I haue prea∣chyd vnto you, but yt same selfe gosspell, yt I haue tolde you of, whyles I was yet present with you in thys world, he shall in∣terprete and expound vnto you. And in an other place saythe Christ: All power is gyuen me
bothe in heauen and in earth. Therfore go ye, and teache all nationes, to kepe and obserue all thynges (not those thynges, y• this or yt sophist shall dreame out) but what so euer I haue cō¦mādid you. For yt wt is spokē ī ā other palce: what so euer ye shal bīde vpō ye earth shal be boūd in heauē & what soeuer ye shal lou∣se vpō ye earth shal be loused ī he¦uē, yt, I saye, doth not gyue auto¦ritie to ye cōgregatiō to make at their owne pleasyr, of sinne righ¦tuousnes, and of ryghtuousnes sīne, to cal euil good, & good euil to make darckenes, light, & ligh darckenes. But by thys sayēg, ye gosspel of Iesuchrist, setforth by māes mouth, is cōsecratid ī to ā heauenly & diuine voyce, that we may be certifyed, that the gosspell, which is preechyd in
ye church of Christ, touchyng ye remissiō of sīnes, through fayth in Iesu christ, & also touchyīg ye damnation of synners, for their infydelytye, should none other¦wyse be obseruyde of vs, than if the Aungelles of heauen, or the father hym selfe, the sonne and the holy gooste, had preachyd it vnto vs. That ye saieng of christ maye be veryfyed, which saithe: He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that dysspysyth you, dysspyseth me, and he that dis∣pysyeth me disspieth hym that sent me. And these thyngs doth Christ saye not because that he wolde haue all the saynges and words of the apostells to be ta∣ken for his. For he hath prescri∣byd vnto them & tawght before what they should preache, say∣eng: Saye ye that the kyngdōe
of god is at hand. Wherfore, whosoeuer hearith of the apost∣ellys those thynges, that they hard, and lernyd of christ, he doth not here an yearthly, but a heauenly, not mans, but gods doctryne. For that cause doyth saynt Paule wryttynge to the Galathyans saye. If we or an Aungell of heauē, should prea∣che vnto you an other gosspell, besydes yt, which we haue prea∣chyd vnto you let it be a cursyd. And because we should not thīc∣ke, that Paule had spoken it rashely, he repet it agayne say∣eng: Euē as we haue sayd vnto you, I saye agayne: If any man dothe preache vnto you, any gosspell besydes that, which ye haue receauyd, let it be acursid. How should then the churche (wc thing neyther the apostylls, nor
the aungelles mougt do) pre∣sume to alter the scriptures, to institute other preceptes, and make new articles of our faith? ys not this congregatiō renew∣id, by the worde of god? ye be (sayth saynt Peter) renewyd, not of mortall sede, but of im∣mortall, by the worde of the ly∣uīg god, which abidith for euer. But the worde of god is coutei∣nyd in the scriptures. How can it be then, yt the churche should haue autorytye, to chaunge the scriptures, and fayne or inuent anew word of god? excepte par∣chaunce she wyl turne and tnās¦forme her selfe, in to the church of the malyngnāntes. For that, that the churche dothe approue and alowe the scriptures, it is done, not for any autorytie that the congregation hath vpon the
worde of god, but by the waye, of witnesse, Christ hym selfe sai∣eng. ye that haue ben with me, frome the begynnynge shall be wytnessys vnto me. And in an other place: ye shall receaue vertu and strenght, after that ye holly goost is come vpon you, & then ye shall be wyttnessys vnto me, not onely at Iherusalem, but also throughout all Iurye, and Samarya and fynally to ye vtter moste borders of ye earth. What then, haue the wyttnessis any autorytye, to chaunge the truthe, or to adde any thyng to the truthe, or mynyshe any thīg frome it? nothyng lesse. For if they wyll be accomptyd fayth∣full wytnessys, they wyll kepe them selfe within the boundes and lymmytes of the knowene truthe, and so to testyfye of it yt
they shal not adde one iote vnto it, nor mynyshe one iote frome it. Sythe therfore yt the church dothe approue and a lowe the scriptures and the gosspell, of Iesu Christ, not for any autori∣tye, that she hath vpon goddes worde, but muche rather by the waye of wytnesse bearyng, she may not leape ouer the enclosu∣res or hedgys of ye gospell, & set forth to ye audience what soeuer pleasyth her in steade of gods word. For ye churche is no mast∣resse, but a seruant and a hand¦mayd. Paul sayeng: The chur∣che is subiecte vnto Christ. A¦gayne the scriptures, is as if it were a seale, wherin the image and effygure of oure lorde Iesu Christ, is grauen for the scrip∣tures ar onely ye meanes, wher∣by we may through fayth, as if
it were face to face, knowe our sauiour Iesu christ▪ as he sayth him selfe. Serche the scriptures for they be they, that testifye of me, And in an other place so it is wrytten, and so it be bouyd, Christ to suffer, on y• thrid daye to aryse frome deathe and that pēaunce and remissiō of sinnes should be preachyd in his name emong all nations. Now as a true seruant, doth knowe the seale of hys master, and can dyscerne the true seale frome a false, and conterfayet seale: so dothe the churche approue the true scripturs, which is y• seale of Christ, and reproue the false doctryne, which is the seale of Antichrist. But who wolde bee so madde to saye, that a seruant may chaung & alter his maiste∣res seale and conterfayt a newe
because that he knowith a diffe∣rence betwene the true seale & the false? Muche more madde and out of theyr wyttys ar they that do openly affirme, that the churche maye alter the scriptu∣res, set forthe new preceptes, & make new articles of our fayth be cause that it gyuith sentēce and iudgmēt, betwene the true and false doctrine. Ys not this to alter and chaunge the voyce of ye true shepherde Iesu christ? Many more placys out of the scriptures, I myght here brīge to cōfyrme thys article, excepte I should kepe them tyll an o∣ther season, whan wyth ye leaue of god, I shall more at large dyspute of this matter. NOW haue I shewyd what the true churche of Christe is, and how we konwe and beleue
that ye holy and sacryd Bybles he the worde of god, because yt ye holy and catholycke churche hath alowyd and approuyd thē And yet neuer the lesse how it is not lawfull for ye cōgregatiō to alter one iote of y• scriptures, and word of god: Excepte thei wyll applye vnto the churche, that blasphemous sayeng of the kynge of Babylone: I wyl ascēd in to heauen, and set my seate a¦boue ye starres of ye liuīg god, I wyl clymbe vp a boue ye height of ye cloudes & be lyke vnto the hygheste. Let vs therfore remē¦bre yt we ar mē, not autores but witnessis of the scriptures, not hedes but mēbrs of ye church not mastres but ministers & seruā∣tes of our lord iesu christ. Let vs ēbrace wt both arms this wholsō doctrīe let vs reaceue these pre∣cepts, & cōmāndētes of ye liuing
liuing god, and be obedyente vnto that faithe, that hathe ben prescribyd and taught, by ye pro¦phetes and the apostells, reciec∣tyng and excomunicating, all mens doctryne inuētions and dreames and so we shall ob∣teyne saluation through our lorde Iesu christ. To whome with ye father & the boli goost bepraise glory & ho∣nor for euer. So be it (::) ☞ ❧ ☜
How the placis of the scriptures, that seme to adscribe vnto god humayne passions and lymmes ought to be vnderstandyd, a doctrine wholsome to auoyde the grosse heresy of the Anthro∣pomorphytis. {inverted ⁂} WHan we do read any where ī ye scriptures that god is subiecte to passiones, or that he hath humayne lymmis, as a head, heares, eyes, and suche lyke, it ought not to be vnderstā¦dyd carnally, & after ye hystorye of the letter (as the Iues and many heretickes do, which take¦ing al thīgs carnally, do thīcke that god is bothe corporall and locall, that is to saye, yt he hath bothe a body, and is also cōteuid within a certayne, and circum∣scribyd place) But all thinges
thus spoken, must be spiritually vnderstandid, and cōfessyd: For whosoeuer beleuyth yt god hathe humayne lymmis, or that he is subiecte to any motiōs affectes or passions of mynde, after an humayne sorte, or as a man is, he wtout doubte forgeth in his mynde, and his harte, Idolles. Therfore by the heade of god we ought to vnderstand, y• very same selfe essence or beynge, of his diuine godheade, which precedith, or was before all thynges, and vnto whom al thynges are subiecte. By the heares of his heade we must vnderstande his holly aungells or vnyuersally all his electes and chosē. Wherfore Daniell in the vii. chapi saythe:
I loked till the seates ware pre¦pared, and tyll ye olde agyd sat hym downe, hys clothyng was as whit, as snowe, the heares of his head lyke ye pure wolle. For what so euer is signified by hys whyt clothyng, that same thing is signyfied by the heares of his heade, yt is to say his holy aun∣gelles, and ye companye, or mul∣titude of his holi electes, which are whytyd in the blood of the immaculate Lambe. Yt is sayed that god hathe eyes, because that he seethe all thynges, and y• nothing is hydden frome hym, in whose syght, as the apostelles saythe-no maner of creature, is inui∣sible. Heb. iiii. For all are open and manifest to his eyes. Other wyse ye eyes of ye lord do singnify
his gracious loking, as we haue ī y• psalmeis. The eyes of ye lorde are vpon ye rightuous. And som¦tymes the eyes of ye lord ar takē for his cōmādemēts wherby ye light of knowledg is ministred vnto vs, as it is wrten the xviii psa. The cōmādemēt of ye lord is lightiōe, giuīg lyght ūto y• eies. The eye lydds of the lord are taken eyther for his hyddē and incomprehēsible iudg¦mentes, or for the spirituall vn∣derstandynge of his holly and sacryd bokes. Wherof it is writ¦ten in ye psalmys: hys eye lydds do examyne, that is to say, trye & proue the sonnes of men. Yt is sayd y• god hathe ears be cause he hearith all thī∣ges, and that nothyng can be kepte in silence frome hym i.
chapiter of wysdome: The eare of heauen hearith all thynges. The nostrells of the lorde, at taken for his inspiration in to the hartes of the faith¦full as we haue in the seconde boke of the kynges and xxii. cha Smoke went vp frome his nost relles, that is to saye, a lachra∣mouse and wepyng compunctiō of the penitent persone, through his inspiration and mouyng. The face of god, is vnto men the knoledge o hys deitie or god heade 79 psalme. O Lorde shew thy face vnto vs, & we shall be sauyd, that is to saie giue vnto vs thi knowleg. This knowledge by the sonne of the liuing god, was ī ye later dayes brought vnto men. Otherwyse
the face of god dothe signyfye y• inuysible essence, of the diuiny∣tye and godhead of the sonne of god, Wherfore, he hymselfe an∣sweryng, by the aungell vnto Moyses dyd in ye xxxiii. of Exo saye: Thou shalt see my back, but my face thou cāst not see. as though he should say thou shalt in ye later daies see myne in car∣natiō, but thou shalt not be able to see my god head. The mouthe of god, is the sonne of god the father, yt is to saye: Christ our lord of whome Ieremy in the fyrste chapiter: of his lamentations. in the per sone of ye Iues dothe saye: because that we haue pro∣uokyd the mouthe of the lorde to wrath. O therwyse ye mouthe of ye lord is taken for his worde and commaundement, viii. cha
of Esaye. The mouthe of ye lorde hathe spoken it. The worde of god is ye sonne of god the father, by whom all thynges ware made as we haue in the psalmes: by the worde of god the heauenes war stablyshed. Agayne: he hath sēt hys worde and healed them. The tonge of god doth misty∣cally signifye the spiritee, by whome, god the father, dothe opē vnto men his secrtes wherfore he saithe in the xliiii. psalme: My tonge is the penne of a redy wrytter. By the lyppes of the lorde, the concordaunce of bothe the testamentes, is vnderstan∣dyd of the which ii testamentes
it is wrytten, in the xvi. of the prouerbys: diuination or pro∣phecy is in lyppes. etc. The arme of god the father, is taken for his only be got¦ten sonne, of whome Iere∣myas in the xxxii. cha speakith after this maner: & now, thou my lorde god, wt hast brought out thy people frome the lande of Egypte, with a stronge hand and streytchyd forth arme. The sonne of god the father is ther∣fore callyd his arme because yt all the electis are vpholden and mayteyned by hym. The ryght hand of god the fa¦ther, is taken for his onely begotten sonne, of whome in the personne of the man, yt he had assumptyd & taken vpon
him, as it is wrytten in ye spalm The ryght hād of the lord hathe done vertu, the ryght hand of ye lord hathe exaltyd me. O ther∣wyse the ryght hand of the lord signifyeth the glory of ye father that is to saye, euerlastyng be a∣titude or blessed fulnysse. 109 psalme Set on my ryght hand The ryght hand of god is also taken, for all the chosen creatu∣res, as by the lefte hand we doo vnderstand all reprobate crea∣turys. as diuells and vngodly folkes. The hand of god the father, is taken for the sonne, be∣cause that by hym althīgs ware made. Otherwyse by the hand of god, his power is vn∣derstādyd, of the which power, it is wrytten, in the xviii. of Ie∣Ieremy:
as the claye, is in the hand, of ye potter, so ye, O house of Israell, ar ī my hād, Third¦ly the hand of the lorde is taken for his scourg. i. cha of Sopho. And I wyll stretche forthe my hand vpon Iurye and Ierusa∣lem. Agayne. Iob. xix. chapiter The hand of the lord hath tuoc∣hyd me. The fynger of god, singular∣ly, is taken for the holi spi∣ryte by whome ye law was wrytten in the ii. stony tablles in the mounte Synay Luck xi. if I do caste out dyuells with ye fynger of god. But ye fyngers of god, in ye plu¦rall number do be token the holly prophetys, by whom
the spirite with his inspiration dyd wryte the bokes of the law and the prophetes. viii. psalme I shall see thy heauens, the wor¦kes of thy fyngers By the hea∣uenes, we do vnderstande the bokes of the lawe and of the prophetys, by the fyngers, the holy prophetes. The image of the in vysible father, is his onely begot∣ten sonne. The apostyll in the fyrste chapitir. to the Collo∣senssys: which is ye image of the inuisible god. The hart of god ye father, doth be token the secret of hys mysticall wysdome, as we haue in the xliiii. psalme: My harte hathe endytyd a good matter.
Yt is sayde that god hathe wynges, because that he, as tenderly, and as louyn∣ly as a byrde, dothe gather vn∣der hys protection and defense hys electys and chosen, as if it were chyckens, broodynge and fosterynge them, as we haue in the psalmes: defende and kepe me, vnder the shadowe of thy wynges. Yt is sayde that god hathe shoulderes, because that he dothe beare vs, his weake membres patiētly, as if it were vpon his shoulders, protecting and defending vs 90 psalme: he shall shadow ye, wt his shoul∣ders, and vnder hys wynges, thou shalte put thyne hope. The belly or wombe of God, wher of it is spoken in the 109 psalme, is takē for the
secrete orygyne of his substance or of his diuine knoledg. Other¦wyse it doth signifye hys incom¦prehensible & hydden iudgmēts The back of the sonne of god, is taken for his ī carnatiō, xxxiii. of Exodds. Thou shalte see my bake. The fete of, god ar ye stablish∣ment of his vertu & power, because that he is presente in all placis, and that al thīgs are vnder him. Esaye lxvi: hea∣uen is my seate etc. Otherwyse as by ye head his diuinite, so by ye fete, his man hode is signyfyed viii. psalme: Thou hast put all thīgs vnder his fete, shepe & oxē Agayne by the fete of oure lord Iesu christ, his holy preacheres are singnifyed. as we haue in
Deutero. They that approche & comenygh to his fete shall re∣ceaue of his doctryne. The clothyng of the sonne of god, is other whylles takē, for his fleshe, yt was assum¦tyd of his godhead. Esay xxxvi Who his he that cometh frome. Edome with embruid clothing of Bofra. Agayne his clothīgs ar taken for his holy congrega∣tiō, which through faith & loue, is conioined with hym. By the vpper garment or clok of god, the fore sayd church is ryght well vnderstandyd xlvi. Genesys: he shall washe in wyne hys stole (that is to saye: his owne fleshe, in the bloode of hys passion) and hys vpper gar¦ment, in the vyne grape that is
wit, is churche. The calciamētes or shone of god, do mystically signyfye his incarnation, which he dyd vouchesafe to assume, and take of the mortalytie of man∣kynde lix. psalme I wyll extend and strecth forthe my shone to I dumea, that is to saye: I wyl declare myne incarnation to ye people of the gentilles. The goyngs of the lorde, do signifye the commynge of the sonne of god in to the world, and hys returnyng agaī vnto hys father, the lxvii. psalm Thy goyngs O god, dyd seme vnto me, the going of my god, which is in the holy place. Yt is sayd yt god dyd ascend vp, whan the sonne of god dyd carye vp in to heauen,
as captyne the fleshe, that he bad assumptyd and taken of vs. lxvi psalm. he ascendyd vp, on hyghe, and dyd leade captiuitye with hym captyne. Yt is read yt god hydyth hys face, whan he dothe hydde and cleane with drawe his knowledge frome certayne vn∣godly persones, accordynge to theyr demerytes & deseruings as we do se now alredye fulfyl∣lyd emonge the Iues. VVe saye yt god shewith his face, whan with hys gra∣cious lokyng he dothe in∣sinuatte hym selfe by a secrete inspiration, in to the hartes, of the faythfull and dothe pour in to theyr myndes hys loue
WE saye that god setith, not that he doth set after an humayne sorte or as a man doth, but that he puyssantly rei∣gneth ouer all reasonable crea∣tures (which rule & gouernance is betokenyd by his setynge) xl vi. psalme. The lord shal reigne ouer al nations, god setith vpō his holy seate. We saye also that god setith vpō cherubin, which is expoundyd: plenytude or ful¦nesse of science, knowledge and vnderstanding, or elles multi∣tude, wherby his holy aungells are singnyfied or the soulis, of spiritual persones, in the which god doth inuisible reigne, gouer¦ne and rule. For he setith in thē that are fule of knowledge and loue. Prouerbya. The soule of the rightuous is the seate of wysdome.
VVe do read that god doth descende, and come downe in to this world, whan at any tyme he doth worke some new, and vnderfull thynge wt was not before, as whan the sonne of god came downe, and dyd take very fleshe, of ye vyrgīe Mary for oure redemption. Of whose comyng downe, we haue in the xvii psalme: he dyd bowe downe the heauenes and came downe and darkenesse was vn∣der his fete. he dyd bowe downe the heauens. For before his co∣mynge, he dyd sende his aungel¦les messangeres and prophetes to declare vnto men his comīge There was darkenesse vnder his fete, because that vngodly men, beynge excecatyd and blī∣dyd with theyr owne malyce could not vnderstand nor know
his in carnation, nor yet at this tyme can. VVE saye yt god standyth, whan he doth staye beare vp and susteine the weake, tyll amendemēt of lyfe through hym, do come. Abac iii. he stode and measurith the year the and dyd louse the nations, that is to saye: he dyd stande to helpe and lousyd them, that dyd beleue in hym, frome the bounds of their synnes. Yt is sayde that god passithe forthe, whan he departeth frome the hartes of certaīe persones for theyr infydelytye, and passith forthe to other. as frome the Iues to the gentyllis and frome the herytickes to thē that are of ryght opinion and
iudgmēt which thīg he is wont to do, not locally or visybly but inuisibly, accordīg to his secret and ryghtuous iudgment. VVE saye yt god walketh, not that he goeth vp and down from place to place which thyng to beleue, is vngod¦ly, but hys walkyng is to delyte in the hartes of the sayntes as it is wrytten: I wyl inhabyt & walke in them, I wyll be their god, Or elles god dothe walke, when he goythe frome place, to place, in his preacheres. GOD doth speake, when he dothe inuysibly with out any sound of voyce or ani other noyse inspire in to the har¦tes and myndes of the sayntes, his wyll, and ryght vnder stan∣vnderstandyng
of scriptures & word, or whan he dothe reuele thynges to come vnto his holy prophetes, whiche speakyng of god is taken thre wayes. fyrste by a subiecte creature, as whan he dyd appeare to Moyses in ye fyry bushe, to Abraham Isacke and Iacob and other holy men, to whome it pleasyd hym, to ap∣peare in his aungells. Secon∣dely in dreames, as to Iacobe, zacharye the prophete, and to Iosephe the husband of Mary to whom he did reuele his secre∣tes Thrydly whā he neyther by visible creaturenor by dreame, but only wt a secret inspiration touchyng the hartes of hys sai∣ntes, dothe make them to speke as we do reade in the bokes of the prophetes, where the pro∣phetes them selfs beīg sodaynly
inspired with the holy goost. do crye out sayng: The lord sayeth this, VVE saye that god seeth, whan he dothe approue any good actys, as wee haue in Genesis: God dyd see all thynges that he hathe done and they ware very good, that is to saye: vnto them that haue vnderstandyd, he dyd shew that they be good, Otherwyse he doth see, whan he doth reproue ye euel factes of men, as we haue in the lix chapiter of Esaye: The lord dyd see and it dyd ap∣peare euyll in his sight or ī his eyes. Thyrdely he seeeth, whan he maketh vs to se, and to know 138. psalme: proue me, O lorde and see my harte. Agayne: See if the waye of vnryghtuousnes
is in me. VVE saye yt god knoweth, whan he makethe vs to know, as he sayeth hym selfe to Abraham xxii. chapyter of Genesis. Now I know yt thou fearyste the lorde. For he that knowethe all thynges before they bedone, doth not by process of tyme come to knoledg, as mē do, but by his examynation tri¦all, and proue, he maketh men to know them selfes which be∣fore, knew not what they ware as we haue in the xiii. of Deute. That I may know and proue, whether they kepe my comaun∣dementes or not. Yt is sayde that god dothe not know, whan he dothe reproue certayne wyckyd
and reprobate persons. Lucke. xiii. I knowe not frome whence ye are, go ye frome me, yt worcke iniquitie. VVE saye that god is full of zeale, whan he dothe chastyse, punish and scour¦ge them, whom he wyl not haue to peryshe, and by scourgynge dothe bryng them agayne vnto hym Or ellys we saye, that is full of zeale, because that he suf∣ferith no synne vnpunnished. VVE saye that god is an∣grie, (not yt he be subiecte to any passyon of mynde, which is vnpossible) whan he taketh iust vengeance vpon vn∣godly synneres, which iuste vē∣geaunce, is callyd the wrathe & furye of god.
Yt is sayde that god repen∣tithe, not that he after an humayne sorte repentyth hym selfe, of any thyng that he hathe done before. For how cāe he that knowyth all thynges, before they bedone, repente of any thynge, that he hath done affore? But the repentaunce of god, is to chaunge the thynges, that he hath appoyntyd decreed and determinid, or to chaunge the good, that he hath begonne, into euyll, or the euyl in to good as we reade of Saule, that god dyd repente, because that he made hym king. And this mu∣tation of good in to euyl, and of euyll in to good, which is done by his secret & ryghtuous iudg∣ment, eyther accordynge to the rygour of his iustyce, or accor∣dyng to his mercy, is callyd the
taunce of god Yt is sayde yt god repentythe not whan he dothe in no wyse chaunge or alter the thynges that he appoyntyd de∣creed and determyned. psalme. The lorde hathe sworne, and he shall not repēt, thou art a prest for euer after the order of Mel∣chysedeche. The sonne of god was a preeste, not after his dy∣uyne god head but after his hu∣manytye, in the which through hys passion and deathe, he dyd offer hym selfe a swet sacrifice vnto god the father beyng bothe the preeste and the sacrifyce. Yt is sayd yt god forgetethe whan he sheweth no mercy vpon vngodly synneres,
which is not done for any cruel¦ty, that is in god, but accordīge to hys secrete and ryghtuous iudgmente. VVHen we doo reade that god dothe harden and in∣durate y• hartes of certaīe persōes, as it wryttē is of Pha¦rao, we ought not to vnderstāde yt god almyghty dothe throughe his pouer, hardene theyr hartes which is vngodly to beleue, but that god, accordyng to theyr de¦seruynges, or for theyr demery∣tes dothe not take a waye, the hardenes of ther hartes, which they nourryshe, with doynge & perpertyng euyll, asthowghe he shoulde endurate them, because tbat he sufferythe them to bee enduratyd.
VVHan we read that god, sleapyth, it is to be vnder∣standid of the onely begotē sonne of god wt vouchaffe to dye for vs in the fleshe, whose death was ryght well callyd a swete sleape. Otherwise god sleapith whan faythe in the prosperytye of this worlde sleapythe in the hartes of the faythfull, Thys sleapynge dyd oure sauyoure syngnyfie in the iiii. of Mathew whan he dyd sleape in the shype Or elles god is a sleape, whā in afflyction and trouble, he doth dyfferre to healpe and succoure hys electis and chosen, ye xliiii. psalme: A ryse, O lorde why art thou a sleape. VVE saye that god dothe watche whan he shewethe hym selfe readye to defend
hys electys and to take venge∣aunce vpon his enemyes. AL these fore sayde thyngs and other like, which wee, fynde of god in the holy scriptures, oughte not to be ta∣ken after the lytter all sense. but mystycally. For almyghtye god in the essence of hys dyuynytye is a spiryte without a body and humayne lymmes. Wherfore he muste be seene, not with the eies of the fleshe, but with the eyes, of the harte. Blessed by they, yt haue a cleane harte for thei shal see god. To see god? is to beleue right in him & to loue him with¦al thy harte. Graunt vs O lord a pure harte that we may se the. to whome with the sonne and ye holy gost be prayse glory and honour for euer So be it
How the Masse dyd crepe in to the churche of Christ, and how clean cōtrary to the scriptures and auncient fatheres, it is made a damnable Idoll, beeng a very snare and nete inuented of the deuell to catche mēs soulys, mayn¦teyned now, defendyd and vp, holden by the papystes, to pycke pouer menes pursys. (::) ALthough this word MISSA. Masse, is not found in the holy and sacryd scriptu∣res, with oute the autorite of the which, we christē owght to admyte nothynge, touchyng our relygyon, yet sith yt by longe custome, it hath take suche a rote in the hartes of the symple and ingnorante people, that it can not easely be plucked a waye I wyll declare whereof it is deryuyd, what it syguified
and how in the olde time it was vsyd, wherby all Christen men shal se & {per}ceaue yt thei are vtter∣ly blyndyd, and deceauyd, that now a daies do vse that kynd of Masse, which to the greate hyn∣deraunce of goddes worde and ītolerable blasphemi agaīst that onely sacryfyce ones for euer offered in the alter of the crosse ys yet by ye papystes maynteyned, in the churche of GOD.
MISSA THIS worde missa as wee doo reade in auncyent autoures is deryuyd of a verb which in latin is cal¦led mytto: mittis, that beto∣kenyth to send. For as a certain autor namyd Epiphanius doth wryte. At the begyngnynge of Chrysten relygion, whan they that reaceyuyd the doctrine of Christ, should cōe together, to of¦fer theyr praieres and sacryfy∣ces of thanckes gyuynge vnto god, to heare goddes word and to receaue together with a cha∣rytable vnytie the sacramente, of the bodye and blood of christ, euery man accoryyng to his abi¦lytie, was wonte to sende a presente or a gyfte which gyfts
and presents, beynge sent after this maner by ye faythfull, ware callyd, Missa, that is to saye, offerynges, or gyftes, sente by the faythfull beleueres, to dist∣rybute, emonge the poure and neady memberes of Christe. But how, by processe of tyme, it hath ben by couetouse persons, altered and at lenght turnyde to detestable idolatry, all men, in whome is any sparcle of god∣lynesse & diuine vnderstanding, dothe playnely see. But now, we wyll come to the partes of it, & shewe how euery thyng, hathe ben by couetouse, ignorance, deprauatyd. For now besydes, the deuelyshe Idolatrye, it is made a snare or nette to drawe money, oute of symple mennes pursys.
INTROITVS ALbertus magnus & Wyl∣liam Durand with other, many newe wrytteres, wt haue enhaunsid and made the Bysshope of Rome that fleshely idolle, a god, do wryte that Ce∣lestinus bysshope of rome dyd, ordeyn, that the introite should be songe in the congregation. But Iohn Chrysostome in his, homiles vpō ye xi. of Mathew, te¦stifiethe yt ī his time, thei ware wōt to sīg whol psalms, out of ye psalter of dauyd, in theyr vul∣gare tonge, whyles that the con¦gregation was comynge toge∣ther. This custome was trans∣slatid fyrste frome the churches of Asia, & Grecya in to ye church of rome, as they saye, by the fore¦sayd Celestynus in the yeare of oure lorde, foure hunderd, xxvi.
and it is callyd, Introitus, the introite, of this verbe, introeo introis, which betokeneth to come in, because that in the co∣mynge in of the people, in to the holy temple, appoynted onely, for the preaching of gods word, and ministeryng of the sacramē¦tés that Christ hathe institutid and ordoned, suche godly psal∣mes, to the greate comforte and edyfyeng of the whole congrega¦tion, ware songe. Which thinge if it were now a dayes vsyd, in ye commune vulgare tonge would styrre and moue greatly the mī¦des of the symple and ingnorāt people to godli deuotion to loue prayse, and laude god. But now to ye great hynderāce of christen godlynesse, we haue whan the ye people is alredye assemblyd to∣gether. a verse or ii oute of the
psalter, or for lacke of it out of the legend Aure, song after such a fashion, besydes yt, it is songe in a foren and straunge tonge, that all men, whiche haue any reason, are wery, or euer halfe of it be done. Confitcor Whan al the people of god, was come together, for the same self pourpose, that I haue shewyde affore, they did al, fall vpō their knees, knoledgyng them selfes to be abhominable sinners, and with the minister, confessynge, them selfes vnto god after this maner. O almyghty god, and mer∣cifull father, we here ac∣knoledg, confese, & recō∣gnyse, that we as most vngodly
wyckyd and detestable synners haue greuously transsgressyde, thy holly, commaundementes, not onely in thoughts and wor¦des, but also moste vngodly in factys & dedes. Wherfore thou, moste swete Iesu, sonne of the lyuyng god, which with thy pas¦syō and death haste ouercomyd the world, and all the prynces therof & now after thy victori∣us tyiūph setist at ye ryght hād of god ye father, beīg a sur patrō aduocat, mediatour & ītercess∣our of all them yt vnfaynedly fle vnto the, haue mercy vpon vs, myserable synneres, that thy moste holly and sacryde bloode be not shed in vayn for vs, but yt thou vouchsaue to fede our sou∣lys, with thy precious bodie, & with thy blood to quickene our spirites, that we dayly encrea¦encreasynge
in faythe loue and charytie, and other godly ver∣tues, maye be worthy membres of thy mysticall body whiche is the church. This was their cō∣fiteor, or confession, for suche beggerli detestable and blasphe¦mouse confession, which at the institution of one Pontianus, is now vsyd in theyr cursyd sa∣cryfyce of the masse (in ye which confession, they moste vngodly, make the creaturs of god equal with the onely begotten sonne, of the liuynge father, that onely medyator of god and man) was not then knowen, nor could be admyttyd. Kyrieeleison. THis songe or prayer of ky∣ryeleison was adscribed to Syluester byshope of Rom But suerely it was borowyd of
Greckes, which by and by after theyr generall confession ware wonte with one voyce, to saye: kyrieeleison, that is to saye: Lord haue mercy vpon vs Chri¦ste haue mercy vpon vs, etc but this was done in theyr mother tong and with greate humility and holynes, to obtayne forgi∣uenesse of theyr sīnes, that they had confessyd openly. How it is now vsyd, euery foule dothe know. Blorya in excelsis. This hymē, gloria ī excelsis, glorye be in the heyght, be∣gon by ye āugel, as we haue in Luc, is adscrib to Simachus byshope of Rome. But the histo∣ryes do testyfye, that Hylarius Byshope of the pyctanians did
make it. For whan the vngodly, oppiniō of that most detestable herytycke Arrius, was fearyde of all godly byshopes, bothe in the east and the west: Hilarius to fence and arme his churche a¦gaynste this pestilente heresye, dyd make this hymne to ye prai¦se of our sauiour Iesu Christe, whome the Arrians, did blasph¦eme, sayeng that he was lesse than the father, and causid it to be songe alwayes, whan the peo¦ple came to gether to the cōmu∣nyon. Simachus therfore imi∣tatyng hylarius, dyd institute that it should be song ī ye church of Rome, to vtterly extirpate, and banishe a waye, the heresye of Arrius. Now it is so sōg that the people knowith not, why nor wherfore it is vsyd There∣fore we maye well compare our
papistes to apes, For as ye apes do imitate & folowe or rather, conterfayte the actys of men, wherby thei are, of many, for theyr owne pleasure and pastim muche made of: so these vngod∣ly hipocrites, do vsurpe, shadow and conterfayt, the godly aun∣cient customes of the primi∣tiue churche and of the holly fatheres, to clooke their owne hipocrisye, abhomynation, and Idolatrye, that thus they may allure and win the myndes of the symple and ignorant people And al is to get money and liue lyke lordes. Dominus vobiscum. IN these holy & sacryd miste∣eryes, the bishope or minister was wont to salute ye people, sainge. The lordy be with you
therby to make them attenty∣nes, also to warne and monishe them, that this sacrifice of thāc¦kes geuīge, owght to be offered with a mutuall loue, charytye, concorde and vnitie. Therfore the people declaryng their, mu∣tuall vnitie loue, and concorde, dyd answere: And with the spi∣rite. This maner of saluting, and resalutinge agayne is takē oute of the olde testament ye vi. of Iuges & out of the epestel to. Timothye. Oh that we myght haue all thynges after the aun∣cient custome. Collecte. SOme men do affyrme that Gelasius, and Gregoryus, war autours of the praiers, whiche ar callyd collectis. But any lernyd man, maye see that
this word collecta, collecte doth come of a verbe, which in latin is called, colligo, colligis, that betokeneth to gather, & it was thus callyd because that al mis∣sis ware gathered ī the churche for the poure, vpon this thynge reade Tertulliam in his boke, intitulyd Apologeticus. For they that saye, that they are cal¦lyd collectis, because, that the preeste, dothe offer vp the pray∣ers of the people, beynge alto∣gether gathered in one, ar. dece¦ued For yt aungel oneli of whom mention is made in the apoca∣lypse, whiche is oure sauioure Iesus Christ dothe offer vp our prayeres to god the father, and causith them to be hard.
Epistola, Yt is vncertayne, who dyd or done yt the epystil should be read. Some mē adscrib it to Thelesphorus, read Ter∣tullian, in his Apologeticall, boke. Some agayne do adscrib this custome of readyng the epy¦stell affore that ye people should go to the communiō, to Hierom because, I thyncke that he dyd, diuise yt same order, which now a dayes is obseruyd I wil shew the ryghte institution, whan I come to the gospell, Graduale. THE grayle, which in latin is callyd graduale, hathe his name, of this worde gradus which betokeneth astea¦re. For whan the Bysshope or minister, that he myght be seen
and harde of all the whole con∣gregation, dyd ascende vp in to any hyghe place or pulpyt, to preache the gosspel, In ye mean season the people dyd with one voyce, call vnto god for grace, bothe that he myght the more lyuely preach Christ vnto them & that they also mowghte, with profytte vtilytye & fruite heare hym. Alleluya ALleluia was borowyde of the Hebrues, and it dothe signyfie, prayse ye the lord and was then vsyd to be songe, after that the minister hathe made an ende. Wherby it was signifyed that the people hathe gladly and with a ioifull harte receauyd the glade tydynges of
the gospell set forthe by the bys∣shope or minister. Therfore lett them be ashamyd, which do ad∣scribe such godly thynges, now by the peruerse hipocrysye of ye papystes, vtterly peruertid to Gregorius, and Gelasins, Bys∣shopes, of Rome. For many yea¦res affore, such godly and whol∣some custome was vsyd in the congregation of Christ. Tractatus. THE tracte, which in latin is callyd tractatus, is de∣riuid of this verbe tracto, tas, yt betokeneth to entretate, vpon, because, yt then, yt scriptu∣res ware moste chefly, affore yt the people, should come to the communion entreatyd vpon, handeled and expoundyd, as
holy Ambrose dothe testyfye But now all such godly thyngs ar, turnyd, in to a furious and madde roasing and belowynge here of the sequentes I wyl say nothynge because that it is a new inuentyon of superstious & vngodly persones, which inuen¦tid and now do inuente all that they can, to let the gosspell. For who dothe not see that this ra∣blement of dome ceremonyes, was excogitat and founde, to exclude and banyshe, out, the holy and sacryd scriptures wt owght onely to haue place in ye congregation of Christ? Euangelium. IN the primitiue churche, be∣cause that many of the Iues, forsakīg the Sinagoge ware
turnyd to christ, euery daye, af∣ter their custome & example, the prophetes ware read in the cō∣gregation. But after that the Synagoge begane to swarne a waye and to rebell agaynste Christ, the gētylles embracing the kyngdome of god, then be∣ganne they, in the congregatyō to reade and expounde ihe goss∣pelles and epystelles. Whiche thinge was done as soone as ye new testament, whiche contey∣neth the iiii. Euangelystes, the Actis the epystelles and the A∣pocalypse, was wrytten and autoryzed by the true churche and spouse of christe, but in the meane seasō, the olde testamēte was not dyspysed or layed a sy∣de For the new testament (wc thynge, they knew ryghte well) dothe expounde the old, and the
olde dothe shadow and conteyn the newe. Now we haue but a peece or percyll of it, which is so reade, that ye people is neuer the better. And mani times thei that reade it, can not tell what they do reade. Where as it is the cheyfe thynge, where fore the people comythe to the chur∣chis, as sainte Augustine doth wytnesse, that there they might learne how to liue, and behaue them selfes at home. GOD graūt yt ye gyfte of prophecye, yt is to saye of expoundynge the scriptures, may be had agayne in estimation, as it hathe ben in ye olde tim, and that such dreg∣gis of dome and vayne ceremo∣nyes, maye once be rotyd and extyrpatid. They do adscribe ye redīg of the gospel, as it is vsid now through out all the yeare,
vnto Damasus, and that as I thincke, because that Heirome, at his instance dyd translate ye new testament out of greke in to latin. Which translation is lost: For this, yt is now attribu∣tyd vnto hym, is not hys, as ye shall see in the commentaryes, that he hath wryten vpō Math in the syxte, and xvi. chapiter. Credo in bunum dcum MAny men do attrybute ye crede to Marke bysshope of Rome, which was in ye eare of oure lorde. C C C. xxx 8 Whan the consile of Nyce was kept. There be sume that adscri¦be it to Damasus whiche was at that time, that the concile of Cōstantinople was kepte. But ye shall vnderstand that the cō∣cile of Nice was kepte againste
Arrius, which denayed ye god∣heade, of Christ, and the cōncyle of Cōstantinople agaynst Ma∣cedonius, whiche denayed the holy gooste. The cōncell therfor of Nice dyd condēpne Arryus, and dyd redacte the whole ca∣tholicke doctrine of Christ, that is to saye, of the coeternall sōne of god in to few articles whiche Marke a boue mentioned, dyd cause to be songe in the churche of Rome. And the concyle of cō∣stantinople dyd comdeme Ma∣cedonius, and dyd redacte in to a shorte soume the doctryne of the holy gooste, whiche Dama∣sus dyd deliuer to the congrega¦tion of Rome also that by the dayly synginge of it, thei might auoyde and eschew those abho∣mynable heresys. Marcus ther¦fore dyd institute ye fyrste parte
I beleue in one god. etc. Dama∣sus the second: And in the holy gooste. et c. Now all thinges ar so deprauatyd the people is so blyndyd, with ingnorance, su{per}∣stition, and Idolatrie, the my∣nisteres are so destitutid of god¦ly eruditiō and learninge, that scantlye one emonge a thow∣sand, do knowe why suche thin∣ges ar vsyd in the congregatiō. For why? they are songe in a straunge tong which the people vnderstandith not. Whan wyll ye, O pastoures, folowe the godly doctryne of Paule, which in the epistyll to the Corinthy∣anes wryteth after this ma∣ner? I haue lyeffer to speake fyue wordes with my mynde in the congtegation to edyfy other than x. thousande wordes with my tonge,
Offertorium SOme wryteres do saye that Euthitianus bisshope of rōe, was the fyrste autore of the offertories, or offerynges. He was in the yeare of oure lorde CC. lxx viii. But his entente was cleane contrarye to the vse that is now. For whan in the primitiue churche, many of the gentilles, which from theyr tē∣der age, ware so vsid to sacrify∣ces and offerynges, that they coulde not easele beleue it, ware conuertyd to Christ: he thought to submite him selfe some what to their imbecilitie and weake¦nesse, and suffered them to brīg in certayne meate offerynges, in to the holy congregation, wt being sanctifyed with the word of god, ware distributyd emōge the poure people. Gregorye be∣being
mouyd with this sayinge of the scripture: Thou shalt not appeare emptye in the syghte of thy lorde god, dyd institute, yt the people should offer gyftes to the aulters, whiche thinge, is now turnyd to the singulare, and priuate profyte, of a sorte of idell lubbers, the poure beīg vtterly despised. Prefatio. YT is for a suretye, that ye aunciente fathers dyd vse but one preface whiche was after this maner. The bysshope or mynyster dyd saye out a lowde. The lorde be with you, the people answering hym: And with thyspiryte. The bys∣shope or minister: Lyft vp your hartes. The people: We heyue them to the lorde. The bisshope
or minister dyd so styrre vp the people, to that holy sacryfyce of thanckes giuing. For all that was done before, dyd partely belonge, to the prophecye or ex∣position of scriptures, and par∣tely to prayers. Here they were preparyd to the cōmune oblati∣on, that is to saye, to the thākes gyuyng and communion. Ther¦fore after that the people had answeryd that theyr hartes, ware dedycatid to god, the my∣nister dyd saye: We therfore be∣inge monished with wholsome preceptis, wyll praye the lorde: Oure father whiche arte in hea¦uen. etc. So they dyd praye all with a lowde voyce. As Cypri∣ane dothe testifie, in his syxte sermon vpon the lordes prayer These thinges beinge finyshed the bysshope or mynyster dyd {pro}∣procede
or went for the fayenge: Let vs gyue thanckes vnto the lorde oure god. The people: it is bothe a worthy and iuste dede The bysshope or minister: Yt is a very worthy, iuste, and whole¦some dede, O eternall god that we all wayes and in all placis do giue thanks vnto ye through Iesu Christ oure lorde, whiche before, that he dyd suffer, toke breade, and after that he had gyuen thankes, he dyd breake it, and gaue it to hys disciples, sayeng. Take thys and eate it. This is my bodye, which is bro¦ken for you, do this, in the remē¦brance of me. Lykewyse whan supper was done, he toke the cuppe, sayenge: This cuppe is the testamente, in my bloode As often, as ye dryncke, do it in the remembrance of me. For
as often, as ye eate of this brea¦de, and drincke, of this cuppe, ye shall shewe forthe the lordes deathe till he come. There was at yt blessed tyme, good christen people, no breathing vpon the bread, there ware no crossis & halfe crossis, no turninges, & halfe turnynges, no dockyng & mowinge, but all thynges ware done decently accordyng to the former institution, and ordonā∣ce of christe, and of hys apostel∣les. All the entent endeuoure and minde, of the holy fathers was, to kepe the precious death and passyon, of oure lorde and sauioure Iesu Christ, in perpe∣tuall memorye and remembrā∣ce, therby to moue, styrre, and īflame the hartes of the christē people, to loue that bountuous and mercifull father, whiche so
louyd vs being yet his enemies that he gaue his onely begotten sonne, that who so euer shoulde beleue in hym should not perysh but haue euerlastyng lyffe But to come to oure pourpose: After that the wordes, that Christe spake at his maundye, ware openly out a lowde reher∣syd, the diacone or minister did call the people of god sayenge: Come ye nyghe, holy a noyntyd of oure lorde and sauioure Iesu Christ, as we do reade in the fyrste homylye of Chrisostome, vpon the vii. chapiter to ye He∣brues. Wherupon dyd aryse our sanctus, which at this presente tyme, with such pipyng, kullīg and roaryng, is in the congre∣gation descanted, and especial∣ly at that time, whan the people should moste chefly prepare thē¦selfes,
to reaceyue the seale and pleadge of theyr saluation. So whan the people with all deuo∣tion, & reuerence, was com vp, euery mā toke a pece of ye breade thus broken, and drancke of the cuppe, bindynge them selfes wt this holly sacramente, in to on bodye, being assuryd, and certi∣fyed in theyr consciencys, that by the breakynge of the body of Christ, vpon the crosse, and she∣dynge of his bloode (whose sa∣cramēt, sign, & tokē they had re¦ceyued) theyr raūsō was payd theyr sīnes forgiuen and cleane taken awaye, with the whiche faythe they fedde theyr hungrie soulys, to euerlastyng lyfe. And because, that they al together, ware partakeres of it, it was callyd the communion. Whiche worde, if we had any grace to
perceyue & vnderstande, might admonishe vs, that one man alone should not eate and drin∣ke vp all, as they do now, moste chorlyshly turnynge their arsis to their christen bretherne whō after yt they haue played there parte, with an it a MISSA est, and a blissyng with an emptye cuppe, they do sende home, beīg oppressed both with bodely and spirituall hunger. Parchaunce some wyll saye, that the people, being assistent, whan the preeste dothe eate and drincke vp all the sacrament alone is through faith partigipaunt of the same as well as if they had eaten and droncke with hym. Nowe I wyll aske them this question: Are all the sacramentes, that Christ hathe instytutyd, and or¦donyd in the new testament ne∣necessarye
or not, and of necessy¦tye, to be ministryd, and vsyd as oure sauiour and kynge hath or¦donyd them. No man I thīcke, wyll denaye, but that they bee bothe necessarye, and of necessi∣tye, to be vsyd, as oure lord and sauiour Iesus christ, hath insti∣tutyd them. For Paule in the xvi. chapiter. to the Corinthi, sayeth: That, which I haue re∣ceyued of the lorde, I haue dely¦uered vnto you, But the lorde dyd saye: Eeate ye, and drincke ye, not in the singulare, but in ye plurall number, And agayne: Bybyte ex hoc ōnes: Dryncke ye all of this cuppe, not therby meanyng, that on alone (which was neuer done in y• primytiue, churche) but that all together, should eate and drincke, at this misticall feaste and banckette
there fedyng to gether spiritu∣ally vpon the body and bloode of oure sauioure Iesu Christe. For if it had ben sufficient, and of as greate efficacye, that the minister should haue eaten and droncken vp all the whole sacra¦mente alone, and not the cōgre∣gation with hym woulde not Christe, that moste perfecte, & euerlasting, preeste after the or¦der of Melchisedech, haue done the same, at his maundie? Why are ye so presumptions, to peruert the ordonance of the li∣uinge god, and with such blynd reasones, to delude, begyle and deceaue, the poure ingnorante and symple people? Wyll not ye vengeaunce of god, spoken of, in the ii. of Malachie, lyght vpō your heades? Ye haue broken ye couenaunt of Leuy, saythe the
lorde of hostes. Therfore wyll I make you, to be dispysed, and to be of no reputation amonge al the people, because that they haue not kepte my wayes. etc. Suche doctrine do you moste vngodly, mainteyne, vpholde & teache, touchynge the eleuation of the sacramente. For, saye ye as the brasen serpente was a to¦ken and a fygure of Christe, wt did put the Israelites in remē∣braunce, that the Messyas pro∣missyd vnto them, should be nai¦lyd vpon the crosse, to heale all them, from the styging of ye olde serpēt the dyuell, that shoulde fastene theyr inwarde eyes vpō hym: so the lyfting vp, of the sacrament aboue the preestes heade, dothe put the ignorante people ī remembrance that our lorde and sauyoure Iesu christe
was lefte vp and exaltid vpon the crosse. Now let vs see, what affinitye and similitude the bra¦sen serpente, hathe with youre lyftynge vp of the sacramente. In the, xx. of Numerye we doo reade that the lorde dyd sende fyrie serpentes, among the peo∣ple, because that they had spokē agaynste god and Moyses, wt stonge the people, and muche of Israell dyed. Therfore whan Moyses at the instance of the people, made intercession vnto god to ceasse the plage, the lorde sayed vnto Moyses: Make a fy∣rye serpent, and set vp for a sign that as many as are byton may loke vpon it & lyue. Here christē reader thou seest that Moyses dyd set vp the brasen serpent at the commaundement of god, wt oute the whiche he neuer dyd no¦nothīg▪
But now, where haue ye any suche cōmaūdemēt touchīg youre idolatrus and damnable eleuation? Ys not this to reckē your selfes wyser, than the eter∣nall wysdome of the fathers? Speake now, dyd Christ that heauenly doctor, leue any thīge vnspoken and vntaught that is necessarye, and neadfull to oure euerlastīg saluation or not? If he dyd, then is he an vnperfecte Christ, if he did not, then is this one, of your vnwritten verities. Why haue ye not this sayeng of the lorde before youre eyes all waies, whā ye go about ye lordes affayres? Ye shall not do euery man, that thyng, that semeth to you beste, but that thyng, which I commaund you, that do ōely. Adde nothyng vnto it, nor my∣nishe nothyng from it. This su∣surely
is a godly doctryne, that contrary to godes worde & hys cōmaūdemēt, ye do teache, and with fyre and swearde, beate in to mens heades, whiche by the mouthe of yt most blessed apostel is pronūcid accursid. For saieth he: If I or an aungel from hea∣uen, do preache an other gospell thē ye haue hard let it be accur∣syd. All the sorte of you, be not a∣ble, to proue this lyfting vp of ye sacramente, by any scriptures, either of the olde or of the newe testamente: This your doctrine therfore, is accursyd, beyng a di¦uelyshe and hipocritical inuen∣tion, to set vp and maynteine I dolatrye. For by it, that thynge whiche the eternall wisdome of the heauenly father hath ordo∣nyd, to our most godly conforte, is made a pernitious and dam∣damnable
idol. For so the crea∣ture and outwarde elemente, I meane the misticall bread and wine, which was of our sauiour Iesu Christ, institutyd onely to be eaten and droncke, is in sted of the creator, most detestably of all ignoraunt persones, worshi¦pyd. But this is the crafte and subtiltye of the deuell. For as affore the incarnation of christ, he dyd cause the Israelites, to worshipe the brasen serpent, ma¦king thē to sticke to ye outward figure and to forget, that thing which by it was signified: so did he, after Christes death, moste craftely by litell and litell with¦draw the myndes of the people frome that thyng, which by the sacrament of the bodye & blood of Christ, was and is signifyed, and causyd them in stede of the
lordes deathe, to embrace the outwarde element, to worshipe, and do godly honour vnto it. I wyll not saye, yt by it, these hipo∣crites do fyl their pursis & eua∣cuate oures. For as christ beīge exaltid vpō the crosse did draw all thynges to hym: so do they by their subtyll and idolatrous lyfring vp the sacrament, draw all kynd of richesse, gold & siluer out fo pour mēs pursis ūto thē, so now by ye means of it thei liue more like lords thā like ministe¦res of godes worde. But now I haue a good trust ī our lord god yt this our most illustre, & noble king Edward ye sext wyl imitat yt godly king Ezechias, (which seing ye liuīg god, to be robbed of his honor & glori, b ye detestable idolatrye done to ye brasē serpēt toke ye brasē serpent down & dyd
beat i al to poulder, wherfor he did prosper ī al thīges yt he wēt about) him, I say, he wil imitat & pull down this idolatry, cau∣sing the sacramēts, onli after y• institutiō of christ, to be ministe¦red, and the word of god, to be so liuely preachid vnto his louing subiects & people, yt ye ministers shall ryght well hereafter saye, wt Paul: was not christ descri∣byd befor your eies? & crucify∣ed emōg you? God graūte yt we maye see yt blessyd world & tyme that we, oure chylderē and our chyldrens childrē may wt oure most godly Kīg worship ye liuīg god, in al truth and verite. I wyl not here speake of the ca¦non, because yt ther is a boke alredy abrod, set forth by M Martin Luther, & translatyd ī
english. W abho∣minable poysen ye is hyddē in it As touchīg ye detestable opiniō of thē, yt do openly affyrm, yt the masse is a satisfactory sacrifice, aualeable both for ye quick & the dead: I wyl al mē to read yt litel bok, yt M Williā turner, a man of godly eruditiō & learnīg, dyd lately set forth agaīst ye masse. wt thīg if thei wil do wt a single eie they shall easely perceaue, how y• world hathbē blīdyd these D. eares, & more. Yf any mā is not yet satisfied ī his cōsciēce, touch¦īg y• matter of ye sacramēt let hī read y• litel treatie, yt Iohn frith hath writē agaīst ye deuelish po∣etrie of Thomas More, and I trust, yt he wylbe in this behalfe wel satisfied. remēbre in y• meāe seasō christē reader, y• as y• soule is a spirite, so it thrustith, and
hungereth for spiritual food, & not for bodeli & corporal. wt thīg if it be wel & truly cōsidered, all those Iuish carnal & fleshely op¦piniōs yt mē haue of ye sacramēt shall esaly vanish away. Let vs praye therfore, with one accord that all Idolatrye and supersti¦tion beīg exiled and bānished a waye: all men may with cleare eyes se the sōne of rightuousnes whiche is christ, to whome with the fathere and the holy gooste bee praise glo¦ry and honor for euer. So be it. (::) ❧
Imprintyd at London by Dumfrey Powell dwellyng Aboue Dol¦burne conduit. Cum priuilegio ad impri¦mendum solum, AN. Do. 1548.
