B2179 [ocm]15556468 206180
A SUMMARY Of Arguments for the 1000 Y. Kingdom: By T.B. Argu∣ment I. IF the New Heaven and the New Earth be a Palace for Christ, the King of Glory, and for his Saints in Glory with Him; Be∣ginning with the Thousand Years, and Flying away within a Little space, after They are Ended; when the Kingdom is Delivered up, and the New Jerusalem Re-ascends to God; Then there must be such a Thousand Years Kingdom; But so It is, by plain Doctri∣nal, and by the Prophetical Scriptures of the Revlation compared: There∣fore There must be such a Kingdom. Arg 2. If All Saints be Saints Dead in Christ Rising first, or of the First Resurrection; Or Saints, Styled The Lrving, The Remaining, not Dying, but Chang'd in the very Moment of that First Resurrection; so putting off this Low State of Body, but not immediately Caught up to Christ; nor Immediately putting on the Incorruption and Immortality of the First Resurrection, but Secured for it by this Change; as being Par∣takers of the First Resurrection; over Whom the Second Death shall have no power. And if there be a Thousand Years between this Change at the Time of the Saints Rising first, before the Time of these Living, these Remaining Saints being Caught up; All which Time the Saints of both Kinds Reign with Christ; Then there Must be such a Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ. But so all this is by plain Doctrinal, and by the Prophetical Scripture of the Resurrection Compar'd; Therefore there must be such a Kingdom. Argum. 3. If Christ, and the Saints of the First Resurrection are in the Palace of the New Heaven above, as on Thrones, and their Glory shining down on the New Earth below; and the Saints, the Living, the Remaining Chang'd, are in the Paradise of the New Earth below, and walk in the Light of the New Jerusalem Above; and so Each in this Thou∣sand Years, Reign with Christ; and at the End the Saints below, are Caught up Alike with the Saints Above, Then there must be a Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ: But so it is by the Compare of plain Doctrinal and of Prophetical Scripture in the Revelation; Therefore such a Kingd. must be. Arg. 4. If Satan the Old Serpent Bound, must Lie a 1000 Years, ha∣ving his Head Broken by the Second Adam, the Seed of the Woman, and Bruised under the Feet of Saints shortly; and then be Loosed for a Little space before he be Cast into the Lake, which can never yet have been: Then there must be a Kingdom of a Thousand Years to Christ and his Saints. But so by plain Doctrinal Scripture and the Prophetical Scripture. of the Revelation, it must be; Therefore there must be such a King∣dom of a Thousand Years. Argum. 5. If the Dead Wicked Raised, as at the same Time with the Saints of the First Resurrection, and with the Saints chang'd; and yet being Raised to Condemnation, are neither counted Principals nor Par∣ of the First Resurrection, but the Dead still; who with Death it self  be the Footstool of Christ's Feet, Sitting on an Exalted Throne Above , and as Ashes under the Soals of the Saints Feet for a Thousand
Years, before They are Finally after the 1000 Y. Destroyed, and Cast into the Lake; Then there must be such a Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ: But so It must be by plain Doctrinal Scripture, and by the Prophetical Scri∣pture of the Revelation Compard. Therefore such a Kingdom must be. Argum 6. If the Gog-Magog in the Revelation, of which Ezekiel's Prophecy is a Great Type, c 38 c. 39. that stirs not for the Thousand Years of Satan Bound under the Reign of Christ with his Saints, against the Belo∣ved City and Camp of the Saints; but at the End of the Thousand Years, makes a short Assault, is no other than the Wicked Dead Rais'd, and Ly∣ing at the Fotstool of Christ on his Throne for a Thousand Years, then Judg'd and Cast into the Lake with Death and Hell; Then there must be such a Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ: But so it must needs be by plain Do∣ctrinal and the Prophetical Scripture of the Revelation Compar'd. There∣fore such a Kingdom must be. And thus according to both plain and Doctrinal, and Prophetical Scrip∣ture; The last Enemy Death shall be subdued, with Satan its Prince, and all its Dead; and in the New Heaven and Earth flying away, the Kingdom is Delivered up, and God All in All. By way of Addition upon All This. Inferential Argum.If at the Reformation, beginning by Luther, A. D. 1517. The Last 180 of the 1260 Years, Assigned to the Tyranny of Antichrist, and to the Witnesses in Sackcloth, Began, and so at the Ending of those 180. A.D. 1697. Daniel's Fourth Monarchy is at an End, and the Kingdom of the Stone and of the Son of Man, Filling the whole Earth shall Begin; and the Kingdoms of this World shall be Proclaimed to be the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, in order to a 75 Y. Preparation to the Glorious Kingdom of the Thousand Years. Then the Time is so near that it ought to call us off from this World to a Faith in, Earnest-Prayer for, and Preparation for this Kingdom: But this hath been Argued on Great Scri∣pture Grounds; Therefore so we ought to be Affected, Loving this King∣dom, and Appearance of the Lord Jesus Coming Quickly. AMEN. Revel. 20. Verse 4, &c Expounded by Parallels of its own. Ver. 4. I saw Thrones, and They sate upon Them. Viz. The Armies of Heaven, cap 19.14 Prophets, Saints, Small, Great, Fearing, God Rewarded, cap. 11 18. Peculiarly John saw the Souls of the Beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and the Word of God. Viz. The Souls of the Slain for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, under the Pagan Empire, cap. 6.9. Then in white Robes, as Spi∣rit, Now Living and Reigning in Bodies of Glory, as Intimated then. Most pecularly, Those who had not worshippe he Beast, &c. Viz. The Witnesses He kill'd, cap. 11.7. His Image caus'd to be kill'd, c 13 15. viz. The Rest of Fel∣low Servants, Brethren, to be kill'd, c. 6.11. V. 5. The Renant, or Rest of the Dead Lied not. &c. Viz. The Remnant slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, being Kings, &c. Small, Great, cap. 19.21. The Dead judg'd, and Those de∣stroy'd, who destroy'd the Earth, cap. 11.18. V. 6. Blessed and Holy is he that hath his part, &c. They Lived and Reigned. Viz. The Nations of the Saved; Kings of the Earth, c 21.24. Healed with the Leaves of the Tree of Life, cap. 22.2. An ANSWER is Desired to a DISCOƲRSE Annex'd.
