B3109B 778.k.15.[26] R214035 99884180 203958
Directions for the Golden Purging Spirit of SCURVEY-GRASS. Being only prepared by me Charles Blagrave Physician. THis Excellent Spirit (for Chronical Distempers) is not onely to be taken Spring and Fall but at all other conveni∣ent times, according to the several Distempers afflicting the Body of Man. If you be troubled with pains in the Shoulders, Knees, Ancles, or any other parts, let them be caused by the Scurvey, Foulness of Bloud, Great Colds or Surfeits; be sure to take it three or four days successively, when you find the pains begin to be more violent than at other times; as usually they will be more violent against Frost, Rain, or at a Thaw, after a great Frost: for then one Dose will work in all the parts and be more beneficial than double the quantity otherwise taken. Be sure to rub the place pained with some of my other Spirit night and morning, before you take the Purging Spirit: Rub it in well with a warm hand, and it will almost carry away any pain, though of a long standing. For Dropsie and Kings-Evil take it three or four dayes together in rainy weather, by reason all the humours are then afloat; and causes the Spirit to have a more powerful operation: For no Medicine except taken at a seasonable time, can have that true operation upon Pains and Humours of∣fending the Body. Being stopped close, it is subject to no decay, but remains good from age to age in extremity of Heat or Cold, without detriment to its Vertues or Operations. It hath been tried in several Voyages to the East and West-Indies, with great suc∣cess upon Scorbutick Sea-men; a small quantity having cured beyond expectation: And it hath proved very effectual for the cu∣ring these following Distempers in Virginia, New-England, and several other places there adjacent. It's called by the Name of The Golden Spirit, for the colour and excellency of the Medicine, and requires no other commendation but its own Vertues to praise its worth. FIrst, I commend it as a thing very beneficial for all persons that travel by Land or Sea, being of so small a bulk, that its carried without any trouble, and is ready upon any occasion to relieve them in any sudden Distemper. It effectually cures the Scurvey, carrying away its spots and pains in the Limbs; taking it three or four dayes successively (in open weather) but if it work the next day, miss a day, and take it again, according to discretion; seeing it's impossi∣ble to make one Medicine to work with all sorts of Bodies alike, therefore begin at 40 Drops, and so you may increase to a 100 or more, adding 10 every day, according to your strength and constitution, thorow-out all these Diseases; for 30 will work with one body more than 100 with another, according as their bodies are replenished with humours. In all these following Diseases you may take it in Old Malaga, White-wine, Ale or Mum, in what quantity you please, and in half an Ounce of any Syrrup. If for the Dropsie or Green Sickness, take a Draught of White-wine after, if you take it in Syrrup, otherwise drink what you please after it; you may take from 40 to 100 Drops, and increase or decease, as you have a mind it should purge: you may drink an hour after warm Broth or Water gruel, if you can with conveniency; not confining your self to house or diet. It also opens Obstructions, and clarifies and sweetens the Bloud; using Exercise after it, it causes those of a swarthy Complexion to become fair and beautiful, by purging the adult matter, that hinders the quick Circulating of the Blood. It cures the Kings-Evil, and disposes Old Ulcers to a speedy Healing, by carrying away all Noxious salt Humours. It cures the Dropsie, gives speedy ease in the Wind Collick, and brings away the Gravel in the Kidneys. It cures the Green-Sickness, with its Melancholly Pains and Stoppages in the Stomach; and helps their Shortness of Breath, and makes them Active and Lively, whereby it procures a fresh ruddy Complexion. It cleanseth the Stomach of Cold Phlegmatick Humours, thins Tough Phlegme, and gives Breath in the greatest Stoppages. It wonderfully purges the Stomach of Wind upwards and downwards, easing the fulness thereof. It helps those that are troubled with the Spleen, by wasteing the swelling and hardness of it. It mightily helps Digestion, and recovers a Lost Appetite, by carrying away Cold Humors and strengthening it. It cures any Violent Surfeits, if taken in time, either by Digestion, or by carrying away that which doth not digest. Its an approved Medicine for Rheumatick Eyes, having cured beyond expectation in few dayes those that have been al∣most blind for many months. Several that hath experimented it, approves it to be one of the best Remedies after the Small Pox, for Putifying the Blood and purging away the Relicks of so Nauceous a Distemper. For an Unsavory Breath its one of the quickest and best Remedies in the World; for it not onely procureth a Sweet Breath, but carries away for the future all Fumes that causes any ungrateful Scent. It effectually kills the Worms in young or old people, and brings them away to admiration. It cures the Itch and all sorts of Breakings-Out or Boyles, and helps Violent Itching in the Flesh and Skin, when there is nothing to be seen. Its an approved Remedy for the Head-ach and Giddiness in the Head. It helps them that are troubled with Vapors and Mother-fits. ☞ The Nurse onely taking of it cures sucking Children of all sorts of Scabs and Breakings-out, by purging and purifying Nurses Milk of all salt Humours; which Milk purges the Child also. ☞ My other Spirit keeps the Teeth from rotting and the Gums from putrefaction, and if putrified dissolves it, and fastens Loose Teeth. And is good for preventing most of these Diseases. You may give it to Children from 3 years old to 8 years old, from 10 to 30 Drops; and from 8 years old to 16, from 30 to 60; and so from 16 and upwards from 40 to 100 Drops; the Bottle being Four Purges for any ordinary Man. ☞ There's no body pretends to counterfeit this Spirit, yet for my satisfaction I have sealed this as well as my other Spirit, with my Coat of Arms, being Three Greaves, anciently Armour for the Legs. Whomsoever pretends to sell my other Spirit and hath not this to sell also, you may be sure it's a counterseit. The price is 1 s. each Bottle. The True Spirit of both sorts are onely sold by Mr. Billingsly at the Printing-Press in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange; Mr. James at the Printing-press in Mincing-lane, Mr. Blagrave at the Black Bear in Paul's Church-yard; Mr. Sherly un∣der St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street, Mr. Mildward at the entrance of Westminster Hall, all being Booksellers; Mr Pres∣cott at the Golden Key, near the Market-place in Southwark, Mr. Hughs a Perfumer in Shandois-street near Covent Garden; Mr. Harrison at Lincolns-Inn-gate in Chancery-lane Mr. Allen at Grays-Inn Gate in Grays-Inn-lane, Mrs. Floyd at Turnstile in Holbourn, and at the Black Swan in Exeter-Change in the Strand; Mr. Paine a Salesman in Ratcliffe-High-way, over against Shadwell Church, Mr. Wright a Milliner at the Corner of New-fish-street-hill, Mr. Blagrave a Perfumer in the Savoy, Mr. Moore at the Maidenhead over against the Dial in Fleetstreet Bookseller, Mr. Halford at the end of the Paved Alley in the Pell-Mell Bookseller. Mr. Brandon a Cheesmonger at the Corner of Clare Market; Mr. Fenton at the Cat and Fiddle in Duke-street by Lincolns-Inn-Fields, John Barnt Cheesmonger at the Golden-Heart in Bishps-gate-street, near the Spittle; and at my House on Clerken-well-green, the second House in New-Prison-Walk.
