10275.3 S2098 23026083 26102
ARTICLES ❧ To be enquired of, within the Archdeaconry of Midlesex, by the Church-wardens & Sworne-men in euery Parish. And presentment to be made thereof to the Arch-deacon. With particular Answeres vnto euery Article LONDON Printed by EDW: ALLDE. 1615.
The tenor of the Oath ministred to the Church-Wardens and Sworne-men. YE shall sweare, that all affections, fauour, hatred, hope of reward, or gaine, or feare of displeasure or malice set aside, you shall vpon due considera∣tion of the Articles giuen you in charge present all and euery such person, of, or within your Pa∣rish, as hath committed any offence or fault, or made any de∣fault mentioned in any of these Articles, or which are vehe∣mently suspected, or otherwise defamed of any such offence, fault or default, wherein you shall deale vprightly and accor∣ding to equitie: neither of malice presenting any contrary to Truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so conceale the Truth, hauing in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeale to maintaine truth, and to suppresse vice: So helpe you God and his faithfull promises in Christ Iesus.
¶ Articles to be enquired of within the Archdeaconarie of Midlesex, for this present yeere of our Lord God. 1615. Articles concerning the Church. WHether haue you in your seuerall Churches and Chappells the Booke of Constitutions or Canons Ecclesiasticall, ready to be read by your Minister, according to his Maiesties pleasure, pub∣lished by his highnes authority vnder the great Seale of England. 2 Whether is there in your Church or Chappell, one parchment regi∣ster Booke, prouided for Christnings, Marriages, and Burialls: and whe∣ther is the same duely and exactly kept, according to the Constitutions in that case prouided, and a transcript thereof brought in yearely within one moneth after Easter, into my Lord Bishops principall Registers office? and whether doth your Minister vpon euery Sunday reade the names of all such as haue béene married, christned, or buried the wéeke before? 3 Whether haue you prouided the Booke of Common Prayer lately com∣maunded by his Maiesties authority onely to be vsed, and the Booke of Ho∣milies, and two Psalters: and whether haue you in your Church or Chap∣pell a Font of stone, set vp in the antient vsuall place: a conuenient and de∣cent Communion table standing vpon a frame, with a Carpet of silke, or some other decent stuffe: and a faire Linnen cloth to lay thereon at the Com∣munion time: and whether is the same then placed in such conuenient sort within the Chancell or Church, as that the Minister may be best heard in his Prayer and administration, and that the greater number may commu∣nicate: and whether are the ten Commaundements set vp on the East end of your Church or Chappell, where the people may best sée and reade them, and other sentences of holy Scriptures written on the walls likewise for the same purpose? 4 Whether haue you a conuenient seate for the Minister to reade ser∣uice in, together with a comely Pulpit set vp in a conuenient place, with a decent cloth or Cushion for the same: a comely large Surples, a  Communion Cup of Siluer, and a couer agreable for the same, with all
other things and ornaments necessary for the celebration of diuine Seruice, and administration of the Sacraments, and a strong chest for the almes of the poore, with thrée lockes and keyes, and another chest for the kéeping of the ornaments of the Church, and Register Booke. 5 How many Bells are there at this present, hanging in the Belfrée of your parish Church, and how many haue there béene heretofore: whether any of your said Bells haue béene taken downe and sold, or made away: and what other Church goods are now wanting in your Church. 6 Whether are your Church or Chappells with the Chancells thereof, and your Parsonage or Vicarage house, and all other housing thereto be∣longing, in good reparations, and decently and comely kept, aswell within as without: the seates well maintained, your Churchyards well fenced, and kept without abuse, according to the 85. Canon: if not, then through whose default, and what defects are? All these things in these Articles to be prepared, according to the Canons vnder the title appertaining to Churches. Articles concerning the Clergie. VVHether hath your Minister read the Constitutions set foorth by his Maiesty, once euery yeare, vpon some Sundayes or Holidayes, in the afternoone, before diuine seruice: according as by the Canons he is bound? 2 Whether doth your Minister vse to pray for the Kings Maiesty, King Iames, and for the Quéenes Maiesty, Prince Charles, Fredericke Count Pa∣latine of the Rheine, with the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, giuing vnto his highnesse such stile and title of Supreme Gouernour of all causes, and ouer all persons, as well Ecclesiasticall as temporall, as by lawe are due vnto him, exhorting their Parishioners to yealde him obedience according to the same, and also in their said Sermons, doe pray for all Arch-bishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, according to the 55. Canon. 3 Whether is the prescript forme of diuine seruice vsed by your Minister vpon Sundayes, Holydayes, Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, according to the booke of Cōmon prayer. And whether doth your Minister duly obserue all the orders, rites, and ceremonies prescribed in the said booke of Common Prayer: as well in reading publike prayers, the Letany, as also in administring the Sacraments in such manner and forme, wearing the Surples, as by the booke of Common Prayer by law now established is inioyed. 4 Whether doth your Minister administer the holy Communion so often, and at such times as that euery Parishioner may receiue the same,
at the least thrice euery yeare, whereof one at Easter, as by the booke of Common Prayer is appointed. And whether doth your Minister receiue the same himselfe on euery day that he administreth it to others, knéeling at the same, and administreth it to none but to such as doe knéels at the re∣ceiuing thereof, and vse the words of the Institution according to the Booke, at euery time that the bread and wine is receiued, in such manner and forme as by the prouiso of the 21. Canon is directed, or wherein is he faulty, and whether is warning giuen by him before hand for the Commuion, as the 22. Canon requireth. 5 Whether hath your Minister admitted any notorious offenders, or Schismatickes to the Communion: contrary to the 26. and 27. Constituti∣ons, without satisfaction by due course of law before enioyned them; or re∣iected any from the Communion, who were not by publike presentment, or other open scandall, infamous, and detected of some notorious crime by com∣mon fame published in the Parish. 6 Whether the Minister, together with the Churchwardens and Quest∣men, doe take diligent héed and care, that not onely all and euery of your owne Parishioners doe receiue thrice in euery yeare, as aforesaid: but also that no strangers of any other Parish doe forsake their owne Minister and Parish, to receiue with you, contrary to the 28. Canon. 7 Whether doth your Minister vse to signe the Children with the signe of the Crosse when they are baptized, according to the booke of Common Prayer, and the 30. Canon: and whether he hath deferred, or wilfully refoled to bap∣tize any infant in his Parish being in danger, hauing béene onely infor the weaknesse thereof, and whether the childe hath died by him default with∣out baptisme, contrary to the 68. and 69. Canons. 8 Whether is your Minister continually resident with you vpon his be∣nefice: or for how long time hath he béene absent, and where is he resident for the most part, and what other be . 9 Whether doth ydl Minister being a Preacher; preach vsually accor∣ding to the constitutions, eyther in his owne thee with your once euery sunday or else in some other Church or Chappell néere adioyning, where no Preacher is, according to the 45. Canon, or how hath he bene negligent in that behalfe. 10 Whether is your Minister a Preacher allowed if yea, then by whome: if no, whether doth he procure Sermons to be preached among you once in euery moneth at the least, by such as are lawfully licensed, ac∣cording to the 46. Canon, or doth contribute toward a licensed Preacher, if his liuing will beare it. 11 Whether hath your Minister another benefice: and whether doth
he supply his absence by a Curate, that is sufficiently licensed to preach in that cure of his, whereon he himselfe is not resident: or otherwise in case he doe not finde a preaching Minister there, by reason of the smalnesse thereof, whether doth he preach at both his benefices vsually himselfe, according to the 47. Canon? 12 Whether is your Preacher or Curate licensed to preach or serue the Cure, by the Bishop of this Dioces, or by any other, and by whom: whether doth your Minister or Curate serue more cures then one, contrary to the 48. Canon. If yea, then what other cure doth he also serue? 13 If your Minister be not licensed to preach as aforesaid, whether doth he reade Homilies, or rather take vpon him to expound the Scriptures either in his owne cure or else where contrary to the 49. Canon: If yea, then you are to present him; and spot me the place where he so hath preached. 14 Whether hath any person béen admitted to preach within your Church or Chappell, but such as you haue well knowne to be sufficiently licensed: whome haue you so admitted? you shall present their names, and how often haue any such béene admitted to preach, and by whose procurement: and whe∣ther haue you caused euery strange Preacher, licensed or not licensed, to sub∣scribe his name, together with the day when he preached, according to the 50. and 51. Canons: and if he were licensed, then by whom he was licensed: And whether haue they or any other preached in your Church not being so∣berly and decently apparrelled according to the 47. Canon. 15 Whether doth your Lecturer and Preacher reade diuine Seruice, and administer the Sacraments in his owne person twice euery yeare, obseruing all the Ceremonies in the booke of Common Prayer established according to the 56. Canon. 16 Whether doth your Minister weare the Surples whilest he is say∣ing the publike prayers, and administring the Sacraments: And if he be any Graduate, whether then doth  we are vpon his Surples, during the times aforesaid, such a hood, as by the ders of his Vniuersitie is agrée∣able to his degrée, according to then 58. Canon. 17 Whether doth your Minister euery Sunday and Holyday, before E∣uening Prayer, for halfe an houre or more, examine and instruct the youth, and ignorant persons of his Parish, in the ten Commandements the Arti∣cles of beliefe, and the Lords Prayer, as also in the Catechisme last set forth in the booke of Common prayer, whereby the chidren of the Parish may be prepared for confirmation, according to the 90. Canon. 18 Whether hath your Minister without license from the Archbishop, the Bishop of the Diocesse, or his Chancelor, or without Lycence vnder the seale of office of the Archdeacon or his Officiall, solemnized mariage betwixt any
parties, the Banes not being three seuerall Sundayes or Holly-dayes first published in time of diuine seruice, in the seuerall Churches or Chappels of their seuerall abode, according to the booke of common Prayer, And the 62. Canon: and that also betwixt the houres of eight and twelue in the fore∣noone, contrary to the 102. Canon. And whether hath your minister in the times prohibited marryed, any without such Licence, notwithstanding the banes haue bene asked, as you doe knowe, beléeue, or haue heard say. 19 Whether hath your Minister, since the last Canons published, so∣lemnized any marryage betwixt any persons, being vnder the age of 21. yéeres, alchough the Banes be thrice asked, before such time as the parents haue made knowne vnto him their consent thereunto, contrary to the 99. and 100. Canons: and whether hath he married any of another Diocosse, and who are they, and by what authoritie, and when. 20 Whether doth your Minister vpon Sundayes at morning prayer, declare vnto the Parishioners what holy dayes and fasting dayes are ap∣pointed to be kept the wéeke following, according to the 64. Canon, where∣by they may be put in minde to prepare themselues accordingly, and to re∣paire to the Church to publike prayer, as by law they are bound. 21 Whether doth your Minister in the Rogation dayes, vse the peram∣bulation of the circuit of the parish appointed by law, and in the same per∣ambulation, moue the people to giue thankes to God for his benefits vsing such Psalmes, Prayers, Homilies, as are to that end set forth. 22 Whether doth any man (being neither Minister nor Deacon) reade Common-prayer openly in your Church or Chappell, or administer the Sa∣crament of Baptisme, or solemnize Matrimonie, or take vpon him to practise any other ministeriall dutie in the Church, that is prescribed to be executed particularly by such, as are either Ministers, or Deacons, and what is his name that so doth. 23 Whether doth your Minister euery sixe moneths denounce in his parish, all such of his parish, as doe perseuer in the sentence of excommu∣nication, not séeking to be absolued: and whether hath he admitted any per∣son excommunicate, into the Church, without a Certificate of his absolution from the Ordinarie or other competent Iudge, vnder his seale, according to the Canons. 24 Whether doth your Minister being a Preacher, endeuour and la∣bour diligently with mildenes and temperance to conferre with, and thereby to reclaime the Popish Recusants in his parish from their errours, if there be any such there being: and whether is he painefull in visitation of the sicke, according to the booke of Common-prayer, and the Canons in that case prouided.
25 Whether is your Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, or Curate too much fre∣quent or ouer conuersant with, or a fauourer or Recusants, whereby he may be suspected not to be sincere in Religion. 26 Whether hath your Minister, or any other, taking vpon him the place of a Minister, preached, baptized children (vnlesse in case of necessitie) solem∣nized marriage, churched any woman, or ministred the holy Communion in a∣ny priuate house or houses: if yea, then where, whome, and how often hath he so offended in any of the premises. 27 Whether hath your Minister taken vpon him to appoint any pub∣like or priuate fasts or prophesses, not approoued and established by lawe or publike authority: or hath he attempted vpon any pretence either of possessi∣on, by fasting and prayer to cast out deuills, contrary vnto the 72. Canon. 28 Whether hath your Minister, or any other person or persons within your Parish vsed to méete in any priuate house or other place, and to hold pri∣uate conuenticles, contrary to the 73. Canon: if yea, then you shall present them all and euery one of them. 29 Whether doth your Minister vse such decencie and comelinesse in his apparrell, as by the 74. constitution is enioyned him, as well at home as when he goeth abroad. 30 Whether doe you know in your Parish, any that hauing heretofore taken vpon him or them, the order of Priest-hood or of a Deacon, hath since relinquished the same, and betaken himselfe to the course of his life, a Lay∣man, neglecting his vocation: if yea, then you shall present his name and the place of his abode. 31 Whether is your Minister noted or defamed to haue obtained his Benefice by Symony, or reputed to be an incontinent person, or doth kéepe any man or woman in his house, that are suspected either to be of euill religion, or bad life, himselfe to be a common drunkard, or to be a common hunter of Ta∣uernes, Alchouses, or other suspected places, a common gamester or player at dice, or other vnlawfull games, a common swearer, or notorious person, or faulty in any other crime punishable by Ecclesiasticall censures, whereby he is offensiue and scandalous to his function or ministery. 32 Whether doth your Minister vse the forme of thankesgiuing to wo∣men after their childbirth, and whether hath he admitted any thereunto that was begotten with childe in adultery or fornication, without license of his Ordinary, and whether haue any married wiues refused to come to Church, according to the booke of Common Prayer, to giue God thankes after childe∣birth: if any be faulty herein, you shall present their names. 33 Whether doth your Minister baptize any children in any Bason, or other vessells, then in the ordinary Font being placed in the Church, according
to the 81. Canon or doth vse to put any bason into it. 34 Whether in the time of diuine Seruice, and of euer part thereof, all due reuerence is vsed: no man then couering his head, all manner of persons knéeling when Prayers are read, and standing vp at the saying of the Beliefe, according to the order prescribed. Articles concerning Schoolemasters. VVHether the Schoolemaster or Schoolemasters within your Pa∣rish, openly or priuately, in any Noble or Gentlemans house, or in any other place, be of good and sincere Religion life and conuersation, & be diligent in the teaching and bringing vp of youth: and whether they haue béene examined, allowed and licensed for Schoole-masters, by the Ordinarie in that behalfe: and how many seuerall Schoole-masters haue you, and what be their names. 2 Whether your Schoole-master, or Schoole-masters doe themselues receiue the holy Communion as often as they ought to doe: and whether doe all their Schollers, which be of age sufficient, and or capacitie, by in∣struction, to receiue the Lords Supper, come to the Communion either in your Church, or where their Parents dwell, once euery yeere, and be dili∣gent to feare Common Prayer. 3 Whether the Schoole-master, or Schoole masters, either priuate or publike, doe teach their Schollers the Catechisme authorized by publike authoritie, at the least once euery wéeke, and doe instruct & examine them in the same, or doe teach any other Catechisme, and what Catechisme it is that they doe teach. 4 Whether your Schoole-master, or Schoole-masters, or any of them be knowne or suspected to reade vnto their Schollers priuately, any vn∣lawfull Bookes, or priuately to instruct them in their young yéeres, either in Popery, superstition, disobedience, or contempt to his Maiestie, and his Lawes Ecclesiasticall by publike authoritie allowed. 5 What recusant Papists are there in your Parish, and whether doe they, or any of them kéepe any Schoole master in their house, which com∣meth not to Church to heare Diuine Seruice, and receiue the Communi∣on: what is his name, and how long hath he taught. 6 Whether the Schoole-master, or Schoole-masters within your Parish, doe teach his or their Srhollers any other Grammer, then that which is called the Kings Grammer, set forth by the authoritie of King Henry the eight, teaching the prescript forme thereof, whereby the Schollers may perfectly vnderstand their Grammer rules and constructions.
Articles concerning Parishioners, Ecclesiasticall Officers and others of the Laytie. 1 WHether is there any within your Parish, that hath, or doth impugne the Kings Maiesties supremacie and authoritie in causes Ecclesia∣sticall, or doe any way, or in any part impeach the same, being restored to the Crowne by the lawes of this Realme established on that behalfe. 2 Whether is there any in your parish that denieth the Church of Eng∣land by law established vnder the Kings most excellēt Maiestie to be a true & Apostolicall Church, teaching & maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles. 3 Whether is there any in your Parish, that doth impugne any of the Articles of Religion agréed vpon in An. 1562. & established in the Church of England. 4 Whether is there any in your Parish that doe impugne or speake a∣gainst the rites and ceremonies established in the Church of England, or the lawfull vse of them: you shall present their names. 5 Whether are there any in your Parish that doe impugne the go∣uernment of the Church of England, vnder the Kings most excellent Ma∣iestie, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest that beare office in the same, affirming that he same is Antichristian, or repug∣nant to the word of God. 6 Whether is there any in your parish that impugne the forme of con∣secration and ordayning of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, affirming that the same is repugnant to the word of God, or that they, who are so ordered in the same forme, are not lawfully made. 7 Whether is there any in your parish that doth hold or frequent any conuenticles, or priuate méetings, and there doe conferre or agrée vpon any priuate orders, other then such as are by the Canons set forth by publike authority, to be by them or any other in Church gouernment obserued. 8 Whether any persons haue lurked or tipled in Tauerns or Ale hou∣ses on Sundaies, or other Holy dayes, or vsed his, or their manuall craft, trade, or mysterie, or any bodylie labour, or kéept their shops open vpon the saide dayes, or any of them, especially in the time of diuine seruice? 9 Whether are there any in your parish that doe, or haue prophaned (since his Maiesties last generall pardon) the Lords day, called Sunday, or other Holy-day, contrary to the orders of the Church of England, prescri∣bed in that behalfe? 10 Whether hath any person in your parish quarrelled, stricken, or vsed any violence vnto, or with your Minister, or any other in the Church or Church yard, or vsed himselfe disorderly in the Church, by filthie and pro∣phane talke, or any other rude and immodest behauiour?
11 Whether is that due reuerence and humble submission, vsed within your Church or Chappel in the time of diuine Seruice, as by the eightéenth Constitution is prescribed? and whether each one in the Church or Chap∣pell, doe apply and order himselfe there in the time of diuine Seruice, as by the latter part of the same Constitution is most commendably enioyned? 12 Whether the Church-wardens and Quest-men doe euery Sunday and Holy-day diligently search who absenteth himselfe, or her selfe from Church? and whether doe they suffer any to abide in the Church-porch, or Church-yard, in the time of Common prayer or Sermon? 13 Whether the Church-wardens doe prouide against euery Commu∣nion, with the aduice of the Minister, a sufficient quantitie of fine white bread, and of good & wholsome wine, for the number of the Communicants that shall receiue, & that to be brought in a cleane and swéete standing Pot of Pewter, or other pure Mettall? 14 Whether haue any in your parish béene God fathers or God-mo∣thers to their owne children? Or whether your Minister, or any God-fa∣thers or God-mothers haue vsed, or doe vse any other forme, answere, or spéech in Baptisme, then is in the Booke of Common prayer appoynted? Or whether any which haue not Communicated, be admitted to be God-fathers, or God-mothers, contrarie to the 29. Canone. 15 Whether is there any in your parish that doe refuse to haue their children baptized, or themselues to receiue the Communion at the hands of your Minister, because he is no Preacher? you shall present their names. And if your Minister, sithence the publishing of the said Booke of Canons, haue receiued any such persons (being not of his owne Cure) to the Com∣munion, or baptized any of their children, you shall likewise present him. 16 Whether doe all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses, cause their Children, Seruants, and Apprentises, to come to the Catechisme vp∣on the Sundayes and Holy-dayes before euening prayer, to heare and to be instructed and taught therein? and those that doe not their duties here∣in, you shall present their names. 17 Whether haue you, or your Predecessors Church-wardens there suffered, since the last pardon, any Playes, Feasts, Banquets, Church-ales, Drinkings, or any other prophane vsages to be kept in your Church, Chappels, or Church, yard, or Bels to be rung superstitiously vpon Holy-dayes, or Eues, abrogated by the Booke of Common Prayer, contrarie to the 68. Canon? 18 How many Inhabitants within your Parish, Men, or Women, a∣boue the age of sixtéene yéeres, doe refuse to frequent diuine seruice, establi∣shed by publike authoritie of this Realme, or to receiue the holy Commu∣nion,
or are negligent therein? what be their names, and of what degrée, state, or trade of life are they? you are to present them all of each sort. 19 Whether doe any of the Inhabitants within your saide Parish en∣tertaine within their house any soiourners, ledgers, or any common resor∣ters and guests, who refuse to frequent diuine Seruice, or receiue the holy Communion, as aforesaid? what be their names, and of what qualitie or condition are they? 20 whether any of the said Popish Recusants be of insolent behauiour, not without publike offence, or doe boldly busie themselues in seducing, or withdrawing others, either abroad or in their owne families, by instructing their children in Popish religiō, or by refusing to entertaine any, especially in place of greatest seruice or trust, but such as concur with them in opini∣on of Religion: and what be their names that so doe? 21 How long the said Popish Recusants haue obstinately abstained ey∣ther from diuine Seruice, or from the Communion, as is aforesayd, whe∣ther of any long time, or onely since his Maiesties raigne, and how long? 22 What persons aforesaid within your Parish, either for the offence aforesaid, or for any other contumacie or crime, doe remaine excommunica∣ted? what be their names? and for what cause? and how long haue they so stood excommunicated? 23 Whether were you the Church wardens and Quest-men chosen by the consent of the Minister and Parishioners, in Easter wéeke, according vnto the 89. and 90. Canon. And whether haue the Church-wardens be∣fore you giuen vp a iust account for their time, and deliuered to you their successors, whatsoeuer money or other thing of right belonging to the Church, which was in their hands: according to the 89. Canon. 24 Whether doe all persons aboue the age of sixetéene yoores, vsually resort to heare diuine Seruice vpon Sundaies and Holy-daies approoued? and whether hath each one of your Parishioners (being aboue the age of sixtéene yéeres, as aforesaid) receiued the holy Communion thrice this last yéere, chiefely once at Easter, in your Parish Church knéeling? If no, then you shall present their name which haue not so done. 25 Whether haue you a fit Parish Clarke, aged twentie yéeres at the least, of honest conuersation, and sufficient for reading and writing? and whether he be paide his wages without fraude, according to the most an∣cient custome of your Parish? if not, then by whom is he so defrauded and denyed? and whether he be chosen by the Parson or Vicar, or by whom, according to the 91. Canon? 26 Whether haue any in your Parish béene marryed within the prohi∣bited degrées forbidden by the law, and expressed in a certaine Table pub∣lished
by authority in Anno. 1563. If yea, then you shall present their names? and whether haue you the saide Table publikely set vp in your Church, and fastned to some conuenient place? 27 Whether doth any heretofore diuorced, or married and not diuor∣ced, kéepe company at bed and boord as man and wife, with any other man or woman, then with the person that he or she was married vnto? and what be their names? If the parties now so liuing together, say that they be marryed, when and where were they marryed? and how long haue they so continued together? 28 Whether haue you in your Parish to your knowledge, or by com∣mon fame and report, any which haue committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest, or any Bawdes, harborers, or receiuers of such persons, or pub∣likely suspected thereof, which haue not béene publikely punished to your knowledge? if yea, then with whome? And whether are there any which are by common fame and report reputed and taken to be common Drun∣kards, Blasphemers of Gods holy Name, common and vsuall swearers, filthy speakers, raylers, sowers of discord among their Neighbours, or speakers against Ministers marriages: Vsurers, contrarie to the Statute made in the seauen and thirtieth yéere of King Henry the eight, Symonicall persons, fighters, brawlers, or quarrellers in Church or Church-yard? you shall not faile to present their names. 29 Whether haue any in your Parish receiued or harboured any wo∣man gotten with childe out of wedlock, and suffered them againe to depart without pennance first inflicted vpon them by their Ordinarie? you shall truly present as well the partie harbouring as harboured, and who is suf∣pected to haue committed incontinencie with her. 30 Whether any person or persons suspected or detected heretofore of incontinencie, and therefore departing out of your Parish for a season, is now returned againe? or in what place else is he or she now abiding to your knowledge, or as you haue heard? you shall not faile to present the whole truth in that behalfe. 31 Whether there be any person or persons Ecclesiasticall or Tempo∣rall within your Parish, or elsewhere within the Dioces, that haue re∣tayned and kept in their custodie, or that reade, sell, vtter, disperse, carrie, or deliuer to others any English or Latine Bookes, or Libels, set foorth or printed, either on this side or beyond the Seas, by Papists or Sectaries a∣gainst the Kings Supremacie in causes Ecclesiasticall; or tending to Po∣pery, Puritanisme, or any other Sect, Errour, or Heresie, against true Re∣ligion, and Catholike doctrine, now publikely professed in this Church, or the gouernment or discipline of the Church of England, now within this
Realme receiued and established by common authoritie, that you know or haue heard of, what their names and sir names are? 32 Whether there be any in your Parish who are knowne or suspected to conceale, or kéepe hidden in their houses any Masse Bookes, Portesses, Breuiaries, or other Bookes of Popery or superstition: or any Challices, Copes, Vestments, Albes, or other ornaments of superstition, vncancelled, or vndefaced, which is to be coniectured that they doe kéepe for a day, as they call it. 33 Whether any of your Parishioners, hauing a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar, or Curate, doe absent themselues from his Sermons, and resort to any other place to heare other Preachers. 34 Whether there be any Inne-kéepers, Alewiues, Victuallers, or Tiplers, that suffer or doe admit any person, or persons in their houses, to eate, drinke, or play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowles, or such like games, in the time of Common prayer or Sermon, on Sundaies or Holy-daies: Or any Butchers, or other, that commonly vse to sell meate or other things in the time of Common prayer, Preaching, or reading of Homilies? and whether in any Fayres, or common Markets, falling vpon Sundaies, there be shewing of any wares before morning prayer be done? And whether any Markets or selling of wares be vsed, or suffered in any Church-yards on the Sabbath day by common pack-men and Pedlers go∣ing about, or any Butchers? 35 Whether hath your Minister, or any of the parish, without the con∣sent or priuitie of the Ordinarie, caused any to doe penance, or to be pu∣nished either openly or otherwise, by any Vestrie meetings, or taken mo∣ney for any crime punishable by the Ecclesiasticall lawes onely, and what be the names of the parties that haue béene so punished, and in what manner? 36 Whether there be any in your parish who will come to heare the Sermon, but will not come to the publike prayer, appointed by the Booke of common prayer, making a schisme or diuision (as it were) betwéene the vse of publike prayer and preaching? and whether there be any who being present at publike prayer, doe not deuoutly and humbly knéele vpon their knées, at such times as by the Booke of common prayer they are appointed: to wit, when they make a generall confession of their sinnes: when all Prayers and Collects are read: in the time of the Letanie: when the ten Commandements are read: & at the receiuing of the holy Communion, &c. And what be their names that haue at any time shewed themselues vn∣dutifull and vnreuerent in that behalfe? 37 Whether there be any married women, or others within your pa∣rish,
which after childe-birth refuse, contemne, or neglect, to come to the Church to giue God thanks for their safe deliuerie, & to haue the prayers publikely appointed in that behalfe by the Booke of common prayer? 38 Whether any within your parish doe resort into Barnes, Fields, Woods, priuate houses, to any extraordinary exposition of Scriptures, or conferences together, or that be drawers or perswaders of others to a∣ny such schismaticall conuenticle. 39 Whether any doe kéepe their children vnbaptized longer then is conuenient, vnlesse that it be for the sicknesse of the childe, or other vrgent occasion? And whether any doe carry their childe or children from the pa∣rish they are borne in, to other parishes to be baptized, and so refuse their owne parish, and to what other parish? or doe bring strange Ministers into their own houses to baptize their children priuately, according to their owne fantasies? 40 Item, (Setting downe the full summe of the Communicants with∣in your Parish) you shall present euery one who hath béene defectiue at this feast of Easter last past, in receiuing the holy Communion vpon neg∣lect, contempt, or any other pretence and excuse. 41 Whether doe you know of any other matter of Ecclesiasticall cog∣nizance worthy the presentment, in your iudgement, heretofore in these Articles not expressed, and which is fit to be reformed in Ecclesiasticall censure? If you doe, you shall likewise present the same by vertue of your oathes. 42 Whether hath your Minister kept any Excommunication in his custodie vnpublished against any of his Parishioners, aboue the space of xx. dayes next after the receit thereof, without some lawfull certificat of the absolution of any such excommunicate person, or of some lawfull war∣rant for the stay of the same Excommunication. 43 Whether hath your Minister admitted any excommunicate per∣son to the holy Communion before he hath receiued a certificat of the ab∣solution of the same partie: And whether haue you permitted any excom∣municate person either of your owne parish or of any other parish, to heare diuine Seruice in your parish Church, since the time you looke vpon you the office of Church wardens within your saide parish? If yea, set downe the names of the same parties. 44 Whether hath your Minister absolued any excommunicate person or persons of your parish, or of any other parish within the Archdeaconey of Essex, within the space of a yéere last past, without a speciall warrant in writing vnder the hands of the Iudge and Register of this Court, or of one of them? If yea, what are the names of such person or persons which he hath so absolued.
45 Whether hath your Minister, your selues, or your predecessors Church-wardens of your parish for the yeere last past, presented any per∣son or persons of your said parish to the Chancellor of the reuerend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London (sauing in the Visitation of the sayd Lord Bishop,) And whether hath your Minister, yourselues, or your pre∣decessors Church-wardens of your said parish, for the yéer last past, presen∣ted any person or persons to the Commissarie of the said reuerend Father in God? If yea, what are the names of such person or persons which you or they haue so presented, and for what cause did you or they present any such person or persons. Articles to be inquired of, by the Minister, Church-wardens, & Sworne-men of euery Parish within the Archdeaconrie of Midlesex, according to the speciall direction of certaine letters heretofore sent to the Lord Bishop of London, from the right Honourable the Lords of the Priuie Counsell. IN primis, Whether there be any in your Parish, either Parishioners, Soiourners, or such as be late come out of other Countries into your Parish, which do refuse to come to diuine Seruice to the Parish Church, or elsewhere: and what be their names, and sir-names, and how long they haue refused so to doe. 2 Item, How many of their wiues and children aboue the age of sixe∣téene yéeres, seruants and other soiourners, abiding in their houses, doe likewise refuse so to doe: and what be their names and sir-names, and how long they haue refused so to doe? 3 Item, Whether there be any in your Parish, which be suspected to haue béene reconciled to the Popish Religion, or to haue béene absolued, or any that procured or councelled any thereunto: and what be their names and sir-names. 4 Item, Whether there be any in your Parish which be suspected to be Massing Priests, Reconcilers, Iesuits, Seminaries, or other persons, which haue receiued any orders or authoritie from the Romish Church, to vse the like: and what be their names and sir-names. 5 Item, Whether there be any Schoole-masters within your Parish, which doe not bring vp their youth in the Religion now professed, or be not themselues diligent in repayring to diuine Seruice, or bringing their Scholers to it?
Articles concerning Parishioners. IN euery Parish where any manner of person dwelleth or soiourneth, which refuseth to goe to some Church to heare diuine Seruice: the Mi∣nister and Church-wardens of that Parish are commanded euery Moneth from henceforth, to goe to euery such person with two or thrée honest wit∣nesses, and before those witnesses, to require euery such person to repayre to the Church to heare Diuine Seruice. And the saide Minister and Church-wardens are commanded to send a Certificat in writing signed with the hands, marks, and seales of the sayde Minister, Church-war∣dens, and witnesses, to their Archdeacon, alwaies on the tenth day before Midsummer day: on the tenth day before Michaelmas day: on the tenth day before Christmas day: and on the tenth day before our Lady day in Lent. So as returne of such certificat may be made in time to the Custos rotulorum at euery Sessions next ensuing those Feasts, testifying as well the manner and time of their admonishments of such Recusants whatsoe∣uer they be, as their answers. And when and whither they went to Church euery Moneth, after such admonition giuen to them, as aforesaid. Or whe∣ther any such person hath wilfully withdrawn himselfe from taking or vn∣derstanding such admonition: and also declaring the names, sirnames, and abiding places of euery one that shall offend in any part or clause of the a∣boue written Articles. This euery Minister and Church-warden is strait∣lie charged to shew his diligence in, and effectually to doe, as they and euery of them shall and will answere to the contrarie, at their perils. You shall bring your Presentment into the Registrie of the Arcdeaconrie of Midlesex, ten dayes before euery quarter, specifying the proper & sur∣name, title, and addition of euery person presented, and how many mo∣neths they haue refused to come to diuine Seruice to their Parish Church, or elsewhere, before the day of making your Presentment. And at the de∣liuerie of your said Presentment you shal likewise set downe, in the latter end thereof, the names of such as haue beene buryed within your sayde Parish for the space of a quarter of a yeere last past before the date of your said Bill, being Men, Maides, or Widdowes. FINIS.
