12562A S118418 99853625 19017
THE GLASSE OF MANS FOLLY, AND MEANES TO AMENDMENT, for the health and wealth of soule and body. The second Edition. This Glasse of Mans folly, is that we may know, The cause of the cruelty, which dayly doth flow. Such powling, such pilfring, such gryping for gaine, And great greedy gathering, as purchase our paine. Such Whores and such Theeues, Bankrouts, and Beggers, Quarrellers, Fighters, and mercilesse Murtherers. Such wrangling for wealth, and care for to get, Such losse of soule health, as canker shall fret. Such euill, and such enuy, heart-hatred, and strife, Such seruing of Sathan betweene Man and Wife. In this Booke is shewed, diabolus deuises, And also reproued, his subtill enterprises. Therefore (gentle Reader) deale thou not so rashly, To reproue with reproching the thing that mislikes thee. The Learned allowes this, which vertue imbrace, For none but ill actions, it seekes to deface. And if it doe touch thee, turne prating to praying, Least Zelotipus Deus, correct thy gaine-saying. LONDON Printed by T. C. for I. H. 1615.
TO LOVERS OF VER∣tue, and Haters of vice, bee Grace and Peace. BLessed & deerely bought by Iesus, this booke doth disprooue, that most doe loue, and is liable to the leaude. It is like that such as loue theyr sinnes heerein reprooued, will mis∣like it, & mee, for reproouing: for strikers at vices, are strooke with calumnies. There∣fore to Gods children is my dedication, to patronize it when the impious despise it. I made it that God may be glorified, you comforted, the wicked rebuked. I beseech you accept it, as a Mite cast among greater Teasures, for Gods word is the warrant. If any obiect there be many good books extant, It is requisite: for people be many, & sinnes do multiplie: Grudge at no good bookes, grieue for sinne. Wee may admire and lament for those of ridiculous Ribauldrie, which de∣rogates Gods glorie. The Inuenter, Printer, Seller, and Buyer, must remember they are meanes to winne the diuell darlings. It is odious how by many they are perused and iterated, but the good refused. It doth di∣vulgate that sathan win and winew vs, & that the tares his Adherents, spring thicker then the good Corne. It is grieuous to thinke how wee grieue our good God. Impietie is so spred that there was neuer more neede of reproofe. The best Bookes please not the proude, Momus maligneth. Herein is expressed com∣fort for the contrite, seuerity for the obstinate, whose stonie hearts deserues hammers, for them sharpe speech is requisite. Valete.
Combibo counselleth not to be counselled, and would the Author alter. WHy trouble you my merry minde? I cannot loue nor like yee: Vnto my corps you are vnkinde, So much to moue and minde mee. It is your losse it gets no gaine, Your Pen your profite hinder: For to refraine from pot is paine, My ioy is carnall pleasure. My Mates and I will looke awry, With frowning face wee view yee: Boore Bibax back-bites bitterly, Superbia doe iniure thee. Capillatus hee will worke thee hate, If you make bookes to braide vs: Wee are at ease, com, be our mate, In pleasures great not grieuous. Astutia will thee despise, Aleator casteth in his lot: Salax against thee doth deuise; Refuse thy Pen, let's fill the pot. Constancie consented to. Feare not the face of Fancie fine, No leaud life, nor loue lust? Seeke thou the safetie of their soules, In God put thou thy trust. Thy Booke good people well doth like, Send forth therefore this Doue; To bring with ioy in Arke aright, By meanes of God his loue. Pray thou to God this worke to blesse, That it may hale to Heauen: GOD glorious is, all praise to him, Good people say Amen. Optime Deus esto nobiscum, nunc & in auum.
THE GLASSE OF MANS FOLLIE. ALthough little considered of some, (yet are they not ignorant of this) that we shuld liue according to Gods will re∣uealed in his word, & be carefull to win each other; dooing our industry to shew the things he hath commaunded, dete∣sting and reproouing that hee hath for∣bidden. And amitie doth animate vs to illustrate Gods glorie in all our actions, (which is the finall cause of mans Creation) therefore mentioned in this praeludium. Such follow not their phātasies, as our aduersaries of the truth doe:Psalm. 97.7. for ietting Iesuits and bloody Papists call stocks and stones Laye-mens bookes, yet God Omniscient doth con∣vince it. Confounded be all they that serue grauen Ima∣ges, that boast themselues of Idolles. Esay, 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my glorie will I not giue to any other, neither my praise to grauen Images. Saint Dauid teacheth vs the true way that directed him right,Ps. 119.105 Thy Word is a lampe vnto my feete, and a light vnto my path. In which as in a myrrour if wée search with true prayer, we shall sée light more fulgent then the bright Sun beames, to shewe vs the way to walke to Gods glorie. From which Canonicall rule Sathan makes an aberaci∣on: Therefore in hate to him, and loue to man, here is re∣prooued, Not vsing the Victuling-house for necessitie, but the common and accustomed sinne of Drunkennesse, that daily increaseth: From which except with spéede wée re∣fraine, wée procure Gods high displeasure to be powred euer vpon vs. The Apost. S. Paul, indued with a heauenly spirit, fore∣knowing future things, wt praemunition, giueth a caueat; 2.
Timoth: 3. This know also that in the last dayes, perillous times will come; for men shall be louers of theyr owne selues, which is to be vnderstood of the inordinate loue of theyr bodies, for while we liue so, wée are enemyes to our soules, which are our selues. Corpora nostra non sunt nos. Our bodyes are not vs, Rom: 8.12. To the which wée are debters, but not to liue after the flesh. Yet till wée the bel∣lie, and fainte the soule: delighting so in liquor that there∣to we lust. Belly-gods abuse theyr bellyes, they can ca∣rouse at all times, thyrstie or not, asmuch in one day as might serue some men ten: So impudent and shamelesse, that they rather boast thereof then bée ashamed. Bibax addicted to Bibaculus, in Cliant to Bacchus, frequenting Bachanal till he be Bacchatus. The deceyuer inticeth to ex∣cesse to torment vs. Some seldome cease, but are exorbi∣tant frō goodnes, flexible to follie, pliant to impietie, with delectation in such dooings. Theyr odious actions shewes affections are not fixed on God to loue him, and with feare to offend him, except a seruile feare, as Sathan hath, it is to be feared, some want it. For though some doo boast they are saued by Christ, they denie him in theyr déedes. The fruits bewrayes the heart to be false.Psalm: 14. The foole hath said in his heart, there is no God: their déedes say, so doo they. The sucking sinne is as common as the Cartway, which is to be deplored, and daylie reprooued. Much festinacion not to be fasting, to fatting, turning pot after potfull into wide weasands, and bias bellies making them gutters of gulpers, and swiltubs for swyne. Vnsatiable in receiuing, and ready in expelling, néere the Dore so perspicuous, as theyr priuities may be perceiued. Then againe, into the Den with an Anthem, fill & fetch, haue for halfe, not ha∣uing ariditie, yet a pint at a draught drawing destruction. Cauponula catcheth them, the Tap-tarrier inticeth them, to powre in pots plentifully, trip and turne a Dye dainti∣ly, sweare and stare, iet and iest, cogge and lye leaudly, in the blind Ale-house not licenced, where the Host sits halfe
rotten, voyd of fealtie, full of fallacie, like the Image in time of blindnesse, which shaked the head meriliest to them that gaue most: So excesse makes men beasts and worse; Modum adhibent apperitui, They measure their appe∣tites by the rule of necessitie: but men with reason, be∣come vnreasonable, of whom it is written, Esay 22.23. Let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. Ede, bibe, lude, is the Epicures felicitie. Christ saith,Ioh. 6.12. Let no∣thing be lost; but they spill and spoyle. Combibo ca∣rous till Colon cracke,Bibbers are bountifull to abuses, not to good vses. hee blowes and boasts he must not be miserable, not remembring the misery of thousands ready to miscary for want of that hee wastes. Math. 5. Blessed are the mercifull; but excessiue Suckpots shew themselues miscreants without comiseration, sympathy, or fellow-feeling of famished folks and children. They pit∣tie not their owne spirituall misery how Satan deludes them of the Benisson; but are foggie, full of fastiuitie, loth to linquish, like to languish, and illiterated, not knowing a letter, he fils the Chimney end with Praebibo tibi; and Lice often fitter for that place then Latine. Lazie Lads likes it, and calles for liquor liuely. Meretrix is an inticer to the slaughter. The lewde are delighted; for they re∣proue not impietie, but get impiously, and spend prodi∣gally, till that got with a reach, is lost by a stretch. True dealers are spighted, which mislikes their misdoings, and spends as riches extends. There be Victualers farre off and neere me, that honour God by their victualing: they reprooue their guests for great drinking, rude talke, and swearing, not hauing their houses dennes for Diuels. Some others, like Proteus (which would change him∣selfe to al likenes) frame themselues as euery man is affe∣ctioned, flattering those that plye the pot fastest; no assidui∣tie delayed. So youth prooue poore, and without a penny, departs in anxietie.Luke 15.13. The prodigall sonne wasted his sub∣stance with riotous liuing, so long as lasted his portion he was in estimation; but when all was gone hee would
haue filled his belly with the husks that the Swine did eate, and no man gaue vnto him. Euen so, when men are poore and purse empty, their absence is liked more then their company. Yet people, whose delight is to péepe into a pot, will not be warned; but may be compared to Phi∣loxius,Arist. Eth. 3.10. which wished his necke longer then a Cranes, to féele the more pleasure in the long running downe: which minde is farre from the faithfull, whose affection is in heauen. Therefore, yée Corpulents, all for the corps, that frequent quaffing and ryot, like vntamed Tigers, and bruites vnbridled, if you would vse militarie resi∣stance against Mille-artifex, which conquers you like Co∣wards, yée would tame your bodies, and nourish your soules: but not féeling his circumuents, yée liue to your lusts, yée drinke and eate at ease, not hauing the combat Gods children haue. O, let vs repent, lest wee haue our portion in this life.Psa. 17.14. Lament. 3. It is of the Lords mer∣cies that we are not consumed. To him be all honour for euer, Amen. Sit laus Sanctae Trinitati. Effects of drowsie Drunkennesse. THe receipt of mens money superfluously spent is odi∣ous to a good conscience. Their wiues and children want sustenance, shee knowes not at what Alehouse to finde him: and séeing her goods consuming, and chil∣dren crying, she tels him his fault, and intreats him to be frugall. The Béere piercing his braine, hee counts her counsell hostilitie: he stamps & staggers, stares, sweares, & blasphemes the Almightie, which hideous othes, wher∣by Gods wrath is kindled. He giues her blowes, no béefe, whereby loue decreaseth, hatred increaseth. When they should pray, they prate, and depart, or liue peruersely. The patrimony might haue maintained family hospitalitie,
and béene left to the posteritie: but two yeeres drinking caused the dissipation. The sequell is euill; great di∣sturbance to good people, whome they cousen, théeue, and purloine from, procuring the Prison: there they haue hunger, thirst, cold, lamenesse, lice, loathsome, noysome: a Dogges death is procured, which was by meanes of wasting. At the Gallowes they cry out of Alehouses, euill inticers, licentious liuing, drunkennesse, whore∣dome, theft, and chambering, which earst would not bee told of; neither will many that now are dissolute: but powre into the paunch, till (alasse) had-land is lowsie. Good Hoasts fore-sée this, and giue good counsell: but an (Antithesis) euill Hoast doeth not; they and their col∣league companions are flexible, but to vertue aduerse. Hee that idely spends his patrimony, deserues this Epithete; (Spend-thrift,) but such as consume it in Drunkennesse, are execrable creatures. O yee consumers, yee are theeues to your families, enemies to God and to your owne soules and bodies, and robbers of all the needy. Woe bee to such as cause the poore to cry, and procure GOD to withdrawe his blessing from Lande and Sea. Yet Colon increaseth Cholera, procuring profusion, the full gorge foames froth. Present pleasure seemes sweete, not regarding that bitter gnashing followes quaffing: for it doth con∣taminate the soule. Excesse of colde Frumenty fills men full of infirmitie.Gen. 19. Lot thereby committed lust and incest. It causeth Lethargie and sleeping, and quailes good qualities. Ierom. Venter mero aestuans spumat in libidinem: The belly inflamed with Wine, bursteth foorth to lust. Beere-belly is inflamed, but not ashamed; yet the woe of woes is pronounced. Oh,Esay 5.11. yee that can drinke at all times, and thinke it mellifluous to be im∣moderate, as instigators intice others, wound not your soules with woes.
Refraine from quaffing, it is a Hecticke, inflaming the soundest parts of the body. It makes a good sanguine com∣plection puft; if not pocky: but dead drunke, pale. Quaf∣fing makes men vnquiet, vntemperate, incontinent, en∣uious, fierce, wrathfull to fight, curse and brawle. It hurts the braines, head, eyes, and hearing, it causeth plurisie, dropsie, to scorne, iest, and talke of bauldry: as a quo∣tidian Feuer, it inféebleth the whole man, bréeding dis∣eases. It infecteth soule and body, and procures plagues from the Almighty: it destroyeth his benefits, and brings plenty to scarcitie, and causeth the poore, the aged, and in∣fants to cry for foode. It offendeth the Omnipotent God, and is an offence to all Gods children. All kinde of sinnes waite on excesse. It makes men prompt to euill, peruerse to pietie: it gaines the Gallowes, and hell without re∣pentance. Yet Milleartifex, with excuse, saith it makes him acute: but how? to serue Asmodeus and Asotus: and therefore to be reiected as Aspis, very venemous. It makes none ingenious to goodnesse, the euill effects are monstrous. It dulles and takes away the sences, sets the eyes in the head anstere and strange to behold. It makes a man a monster, metamorphosed from the Image of God, to the image of the Diuell: their actions are irksome to good people, though the rude reioyce to see it. Quaffing is the occasion, if not the cause of felonious theeues, and flattering theeues (alias couseners:) the first are dangerous; the last liker hypocrites, to insinuate and say they loue you, but it is the adiunct of your purse, pro∣mising, but neuer paying. I restraine to particularize any by-qualitie or name, yet many deteine that is not their owne, but prosper not. The effect of drunkennesse and gluttony is pouerty:Pro. 23. Woe, sorrow, contentions, bab∣ling, woundes without cause: rednesse of eyes, are adioynts to them that tarry long at the wine. At the last it byteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. Thine eyes shall beholde strange Women,
and thine heart shall vtter peruerse thinges. Wine and Women leade wise men out of the way. The best wine and worst women are prouokers. Much eating and drinking makes Idiocie and dotage, whereby men are al∣lured to the vndiscreet, as Herode, to graunt the head of blessed Iohn Baptist, to a deceytfull Dauncer. Hosea 4. Whoredome, Wine, and new wine, infatuates the heart. Excesse makes men estranged from themselues, excluding all honesty & humanity. Some cannot liue on their lands, nor others by good Occupations,Psalm: 107. and therefore spoyled in prisons. A fruitfull Land is turned into barrennesse, for wickednes. Drunkennesse destroieth Gods benefits and doth auert his blessings. Yee Common-wealth consu∣mers, deuote not your selues to the Diuell. Your surset∣ting excesse, so raiseth the price, that the poore cānot main∣taine theyr Families, but are distressed, some distracted. Yée are the death and vndooing of thousands. How can you answere for those yée cause to starue; and for the death of your selues, by your excesse? All the world haue the lesse and worse successe for you. Millions of men haue beene vndone, by haunting such Houses,Be counselled where they lost their liuing, and learned leaudnesse. Young men thinke on this (for your sakes I write this) before your Land be gone, before yée be in thraldome, and dis-franchised of your liberties. Remember now thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth,Eccles: 12. before thine eyes be dimme, and thou tremble. Doe not procrastinate; It is apparent, that superfluous powring in of drinke, hath prouoked God to powre downe extraor∣dinary Flouds: and for your foaming out, to make the Sea breake out, whereby People haue perished, Cattell drowned, Goods and Bridges borne into the Ocean. The Skye cries against vs, Thunders are fearfull, Diuels ire∣full, Trées rent, Houses brent, People killed, many things destroyed, God is displeased, winde and weather auerre it; oft, Ships are sunke: Oh we are obdurate, we pull downe
greater vengeance, and amend not. Manie vse Dolus, to pamper theyr paunches with Diues, till with that Epulo, they taste dolorificus. Oh soule, thinke how the diuell doth pollute thée, make not so much of thy bodie. Excesse brings not salubritie, nor sanctitie, wholsomnesse nor holinesse, but contrarie. Prouerb. 20. Wine is a mocker, strong drinke is raging, and whosoeuer is deceiued thereby is not wise. Such are deceyued and vnwise as quaffe Quartes in a day, but one were better, and hée fitter to any good action. Yet protract they the time at Ale-houses, and make their bodies vnpro∣fitable receptacles. Prouokers fat themselues & others for the day of slaughter, hindring manie, but profite not any. Oh a dearth is to be dread. Bée not a sucking Sodo∣mite, the mouth shalbe full of earth. Quaffing leades to the lake of quaking. Pray and repent. Our prosperitie, tranquillitie, and truth many yeares taught, will be witnes to reprooue vs, for want of loue to God, and for our selfe-loue to impiety. Consider this yée that forget GOD. Be not brutish; they are worse then Brutes, that are bond-slaues to euill Affections. Therefore hate that which God abhorreth: to him be all honour for euer. Amen. DEO omnis Potestas & Gloria. ¶ Drunkennesse, and Excesse of drinking reprooued. COmbibo perswades his complices that they committe no Drunkennesse so long as they can talke and walk, although theyr Bellyes be bladder-blowne. But re∣member oh Swyne, and manners worse, what the Pro∣phet saith; Woe be vnto them them that are mightie to drink wine,Esay. 5.22. and men of strength to mingle strong drinke. Now knowe that God hateth the inordinate Drinker, although hée doe not stagger. Some are gyddie by Age, Sicknes, or Imbecillity, yet
little drinkers: the Drones are the Drunkards; Woe, and the woe of woes are denounced to them. Esay. 5.11. Woe vnto them that rise vp early in the Morning, that they may follow strong drinke. They haue woe and sorrowe,Prou. 23. that tarrie long at the Wine. Yet Bibulus whose best behauiour is barbarous, vseth the Ale-house, and abuses it as an euill-house; woes will not warne him, hée neglecteth his Vocation, to the detriment of his Wife and Children. But if any prouide not for his owne, and especially, for those of his owne House, hee hath denyed the Faith,1. Tim: 5.8. and is worse then an Infidell. Many prouide for the wormes, that shall wring their corpulent Carcases. Christ giueth a Caueat, Luke, 21.34. Take heed to your selues, least at any time your harts be ouercharged with surfetting and drunkennesse. Let menacing or Admonition amend vs. Ephesians, 5.18. And be not drunke with wine, wherein is excesse, but be filled with the Spirit. Alas, the Carcas is filled, and the spirite of God ex∣cluded. Heluo hasteth to hell, and gormondise his guts, till hee euacuates as hée receyued. A Swyne is a swallower, immoderate to moysture, Matth. 8. The Gergesenes lost many into whom the Di∣uels entred, droue them into the Sea, & drowned them in that moysture; and the Diuels driue Swinish mindes, to drowne them with drinke. 1. Cor. 10. Our eating and drinking must be to Gods glorie, to eate and drink to liue, and not liue to eate and drink. Drunkennes & reuellings are fruits of the flesh,Gal: 5. they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdome of God. A fearfull Enthymeme, to them not mortified. Imbrace the saying of S. Paule, not the pot. Let vs walke honestly as in the day, not in ryot∣ting & drunkēnes, not in chābering & wantonnesse, nor in strife & enuying, but put yee on the Lord Iesus Christ,Rom. 13.13 and make not prouision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts therof.
Except wée abandon the déedes of darknes, we put not on the Lord Iesus, but the diuell. To sée him makes such to quake: but they entertain him, serue him, and feare not. The Lord saith by the prophet Ioel, 1.5. Awake ye drun∣kards, weepe and howle ye drinkers of wine: Hee mena∣ceth and admonisheth them to preuent the Anger to come. Ierem: 35.6. The Rechabites abstained from drinking of wine, at the cōmandement of Ionadab; Much more ought we to refraine from drunkennesse at Gods commaund. The Lord reprooueth the Adultrers, that louest agons of wine. The prophet complaineth, Esay. 56.12. Come yee (say they) I will fetch wine,Osea. 3. and wee will fill our selues with strong drinke. That Come, driues to detriment, and we goe willingly. Math: 11.28. Christ saith Come, for our comfort, but we will not: It's the fashion to call and prouoke each other to excesse of drinking. It was not so, at that royall Feast, Hester 1.8. And the drinking was ac∣cording to the lawes, none did compell. The great God, little regarded, denounceth woe to inticers. Woe vnto him that giueth his neighbour drinke, that puttest thy bottle to him,Abac. 2.15. and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest looke on his nakednes. Solomon would drawe vs from the meanes that moueth delight to drin∣king, least we be drunken. Prou: 23. Looke not vpon the wine when it is red. Oh that Parents would not be sa∣nage, but sage as Salomon, to counsell. It is odious and absurd for youth to drinke much. Except in labor, a modi∣cum suffiseth nature. To giue wine to a young man, is to adde oyle to fire: Wine and strong drinke are fitte for the weake and sicke. Prou: 31. Giue strong drinke to him that is ready to perish, & wine vnto those that are of hea∣uie hearts. Alas, such lacks, when lazie liuers gulps gal∣lons, and iudge that those which ioyne not with them, doo thinke themselues righteous; but they that féele theyr sinnes most, vse meanes to tame their flesh: So did pru∣dent Paule, 1. Cor: 92.7. I keepe vnder my bodie, and
bring it into subiection. It appeares that pamperers are Iustitiaries and féele not theyr sinnes, which defileth their soules. Did they, they would striue and resist it, and not so nourish it. Immoderate nutriment procures im∣minent punishment. Saint Dauid being thirstie, desired water, and it was brought him. Neuerthelesse hée would not drinke.2. Sam: verse 17. And he saide, Be it farre from mee ô Lorde, that I should doe this; Is not this the bloud of the Men that went in ieopardy of theyr liues? Therefore hee would not drinke it. A carnall minde would thinke wine had bene fitter to strengthen him against his visible enimies: but being then not fit, Excesse with vs is much more vnfit, and to be re∣frained, that wée may ouercome our inuisible enimies the diuels. He refused that he had néede of: much more ought we to refuse néedlesse excesse: such effusion causeth confusi∣on, in the lake of lamentation.Daniel: 5. Balthazar being drinking of his cups, heard and had a cooling. God graunt vs grace to be prepared, and in well dooing at Christs comming. Lamentat: 3. It is of the Lordes mercies, that we are not consumed: to him he all honour for euer. Amē. Laus Deo. ¶ A perfect proofe that Gods children must not be associated with Drunkardes, nor with other impious. SAlomon saith, Be not amongst wine bibbers. Prou: 24. Be thou not enuious against euill men, neyther desire to be with them. Prou: 28. He that is a companion of riotous mē shameth his father. The Psalmographe saith,Pro: 23.20. Psal. 26. I haue not sate with vaine persons, neither will I goe in with dissemblers. But Drunkards count such no companions. They lose a lofty title that shake not hands with the diuell. The foremost in leaud life is the bad. But it's better to be hated and goe to Heauen, then of them to beloued and goe to Hell. Vertue shall ascend, when Vice
shall descend,Iames 4. their amitie is enmitie. Whosoeuer therfore wilbe a friēd of the world, is the enemy of God. Therfore good men dare not flatter them in follie. Ps. 139.21. Dauid hated thē that hated God. He shewes where the true harted shall dwell. Ps. 15.4. He shal abide in Gods tabernacle, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but honoreth them that feare the Lord.2. Tim: 3. But this world will grow to an Antipathie. Euill people shall be esteemed, and good people contem∣ned. Yet if thou hast ignominie refraine theyr company: for though thou be expert with a good Booke in thy bosome they will frame thée to theyr fashion, and so to confusion. If they cannot winne thee, they will wrong thée. They that are dissolute of theyr duties to God, are carelesse of theyr soules, and of thy safetie. It is a probabilitie, that their euocation and prouoking, is manie mens vndooing. Say then with the princely Prophet, Psal: 119.115. Depart from mee yee euill doers, I will keepe the com∣maundements of my God. Ʋer: 63. I am a companion of all them that feare the Lorde. Bée thou so, and not a Chamelion for all companies. Cato counsells thée to walke with good men. Shall an Ethnick excell vs in good conuersation, that neuer had our meanes of conuersion? Hée doth admonish vs, and Christ doth menace vs, Math: 24. Hee that eateth and drinketh with the drunken, shall be appointed his portion with Hypocrites: there shalbe weeping & gnashing of Teeth. S. Paule reproouing the impietie of people, shewing the wrath of God for the same, saith: Be not therefore parta∣kers with them.Ephes. 5.7. They that let Drunkardes haue drinke may prosper a time, but such gaine is like to prooue paine. Hée or shee that giue weapons to those that wound them∣selues,A Caueat to fillers to Drunkards. are culpable. Thou art forbidden their companie and societie. It is odious to attend them. Consider this, yée that haue houses for such. Reprooue and remooue such slowbellies, you had better doe any slaue∣rie then be accessary to theyr actions. Math: 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gaine the whole world,
and lose his owne soule? Abhorre their behauiour though they hate thée, Ephe: 5.11. And haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull works of darknes, but rather reproue them. If they will not heare they are barbarous. Prou: 12. Hee that hateth reproofe is brutish. Win them with lenitie, else refraine their society, 2. Cor: 6.14. What communion hath light with darknes? Gen: 25.22. Esau and Iacob strugled in the wombe: So doe Gods seruants and sathans adherents; and so did Christ and his Apostles with the wicked world. Let vs not serue sin, but our good God, to whō be all honor for euer. Amen. Laudate IAH. ¶ Drunkards hatred to those that abhorre their behauiour. THe primarie prophet,Ps. 119.139 a Paragon of ardent amitie to God, saith: My zeale hath consumed mee, because mine enemies haue forgotten thy worde. A man to mourne for his owne sinnes in sinceritie, is not cōmon: to mourn for sins of others is not much in custome. He was a mourner for his owne sins, & for the sins of his enemies, which thing so admirable, fewe doo imitate. Yet when hée wept, it was to his reproch. He was a Prouerb, & song of the drunkards;Psal. 69. Gods spirite excited him to reprooue such as impea∣ched Gods glory. But malefactors could not, neither cā they abide such mislikers. Ps. 35. The abiects did teare him, & with hy∣pocriticall mockers in feasts, they gnashed vpō him with their teeth. He saith, False witnes did rise vp: they laid to my charge things I knew not, they rewarded me euil for good, to the spoyling of my soule. Yet in their sicknes he mourned, in his aduersity they reioyced. It was, and will be false filbellies, hate their vnlike with crueltie. The sighīg singer of Israel had many enemies:Patheticall affections are with afflictiōs vnmercifulnes are adioynts to miscreāts, like tyrāts in time of blindnes against the modest mar∣tyrs being patients, when fierce agēts threw fagots on their faces: Effecting their craft without mercy, that the martyrs might not professe their maister. Yet did they, eleuatīg harts & hāds in fire & flames, sing psalmes to God, to whō be all honor for euer. Amē.
Whether Papists or Atheists, some Alemates obserue this Adage, Nō amo te, nec possū dicere quare: I like thée not, nor can I tell thee why: theyr Eglogue comes of enuie. But sance for the false tongue,Byrche for black tongues are Psal: 120. Sharpe arrowes of the mightie, with coles of Iuniper. Yea, Psal. 101.5. Such shall be cut off. Yet armed with Ale, they euapo∣rate that such and such are miserable, because they are fru∣gall, and to better vses liberall (not haunting nor deligh∣ting with Drunkards.) Younglings hearing this, spend till their purses be pennilesse: For a false tale with Ale, is in stéede of a toast. They harken to the fiction: of such is made mētion, wherin they thinke it strange, that you run not with them to the same excesse of ryot,1. Peter. 4.4. speaking euil of you. So such kissers of Culigna frequēt excesse & riot, and contemne those that wil not. Quaffing mockers confabu∣late wt petulancie against painfull Preachers, which re∣nounce pomps & vanities, & are industrious to draw vs to goodnes, by their good conuersation, & profitable preaching: which doe pray, watch, and studie, to deliuer Doctrine in the best manner, to send soules to saluation: but intempe∣rancie vse cōtinually, & will not behold the liues of good li∣uers Asmodeus do spight and not delight them. If any did prooue a ply pot, ready to riot, they would count him quiet, though a pleasurable plague. If Drunkards could draw any to bée as Simon magus a∣wong the Disciples, and as vnsatiable Iudas among the A∣postles. Or to refraine from the counsell of Saint Peter. 1. Epist: 5. and from the life of Timoth: 2. epist: 3.10. and from the charge giuen him, 2. Tim. 4; Sathan had his seeking. Or to forget the great menacing: Ezechiel, 3.18. and Chapter. 33.6. that bloud might goe with bloud, and de∣struction for want of instructing. Or to be like the trée Caprisicus, that God might reiect them. Or aduerse, to ayme at the vertuous, and quench god beginnes, the Pope, were eased, and the Diuell pleased. Good men are prudent and innocent, and haue Gods blessing, by preuen∣ting
euill occasions: for Inticers flatter them in the face; but prate in priuate. The Scorpion hath a fayre face, and a foule tayle: so some haue sugred words, but bite the backe. They cannot abide reproouers of impiety; but are like the rude rout which said of Paul: Act. 22.22. Away with such a fellow from the earth; for it is not fit that hee should liue. Many quaffers haue such Iewish qualities. There can bée no true concord betwéene men moderate, and Monsters inordinate: good and euill agrée not. Gen. 3.15. Enmitie is betwéene the Serpents séede and the Womans.2 Pet. 2.7. Iust Lot was vexed with the filthy conuersation of the wicked: but they were destroyed, and he was deliuered. The Bée hath honey on her legges, but a sting in her tayle: so, though sinne seemeth swéete, when God doth strike the stroke, the sting shall strike the soule. If such were said to; Leaue hibbing, your houses and a burning, they would not grudge to haste home: much lesse must such bee angry, but faster runne, being warned from excesse, that their soules be not burned. Alas, men runne to ruine. It is of the Lords mercies that wee are not consumed. To him be all honour for euer, Amen. Laudate Deum. A profitable Preparatiue for the Excessiue. I Beséech all such as would haue happinesse, to leaue ex∣cesse, and seeke for safetie, that they may arriue at the Hauen of Heauen: to that purpose I expresse a Prepa∣ratiue as a meanes to bring the body in subiection to the spirit. It is a Fasting ioyned with true Prayer, not think∣ing thereby to merite, as sond Papists affirme, Luke 17.10. When yee shall haue done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are vnprofitable seruants. Of Fasting, we read, Leuit. 23.14.27.29. Iudges 20.26. Daniel 9.3. Ioel 2. Ionas 3. Moses and Elias fasted. Ezra did appoint it, 8.21. Dauid saith, Psa. 35.13.
I humbled my selfe with fasting. As it is commanded, so it is commended, and of Christ and his true seruants hath been vsed, Lu. 4. Acts 9. Acts 10. Acts 13. 1. Cor. 7. 2. Cor. 11. Omnis Christi actio nostra est instructio: Euery action of Christ is our instruction. When hee had cast a Diuell out of a childe, he sayd, Mathew 17; Howbeit, this kinde goeth not out but by Prayer and Fasting. This might excite vs to Fast and Pray, it is requisite and re∣quired.Luke 2. Anna, a Widdow, departed not from the Tem∣ple, but serued God with fastings and prayers. The excessiue serue Sathan in feasting and playing, and gor∣mondize their guts in gluttony. Bee prepared for thy profite, accomodate thy selfe fit for fruits of faith; for fasting is a meanes to helpe forward the vertues and graces of the minde. Enter thy chamber, remember what thou art; a blast of breath: how short thy time is; not sure of an houre: and when thou dyest, thou goest to him thou seruest. Hilarion giues vs a lesson, as Hierom relateth; Ego (Asine) faciam, te vt non calcitres: O thou Asse (said Hilarion to his body) I will make thee that thou kicke not: meaning, to tame it. Saint Paul was minded so to subdue it, 1. Cor. 9.27. Fasting is a meanes to humble men, and to brydle their affections. 2. Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ hee is a new creature: the minde is changed, actions altered, euill company auoyded. Not to drinke betweene meales is profitable and peaceable for people that labour little. If worke requires it, drinke not so strong as shall make thee stagger; rather vse small Ale, and better Meate. Loyterers neede not drinke as Labourers. If wantons would be warned, they might finde it a meanes to tem∣perance, sobrietie, lenytie, chastitie, health, wit, and wealth: then would they consider that abstinence is need∣full, and excesse needlesse. Some will not fast truely, because Papists fast false∣ly; and refuse many good meanes, which others vse to no
good end. Wee ought to fast, Gods word requires it: our gratious King commands it: our bodies shall be the more obedient to the spirit, and more spared for the poore: which not to regard, is a defect of charitie, no effect of faith, but of infidelitie. The sinne of Sodome was, Pride, fulnesse of bread,Eze. 16. abundance of idlenesse, neglect of the needy; which sinnes abounde. Christ saith, Luke 6.25. Woe vnto you that are full; for yee shall hunger. Woe vnto you that laugh now; for yee shall mourne and weepe. One saith; Foelicitas & moderatio diuiduum contubernium habent: Prosperitie and moderation dwell in two houses. It is dainty to finde them dwelling together. Saint Iames 5. threatneth the wicked rich men; Goe to now, ye rich men, weepe and howle for your miseries that shall come vpon you. vers. 5. Yee haue liued in pleasure on the earth, and beene wanton: yee haue nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. If such could consider of this, and that thousands mourne for meate and drinke, which they haue too much of: their pleasure, would bee pitty: their wantonnesse, weeping: their feasting, fasting: which surfeting pre∣uents: for it is rare for such as pamper their paunches, to ouercome euill affections. Therefore I pray you vse this preparatiue. And the peace of God be with vs, Amen. Halelu-iah. ¶ A Letter to the Licentious. GRace and peace be with vs. I pray you consider why impietie is reprooued. The finall cause is, that God may bee glorified: for the sonne that loues his father, grieues to see him dishonoured. The materiall cause is the commaundement from God: the efficient in this manner formall: Leuiticus 19.17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart: thou shalt in any wise
rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sinne vpon him, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another dayly, 1. Pet. 4. As e∣uery man hath receiued the gift, euen so minister the same one to another. A good conscience procures it, and amitie bindes it.Iam. 5.20. Let him know, that he which conuerteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall saue a soule from death, and shall hide a multitude of sinnes. Wee ought to succour each other. Commiseration is a pulsiue cause, which mooueth Gods children: They grieue to sée a Beare teare a childe; much more to sée Sathan deuoure soules. If we sée a house ready to fall on a man, and not aduer∣tise him, we are guilty of his death: so, if we sée one séeke the detriment of his soule, and not admonish him, we are culpable. Thinke on this, Masters of families, Victualers, Keepers of Tauerns, and all others; godly zeale exciteth vs,Mat. 7.12. and God commandeth vs to doe as we would be done vnto. And good people doe desire to bee taught: the bad, like the Diuell, drawes others to euill; and boast, they shall to heauen; but will not tread the strict path. Oh, it is vnpleasant: but being profitable, let vs with lenitie ad∣monish each other, and desire to be admonished. A blessing is promised, They that turne many to righteousnes shall shine as the starres for euer and euer.Dan. 12.3. He meaneth faith∣full Ministers, and others of the faithfull: the which hope of felicitie doe quicken to vinification. They indeauour to doe good, and are grieued that the greedy Diuell gets many into his net. It is furnished with leawd delights, alluring baytes, and sugred sinnes. If a Calumnor take his part to confront my labour, I wish him, first to consider; Satan doth cousen him, to hale him to hell; I doe counsell him, and haste him to heauen. Eschew the Diuels net full of false bayts. PArtialitie, for the carelesse Officer: superfluous speach, for Buyers and Sellers: euill excuse, for Swearers
and Lyers: false hope to escape, for the Théefe and Filcher: false hope of gaine, for the Dicer and Gam∣ster: néedlesse breake, for the base Bankrout: calliditie for the Cousener, which for fauour will lye, and say he is a kinne to good men. Infidelitie for the Atheist: bragge boldnesse for the Blasphemer: wilfulnes, for the Way∣ward: enuy, for the Ambitions: reuenge, for Quarrel∣lers. Murther, for the Wrathfull. Lone of loathsome lust, for Drunkards, Gluttons, and filthy Fornicators. In∣ordinate loue of the carcasse, for the proud and painted. Gryping gaine, for Vsurers and greedy Extortioners. Worldly affection, for the couetous. Cruelty for the vn∣mercifull. Desperation and destruction, for the faithlesse. Disdaine of Gods word, for negligent hearers. No regard of God, for riotous Roysters. Dissimulation, for Iudas-like hypocrites. Vaine-glory, for pickthankly world-plea∣sers. Deceipt, for seducers. Carnall pleasures, for pro∣phane liuers. Hate of truth, for Sectaries. Desire to get, for the Empericke, which by vnskilfulnes causeth death or long sicknesse. Enticings to all euil, hastinge from hea∣uen, halings to hell. Many looke like Lucifer to quar∣rell with the quiot: but cowards to resist Sathan; he con∣quers them, & snarls them in his snares to torment them euer. To preuent it, repent, pray for a cleare heart, and a right spirit, rest not till you haue it: abandon the déedes of the flesh, imbrace the fruits of the spirit;Gal. 5. They that are Christs haue crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. With faith and amendment apprehend Christs merits, then God will behold thee in him, thou shalt haue fauour with our heauenly Father. Consider my Letter: and the Lord assist vs. Abhorre Sathans snares. Iam. 4. Resist the Diuell, and hee will flye from you: draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. With a Memento: Imbrace amendment, haue it in sempiternam rei memo∣riam. Sic fiat. Rocede à malo, & fac bonum.
¶ Reproofe of Whoredome, a collaterall consort to excesse, attendant to the same. Sublata causa tollitur effectus. Take away the cause, and the effect falleth. QVaffing is so accustomable, that Whoredome com∣monly is the sequel; so monsterous, as, to auoyd long period; I will not expresse. Much youth betimes fre∣quent Fornication; the which coition is execrable. 1. Cor. 6.9.A reproofe of Fornication. No Fornicator shall inherit the kingdome of hea∣uen. vers. 18. Flee fornication: euery sinne that a man doth, is without the body: but he that committeth for∣nication, sinneth against his owne body. He defileth his owne soule and body, and also the party with whom he is so filthy. Thinkest thou to make amends with mariege? repent, remember the dreadfull sentence, Reuel. 22. Such shall be shut out from heauen. Eph. 5.3. Fornication and vncleanenesse must not bee once named.1. Thess. 4. For this is the will of God, euen your sanctification, that ye should abstaine from fornication. It is so heynous, and God doth so abhorre it: 1. Cor. 10.8. that there fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Consider this, ye shame∣les fornicators, with dogs and bitches qualities, your sins cry for vengeance,Gen. 19.13. as the sinnes of Sodome. Re. 14. It is written that no man could learn that new song, but they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. And would you sing in heauen? repent lest ye sigh in hell. Young men & maydens, if sinners intice you, consent not: take example of chaste Ioseph,An example for youth. Gen. 39.8. when he was offerrd, he re∣fused; for he feard God. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord: yet such forsake Christ; and make them∣selues the members of an harlot. They are repugnant to those that kéepe themselues chaste for the kingdome of hea∣uen sake, which Christ hath set in a place of price, and saith, Mat. 19. Hee that can take it, let him take it: but a varlet takes an harlot. Hee that hath not the gift to liue
single and chast, may séeke for mariage, lawful for all men:1. Cor. 7.9. Heb. 13.4. and is an Antidotarie against fornication, to bee vsed in the feare of God, for the procreation of children, and for the mutuall societie of each other. Yet many of the sauadge sort maryed know not the right vse of mariage, but linger after lusts like bruit beasts, and like a Nicholaitan, not content, is cōmon with an o∣ther proud Paramour. The vnmaried & maried of leawd disposition must be aduertised by Solomon; Pro. 23.27.A reproofe of Adultery. A whore is a deepe ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Pro. 6. He that committeth adultery, destroyeth his owne soule. Her house inclyneth vnto death, & her paths vnto the dead. None that go to her returne againe,Pro. 2. ney∣ther take they hold of the waies of life. Oh drudges of drudgery, ye refuse the heauenly felicity. Adultery, fornication, vncleannes, laciuiousnes,Gal. 5. All kinde of vnleannesse must be aban∣doned. Pro. 15. Psal. 113. Ier. 23. Amos 9. A meanes of chastitie. are fruits of the flesh, the cōmitters thereof shal not inherit the king∣dome of heauen. It is to be feared, that fornicators & adul∣terers are Atheists: for durst any doe such a thing before a king? they doe it before the All-seeing King of kings. The eyes of the Lord are in euery place, beholding the euill & the good. Yet Asotus serues Asmodeus, in Cities, towns, and countries. Psa. 97. Ye that loue the Lord, hate euill. A meanes of chastity is mediocrity in dyet, labor, watch∣ing, prayer, reading, hearing & meditating: refrayning frō wāton cōpany, vnchast speaches, gawish apparrel, gazing on the disguised, & frō wanton looks: therfore rule thy row∣ling eies. Iust Iob saith, 31. I made a couenant with mine eies, why should I think vpō a maid? If thy heart be cleane thy eye is ruled; if thy heart be wicked, thy eye is wādring, which fils thy hart ful of pollution. Christ faith, Mat. 5.28. Whosoeuer looketh on a woman,Mat. 5.28. to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. Kéepe in thy eye, the heart will be the better, vse it to thy booke. 2. Sam. 11. Dauid looked on the wife of Vriah; hee liked, lusted, and for it was perplexed: and hauing a new heart,
hee prayeth to the Lord, Psa. 119.37. Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanitie. Gen. 12. Pharaoh was plagued, and all his house, with great plagues for de∣lighting in Sara, vnknowne to them to be a wife. Yee Lust-louers, leaue it. Yée Fornicators and Adulterers, in pretence and action, how shall ye escape the vengeance to come? your idlenesse and drunkennesse bringeth Ba∣stards. I grudge not your collections, but grieue at your small corrections. Oh, Salax, bee sanctified, resist Sa∣than. Susanna consented not, but withstood the stout Adul∣terers. Be warned, youth was neuer more wayward.Consider this, you that are marryed, and are inordinate in abusing your bed: O feare the Lord, lest your propa∣gation be vntoward, extraordinary and stange, abortiue or vntimely. Imitate Tobias, 8. He being newly maried to Sara, rose out of the bed, and said, Sister, arise, and let vs pray, that God would haue pitty on vs: and the latter end of his prayer was this; vers. 7; And now, ô Lord, I take not this my Sister for lust, but vprightly: therefore, mercyfully ordaine that we may become aged together. And she said with him, Amen. And I pray God more may be so minded, Amen. Timete Iehouam. ¶ Starch is here reprooued: Poking-irons are ill vsed. AS by Gods word Drunkennesse and Whoredome is conuinced: so is Starch, made of that which is the chiefest foode for the sustentation of vs, here reprooued. For, whereas poore people that want bread should be nou∣rished and fed therewith; many, to fulfill their fond affecti∣ons, feede their great Ruffs; which shewes we haue more desire to carnall delights, then loue to relieue the needy. Many men, women, & children, want bread, which earth doth vse for pride. But Loue-lusts say they buy it, and the efore not culpable of the making; a ridiculous ex∣cuse: for if there were no buyer, there should be no seller.
There be wealthy Houswiues, and good house-kéepers that vse no starch, but faire water: their Linnen is white, and they looke more Christian-like in small Ruffes, then Light of loue lookes in her great starched ruffs; looke she ne∣uer so hie, with eye-lids awrye. The princely Prophet saith, Him that hath an hie looke and a proude heart, will not I suffer.Psal. 101. Presuppose prettie pleasure did say: Where finde you in Gods word starch forbidden? It is like it was not vsed in the time of the A∣postles, therefore not named. But the Diuell hath inuen∣ted it, and many such deuises, in these last lustfull dayes. I finde that CHRIST saith, Whatsoeuer yee would that men should doe to you, euen so doe you to them. (Therefore consider) would you the poore shuld vse vnpro∣fitable meanes to make you suffer hunger and colde? No,Math: 7.12 no, pricked pride, your fruits are faultie. Whatsoeuer will serue necessarily for the sustētation of man, ought not vn∣profitably to be spent: but the Meale, Starch is made of, will serue necessarily for the sustentation of man. Ergò, it ought not vnprofitably to be spent. This Syllogisme consisteth of no false principles. And if you think it not spent vnprofitably vpon great ruffs, con∣sider the effects. First, it hindreth our food:Discōmodi∣ties of starch, & starching. it wasteth our wood, it spends the precious Time, that might be spent bet∣ter. And people liue gréedily, and néedily, to maintaine it. It frets out much Linnen, and the poking-Irons seare it: and wasting that people want (it is to be feared) it hath often moued GOD to seare the Corne and Grasse vpon the ground. Wanton wenches are tempters and Inticers, that ruffs must be great, and starched. Good men must resist them; for Eue by inticing, brought Adam to ruine. There is as much spent in that haynous order, as might sustaine ma∣nie poore people which aske Bread; The answer is, I haue it not; when Newe-guise hath it about the necke. Manie spend Daies and Nights vnprofitably to set great Ruffs,
yea oft when they should heare and learne Gods word. Oh shamelesse Mares, more liker then bashfull Maids, that spend most parte of theyr life time about Starch and starching, patting, pulling, thrusting, rubbing, wearing, tearing, and starching of cloth with hote Irons. Lucifer inuenter of Pride hath inuented an exercise, wherein Minion Meretrix takes alacritie. Much wood is spent friuolously, and the poore vnable to buy it. Much lin∣nen by them is burnt, and the Poore want cloth to shifte them. Starch is taken from wheate Meale, and many crie out for course crible. Yet fancie fine, with ruffes vp to her eyne, likes not to be reprooued. To cull and kisse, her pleasure it is, say what you will. I say the poking irons whereby they destroy good stuffe, is méeter for a Plummer, and punishment méet for Pride. Oh carelesse Caterpillers, that spend vp peoples Foode, for the leaude lusts of theyr hearts! How can you answere it before GOD? Excuse saith, it shewes cleaner the longer. I answer, it is rotted the sooner. (And further) twise washing is not so much labour, as patting and starching. And they that haue bread can wash oft. But take away the bread, the life is lost, wherof one is more precious then all starch. And wilt thou be culpable of death by thy great Ruffes? which stand stiffe, agreable to thy stoutnes. Be not a beast bolde and past shame, to doe such hurt by thy hauty heart. Set not out thy great Ruffs, as though thou wouldst take vn∣happy flight with Icarus. It is a meanes to make thée loue the lustes of thy bodie, to looke bigge with stiffe-necke, as though thou wert the popes brother, or should marry Ien∣ny Ietter. Oh earth looke to thy féete: when breath is out, thy bo∣die is a fearfull Anatomie. But Salax loues not to heare of Earth nor Death: the excuse is, starch is made of brāne. If so, good for Horses, and other good vses, to sustaine that which hath life, the more Oates and Pease should be spa∣red
for the poore, which wish to be suffised with branne, and want it. But it is apparent, it is made of that which may make good bread. Salomon saith, Cast thy bread vpon the face of the waters. But many kéepe it from the poore,Eccles. 11. and cast it on great Ruffs. Salomon vseth an Ironie, and saith, reioyce. Then he shewes the ignominie: that such rude reioycing brings iudgement. Yet some that so walke in the wayes of their hart, and sight of their eyes, doe adulate that they are addict vnto: and when white starch is stale, then they vse yellow, or blue, & know not how soone to taste of gréene among wormes, or of blue Brimstone in destruction. Be warned, thy time is short. Pray that thine eyes may be opened: to that end I write to leaud life that walks in the broad-way, as most people run from Heauen to Gehenna. ¶ The cause of Cousening, Dearth, and Scarcitie. VOrax, deuouring of much, yet grudging. The more such get, the more they want; they gape with guile, yet haue they scant. Riot, bibbing, painted back, ma∣keth many daily lacke. Bringing Dearth and scarcitie, murther whoredome, bribery. Till excesse of Belly and Backe be left, all Vices will abound with theft. Turne therefore superfluitie, to meane and mediocritie, and then this Realme to penurie, shall not decrease by pouertie. ¶ Of abuse in Apparell. IN this reproouing of superfluous Attire, thrée things are to be considered. First, the manner of excesse. 2. the euill effects. 3. the reproofe by Gods word. Concerning the māner, I purpose to reueale the folly of such as are poun∣ced pompions, dead man like, with all their substance on their backs. Excéeding wealthy men and matrones which kéepe hospitalitie for the hungrie, and are plainely Appa∣relled, when being ouer-worne, are giuen to the néedy.
Such refraine from excesse, and do spare for the poore. But as some gormandize their guts, that their backes are bit∣ten for want of shifting: So Superbia pincheth the belly, and painteth the Backe, and ieopardeth the best ioynte to iet in colors, that mediocritie is excluded from either. Wee ought to weare decent Apparell to couer our na∣kednes: But they which abuse Gods benefits in cutting Cloth full of flashes, makes them vnméet to couer Naked∣nes, or to keepe off colde, or for any good purpose for the Poore. As there is Veluet for superiours, so Russet fits inferiors: but many of the meaner sort haue brought cloth to excesse price by vndiscrete wasting, that the poore deplore it. And they bestowe as much cost in their capes, cuttes, iagges, lace, & needlesse Nouelties, as the outside comes to. Were it not for fond fashions which we learne from other Nations, famous Brittaine should be more famous. Ex∣cessiue delight of the carcasse, doth digresse from our reli∣gion, and is a scarre to our true profession. Myriades of fashions are followed. It is to be admi∣red how brag boyes and wenches will paint their bodies. It's to be feared they seeke not sutes for their soules. Par∣rat is arrogant, she hath her Apologie, though no other Di∣uinitie, that Pride is not in her Apparell. I wish her to learne this and auoyde it: that Pride is Matercula & origo om∣nium vitiorum the mother and nurse of all mischiefe, roo∣ted in the heart, and breaketh foorth as a leaprosie, in obsti∣nate words, peruerse déedes, & outragious Apparell, which are fruites of proude and vaine delighted hearts, that are not wearie of this world, but wedded to it. Such as are proud in rags (had they wherewith) would illustrate their pride by Attyre. If any obiect, that it is a small matter, and as Mynte and Anyséede, in respect of greater; Consi∣der the effects. Effects of excessiue Apparell. GOd which forbids it is disobeyed, and his anger pro∣cured. Many to be concinnate and finely apparelled,
buy, and are trusted. It is pleasant in buying, but it pin∣cheth in the paying. Man and Wife looke awry, and are at contrarietie. Concord decreaseth, they perseuer, and are not placable. Their thrift is turnd to shift, they part, or liue not in loue. Some prooue Théeues, and whores, by whome peo∣ple are perplexed, that they apprehend and hang them. Some are so hanty they wilbe as braue as the wealthy, and haue it, quo iure, quàve iniuria, by hooke or crooke, till at length that is pledged which purchaseth no honestie nor profite. Others of pretty wealth (seeing that presumption) step past theyr degrée, attired triumphant: So euill is imitated, goodnes neglected. They liue deceitfully, and wickedly, to painte theyr houses of clay. Some will haue great Ruffes, though hose hang out at héeles, and they prooue hackneys. In time past one might haue clad himselfe as cheap as two great Ruffes and starching comes to; many rich painte and pam∣per themselues. Excesse makes one to pine at anothers pros∣perity, and both chase away true amitie. They want, yet haue too much, they consume it on theyr lusts, by starch and great ruffes. The world was neuer so gréedy, fierce, and full of furie. One couets anothers house ouer his head: If Dio∣genes were here, he would be enuyed for his tunne. Men can∣not liue of much; Land and liuing is too little. That which should sustaine the hungrie, is spent in prodigalitie, gawish Garments, friuolous fashions, tufts, trifles. People may perceiue by view of Verdigalls, that if some had made them∣selues, their buttocks had bene bigge. Excesse of the carcas causeth Common-wealth-consumers, true dealing to be excluded, Sensualitie maintained, the néedy not nourished. Much is spent in pride, which causeth Dolus to haue Di∣ues qualities, with face of Auarice and anstere countenance, to pinch the Poore, the Fatherles, and defraud the Friendles. The proud do preye vpon such. If they misse of their purpose, they menace and maligne them. God hath forbidden it,Mal: 3.5 and will be a swift witnes against such. Yet people procure the heauy curse, to painte theyr haultie corps. Excesse of Apparell procures couetousnes. A Cormorant
selleth any thing that an other may not owne. Rents are rai∣sed, Bribes imbraced, Timber goeth down, without regard of Nauigation. Ouidius. Crescit amor nummi quantū pecunia crescit: as thy money increaseth, so doth the loue of it. Yet read we, The couetous hath no inheritāce in the kingdom of Christ.Ephes: 5.5. Bursa auari os est diaboli. The purse of a couetous man is the mouth of the diuell. The eyes of the excessiue are like Hell, neuer satisfied, Tam deest quod habet, quam quod non habet. He wanteth that he hath, as that he hath not: All is to maintain pride. The body is decked, the soule neglected, the Saboth is broken by tricking and trimming meate for maddes. In stéed of a Booke to sée our sinnes, some foote two houres in a glasse to frame a frontlet. Ruffs must haue Rebatoes. If she turne her face, her body turneth, else the ruffe is brused. So her neck standeth stiffe stretched, like her sisters of Syon, and shewing her shamelesse labour, she comes to the Cathedrall, when Ser∣mon is halfe done, in time to be séene, though not to learne; farre finer then at the doale the day before. She feares no ar∣resting, her husband is hidden. Excesse brought his distresse. Yet if drinked drop on her great ruffe, a change present, some shall pay for it. O Earth, thinke on the fearfull Iudgement shewed on a woman in Antwerpe (as it is related) to whome the diuell appeared to set her Ruffs, which whē he had finished, he kissed her, & wroong her necke in twoo. Her bodie suddenly changed blacke and blewe, painted and coloured small to her profite. Laid in a toumbe, she was suddenly gone, and a blacke defor∣med Cat in the roome. If curious Ruff-mongers, be incredu∣lous of this, I wish them beware, least to them come the like. Acts 12.Gay Attyre is a meanes to pull the minde from heauen. Herode in his Royall Apparell, vnmindefull of God, was smitten of the Angell. The attire of the Daughters of Syon, procured the sworde.Esay. 3. Iezabel presently after her Attyring and painting had paine. Many procure theyr pouertie and paine; Fellowes prophane, consume theyr substance to please theyr Paramours. Oh yée that are ouercome by Ʋe∣nus, rather by Ʋenerie, be not led by ignorant, arrogant wen∣ches,
whose wanton attyre bewrayes a Harlots heart, I am painted to play with. Oh Worme for wormes, thy carcas shall be Carren: thou hast prickes in thy forehead, be prickt with repentance. O Salax be sanctified, be clothed with Sobrietie, repent with Fidelitie. Remember thy winding shéete: when that is con∣sumed, thy carcas shalbe naked.Coseners are Theeues, as wasps among Bees. Doe not for inordinate loue thereof, vndoe thy selfe. Following fashions procures bri∣berie, and chaseth brotherly societie. Some braue, doe brag they are of hability. So get they goods in credite, but flée in falshood. Others to allure, like the Harlot.Prou: 7. The Leopard by his spotted skinne inticeth Beasts and killeth them. His skinne is good, his flesh is naught. So Sepulchers are pain∣ted, yet full of putrefaction. Fine are some outsides, as if the insides were answerable, it smelleth of Hypocrisie, we are full of corruption. It was the saying of an Emperour, Sumptuousnes of Apparel is Ʋexillum superbiae, Nidus Luxuria: The Banner of Pride, the nest of Lust. Herodotus writeth in his Booke, that Iuda Dictator of Rome, had a Sonne, being prickt vp in gay apparell, had no minde of his book, but delighted in pride, & at length was hanged, as many are in these dayes, whose Pa∣rents farre inferior deck their bodies, and neglect their soules; which makes them so hautie, that their Hattes are heauie in presence of Magistracie: Pride makes them forget the God of might, to whom be all honour for euer. Amen. Superna curate. ¶ Excesse of Apparell reprooued, S. Paule willeth that Women adorne themselues in modest apparell, with shamefastnes and sobrietie. Whereby we must learne that modest apparell sister in equalitie to shamefastnes and sobrietie, doth more adorne and beautifie. But the contraries are common. Immodest apparell out of measure, boldnesse and light behauiour. A Garment is fittest to modestie, voyde of superfluitie. Who goe more in gaudes then great mens Idiotes? Yet many imitate the
same, with néedlesse vanities and tokens of wantonnesse. Excesse is so in vse, that shamefastnes and modestie with ma∣nie are absent, when Curiositie, gay Tufts, great Ruffs, stiffe Necks, Stout-looke, with small Grace, is present. Bold as a Bull, wt tokens of dishonesty, blushing no more then a beast. The holy Ghost fordiddeth Broydered haire, or golde, or pearles, or costly Aray. Some say, It is not costly, so long as they can maintaine it. Consider, The Lorde threatned to punish the Princes and the Kings children, and all, such as are clothed with strange Apparell. Much more ought Cin∣cinnata to feare,Zephan: 1.8, which is poore, yet pompous. We must not clad clay to the outmost of abilitie, but learne the Apostles meaning; for golde, pearles, and costly Aray is not only forbiddē, but also broided haire (which is not costly) but plaited, bushed, or laid out: wherby all pōp & prouocations to euill is forbidden) which wanton women procure, in dec∣king themselues. For it is is a meanes to drawe the heart to delight the bodie, and leaude pleasures thereof, the World, and vanities thereof, to renounce Gods Kingdome, and the Ioyes thereof, to haue Hell and the torments thereof. There∣fore such vanitie is forbidden, and the habite agreable to mo∣destie, shamefastnes, and sobrietie commanded. Noahs Arke was pitched without and within: So the out∣ward habit must be as the humble hart, & our harts must be reformed, else our actions are abhorred. 1. Peter. 3. Whose adorning let it not bee that outward, of plaiting the haire, and of wearing of golde, or of putting on of Apparell. It requires the Ornament of a méeke and quiet spirite, as holie men which trusted in God adorned themselues. Cap: 5. He bids them be clothed with humilitie; For GOD resisteth the proud, and giueth grace to the humble. But many are clo∣thed with haughtines, as if pleasures were their God. The 7. commandement is, Thou shalt not commit adultry: which is to be vnderstood, the euill acte, and prouocations; as vnchast behauiour,1. Thess: 5. wanton apparell. Abstain from all appea∣rance of euill: That hath any shewe of euill. It is written Deut: 22.5. The woman shall not weare that which partai∣neth
vnto a man, neither shall a mā put on a womās garmēt. This seemes a small matter: so did it to Eue, to taste for∣bidden fruit. Oh foolish flesh! it followes: for all that doe so, are abhomination vnto the Lord thy God. It seemes some care not to be abhorred of God, they will be as fine as D. in their Dubblets, liker men, then women: wanton apparell is forbidden, vers 11. Thou shalt not weare a garment of diuers sorts, as of Wollen, and Linnen together: but where the lusts of the flesh are delighted, God is not regarded: for some at Font for fashion, vowe to him that they forsake the Deuill and all his workes, the vaine pompe and glory of the world, tha carnall desires of the flesh, and that they will not follow nor be led by them, yet painted for a Play, ruft like a royster. Some that haue hayre of their owne are not content with the colour God gaue it, but weare hayre none of their owne. Others launch out their hayre dyed a Trim-tawny: then must be muske, to preuent the sent: so perseuering in wan∣ton behauiour they breake their fidelitie and couenant made with God, promise in Baptisme is forgotten. Oh be not hy∣pocrites, but Christians in déede: promises to men must be perfomed, Psal. 15. much more vowes made to God. For∣sake your vanities, follow righteousnesse,Psal. 76.11 Deu. 23.21 lest yee feele your folly, Esa. 3. The Lord saith, because the daughters of Zion are hautie, and walke with stretched forth neckes, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they goe, and making a tinkling with their feet: he would take away their braue∣rie, and giue them in stéed of well set hayre, baldnesse; which came to passe with much miserie. You with great Ruffes, and stretched neckes, leaue it: when pride is at the highest, it is neerest the fall, 2 Kings 9. Iezabel painted her face, and attired her head, but presently trodden vnder feet, and torne with Dogges: yet painting and making the face shine like a shoing-horne, is common. Qui se pingunt in hoc seculo, aliter quam creauit Deus,Cyprian. metuant ne cum dies resurrectionis venerit, artifex creaturam suam non recognoscat. Those which paint or colour themselues in this world otherwise then God hath made them, let them feare,
lest when the day of Iudgement commeth, the Lord will not know them for his creatures. Some will haue their beauty decored, it is to be feared their soules are deformed. And as their soules are alienated and estranged, so their bodies are metamorphosed, and changed from the fashion God framed them. Exornation hath no order: Many make themselues ga∣sing-stockes till they proue poore, and are kept on the Parish, Prou. 7. She that inticed the young man was clothed in har∣lots attire; whereby we gather by the holy Ghost, that intin∣cing attyre is whorish, Tit. 2. Temperance is an adiunct to Christians: if Adam and Eue had continued in their first e∣state, garments had beene néedlesse: and shall we extoll our selues in that which our perfidious act procured? Will a Théefe gild the rope his théeuish act hath purchased? If a Sem∣pronian say: The rope bereft the life, but apparell preserues the same: I say, costly array which is by Gods word forbid∣den, is a meanes to kill Body and Soule, Prou. 3.5. Leane not vnto thine owne vnderstanding: the least sinne deserues damnation; yet we forsake heauenly directions, and follow fleshly affections. Suus cuiusque crepitus, sibi bene olet: euery one thinketh his owne wayes best. O be not wey-ward, but warned, for the holy Ghost speakes not in vaine. God made Adam and Eue coates of skinnes,Gen. 3.21. and cloathed them; yet they had the superioritie of the whole Earth. Therefore this pre∣pared apparell for them should be as a glasse to vs, to sée and flye from Folly: and a Pedagogie to teach vs to vse it for ne∣cessitie, not for sensualitie. But how agrée the comely coates of these wealthy Go∣uernours, with the superfluous fashions of Wat Waste-all. and fooleries of Minion Marre-all, which goe past their abilitie, shamelesse and gracelesse with all their wealth in va∣nities to be viewed? And how agreeth fancy fine nobles, with iagges, welts, gardes, gay tufts, great Rufs, confused sets, supporters, bushes to make their bodies straight, and want of Gods word to rule their soules right? their corked héeles set vp so hie, that some doe tread awry. They despise
and didiget at those that weare small Bands, and plaine de∣cent apparell, which are worne for foure causes. First, to be obedient to God, and agreeable to his word. Secondly, for a helpe to pull downe our pride. Thirdly, to win others. Fourthly, they maintaine it with trueth and honestie. Boe ashamed you and yours, that consume all by your excesse. Pride is combined with witlesse fashions: Some men are like monsters, with Ruffes, farre excéeding former Ruffins: Boyes haue shalt haired heads; some bigger, a curious cut; lockes for pediculus, long of each side, stigmaticall like. He that subiected his body, saith: Doth not euen Nature it selfe teach you, that if a man haue long hayre it is a shame vnto him? 1 Cor. 11. Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimus{que} negata. We desire things forbid, and couet things denyed vs. Spa∣nish pompe, and Spaniards pride hath long lockes, as if they were ashamed of their eares; with Shirts hanging out at knees, disguised from top to toe, as if they went to the pit in∣fernall. A mans attire, and excessiue laughter and gate,Ecclus. 19.30. shew what he is. Ambr. 1. Officior. Est in ipso motu, gestu, & incessu te∣nenda verecundia: habitus enim animi in corporis statu cognoscitur. Externall actions bewraye internall affections: some excéed in varietie as though they might spend much a yere by Land, yet nothing. Men of Nobilitie, Gentilitie, and Yeomen of habilitie goe decent and plaine, when farre inferiours are shin-trim, and garded with others goods got by guile. O earth be humble, Gen. 2.7. thou wert made of that beasts tread vpon, Gen. 3.14. and of that Serpents eate on. Our first Parents were Gods Vicegerents, and God could as easily haue cloathed them in gorgeous apparrell as in plaine coates of skinnes. Then minde it, it was to mooue vs to mediocritie. Those garmenes speake to vs that GOD allowes vs cloths to couer our nakednes, but not to abuse them in excesse. Christ nor his Apostles gaue no such examples: Christs gar∣ment was without seame. Math. 3. Iohn had his rayment
of Camels hayre, and a leathern pelt about his loynes. Gods children haue beene content to weare sheepes skinnes, and Goates skinnes.Heb. 11.37. Garments according to euery mans calling, plaine and comely, are commendable: we may vse them, but not abuse them. It is lawfull to eate, drinke, and weare ap∣parell: but excesse of eyther incurres Gods displeasure. Ha∣uing food and raiment,Tim. 6. let vs therewith be content. It is more then God owes vs, and wee (proud beggars) deserue nothing but damnation. Content must be when wee haue but food and rayment: if riches, wee must not consume them on our lusts: If a Ruffin say that he and his doe vse excesse to please his Wife, he is not fit to rule a householde, and vnlike the good Centurion, to say, Doe this, and it is done. Saith Iosua, 24.15. As for me, and my household, wee will serue the Lord. Pray that she which allures thée, and oft rules thee, be not a let like Eue, but a helpe as Sara: not sauadge, but sage. Pro. 31. The price of the vertuous is farre aboue Ru∣bies. If she be such, so is thy household, prayse God for her; if she be not, pray God to conuert her. Be not Cynicus, som suffer sorrow: admonish her quietly, loue her, and winne her with lenitie. If shée see that you gréeue indéed, that shée offend God by her excessiue attire, she cannot loue thee and vse it, but leaue it if she loue thée. Loue God and leaue it, hee forbids it: it is an offence to Gods children, whom hee hath such care of, that it were better for their offender, that a Mill stone were hanged about his necke, and that hee were drowned in the depth of the Sea, Math. 1.Mat. 18. Some lawfull thing to auoyd offence is to be omitted: much more vnlawfull, as such ex∣cesse. And who dare disobey Gods word? except such as in heart haue him not: his word is sufficient to conuince: yet the sayings of the Painims incomparable in efficacie to hea∣uenly Diuinity may be expressed, because their careful doings excell carelesse Christians. Monta.Hate pride, desire to be cleanly, not gorgeous in apparell: Hee toucheth the Momes, not men, which spend all at the Ale-house till hare skin appeares: and dirtie (not deyrie) wo∣men, which launch their hayre out long, and leaue it in whit∣meat.
Oh foole, gorgeous apparrell is not an Ornament,Sophocles. but a shame, and manifest shew of thy folly. Hee toucheth those that would be extolled, but haue shame in stead of fame: for Ruffians speake rashly of their dishonesty. Gay apparrelled women stand foorth as bayts to catch men. Hee toucheth the disguised with fore-heads frizled,Aurelius. which buye Complexion, and cause an euill action standing more bold then bashfull, painted to play with. The women of Lacedemon refused the rich Roabes King Dionisius sent them, saying they would do them more shame then honour. If such were now offered, stretched out armes would reach them, and gréedy Gehesa would haue them. Some so delight the flesh, that good sayings nor examples doe not amend their misdoings. Demas forsaketh the hea∣uenly conuersation of Saint Paul, and imbraceth this present world: (the Vipers garled skinne, whose venemous sting is deadly.) Oh eleuate thy heart to heauen:Rom. 8. If any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Now let vs examine our selues: Doth the Spirit of Christ, which is alwaies in sharpe and painefull battels with the flesh, and locked in that dungeon of dung, delight to set out, the same in excesse? No, for it is a meanes of carnall desires: it hath respect to the soule, by whom the body liueth. It al∣lowes the body that is néedfull, and liues for life, not for lust, longs to bee with God, and delights that natiue Kingdome. It ioyes in the deliuerie from the inticements of the flesh, world, and diuell, with whom it fights, séeking to subdue the flesh by often abstinence, watching, prayer, and forsaking pompe and pride. But our painting is apparant that we are not in battell, but are inordinate louers of our bodies. Good God giue vs grace to amend, that with a liuely faith we may apprehend Christs merits, and be cloathed with his white Roabe of righteousnesse: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost be all honour foreuer, Amen. Seruite Iehouae.
Newes to the poore, too good to be true: All will not beleeue it that doth it view. THe Diuels reioycing doth decrease, men shew good words & deeds: In mutuall comfort, ioy and peace, we croppe vp cursed weedes. The Milsayld Ruffs doe all goe downe, and little Bands in place. Gods word preuailes in euery Towne; for Pride hath great disgrace. Starch is turned into Bread, yee poore haue oft desir'd it, Pride-popiniay doth learne to kneade, which lately did mislike it. Light of Loue is not so fine, but frames her selfe to thrift; And learnes good houswifery in time, frequenting no euill shift. Minion now must make White-meate, full fit she is to learne it: To garden, plant, to sow and set, which brings this Realme much profit: Cabadge, Mill'ons, Onions, Leekes, betimes in time of yeere: Good newes, you poore shall haue fat cheekes, foode will not be so deare. A recompence she now will make for all her time ill spent: Rememberance doth make her shake, and now she doth repent. The needle and the spindle she full quicke oft time doth vse, And loues in heauenly word to see, and doth all vice refuse. She that did watch great Ruffs to set, and sleepe the Sabbath day, Attentiue is and vigilant to heare Gods word and pray. The Poking-yrons barre the doores, goods safe in house to keepe, From such as doe like knaues and whores, molest men in their sleepe. Great holes in cloth cut shall not be. Good cloth it will be cheape. The poore pray God this thing to see, their hearts for ioy doe leape. Pinkt Hats on thornes shall hang no more, plaine stuffe will last 3. yeere; You shall them haue good Brethren poore ere rugge begin to peere. Valete in Christo. ¶ A reproofe of hideous Oathes. THE accustomable sinne of Swearing, and detestable ta∣king Gods Name in vaine, apparantly appeare such little or nothing estimate his Maiestie. The manner, Acrotho∣rax and Acolastus sweare by him, with dialect disorder and a brauery in common talke, as it they sware by Iohn or Ione,
and so vsed in sporting places, as to heare may mooue a true beleeuing heart to bléede. Not so onely, but by all the parts of Christ particularly: not considering how his parts were pierced for our sinnes, and we exclude our selues from that benefit. The Iewes rent him with nayles, stripes, and thornes; and Swaggerers still doe teare him with their tongues. Some vse it in buying, selling, and guilefull getting: they are couetous to borrow much, but sparing to pay. They promise, but breake performance, Assertorie, pro∣missorie. Others vse a perillous petition to get goods: So GOD iudgeth them: not considering the dreadfull Iudgement and seuere sentence pronounced;Mat. 25. Depart from me ye cursed into euerlasting fire: when they shall obey to their decay. Some; As God shall haue part of their soule. Oh wic∣ked wretch, thou owest not thy selfe: GOD will haue thée soule & body, or the Diuell soule & body. Some by their faith: Heb. 11. But without faith it is impossible to please God. Others sweare by creatures, whereby they displease God greatly, which is iealous of his glory; and sayth, Ierem. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children haue forsa∣ken me, and sworne by them that are no gods. To reprooue this and the like, Christ saith; Mat. 5.Reproofe of Swearing. Let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whaso∣euer is more then this, commeth of euill. When wee sweare we must vse the glorious Name of God with great reuerence and feare:Deut. 6.13. Heb. 6.16. (viz.) Where the glo∣ry of God is sought, or the saluation of our brethren, or be∣fore a Magistrate in witnessing the truth: not in our com∣munication, or otherwise vainely. It is forbidden, Leuit. 19.12. And yee shall not sweare by my Name falsely, nei∣ther shalt thou prophane the Name of thy God, I am the Lord. Regard it:Deut. 5. For the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vaine. The Lord hath sayd, Zacha. 5. That the curse shall enter
into the house of him that sweares falsely by his Name. Leuit. 24.God commaunded, that hee which blasphemed his Name should bee stoned. It was effected, and now is to be wished such should be punished. Although it be reprooued, it is to be feared few will refrayne: for Sathan is subtill to seduce be∣fore Christs comming, and is industrious to draw vs to that God hath forbidden: so that some, as in their health did sweare and curse; so haue they in their sicknesse, and de∣parted fearefully. Esay 45.9. Woe be to him that striues with his Maker. Consider this, yee that forget God, lest I take you away,Psa. 50.22. and there bee none to helpe. Oh if you knew him, you would quake to blaspheme him: his glorious brightnesse excells the Sunne in the Firmament, so that sinfull eyes cannot beholde him. Esay 6. Seraphins couer their faces in Gods presence. Thou blast of breath, bee not so saucie with the GOD of Might and Maiestie. Ieremie 10.6. Forasmuch as there is none like vnto thee, ô Lord, thou art great, and thy Name is great in might. vers. 10. At his wrath the earth shall tremble. Oh, bragge beggers, bold to dishonour him, you must from wealth,Psa. 8. or wealth from you, it is none of yours, honour the owner. The Psalmographe doth ingeminate this; O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth! Our Sauiour taught vs to say; Hallowed be thy Name. Let vs not derogate it. Bad children grieue to see their father mis∣vsed: much more Gods children to sée our heauenly Father abused. Some leawd of the vulgar heare, and beare with Swea∣ters and Drunkards; but checke such as abhorre it, for any small infirmitie past for want of fore-sight; and with ly∣ing make a myte a mountaine. I would I and others had but infirmities; I haue millions of sinnes, and GOD knowes of more then I can remember. Good God assist vs to resist and hate sinne in our selues and others, that with silence we sée thee not blasphemed. Common Swearers, are commonly Cursers, and askers of
euill petitions, impious people are wrathfull like the Diuell, asking plagues, poxe, and all kinde of euill. So ofte times they haue that they craue. Our tongues are not to be vnru∣ly euils, but to pray to God and praise him. He that vilifieth his Name, shewes himselfe worse then a tode, which by singing sets sorth Gods praise. Psal. 148. Ze∣lous Dauid exhorteth créeping things vnrationall, to praise GOD, yet men with reason blaspheme him: which none can doe that loue him. A president repugnant was S. Dauid, Blesse the Lord, ô my soule, and all that is within mee blesse his holy Name.Psal: 103. Let euery thing that hath breath praise the Lord. And shall Man hauing reason blaspheme him?Psal: 150. Oh it is odious to a Christian. Therefore when thou hearest any take Gods name in vaine, say; Blessed be his Name. If he regard it not, exhort him with leuitie: If he be peruerse, refraine his companie. Ioseph, by kéeping Pharaohs Court, learned to sweare By the life of Pharaoh:Gen. 42. but he returned to such vertue as is to be feared few do, for sin is now so auaileable it seemeth to be ineuitable O arrogant earth, feare the Almighty. Bee not an In∣fidell, worse then the Diuell; The Diuels belieue, and tremble. True Faith and true feare hath care to eschue euill, and doe good. Prou: 8.13.Iames 2.19. The feare of the Lord is to hate euill, pride, and arrogancie, and the euill way, and the froward mouth doe I hate. A Blaspheamer with his froward mouth and black tongue makes his soule blacke. GOD made it to praise him, not to dishonour him. He saith, 1. Sam: 2.30. For them that ho∣nour mee, I will honour: and they that despise mee shalbe lightly esteemed. Pray to GOD, and praise him; none can saue thee but hée, and he abhorreth sinne. Heb: 1.13. Thou art of pu∣rer eyes then to behold euill, & canst not look on iniquitie. Now let vs consider this, how wee procure Gods anger, and grieue him with our sinne, by Sathans seducing. To sée him maketh man to quake, but the Swearer séemes to be pos∣sessed,
and feare not. Both must be admonished. You that with silence heare it, and yée that vse it, leaue it, least in Hell yee languish, with blaspheming and cursing the time of byrth and being. To preuent it, Repent: Loue God and laude him; Else at Iudgement day thy conscience will accuse thee, Christ will refuse thée, the Hoast of Heauen ab∣horre thee, and Diuells euer torment thée. From which good Lord deliuer vs, for IESVS sake, that bought vs. To the which GOD Almightie, thrée persons in Trinitie be all possible praise for euer. Amen. Benedic anima mea Iehouae. An Inuectiue for Sabbath-Prophaners. THe abuse of the Sabbath doth greatly derogate the glory of God. Vsed of some in the Church, of some out of the Church. Concerning euill behauiour in the Church, There are certaine seduced in greedie getting, or néedlesse dec∣king; that they goe late, attyred meeter for a Play, then to pray. Whose eyes wander in euery corner, and the finest fa∣shion is their prospect. They by watching about their follie, and others (too full fed) doe slumber and comber the Church, offending God, and grieuing the good. The hungry sléepe not at dinner; to sléepe at a Sermon shewes no hungrie desire: the paunch full is vnfit to pray. Sermon-sléepers, whether Papists or Neuters, intrude a∣mong the Protestants. They ease the corps by leaning. So should they the Conscience, and auoyde sleeping by standing, but Pinguitie preuents it. Ignorants went farre to fall to an Image: Farre and neere, fall thou to the true God. Goe sooner, and be better prepared to pray, and praise him. Parents re∣buke your boyes.Some Ruffians and rude ones, yea, bragge boyes, haue hattes on their heads, when Psalmes are read or sung (be∣ing Prayers and petitions.) 1. Cor. 11.4. Euery man pray∣ing or porphecying, hauing his head couered, dishonou∣reth his head. To begge of a King couered, is vncomely; Much more so
to begge of the King of Kings. Some sittes, praying the Lords Prayer. Matthew. 26.39. CHRIST did prostrate and pray because of our sinnes; and shall not we sinners knéele when we pray? S. Paule did it. Acts 21.5. If wee knéele not, standing is fitting, so did the poore Publican: Luke. 18.13. GOD ordained body and soule, and will be acknow∣ledged by both. 1. Cor: 6. For yee are bought with a price: Therefore glorifie God in your bodie and in your Spirite, which are Gods. And if we will not willingly, hée will be glorified in our destruction. Therefore stand in awe, with inward and outward obedi∣ence, Esay, 66.5. Heare the word of the Lorde, yee that tremble at his word. Psalme 134. Lift vp your hands in the Sanctuarie, and blesse the Lorde. Blessed Preachers per∣forme it, so ought the people. Deuout Dauid saith, Psal: 63. I will lift vp my hands in thy Name. Nehemiah. 8.3. The people did with willing mindes heare the Word of God, from the morning vntill Midday, and the eares of the people were attentiue. Ʋers. 5. All the people stood vp. Ʋers. 6. And Ezra blessed the Lord the great GOD; And all the people answered, Amen, Amen; with lifting vp their hands: and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lorde, with theyr faces to the ground. Such Agilitie moueth vigilancie, as a meanes of amend∣ment: but be frée from hypocrisie, God abhorres it. Be euer more zealous then thou séemest. Lift vp thy hands, with hart annexed, for hands without heart is abhominable. vers. 8. So they read in the booke of the law of God distinctly, & gaue the sence, & caused them to vnderstand the reading. Theyr Teachers did comfort them, Ʋers. 9. For all the people wept. Alas, little is our wéeping, much sléeping. Pride omits sub∣mission. Re. 1.7. But all the kinreds of the earth shall waile because of him. And some, so soone as Sermon is done, wran∣gle of worldlinesse, and are more stout then studious. Loue of Riches chokes the Word.
A good Cow chewes her cud increasing good bloud, and we must meditate in the word whē we haue heard. If we were pricked in our harts we would say to the Preacher, and each to other, as the people to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Acts 2.37. Men & Brethren what shall we do? Then Peter said vnto them, Repent. We know it, God graunt we may doe it. Mark: 11. Iesus went into the Temple, and cast out them that did abuse the same. Ʋer. 16. And would not suffer that any should carry any vessell thorow the Temple. Ʋer. 17. And he taught saying vnto them, It is written, My house shalbe called of all Nations the house of Prayer. Slacke we are to pray, or repaire that House: but where bodyes are fed, and lasts fulfilled, building is not spared. For the neglect of building the Lordes House,Haggai. by them that dwell in their steled houses, the Lord staied Heauen from deaw, and the Earth from her fruite. Nabuchadnezzer gloried in his building,Dan. 4.30. but heard a woefull voyce. Many braue buildings are burned. God make vs more mindefull of his House, and to vse our selues well therein. Amen. Of euill behauiour out of the Church. THe more a man neglects the means of true knowledge, the liker he is a Beast: the more endued with that light of life: the liker hée is his Creatour. Yet Church-slée∣pers and slack-goers can on the Sabboth hast to an Alehouse, and say, the Preacher was too tedious, which shewes they felt not the swéete taste, for such sits longer in leaude demeanour and loues it. Men can watch a day to compasse a match for backe and belly, or to kéepe ill companie: but to heare glad tidings, is thought tedious. Hee that is wearie of Gods word, is weary of God: Looke into it, It is his Image, by whome the Sonne hath reuealed him. As some are carelesse, so their Children growe gracelesse: Boyes are in back-lanes, swearing and swaggering, in open Stréetes wrangling, in houses playing, in yardes worrying Dogges and Cattes, committing mercilesse actions. Had not
Man sinned Beasts had not striued: Some reioyce in the sight, and in sinne. Good Parents doe kéepe children and Seruants to their bookes, repeating to them that the Prea∣cher taught: when lewd ones are in stréetes desturbing them. They that instruct not their Familie, are like to féele of theyr follie. Iacob reformed his Houshold, Cornelius feared God,Genes. 35. Acts 10. with all his house. When children disfigure their faces Parents are grieued: but they sée them disfigure their Soules and suf∣fer it. Let not your Boyes be rude in streetes, to people that passe: gracelesse youth grieue them daily, casting scornefull words or worse. There is difference of Youth; the well trained vp are ver∣tuous, the idle are vicious: and haue cause to crie; Nocet in∣dulgentia nobis: Sufferance doth hurt vs. Some such, at ten yeares are past recouery, hanged by twenty.Securitants consider it. Then they crye out of their parents. Had they feared God their children had not miscaried: For this is his Edict, Leuitic. 19.30. Yee shall keepe my Sabbaths, and reuerence my Sanctuarie; I am the Lord. But such regarde not, they scorne the Aged, that giue them good counsell: yet Age is a Type of Eternitie. And God saith, Ʋers. 32. Thou shalt rise vp before the hoary head, and honour the face of the Olde man, and seare thy God; I am the Lord. They that feare God, dare not prophane his Sabbath. But some trauell all that day. Others heare a Sermon in the Forenoone, and an other in the after: but spend the other part of the Day in bargai∣ning, and other vnprofitable pastimes. GODS WORD is compared to a Hammer, to breake a stone. Oh Sabbath-prophaner art thou harder? Clay, doth the Sunne make thée harde? Pharaos heart, art obdurate? Be submisse and mollified. Amend, pray, and praise God. Laudate nomen Iehouae.
¶ A proofe that the Sabbath must be obserued. SAbbat signifies holy rest, not ryot. God hath commanded and reserued that (one whole day of seauen) to be celebra∣ted to his Maiestie. He gaue the example. And he rested on the seuenth day,Genes. 2.2. from all his worke which he had made. The kéeping of the Sabbath is a Morall precept. God spake it, Exod: 20. God wrote it, Exod: 31.18. and the Tables of stone being broken, God wrote the second time on tables of stone,Exod. 34. as hee did on the first. The Sabboth was commanded for a perpetuall couenant, Ex:31.16. God allowed vs sixe dayes to worke, & reserued to himselfe one, which men would rob him of. The wicked would haue all dayes, and the diuell would haue all soules. To worke therein was death, Ex: 35. On which day,Exod: 16. the Iewes might kindle no fire. Sixe dayes they might gather Manna, on the seuenth there was none to be found, they were forbidden to séeke it that day, and euery man commanded to abide in his place the seueth day. God tooke away the occasion from their labour, signifying how holy he would haue the Sabbath kept. It is a Sabbath of rest,Leuit. 23. an holy conuocation, and was commaunded to be cele∣brated from Euen to Euen. S. Paule kept the whole day, and continued his preaching till midnight.Acts 20.7. On the preparation to the Sabbath, the bodie of IESƲS was begged by Ioseph to be buried,Mark. 15. Luk. 23. for obseruing the sabbath. God hath commanded the kéeping thereof, with a Memento. Sunday was the first day of the Worldes Creation, and the day of Christs Resurrection. S. Iohn calles it Dies Dominicus. I was in the spirit on the Lords day: for it was by the Apo∣stles established,Reu. 1.10. and Saturday, the Iews Sabbath abolished. Therfore it behooues vs carefully to kéepe Sunday, the Lords day. The Law is perpetuall, so is the Sabbath: and is to be sanctified to Gods seruice. For though (being vnder the Gos∣pell) we are deliuered frō the shadows of the ceremoniall law; yet it foloweth of congruity, that we indeuor to kéepe the mo∣rall precepts, and be obedient to Gods commandements; else we are not grafied in Christ, which saith Math: 5. Thinke not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets, I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill. If wee belong to him, we will doe our industrie. God is iealous of his glory, which men di∣minish, dishonouring him more on that day, then in all the wéeke. His Memento is not minded. Man and beast must rest. Yet rude ones ride on the Sabbath vpon small occasions. All within thy gate must rest (that is) within thy power. Childrē seruants and stranger. Sée it performed, preuent eternall pu∣nishment. By Christ we haue Christian liberty, to doo things of necessity, for preseruation of life, and of things in vtter de∣cay on the sabbath. Christ then healed a man, and the Iews did lift shéepe from the pit: and we must be carefull that the thing wee doe be such as cannot well be deferred to further time. Néedlesse worldly workes, wordes, and worldly thoughts, must be abandoned. Nūb: 15. God cōmanded all the people to stone a man that gathered sticks on the sabbath.Math: 1.80. Oh yee that follow lusts, be obedient, least yee be perpetually punished. God lookes for our Obedience: to obey is better then sacrifice. Nehemiah 13. reprooued them that brake the sabbath, in bea∣ring sheaues, and loading their Asses, and that solde ware; he told them that euill came on the Cittie, because their Fathers did so. The Lord by Ieremie 17.21. dehorteth from breaking the Sabbath, and exhorteth people to hallow the same. God promiseth a blessing if they obey: if not, a destruction. Ioyfull promise is for performance. For thus saith the Lord vnto the Eunuches that keep my Sabbaths, & choose the things that please me, and take holde of my Couenant vers. 5. Euen vnto them will I giue in mine house; & within my walles a place, and a name better then of sonnes & of daughters. I wil giue them an euerlasting name, that shall not be cut off. In this Maior is a Benisson, to him that knoweth not a woman, if hee applie the Minor. To euery man that kéepeth the sabbath (not doing his owne wayes, nor speaking his owne wordes) God hath promised a blessing. But God is forgotten, and present pleasures thought on. Some substantiall whome the world estéem of, talke on their trash, subtilty, and sensualitie on that day: and for a messe of potage, wt Esau, lose their birthright.
Young-men, some of them are like a generation of Vipers, starting aside like a broken Bowe. Neuters, that delight not Gods Lawe, say, they belieue as the Church belieueth; and how that is, they knowe not, as though they had a taste of the Whore of Babylon. Lurking Masse-mongers doe seduce and make them luke-warme. The body of Iezabel was deuoured, but her Feete, skull, and handes remained. And though the light doth disprooue Idolatrie, some with deceiued tast thereof, would burne in∣cense to the Queene of heauen: which God reprooued, and se∣uerely punished. Consider it, yée that are thereto addicted. They that loue darknes, ha e the light, least it should reprooue them.Ierem. 44. Such are wilfull Absenters, and some that heare, are Sabbath-prophaners. The true vse of the Sabbath is, with the Assembly to heare Gods word read, and preached, to re∣ceiue the Sacrament with thanks and repentance, to pray for our gratious King Iames, Quéene, and Royall progenie: and for all Gods children, (being the Church vniuersall.) O Lord we thanke thee for our dread Soueraigne his great pre∣seruation, from Iannes, Iambres, and traitorly Iudas: and we beséech thée to deliuer vs from such mercilesse papists. Amen. As at all times, so chiefly on the Sabbath, we must feede on the word, and thanke our good God; meditate, comfort, and counsell each other, from euill to good; and prouide for the poore at such time of the day, as shall not hinder the seede sowne in vs. S. August. makes mention of 3. kind of works, that must be done on the Sabbath, viz: The works of godli∣nes, instructing the ignorant: the works of Charitie, giuing to the poore. The works of necessitie, to saue things in vtter decay. As at all times, so on this day, let vs comfort the di∣stressed, & praise him, which rose then for our consolation and and Iustification. The Iewes sabbath did put them in minde of their deliuerāce from the cruelty of Pharao vnto the desert, where they were fed with Manna, and so to the promised Ca∣naan. Our Sabbath puts vs in remembrance of our deliue∣rance from the fiery Pharao the diuell: and that we shall pos∣sesse eternall rest, if we obey God, and keepe the true Rest.
An absenter sayes: God heard Iob on the dunghil, Daniel in the denne; so may he me in my house. Saint Dauid saith, Psal. 122. I was glad when they sayd vnto mee, Let vs goe into the house of the Lord. Psa. 84. My soule longeth, yea euen faynteth for the Courts of the Lord. Hée accompanied the holy conuocation: Psal. 42. I went with them to the house of God with the voyce of ioy and prayse. It must be the finall cause. The swéete Singer saith, Psal. 81 Sing aloud vnto God our strength; make a ioyfull noyse vnto the God of Iacob. The ruder sort make not a ioyfull noyse; they can sing few tunes for Psalmes, nor in tune, but disturbe the Congregation. Dauids heart and swéete loud voyce makes harmony, illustrating the glory of God, which ordey∣ned heart and voyce. He a type of Christ, saith; Psal. 35.18. I will giue thee thanks in the great congregation, I will prayse thee among much people. Louers of God are ioyfull to prayse him among many, and to sée God praysed by many. Let vs not let it, but loue it: imbrace the truth, and prayse God for it. To the which blessed Trinitie be eternall ho∣nour, prayse and glory, Amen. Tota ipsa anima laudet Iah. ¶ Against the euill effects of Dicing and Carding. DIcing and Carding are accustomed with company that vseth excesse: they goe to an Alehouse, and call for an Out-house, and sit wrangling, dishonouring God, ser∣uing of Sathan, and cause vexation. The winner spends it prodigally, procuring Gods displeasure. The sadde lozer gripes for money gréedily; to be reuenged, rashly hee ventu∣reth more, which turnes still to the lesse. Then the youth entreth into a Shoppe booke; the day come, money hee hath none, his Land is accepted, friendly he is excited: hee makes a sale, and sets vp that buyer: the money soone spent, he sets vp a wispe, and is drudge to swearers and drunkards. If that serues not, then begging, théening, and killing; venturing soule and body for money: but tyed at Tiborne,
take example:The cry of the carelesse. Our wofull Parents loued our bodies, but hated our soules; woe to the time of that libertie. Yet some will not be warned, they are remisse in that dutie, and bring their children to misery. O securitant, thou art the cause of thy childes destruction, if not damnation; and thy childe the meanes of thine. Hadst thou béene carefull, his precious time had not béene spent in play: whereof came idle spea∣king, strife, swearing, pouerty, théeuing, hanging, (preiu∣diciall effects of dicing and carding.) Some say, My sonne is no Dicer nor Carder: but thou permitst him to a proparatiue by such like play. All euill is so prompt to spring from our corrupt natures, that euill learned in youth is hard to bee remooued: if good, it is like to bee setled. Therefore rightly are children compared to Vessels which commonly kéepe the taste of the first liquor. Yet many will not be counselled, but giue euill example to their household. Tully toucheth them: Plus nocent exemplo quam peccato: They hurt more by the example then by the thing it selfe. The actions of House-kéepers doe animate the household. Eph. 5.16. Men must redéeme the time. Vertue must bee annexed to faith. Let vs vse holy conuersation and godli∣nesse.Pet. 1. Passe the time of your soiourning heere in feare. To preuent youths vicinitie to vice: in stead of dice and card∣ing, reade good bookes, pray, and prayse God. Euery minute requires the aduancement of Gods glory, and good of each other. Vnprofitable actions become not Christians, they are no motiues to mooue men to praise GOD. Carelesse Libertines must leaue them: they are no good works of the Gospell, nor the light Christ gaue charge should shine among men: but meanes to haue God blasphemed, and the Diuell serued. They are no holy actions, no fruits of the Spirit; rather wantonnesse, whereof ensueth contentions and fruits of the flesh. A good trée brings foorth good fruit, Mathew 7. The fruitlesse combers the ground,Mat. 21.19 like the wilde Figge trée that Christ withered. Forasmuch as the effects of carding and dicing are euill,
and the exercise thereof may bee left without damage to any, it is sufficient to prooue they ought not to bee vsed. To re∣prooue many things in briefe:1. The. 5.22 Abstaine from all appearance of euill; (that is) from things that haue a shew of euill, much more from things meanes of euill. The effects shew that dicing and carding causeth euill: Not to mée, nor by mée, saith one. Oh, thou spendest the time that might be spent better, and shewest an euill example farre from grauitie and integritie. Whatsoeuer are appea∣rance of euill ought to bee omitted: but dicing and carding are appearance of euill; ergo, they ought to bee omitted. The assumption is prooued by the euill effects; besides, the of∣fence giuen to the godly. Mathew 18. Christ pronounceth woe to Offenders. 1. Cor. 8 13. Some néedfull things are to be omitted to auoyd offence; much more, néedlesse. Whatsoeuer is vnprofitable, and may bee omitted with∣out damage, ought not to bee vsed: but carding and dicing are vprofitable and may bee omitted without da∣mage: ergo, they ought not to be vsed. Dicing and carding, which consisteth méerely vpon blinde hazard, lot and chance are to be reiected. Dicing consists in lot-casting, being a religious ordinance for serious matters to determine doubtfulnesse. Lotte was cast for Mathias, Acts 1. God is the disposer of the Lot.Pro. 16.33. Oh it is base to bée vsed in boyes play. Publius; Quanto alcator in arte melior est, tanto nequior est: How much the Dicer is cunning in his Arte, so much the worse hee is. S. Amb. lib. 1. De offic. chap. 23. Playes & pastimes are swéete when they are repugnant to the rules of christianitie. Ciprian; Play at Cards is an inuention of Satan, which he found out that he might the easier bring in Idolatry: for the coat cards which are vsed, were sometime the Images of Idols and false gods. Iustinian the Emperour abhorred Dice play, & by his Authenicall Lawes suppressed it. Magistrates forbid it; Preachers reprooue it; for the word of God doeth menace it; the Fathers reiect it; and the Pagans detest it.
Gen. 1.27. Man was inuested in Gods likenesse: we should imitate Gods properties: hee wrought that could make all things at a thought:Gen. 2.15. and so appoynted vs. And the Lord God tooke the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden to dresse it and to keepe it. If man in his inocencie ought to worke, much more now being polluted. Gen. 3.19. In the sweate of thy face shalt thou eate bread, till thou returne vnto the ground. Some will not worke in Winter, and ther∣fore begge in Summer. It is written, 2. Thess. 3. That if a∣ny would not worke, neyther should they eate. If thou be wealthy, and wilt not worke: Adam was wealthier, and hée wrought. Walke thou in the Fields, behold Gods bene∣fits, and prayse him. Walke in thy house, pray, read, and meditate: for dicing and carding is vnwholsome, & bréedes Gout and Dropsie. They bee called honest recreations; yet Sathans inuentions. The prophane are cald Good fellowes; so haue béene Diuels. Gods word doth direct vs to passe the short time of our pilgrimage: Iames 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing Psalmes. But prayer seemes vnpleasant, and Psalmes too much solemnity. Hymnes and spirituall songs some haue no skill in, when bawdy catches delight them. Mat. 12.Idle words, for which men shall giue an account of at the day of Iudgement, séeme swéete. Idle words are, Ʋanae & inutiles nugae in quibus plerique vitam terunt: Vaine and vnpro∣fitable tryfles, in which many waste their life. Idlenesse is the cause of idle words. Otium puluinar est Satanae: Idlenesse is a Feather-bed of the Diuell. Idle words are with idle actions. You turne the Dye, thinke how you turne to folly. Thou doest cast thy Card, thinke how you cast away time. Thou bidst thy Bowl rub, thinke thou shalt be rotten. Re∣frayne from vanitie, and also crueltie: sée no blinde things fight, nor blinde Beares whipt. Mat. 5. Blessed are the mercifull.Pro. 12. A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast. Let good motiues bee a meanes to preuent such pastimes as are meanes to preuent repentance. Christ saith, Watch and pray.Mat. 26.41. The world saith, Watch and play. The holy Ghost
bids vs, Heb. 12. Follow peace with all men, and holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord. But common Gamesters are commonly wranglers, and séeme voyd of peace and holinesse. O yée that haue play vsed in your hou∣ses, lose not Paradise for pelfe. It was decréed in the time of Iustinian, that such houses should be confiscat. In stead of Cardes and Tables, haue a Bible on thy Table. Put off and abhorre euill. Eph. 4.24. And that yee put on that new man, which after God is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse. Christ nor his Apostles were no gamesters: yet the Liber∣tine that should learne to read, makes gaming his summam voluptatem, and saith it refresheth his wit: but that which is swéetest refresheth the wit soonest. The Prophet saith;Psa. 119. vers. 103. How sweet are thy words vnto my taste: yea sweeter then honey to my mouth. vers. 62. At midnight I will rise to giue thanks vnto thee, because of thy righteous iudgements. That time is pleasant to play; but not for them to giue thanks and pray. Then they throw pots at each other, with such swearing and blaspheming of God, as is grieuous. Vers. 148. Mine eyes preuent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word: but others refuse their rest, to ryot. He desired Gods word farre aboue fine gold,Psa. 19. and thought it swéeter then the hony combe. Others refuse it, for dice, cards, & wanton com∣pany. The sanctified, grieuing for their sinnes, séeke in Gods word for swéete comfort: but such as loue leawdnesse get false comfort by lasciuiousnes. They refuse Gods word: play∣ing, wantonnesse, and foolish iesting, is a salue for their sore. Blessed is he that can say in his heart: Psa. 119.97. O, I loue thy Lawe, it is my meditation all the day. Pray for that minde, yee that prophane euery day.Deut. 6. Gods precepts must bée as frontlets betwéene mens eyes: they are Gods childrens pastime. The impious vse an Antithesis, and passe their time with contraries; they say they are the apter; but it is to euill. So the Diuell seduced Eue to thinke, that by eating the for∣bidden fruit their eyes should be opened, and be as Gods:Gen. 3. but it was to the ruine of them and theirs. Re. 4. In heauen
God is praysed continually; and canst not thou endure it at voyd times? O rich earth, poore earth, proud earth, loue God, and vse it on earth. Be not gracelesse and shamelesse to omit vertuous singing, reading, conference, prayer, and medita∣ting, to vse dice and carding. Doe not procrastinate, a∣mend spéedily, and spend thy short time profitably. Be expe∣dit for the day of the Lord: Luk. 21.35. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Vers. 36. Watch ye therfore, and pray alwaies, that ye may bee accounted worthy to escape all these thinges that shall come to passe, and to stand before the Sonne of man. 2. Pet. 1. And giue diligence to make your calling & election sure. O consider, we can spare no time for idle playing, nor idle speaking.Heb. 6. The earth which bringeth thornes and bryers is reiected. 1. Pet. 1.13. Wherefore gird vp the loynes of your minde, be sober, and hope to the ende. Let vs doe well, lest God come with deuouring fire and finde vs euill occupied. Let the remembrance of his sudden comming preuent euill in thée; againe & againe, I beséech thee. Soli Deo laus & gloria. ¶ A meanes of amendment. FOrasmuch as many liue liker Atheists then true Christi∣ans, here are certaine motiues to excite to amend. Many seruing Sathan, can boast they shall bee saued, not come to the steppe of pietie, to hate iniquitie, that they may apply Christs righteousnes to their conscience. That most of this world shall be saued, many places of holy writ refelleth. Mat. 22.14. Multi sunt vocati, pauci vero clecti: Many are called, but few are chosen. It followes, few shall be saued: O feare∣full sequell! O consider thine estate, hee without whom is no saluation spake it. Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to beare the sinnes of many: yet few saued relatiuely in re∣spect of the damned. His death is sufficient; but few haue that seruent faith, whose effect is a godly life. Christ giueth a cauent:Mat. 7.13. Enter ye in at the straight gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction: and many there bee which goe in thereat. 14. Because straight is the
gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth vnto life, and few there be that finde it. Consider the oppositions: The broad way to destruction many walke: the narrow way to life few finde. The entrance is straight, the passage troublous, sharpe, and full of difficulties, vnpleasant and repugnant to the pleasurable broad way. Gods word is the right rule from which men make an aberration. And Christ is the true way; but he that is in Christ is a new creature. And to such as be∣gin so to be, so many temptations, rebukes, and tryals, wait on that vertuous life as few endure. Troubles with pietie is a Christians liuery: here is little or no Alcion time. We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdome of God.Act. 14.22. Christ saith, Luke 13.14. Striue to enter in at the straite gate: for many, I say vnto you, will seeke to enter, and shall not be able. This command and the reason might excite vs to cut off all obstacles, and haue godly strife, rife to excell in vertue. Alas, our striuing and seeking is in the broad way, hauing a forme of pietie, denying the power thereof: few leaues, fewer fruit. The fiue foolish sought and craued,Mat. 25. but were excluded: the faith that brings foorth good fruits is re∣quired. Belialls may Iaunce themselues. Iusticiaries whippe themselues, without true touch of conscience, as appeares by their present committing of incontinencie, and bloudy massacry. The prophane may follow iniquitie, presume on Gods mercy, and sinne in such séeking: the best is neglected, the worst is delighted. Many are perfidious, else they would beleeue Christs words, and be zealous to amend. Consider seuere sayings, Mathew 20.16. 2. Esd. 8. The most High hath made this world for many; but the world to come for few. Saint Aug. affirmes it; Si omnes liberarentur, foret, vt absconditum esset quod peccato debetur propter iustitiam; Sin autem nemo liberaretur, foret, vt non appareret quod per gratiam donatur. If all should bee deliuered, that were hid which by Iustice is due for sinne: but if no man should bée deliuered, that should not appeare which is giuen through grace. Wée are all by nature the children of wrath: it is Gods mercy to saue any.
The Elect shallbe saued: they with a liuely faith are louers and liuers of righteousnes: to that end such are deliuered, be∣ing fewer then the faithles.Luke 1.17. Christs death is sufficient for all, but not effectuall to all; the fault is in vs sinfull people. Oh let vs pray and repent, with auersion from sinne, and conuersion to godlinesse: for right beleeuing hath good liue∣ing, without which liuely faith we pertaine not to Christ; for that liuely faith apprehendeth him, which makes vs iust, in that respect wee are iustified: not formally, as it is inherent righteousnes in vs; but relatiuely, in respect of the obiect: for we are vnrighteous;Be a good Souldier. therefore we must resist sin continually, which is so sharpe a life as few vse. Luke 8. Séede was sowen in 4. places, but one fertill. Impious people are plenty; sancti∣fied are dainty. Arist. Plurima pessima: The most men are the worst. Preciosa non sunt numerosa: Good men are least in num∣ber. When all the world was drowned in the deluge, but 8. faithfull were preserued: before, many heard of it, but few would be warned.Gen. 19. When the Lord rayned vpon Sodom and vpon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from heauen, thrée were segregated from thousands. Exo. 12.37. And the children of Israel iournied from Ramases to Succoth about 600000. on foot that were men, beside children. God said; Surely, there shall not one of this euill generation see that good Land which I sware to giue vnto your Fathers.Deut. 1.35. Caleb, Io∣shua, and little ones were accepted; the other were cōmanded to turne backe. How many were excluded from the heauenly Canaan, which this Land was a type of, I leaue to the Lord. It is a fearefull example, Psa. 95.11: for he calles it his Rest. It is mentioned, Eze. 14.22. Among many God reserued but a small remnant for his Church.Rom. 9.27. S. Paul doeth paralell the place of Esay 10.22. Esaias also cryeth concerning Israel; though the number of the children of Israel bee as the sand of the Sea, a remnant shall be saued. These documents, ra∣ther threatnings, should deterre men from their owne detri∣ment.2. Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them downe to hell. And spared not the old World. And turning the Cities of Sodome and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned
them with an ouerthrow, making them an ensample vnto those that after should liue vngodly. Yet conscience is scant, sinne is excessiue. Mat. 24.37. As the daies of Noah were, so shall also the comming of the Sonne of man be. Consider the comparison. They eat and dranke, so do wée superfluously: they bought and sould, so doe we deceitfully: they loued the world, so doe we egregiously: here repugnant; they planted, we plucke vp, to the preiudice of the next posses∣sors. Euery one for himselfe; the Prouerbe is fearfull. Ma∣nie are deluded, and from Heauen excluded; For God is not feared. Christ bids vs watch for his sudden comming. These motiues might mooue vs to contrition, vigilant expectation, and supplicate for mercie euery houre. When Sodom and her sister were consumed, and all the world drowned, few faithful were found. How few God shall find, when hée comes with fierce Fire, hée Omniscient knowes. He shewes by his Word, the world shall be worse. Luke 18.8. When the Son of man cometh, shall he find Faith on earth? Alas, what order of life will this world leade? No true Faith, no Saluation. This excites to examine our selues, not doing as most do. For Atheisme, Neuterisme, Self-loue, Idolatry, and all other impietie cryes in the eares of the Lord that liuely Faith is little, and that Christ shall finde very lit∣tle. The Diuells lease drawes to ende, therefore he is gréedy to get. Reu. 12. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, for the Diuell is come downe vnto you, hauing great wrath, because hee knoweth he hath but a short time. Mark. 9. When Christ commanded him out of a Childe, Ʋers. 26. He cryed, and rent him sore, and came out of him. So now his time is short, and hée makes hauocke, fiercely sée∣king whom he may deuoure. Hee aymes at the vertuous: so doe his Adherents. He spares such as serue him, he knowes they are his; they helpe him to entice Gods children. Hillarius. Dulce Diabolo, nos poc∣care. It is sweete to the Diuell to see vs sinne. Leo: aut im∣petrat mortes, aut impetit mores. If he cannot kill a man, he will corrupt him. He is subtill to seduce. This worlde growes
vngodly, the néerer the ende, the more vngodly. Saint Paule prophecied, 2. Tim: 3. This know also, that in the last dayes, perillous times shall come. Hee expresseth a Catalogue, whereby is apparant, that men shall be commit∣ters of capitall sinnes. Traytours, heady, high-minded, lo∣uers of pleasures more then louers of God. It appeares people will grow gracelesse, God little regar∣ded, but dishonoured, and lusts fulfilled: so that such as run to riot, shall liue most in quiet, and that any thing that in∣creaseth sinne, wil be much gaine got by, the Diuell and all quickly. Bawdy Bookes will be perused, the good lesse vsed. A floud of wickednes will flowe. The prophane shall be ex∣tolled: Good people not estéemed. For haters of that which most shall loue, shalbe hated: and most men shall make plea∣sures their God. That which men shall loue most they shall make their God. But men shall loue pleasures most. Ergo, Men shall make pleasures their God. It may be saide then of Selfe-loue, Pride, and Pleasure, Haec tria pro Trino Numine mundus habet. This is the Trinitie which the world doth worship. Noah forewarned the olde World; which was drowned. Preachers do teach vs, Lawes doth enforce vs, yet our harts are vnreformed. The righteous soule of Lot was vexed at peoples impietie, which were destroyed, and hee preserued. 2. Peter. 2.9. The Lorde knoweth how to deliuer the godly out of temptations, and to reserue the vniust vnto the day of iudgement to be punished. If Gods seuere threatnings, nor louing admonitions, the multitude destroyed, the small number preserued, make vs not to amende: Yet thinke of Christs wordes, whereby is shewed few are saued in respect of the damned. A malefactor feareth no halter till he haue it; and many feare no Hell, till they féele it; Therfore to such I expresse an Epitome of paines. ¶ A short discourse of long Destruction. THe Pangs of Hell are so vnspeakeable, as no mortall tongue can expresse. The Damned shall féele the seuere
wrath of God lie vpon them for euer; which is greater & shar∣per then all Fier, Swords, Paines, & Plagues of this world. They shall be enuironed, filled, terrified, and tormented of dreadfull Diuels whom they haue serued. Soule and bodie for euer shall suffer horror. A liuing death, pangs must be abi∣ded. A dying life neuer ended. An euerlasting burning intolle∣rable, yet in explicable: Our fire may be extinguished, but yt is fier that neuer shalbe quenched, the destruction is euerlasting.Mark. 9. 2. Thess: 1.9. Infinite pangs are prepared for the enemies of the infinite GOD. Had they euer liued here, they had euer bene obstinate, therefore euer punished. Feare and tremble, yee that derogate God of his glory, and attribute it to creatures. Yée prophane Prodigalls, bolde to blaspheme him, burne not in Brimstone. Oh Atheist, belieue in the Almightie; O Neuter, nourish no iniquitie. Brutish Bawds, sucking Sodomites, Corne-hoorders, sore-stallers, poore-staruers, pitilesse partialls, which concurre to defraude the friendles, in hell is direfull eiulation. Our fire is ordained to comfort, that to torment: ours giueth light, that vtter darknes. Our fire is substantiall, so is that. But our fire wasteth that it burneth: but hell fire much hot∣ter, burneth soules and bodies, yet wasteth them not. Math: 5.22. Christ threatneth with hell-fire. There wilbe Passion, Propassion, Sympathie, & fellow-séeling of soule & bodie: And for finite lewd pleasures togither, they shall haue infinit pangs. Ps: 11.6. Vpon the wicked he shall raine snares, fire & brim∣stone, & an horrible tempest, this shalbe the portion of their cup. The sulphureous pit is déepe and dolefull. Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shalbe turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God. Math: 22. They shalbe bound hand & foot, and cast into vtter darknes, there shalbe weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Couseners, Théeues, and Murderers, which flée with mens goods, shall there be stayed. Thou starter return, least death & hell follow thée. As the af∣fections of the Impious ascended not to Heauen, but were holden downe to the lusts of their bodies: So soule and bodie shall descend downe to Hell torments, and therein be holden.
Ezek: 32. The prophet speaketh of the wicked, that they are gone down to hell. Ps. 55. Let them go downe quick to hell. And the smoke of theyr Torment ascenth vp for euer and euer: And they haue no rest day nor night. Hell is be∣low, fearfull, and farre from Gods fauour. There is no hope of health, no remedy for reliefe, they sigh and sorrow in death euer, but die neuer. Here children sée pa∣rents, & parents theyr children run to hell, and may helpe it. In inferno nulla redemptio: quoniam nec pater ibi potest adiuuare filium,Aug: nec filius patrem. In Hell is no redemption, for the Fa∣ther cannot helpe the sonne, nor the sonne his Father. Luke. 16.24. Diues could not haue one drop of water to coole his tongue, tormented in this flame. If Securitants did but touch our fire, and thinke of Hell fire, they would consider. To see the Diuell here in his vglie shape, would distract the stoutest; and to heare soules skréeke, affright them; to looke downe so déepe, dismay them. Oh vnspeakeable to sée and féele the Diuell drawe them downe, and torment them. O yée which consult to deceiue the friendles: and if yée obtaine it not, it's him you ayme at: vse not oppression, make restitution. Haste not to Hell, there Pangs pricketh, Feare frighteth, Fire frieth, Diuels dismay men, and griefe of Conscience gripes them. To be terrified in hell torments one minute, is more bitter then a thousand yeares pleasure here is swéete. Yée Sarcasticall scorners, that reioyce in Sodisme, consider this. And ye that blaspheme Gods Name, Presuppose (I pray) that one in hell were here againe, vpon condition to be a true Christian;A supposall. Oh he would fast, pray, crie for mercy, and mourne for peoples miserie: not ceassing, but saying, People repent, turne vice to vertue; It may be, his consorts erst in sensualitie, would mourne and admire it, which now heare of hell, and amend not. Pray and repent, for none can come from hell to make re∣stitution, but are holden in chaines, euer in pangs, easelesse, hopelesse, and remedilesse. Embracers of Whores shall be bruised of Diuels. Myrth wt Meretrix, wil cause sad conflicts.
Leaud eyes shall sée Lucifer. For light regard of Gods Ʋbi∣quitie, they shall haue miserie. For detaining goods wrong∣fully, foule Fiendes shall wring thée. He that borroweth like a lamb, and detaineth like a Lyon, speaking euill in stéede of payment, shalbe pained. Lyons haue pittie. Masties miti∣gate their furie. But the Diuell is euer furious. His adhe∣rents here are mercilesse, to make the aged ioylesse. They spight at theyr prosperitie, reioyce at their aduersi∣tie: they doe them wrong, make them sad, and account them Melancholy. The stout are astonied, when God sends thun∣der and Lightning: much more shall they feare, when fierce Fire shall pierce them, and Sathan torment them in the loth∣some Lake of lamentation. The fearfull flashing Fier, the spight of dreadfull Diuells, the sobbing sighes of soules, the roaring of fierce Fiendes, filthie sauours, and dolefull deane, though they felt no other paine, will be able to breake the heart; if so, paines would not decrease. Curses then shall be effected. Deuteron: 27.19. On him that peruerteth the iudgement of the Stranger, Fatherlesse,Zach: 7.10. and Widow; the féeling of the full reuealing of the wrath of God will be woefull. Ʋirgil speaking of the punishment of men for vices, said in this 6. book of Aeneydes, A hundred tongues cānot expresse the paines men suffer in Hell. For lothsome Lust, they haue lost the vnspeakable Ioyes of Heauen, and procured the Pinching pangs of hell; banished from God and his Saints for euer, to be with vgglie Diuells, Iudas and Iulians. To be excluded from Heauen, and included in a Prison, without paine were yrkesome: But to be in that Pit in vn∣speakable pangs and endlesse, is most grieuous. They shall be euer shut out from the dore of Gods mercie: CHRIST will say, Depart from me, yee cursed,Math: 25. into euer∣lasting Fier, prepared for the Diuell, and his Angells. Christs comming to such will be terror, his seuere Sen∣tence more terror, Hell torments most terrible. Christ will diuide his Shéepe from the Goates. Math: 3. And gather his
Wheate into the Garner, but will burne vp the Chaffe with vnquenchable Fire. All the workers of iniquitie shalbe where is wéeping and gnashing of téeth, when they shall sée Abraham, Isaack, and Iacob,Luke 13. and all the Prophets in the Kingdome of God. As Diues saw Lazarus with Abraham, so shall the dam∣ned sée Gods Children. And thereat bee vexed and amazed, sighing and saying they had such in derision. Scurrilous Sar∣casmus shall confesse his foolishnes. Mockers shall mourne.Couzeners which scorne true dealers shall lament with Heart-smart, and heauy Hey-hee. 1. Cor: 3.18. Had they bene Fooles of this world, and belong'd to CHRIST, they had bene dignified, not damned. The craftie crue shall haue scalding. For leaudnesse, lan∣guishing. For abusing of Wealth, wayling. For Adultery, Destruction; vttering and iterating, Woe worth the time they hated to be counselled. If a malefactor were cast into a burning Brickkill, he would stare and start, stamp hee could not, but be quicke dispatched. Why then are wée so farre from seruing God, and néere Sa∣than in sinning, to procure endlesse Hell fire? Men heare this, and liue amisse, because they are grace∣lesse: the Neuer-dying worme, and dreadfull second death is procured. We imbrace present pleasure, and feare no fu∣ture paine. Some liue as though there were no Hell, and aske where it is, hasting thither. O our euill Affections are below, and Hell is lower. Prou: 15.24. It is beneath, vnpleasant, Painfull. Hell is déepe. Prou: 9.18. The Damned are voyde of hope and recouerie. The vnsatiable shall féele, that (Prou: 27.) Hell and destruction are neuer full. It is large and déepe for manie, yea for most. The wic∣ked Rich, and wicked Poore, shall into the gulfe of gar∣boyles. In the two last Chapters of the Reuel: is mentioned a Ca∣talogue of manie that shall into Hell, they shall finde and féele it so Circumscriptiua, that they shall neuer bee in Heauen,
which GOD hath prepared for his Elected; and ordai∣ned Hell for the Reiected: they are Opposites: For in this there is partition of Affection, and the contrarietie of effects euer shalbe. In Heauen Ioy, and praising of GOD amongst An∣gels: In Hell horror, cursing theyr Parents, Byrth, and béeing amongst Diuels. Hideous sights will affright them, and eternall Fire afflict them. Thou Loyteror, that canst not abide to labour; how wilt thou then abide then to languish? Sathan enticeth thée to tush, but tush wilbe turned to terror; for déedes of darknes, thou shalt haue fire and darknes. Deuils will daunt thée, they roare irefully, Soules skréeke mournfully: the intollerable torments are abidelesse, and endlesse. Minos examen, Radamanthus dat cruciamen: tertius heu Frater, tertia iura tenet. One Diuell rippeth vp thy exami∣nation: an other Diuell tormenteth thée; and the third is not behinde to adde one torment to an other. Thou shalt bee prickt for thy Impietie, pierced for thy Periurie: thy hatred to such as abhorred thy leaude life shal hurt thée. Thou shalt féele how the Diuell deceyued thée here, to torment thée there. The partiall, that doe euill one for another, shalbe in Hell together. Here is Time, men must redéeme it; after this Life, no time but Eternitie. Once in Hell and euer, without mitigation, or intermission. Oh how shall the soule and body abide such torments, as are sharper then all the diseases of this world are, being vpon one lying aliue here in a fiery Furnace? A minute of time would kill vs. When millions of millions of yeares are expired, th'ende there is not the néerer. It is no Lease, but endlesse. Consider this. yée that séeke out the helplesse, and borrowe their goods by great protestations, yet detaining, not fearing Conuiction; as if for a dish of Apples, yee could preuent the right of the Friendlesse: Iudas restored, you store it.
A little Thiefe goes mourning to the gallowes, when a greater reioyceth in guilefull getting. Shifters that assist him, are not much vnlike him. In Hell such wrongers shall bee wrung. There will be Roaring, Skriking, Garboyles, Griefe, Gingling, Glaring, Staring, Crying, Mourning, Howling, Sighing, Sob∣bing, Stretching, Panting, Gasping, Gnashing, wringing Mouthes, Handes and Bodyes: thinke on Death, thinke on this, it's fearfull to heare, worse to féele. Many are wil∣ling to escape it, but loue of Lust lets it. Tooth-ake is paine∣full, and Heart-ake giues the Ʋltimum Ʋale; but in Hell, all parts are euer perplexed. Sathan hath cousened some to shorten their dayes, that could not endure griefe: which they would neuer haue done, had they knowne the pangs of Hell: they that regarde not GOD here, shall feare, and féele his Iudgements there. Oh hard heart, that no call can penetrate, thou shalt re∣lent, too late shall be thy contrition. For in Hell is woe and wayling, horror, and terror. Reuela: 20. It is a bottome∣lesse pitte, for the pittilesse, a Lake of fier and Brimstone. Where the Beast, and the false Prophet are, and shall be tor∣mented day and night, for euer and euer. Quarrellers shall quell in hell, Murtherers shall mourne, the bloud-thirstie, shall be thirsty. Thieues booties shall be bitter. Pangs endlesse, will make them comfortlesse. The worme of Conscience remaineth, fierce Fier endu∣reth. O Idolator pray to God, to no creature. Saints search not thy heart, but onely thy Creator: the Cursed shall be crushed in the burning Lake, which is the Second-death. When so many yeares are expired, as in Earth and Sea are sands, and droppes of water, the ende is not the néerer. Leaue leaudnes, belieue this; It's better to be a toade, then to féele this. Seruers of sinne, shalbe subiect to Sathan. Hautinesse causeth heauinesse.Psal: 50.22. Now consider this; yee that forget GOD.
Art thou couetous and voluptuous, flattering Superiours, defrauding Inferiours? let not pleasure, mucke and mony hale thée to hel, giue that which hurts thée to them that haue not. Art thou wealthy & wilfull? it is wofull: with a naugh∣tie matter do not perseuere, and vndoe men for euer. Adula∣ters be no assisters, repugne euill doers. Burne not; for, bona omissa, mala cōmissa: the pangs are so intollerable, as to thinke on is terrible. Thou that flatterest thy friend with league of lenitie, and with thy mates séekest his infamy; Iudas the Traytor was such a deceiuer. And yée that are mercylesse to the aged, and to the poore in their sicknesse, the same qualitie hath the Diuell: if he haue thée in hell, he will fray thée, fry thée, and with brimstome baste thée, and in stead of coole li∣quor, giue hot Lead: if thou wilt not come there, resist all things that draw thée thither: Mat. 10.28. Feare him that can destroy both body and soule in hell. Good God, we pray thée, kéepe vs from Gehenna; it is thy mercy to spare vs, wée all deserue those torments. Blessed Trinitie, guide vs to felicitie: to thée be all honour and glory for euer, Amen. Sit Deo laus in seculo. Sic fiat. ¶ Comfort for the contrite. WE finde in sacred Scriptures that few shall be saued in respect of the damned; and that the pangs are vn∣speakable, infinite, and in explicable.Mic. 6.8. He hath shew∣ed thee, ô man, what is good; and what doeth the Lord re∣quire of thee, but to doe iustly, and to loue mercy, and to walke humbly with thy God? We must turne from sinne, and walke in newnesse of life. To be a new creature is requi∣red: we sinne oft, abhorre it, and preuent it. Repent with detestation, haue dayly renouation and amendment: haue Oyle with thy Lampe. Sauing grace and regeneration must be with a Christian profession. Bee faithfull, as Peter; well doing, as Dorcas: haue a good desire, despayre not; no dis∣dence, confidence; hate thy sinne:Mat. 11.28 Christ calleth such to giue them rest: Mat. 12.20. A bruised reede shall he not breake,
and smoking flaxe shall hee not quench.Ezech. 18. Come to him with a sparke of grace, hee will not despise thée. Repent truely, God will forgiue thée. Perseuere in pietie to the end. Sorrow for sinne, ioy in Christ, with two contrarieties at once in one subiect. Fight a good fight, finish thy course, kéepe the faith. Shrinke not like Balaams Asse vnder his burden. Psa. 27.14. Waite on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart. Put on the whole Armour of spiri∣tuall weapons;Iam. 1.12. fight, and faint not. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tryed he shall receiue the Crowne of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that loue him. Resist sin strongly, flye to Christ humbly, hée shed his teares and pretious bloud for thée. Wéepe thou with Peter, craue with blinde Bartemeus; sée Christ by faith, and shew foorth fruits with Zacheus. Persist with the woman of Canaan.Mat. 15. Imitate Dauid, voyd of pusillanimity, full of mag∣nanimitie, yet mourned; Psa. 6.6. I am weary with my gro∣ning, all the night make I my bed to swimme; I water my couch with my teares. The sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit:Psal. 51.17. Luke 15.7. Psa. 103.11. a broken and contrite heart, ô God, thou wilt not despise. Ioy shall be in heauen ouer such. Therefore with submission vse contrition. For as the heauen is high aboue the earth: so great is his mercy toward them that feare him. God giue vs repentante, that we may be faithfull ap∣plyers of Christs righteousnes, Amen. Dum spiro spero. ¶ Of the ioyes of heauen prepared for Gods Children. FOr the faithfull penitent which warre against wicked∣nesse is prepared a place so ioyfull as is vnspeakable: such haue not onely immunitie, and freedome from bondage, but also interest to the priuiledges of Gods children, who are heyres with God,Rom. 8.17. Reuel. 7.14. and coheyres with Christ in his King∣dome: which is by the bloud of Iesus, which washeth vs white, without the which is no puritie. God imposed the
punishment for our sinnes vpon him,Rom. 8. and he hath fully satis∣fied the Iustice of his Father for them. The holy Spirit speaketh to faithfull perseuerers:Reu. 2.10. Bee thou faithfull vnto death, and I will giue thee the Crowne of life. Reuel. 3.21. To him that ouercometh will I graunt to sit with me in my Throne, euen as I also ouercame, and am set downe with my Father in his Throne. Reuel. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes: and there shall be no more death, neyther sorrow, nor crying: neyther shall there be any more payne: for the former things are passed away. Ʋerse 7. He that ouercommeth shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my sonne.1. Cor. 2.9. Eye hath not seene, nor care heard, neyther haue entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that loue him. When the Quéene of Sheba was come to Solomon, shee sayd, 1. King. 10.7. Behold, the halfe was not tolde mee. So Gods Saints shall then sée that the thousand part of those ioyes were not tolde them. Aug. O gaudium, super gaudium, vincens omne gaudium, ex∣tra quod non est gaudium, quando intrabo inte, vt Deū meū vide∣am, qui habitat in te? O ioy aboue all ioyes, surpassing all ioyes, without which there is no ioy, when shall I enter in∣to thee, that I may see my God that dwelleth in thee? Pro∣fectò in me totum non intrabit, sed ego in illud totus intrabo. True∣ly it will not enter wholly into me by my knowledge, that I may comprehend it, but I shall enter wholly into it by fruition that I may enioy it for euer. It is such frée-hold, as is good for vs to build there; an inheritance incorruptible,1. Pet. 1.4. and vndefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserued in hea∣uen for vs. There is beauty, brightnesse, iubilation, exulta∣tion, mirth without mourning, heauenly harmony, delecta∣ble, vnspeakable. Saints shall sing with Angels and hea∣uenly habitants, All glory to the Trinitie. There is health, rest, riches, abundance with continuance. A Paradise excée∣ding all pleasure. The Trinity in vnity shal ioy all hearts, his beauty is glo∣rious,
the longer viewed, the more desired. O excellent So∣ueraigne,Exo. 34.29. 2. Cor. 3.7. brighter then the day Sunne: the skinne of Moses face shone bright by being with God: glistering and glori∣ous then shall men bee, being glorified and euer with God. Sinne shall no more disquiet vs, the flesh and the spirit shall then be at quiet; hauing perfect knowledge, perfect holinesse. For now wee see through a Glasse, darkly: but then face to face:1. Cor. 13.12. Exo. 33.20. 2. Tim. 4.8. now I know in part; but then shall I know euen as also I am knowne. The Lord God said; There shall no man see me and liue: but there we shall sée him, and liue. All that reigne with Christ shall haue crownes of righteousnesse. 2. Pet. 1.11. It is an euerlasting Kingdome. Luke 14. Blessed is he that eateth bread in the kingdom of God. Ioy∣full is the societie of those heauenly Citizens: the Region is Royall, and a Kingdome excéeding all kingdomes. Reu. 21. It is likned to a City of pure gold, which had no neede of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it: for the glo∣rie of GOD did lighten it, the Lambe is the light thereof: vers. 25. And the gates of it shall not bee shut at all by day: for there shall be no night there. We heere are in danger of the Diuell and his darlings: but there shall be no enemie to hurt nor annoy. The glorious Heauen of heauens is not contaminate, but immaculate: there shal enter into it no vn∣cleane thing.Mat. 13.43. Esay 25.6. Then shall the righteous shine foorth as the Sunne in the kingdome of their Father. God will feast his faithfull: at his right hand is fulnesse of ioy; euerlasting ioy shall bee vpon them. Aug. There is myrth without mone, place without payne, life without labour, light without darknes: there youth alwaies flourisheth and neuer decay∣eth; there is no torment felt, nor howling heard; no sorrow séene, but possession of ioyes euerlasting. How glorious things are spoken of thée, thou Citie of God? true reioycing is in thy habitation. We shall bee rid from warfare, and bee in welfare, from sinne, Satan and his adherents, from hun∣ger, thirst, heate, cold, wearinesse, infirmities, dread, doubt∣fulnesse, sicknes, vexation, death & damnation, & be euer with God our preseruer. Good children are glad to sée their father
here; much more to behold our Heauenly Father, his sonne our Sauiour, the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier there. S. Iohn sprang in his Mothers wombe, at the tidings of our Sauiour.Luk: 1.41. Angells praised, and said, Lu. 2.24. Glory to God. The shepheards went and saw him, published the newes, and gaue praise vnto God. Old Simeon took him in his arms, reioycing. Old Anna gaue thanks likewise vnto the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Hierusalem. Oh when men and all the hoasts of Heauen sing to his Maiestie, most glorious is that harmonie. Wée shall sing in the presence of God, Halleluiah, Saluation, glory, & honour, & power, be to the Lord our God. Oh heauenly harmony, myrth, & melody; Blessed are they that are called to the Lambs supper. M. Brad∣ford ye Martyr belieued this beatitude, and thus did animate the young-man at the fire. Be of good comfort Brother, for we shall haue a merry supper with the Lorde this night. All faithful harts crossed with calamity, and grieued for iniquity, be comforted, yée shall inherit a kingdom. We shal come to the mount Sion; not Sinay where the Law was giuen, but to the innumerable company of Angels. S. Peter saide, for the sight he saw on the mount. Lord, it is good for vs to be here.Math. 17.4 But then wee shalbe in light vnchangeable, and sée Christ euer in felicity, whom his enemies had in obloquie. Those Ioyes infi∣nite passe all Ioyes finite. The voyce of Ioy and gladnes shal be euer wt the righteous. Oh happy heires of heauēly inheri∣tance, without our deserts. Aug. Deus coronat dona sua, non me∣rita nostra. God crowneth his owne gifts, not our merites. O blesse the Lord: who redeemeth thy life frō destruction:Psal: 103.4. who crowneth thee with louing kindnes & tender mercies. Feare not little flock,Lu: 12.32. Reu: 4.8. for it is your Fathers good pleasure to giue you the kingdome. O let vs say, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almightie, which was, & is, & is to come. We shalbe Citizens with the saints, and of the houshold of God, dignified and glo∣rified. In Ioy we shal reioyce that our names are written in heauen, franchessed fréemen, irreuocably inrolled, as sure, ra∣ther surer, then the estate of Angells. We shall haue the frui∣tion of Christs Resurrection, and be manumissed from the bon∣dage
of death and destruction; Frée denizens, freed from mise∣ries and proude peoples malice. Those Ioyes passe all Iubi∣lees. Good Iesus bring vs to that blisse. As there is no equa∣litie betwixt the Creator, and vs here sinfull creatures: So is there none betwéene the ioyes of Heauen, and worldly plea∣sures. These are ioyes transitory, the other Ioyes eternall. Rom. 8.17.Wee shall be ioynt heires with Christ, and partakers of true happinesse. There is no sighing, singing. No heauinesse, Ioyfulnes. No ignominie, glory. Holy, holy, holy, shall be euer ascribed to Iehouah. The Virgins could learne the new song, which follow the Lambe.Reuel. 14. Oh the Ioyfull harmony that wee shall heare, and be glorified euer in glorie. Wee shall haue a palace vnspeakable, being deliuered into the glorious liber∣tie of the Children of God.Luke 20.36 Neither can they doe any more, for they are equall to the Angels, and are the Children of GOD, being the children of the Resurrection. If a man here sicke heard those ioyes, he would not féele his paine. Oh ioyfull shall we be when we be there, hearing, seeing and hauing vnspeakable ioyes.Aug: Erit in Coelo domus tua aeterna, si modò bene in hoc tabernaculo vixeris: Thine house shall bee eternall in heauen, if now thou liuest well in this tabernacle. Lose not that permanent Paradise for this pleasure, which in respect thereof is paine: for the Barley corne, lose not the pretious Pearle: for carnall copulation, eternall benediction: for a minute of selfe-will,Reu: 3.20. millions of yéeres ioyfull. Ah, God forbid, he bids vs returne and reteyne him: Behold, I stand at the doore and knocke. Receiue him, and hee will receiue thée, to sit in glory with his Maiestie, which is a dignitie of all dignities. Iob. 19.25.This did mitigate Iobs misery; For I know my Redeemer liueth, & that he shall stand at the latter day vpon the earth: and though after my skin, wormes destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. S. Paul saith, Phil. 3. For our con∣uersation is in heauen, from whence also wee looke for the Sauiour, the Lord Iesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like vnto his glorious body, &c.A Comfort. Our bodies shall be conformable to the body of Christ
our Head. We shall be like him: ill thoughts, bad motions, and perturbations shall be excluded. Wee heare this; but hée that beléeues it, and hopes to haue it, his affection is fixed in heauen. Therfore pray and repent, so shalt thou haue; what? A worldly commodity for which thou dost venture soule and body? Ah, thou shalt haue a Throne of tryumph, excéeding all earthly treasures, to reigne in ioyes for euer. If thou hadst all earthly riches, plentiousnes, pleasures, and pleasantest place on earth, with all elegant obiects, Princely prospects, dainty delicates, musicall Instruments, swéete singers, per∣sumes, and fine sauours, with all thy vnfained friends, and choyce of chiefe louers: yet all this were paine in respect of heauen, where we shall ouer be with our good God: to whom be all prayse, honour, power, and glory now and euer, Amen: with heart and tongue, againe, Amen. Gloria in excelsis Deo. PSAL. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not heare me. PROV. 23.26. My sonne, giue me thine heart. ¶ Pray heartily. OH heauenly Trinitie, one God in vnitie, to thee bee all honour. Glorious God, at thy brightnes, the Sunne, Moone and Starres are abashed and impure in thy sight: much more I, a sinfull creature, which by mine iniquities haue stained those bright crea∣tures. Omniscient God, thou knowost my thoughts before I thinke them, and knowest me before I was. I was conceiued in sin, borne in sinne, in sinne I liue. I am by nature the childe of wrath: O giue me grace to be borne from aboue, that I may enter into thy kingdome. I am not worthy to looke vp to thee, I deserue to bee cast downe to hell; but I appeale to the Throne of thy mercy, in the Name of Iesus my Sauiour, which calleth all penitent sinners to him to giue them rest.
Oh Sauiour, refresh my silly soule which cryes to thee out of my sin∣full carkasse, that I may apply thy sufferings, merits, and promises to my soule and conscience, and be accepted through thy righteousnes. My Lord and my God, out of  side issued the bloud of my re∣demption, and water of absolution to purge me from pollution: thou standest at the dore and knockest, giue me grace to open the dore of my heart; touch it with the finger of thy Spirit, that it maybe a fit re∣ceptacle to entertaine thee. Create in me a cleane heart, ô God; and renue a right spirit within me, that I may resist all exill, and walke in righteousnes and holinesse all the dayes of my life. Let the assu∣rance of thy loue wipe all teares from mine eyes: so come Lord Iesus. Good God forgiue me all my sinnes for Iesus sake, in whom thou art well pleased: cloath me with his righteousnes, and behold me in him. I doe deserue damnation, but hee hath payde my ransome. Lord let me finde and feele thy mercy. Giue mee grace to redeeme the time, and spend it to thy prayse. Blesse this Realme, our King, Queene, and Royall Progeny: blesse and comfort all thy children. Make vs loue those things that thou dost loue; and hate that thou hatest, that we may keepe faith and a good conscience. And if it be thy will, for∣giue and conuert our enemies: Good God, prepare me and thy chil∣dren fit for thy kingdome. O Christ giue vs grace to examine our selues whether thou be in vs, that we may expresse the power of god∣linesse in our liues. Lord receiue our soules when we depart this life, that we may prayse thee in heauen eternally. The which peace God bring vs, for Iesus sake that bought vs: to whome with thee, ô Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all might, maiestie, prayse, honour, glory, power and dominion, now and euer, Amen. Watch and pray, prayse God. FINIS.
