15186.5 38160667 29285
The Lamentation of a new married man, briefely declaring the sorrow and griefe that comes by marrying a young wanton wife. To the tune of, Where is my true Loue YOu Batchelors that braue it So gallant in the stréet, With Muske and with Rose-water. Smelling all so swéet: With Shooes of Spanish leather, So featly to your feete, Behold me a married yong man. Before that I was wedded, I liued in delight, I went vnto the dancing Schoole, I learn'd at Fence to fight: With twenty other pleasures, That now are banisht quite, I being a married young man. When I liued single, I knew no cause of strife, I had my heart in quiet, I led a pleasant life: But now my chiefest study Is how to please my Wife, I being a yong married man. Quoth she, You doe not loue me, To leaue me all alone, You must goe a gadding, And I must bide at home, While you among your Minions, Spend more then is your owne: This life leades a married man. Doe you thinke to kéepe me So like a drunge each day▪ To toyle and moyle so sadly, And lame me euery way? Ile haue a mayd, bir Lady, Shall worke while I doe play, This life leades a married man. Then must I giue attendance Vpon my Mistresse héeles: I must wait before her, While she doth walke the Fields. Shee'l eate no meate but Lobsters, And pretty Grigs and Eeles: This life, &c. Then must I get her Cheries, And dainty Kather'n Peares: And then she longs for Codlings, She bredeth Child she sweares: When God knowes tis a Cushion That she about her heartes: This life, &c. She must haue Rabbet suckers, Without spot or specke: I must buy her Pescods At sixtéene groates the Pecke: She must haue Egs and white wine, To wash her face and necke: Tis to life leades a married man. If once to passe it commeth, That she is brought to bed, Why then with many dainties She must be dayly fed: A hundred toyes and trifles Comes then within her head: This life, &c. Against that she is Churched, A new Gowne she must haue: A dainty fine Rebato About her necke so braue: French bodies, with a Farthingale, She neuer sinnes to traue, This life, &c. Abroad among her Gossips Then must she daily goe: Requesting of this fauour, A man must not say no, Lest that an vnkind quarrell About this matter grow: This life, &c. To Offerings and Weddings, Abroad then she must prance, Whereas with lusty youngsters This gallant Dame must dance: Her Husband must say nothing, What hap soeuer chance: This life, &c. And then there is no remedy, She must goe to a Play, To purge abounding Choller, And driue sad dumps away: She tarries out till mdnight, She sweares she will not stay: This life, &c. When home at last she commeth, To bed shee  her one And there  full soundly, Till the  mone, Then must she eate a Cawdle With a siluer spoone: This life, &c. Therefore my friends be warned, You that vnwedded be, The troubles of a married man You doe most plainely see, Who likes not of his liuing, Would he would change with me, That now am a married man. Where I was wont full often Good company to kéepe, Now I must rocke the Cradle, And hush the Childe a sleepe: I had no time nor leasure Out of my doores to ppe, Since I was a married young man.
The second Part to the same Tune. An answere sent to the young marryed Man, Written most friendly by his gentle Wife Nan. depiction of a lady with bared breasts ALacke wherefore lament you, your happy wedded state? Therein you show great folly, repentance comes to late. To make your selfe a mocking-stock, with euery scoffing mate, Now you are a married young man. In youth, doe well rememnber, your minde was all on pride: Deceiuing sport and pleasure, your lauish thoughts did guide: 'Tis time such folish fancies should now be layd aside, Now you are &c. When you liued single, your time you vainely spent: Vnto valewfull pastime, your yongling wits were bent: But now you must learne wisdome, discredit to preuent: Sith you are, &c. An alas to estimation, longs to a single life: What were you but a skip Iacke, before you had a wife, A mate for euery mad-cap, a stirrer vp of strife, Till you were a married young man. A Wife hath won you credit, a wife makes you estéem'd. An honest man through marriage, now are you surely déemd, And you shall find at all times, a wife your dearest friend, Now you are &c. Then is it right and reason, your wife should pleased be: It is a happy houshold, where couples doe agrée: It doth delight the Angels, such concord for to sée, Then blest is the maried young man. It I doe blame your gadding, it is for loue be sure: Bad company doth alwayes ill counsell still procure. The man that will be thrifty, must at his worke endure, While he is a married young man. This works his Commendations, amongst the very best: The chiefe men of the Parish, his quaintance will request: And then he shall be called to office with the rest, When he is a married young man. He shall be made a Headborough, vnto his credit great, At what time all neighbours, his friendship will intreat, And then it is most decent, he should goe fine and neate, When he is a married young man. Then bareheaded vnto him, a number dayly stocks: To helpe him by his office, from many stumbling blocks: Then comes he to be Constable, and set knaues in the stocks: Thus riseth a married young man. His wife shall then be seated in Church at her desire, Her Husband he is sideman, and sits within the Quire, Then he is made Church warden, and placed some what higher: Great ioy to a married young man. Then séeing all this credit by marriage you doe finde, Vnto your wife tis reason, you should be good and kinde: And sometimes waite vpon her, according to her minde: As best fits a married young man. If freindly you goe with her to walke out of the Towne, Why then you may haue pleasure, to giue her a gréene Gowne: To haue so great a fauour, some men would giue a crowne, Which is not a married young man As for the Peares and Apples; you giue me in the street, The Cheries or the Codlings, for pretty women meet, At night I giue you kindly a thousand kisses swéet: Great ioy to a married yong man. An hundred other pleasures, I doe you then beside: In bringing forth your Children, great sorrow I doe bide. For twenty Gownes and Kirsles, the like would not be tride, By any fine yong married man. Why should you scorne the Cradle, I tell you sir most plaine, There is not any pleasure, but sometimes bréedeth paine. If you will not be troubled, why then good sir refraine To play like a married young man. FINIS. London printed by A. M.
