16690 99844444 9255
SONGS OF SION. Set for the ioy of gods deere ones, vvho sitt here by the brookes of this vvorlds Babel, & vveepe vvhen they thinke on Hierusalem vvhich is on highe. By W. L. Let the vvord of god dvvell in you plenteouslie in all vvisdome tea∣ching, & admonishing your ovvne selues in Psalmes, & Hymnes, & spirituall songs, singing vvith a grace in your harts to the lord. Colos. 3. 16.
To all such of the Congregation both men, woemen, and children o discretion that are of the English nation▪ residing at Hamborough that seeke, & serue god in sincerity vvithout hipocrisie or faction. Grace be giuen in Christ BLessed, & beloued in the lord. The Christian sobriety▪ & cōfortable charitie vvhich I obserued in my table brothers occa∣sioned the cōposing of these hymnes. It vvas their goodnes to make them publique for the benefitt of others also. They are all deuine songs, yea from meditations of the scripture are they dravvne. If you shall vse them in your priuate families to gods glorie,
ur ovvne solace, & to the instructiō, edification of your children I haue e end of my desire. Receaue them as e symptomes of my soules affection the generall aduancment of gods uice, to the priuate consolation of you your children, & to the praise, and nour of our ovvne mother tongue. us in the midest of manie harshe mes of grudge, and despite I haue arned to tune the songs of Sion. For vvhich I praise god, and shall neuer ase to pray for your blessednes in the uing mercies of Iesus Christ his uours. resting Yours in the lord W. L.
An hymne or song. Of seauen straines, or strings et to the tone of seaven sobs, and sighes of a seaven times seauen sd soule for sinne, and is to be song i the tune of I life mine hart to thee. PSAL 25 or. Flie soule vnto thy rest. Seauen times a daie vvill I praie to thee o god, and vvill prâise thee o lord for thy great gifts, and good graces, both to me, and mine PSALM CXIX. When the spright of mā doth sighe and sob to god, and is lift vp on highe, the spright of god doth bovve it selfe to man in ioy, and peace. CYPRIAN.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. OHN POWELL one of he assistants of the worthy cōpanie of the Marchants Aduenturers residing at Hamborough. Grace, peace, & mercie be multiplied in Christ Iesu. WOrthy frend. VVhen Iuliā the Apostate infested the church of god, sōtimes by barbarous cruelty, & somtimes by deuilish policie, among other his vvicked practises that vvas not the least, nor the last vvhen e interdited the christians all vse of bookes, both priuatly, & publike∣ for their children to learne
excepte Poetry. It pleased almighty god in that distresse of his church to stirre vp a learned man one Apollinarius a singular Meta∣phrast to put into heroicall Greeke verse all the psalmes of Dauid by vvhich blessing the children of god had vse, and comfort of that excel lent booke of the psalme, & the tyrants decree tooke noe hold of thē, because novve it vvas become deuine poesie, & poetry they might read. Which shevves vnto vs gods especiall, & singular providence for his church vpon all occasions. And novve albeit (god be blessed) there is noe cause to complaine either of any such Apostatical povver, for vve haue an Apostoli∣call king, nor of any such vvicked pollicy, for vve haue had kings, & Queēs nursing fathers, & nursing
mothers of our church; yet in these Halyon daies of ours I haue presumed to metaphrase some passages of Dauid psalmes as an Essay to knovve vvhether vve might expresse our harts to god in our holy soliloquies by mōasillables in our ovvne mother tongue, or no. It being a receaued opinion amōgst many of those vvho seeme rather to be iuditious, then caprichious, that heretofore our english tongue in the true idiome thereof consisted altogether of Monasillables, vntill it came to be blended, and mingled vvith the commixture of Exotique languages. And I my selfe haue seene all the lord prayer vsed in the tyme of Iohn Wickleefe to be expressed in vvords of one sillable. And because gods children did reckon seauen tymes seauen yeares
before they could enioy their yeare of Iubile. I haue made allusion in this little Essay to tune forth seauē tymes seauen sad sobbs for sinne, that vvhen vve haue spent the remaynder of our vvretched dayes of our pilgrimage here, god may in his mercie vvipe avvay all teares from our eyes, & bring vs to our eternall Iubile in his glorious king∣dome. Which god grant to you, to me, & to all Christian people for his ovvne rich mercie sake, and the satisfactory meritts of Iesus Christ our lord Amen. Written from my studie vvithin the English house at Hamborough Jan. 24. Yours because you are of Christ. WILL: LOE.
The first straine. 1. LOrd heare my suite, my plainte, That my soule makes to thee. Lord in thy truth one looke of grace Grant in thy loue to me. 2. Lord see the moane I make, Looke on me in thy grace Let not my sighes come backe in vaine But shewe to me thy face, 3. Loe I was borne in sinne. My kind, my shape, my all, My stocke, my flocke, my selfe from birth O Lord from thee did fall. 4. And I poore soule am sett In greefe, in paine, in woe, My sinnes come on, my soule doth faint, O quitt me of my foe. 5.
My sinnes the haires doe passe That are set on my head, My hart doth feare, and faint, and faile And I am as one dead. 6. Thus goe I greeud, and goord, And frett in hart, and spright Thus am I faint vvith feare, & death My sinnes they doe me fright. 7. The deeds that I haue done Are sett in vevve of eie. My faults, my thoughts, my sinne my shame Thy lavves thy lookes doe spie. 1. SIGHE. O that my thoughts, vvords, vvorkes and vvaies vvere made so straight, and right, that I might keepe thy lavves  lord all the daies, & nights of my vvhole life so should I be clere, & cleane from the guilt of sinne, & shame.
The second straine. 1. O God if thou shouldst vvaighe My vvaies, and take a vevve, ould not scape thy rod, thy vvrath I should in vvoe it rue. 2. iudge me not I pray, O sheeld me from my fall, r in thy sight none iust doth liue No none I say at all. 3. rge is thy loue to me, For it vvith thee I treate grant me it for Christ his sake Gainst sinnes so huge, so great. 4. O Christ vvhat vvight doth knovve? His sinne, & faults of life O cleanse me from my sinnes at once Which are in me most rife. 5.
And keepe me lord I craue Least sinnes doe ore me svvay, So shall I then be free, and faine, To keepe thy lavve for aie. 6. This lord of thee I beg To thee I hold vp hands, And hart, & soule, both thirst, & gape As doth the drought in lands. 7. As maids doe vvatch, and vvaite, On Queenes some grace to haue So doe I lord both day, and night For grace both beg, and craue. 2. SIGHE. O that there vvere such an hart i me to feare thee, & to keepe all th lavves that it might goe vvell vvith me & mine for aye.
The third straine. 1. LOrd turne thee to thy grace That once thou shewedst to me O saue me not for my good acts I seeke, I sue to thee. 2. My soule vvhy dost thou faint? And art vvith greefe soe prest? My hart, my mind, vvhy doe you thus Fret ore vvithin my brest. 3. Trust soule to god for aye, And thou the time shalt see When thou shalt thinke, & thanke him still For health, & peace to thee. 4. For vvhy his vvrath doth last, A space, and then doth slacke But in his face, & grace for aye, Thou canst not ioy long lacke. 5.
Though gripes, and greefes full sor Doe lodge vvith thee all night Yet ioy, and grace shal be at hand Ere that the day be light. 6. The lord is kind, and meeke When vve doe make him greeue, He is full slovve his vvrath to shevv, Great grace he doth vs giue. 7. And loe vvhat loue good men To their ovvne seede doe beare, Like grace the lord doth shevve to such As searue him in his feare. 3. SIGHE. O that I had vvings like a doue (my svvete loue) that I might fly hence to thee, & so be at rest both in mind, in thought, in hart, in soule, and in mine vvhole.
The fourth straine. 1. THE lord that made me knovves My shape my mould my lust vve vveake, hovve vaine, hovve fraile, hovve fond, And that I am but dust. 2. god in me set vp A pure hart in thy sight, d eke in all my parts let be A good, and meeke svveete spright 3. With thy svveete spright of povver Cure thou o lord my sore, And I shall teach the good, and ill To bovve to thy svvete lore. 4. My soule doth pant, and bray Mine hart is neere at rest t seekes to knovve thy lavve thy vvill, And vvhat may please thee best. 5.
O vvould it might thee please My vvaies to sett in right That I might both in hart, and deed. Thy lavves to keepe in sight. 6. O lord I doe tend still My daies, my time to serue That I, nor miē may haue a thought From thy lavves once to svverue 7. O saue me then o god, Looke on me vvith thy health For that I rate at such a price More thē the vvide vvorlds wealth 4. SIGHE. O let the vvords of my mouth, the thoughts of my hart, the tune of my voice, & touch of my tongue be euer in thy sight o lord as a svveet smell for Christ his sake both at morne, Eue, & none daye.
The fift straine. 1. WIth ioy lord of the Iust Let my poore soule be fraught That I may liue in peace, and glee, And free from all thats naught 2. Lord keepe me for in thee I stay, and stand and feed Thou art my god, and of my goods O lord thou hast noe need 3. I giue them to the Saincts That in the vvorld doe dvvell Yea to the folke of faith, and loue Whose care is to doe vvell. 4. My hart is prest for aye, And eke my tongue is soe I vvill raise vp my soule in song In spight of hell, and foe. 5.
To praise my god that hath Shevvd loue and life to me, And made me scape both bloud, & blovve And soe did sett me free. 6. O lord vvhat shall I pay To thee for this thy grace I vovve to thee, my selfe, my life My loue, and all my race. 7. Grant lord I beg, and pray In thee that vve may rest So shall our soules sing to thy praise And aye in thee be blest. 5. SIGHE. O my god vvhy art thou gone from me, and vvhy dost thou hide th svveete face from my prayer for seeke thee, & sue to thee vvith all m hart, and that thou knovvst full vvell.
The sixt straine. 1. MY soule giue praise to god My spright shall doe the same, d all the parts of hart, and mind Shall praise for aye his name 2. ue thankes for all his gifts Shevv soule thy selfe most kind, d let not his good deeds to thee Once slipp out of thy mind 3. e quitt thee of thy faults He rid thy life from death is good, his grace doth vvaite on thee His vvord doth giue thee breath 4. If thou vvert brought to graue, And turnd to mould, & dust Yet he vvill giue thee life in store As he to thee is iust. 5.
Teach me then, lord to knovve Thy lavve, thy loue, thy lore, Thy vvorkes, thy vvords, as signes▪ seal Ile lay them vp in store 6. O day of ioy to me When I learnd first to knovve Hovve for to scape my selfe, my sin And hell that is soe lovve 7. I giue mine all to thee, My bud my branch, my fruite I beg of thee, o lord, my god To grant to me my suite. 6. SIGHE. O my god to thy hands I giue  spright thou hast bine a pledge for m and that to death o god. Thou art th the god both of my health, life, & r for aye.
The seuenth straine. 1. O Lord thou hast me tride, And day by day dost knovve thoughts, my vvords, my lookes my deeds, My sighs, my groans, my vvoe. 2. y bones they are not hid Thou knevvst them all each one r in thy note they vvere all vvrote Each ioynt, and bone, by bone, 3. ie still, and search mine hart, My thoughts proue day, & night d if the ill doe touch me lord O leade me to the right. 4. r thou canst rule my raines As vvhen I vvas in vvombe. giude me in this life of mine, And rest me in my tombe. 5.
Keepe me from men that muse Of bloud of bane of ill, O let me thinke of thee o lord, And hovve to doe thy vvill. 6. So shall noe shame me taynt My corps, my goods, my nam So shall I rest in ioy, and peace, And touch noe blot of sham 7. So shall thy folke for me, Be glad, and sing thy praise, So shall my selfe, my seed, my so Be thine in all my daies. 7. SIGHE. O let not my suite come in  to thee, but heare o my god, an to my soule I am, and vvill be thy  from hell, thy port from the sea of  vvorld, and vvill bring thee to the▪ of blisse.
A months minde. o Thinke on death, & muse  the graue, that the feare of death ay not be fierce vvhen Christ shall call vs out of this vvorld, & is to be song in the tune of. I sayd I vvill looke to my vvaie PSALM XXXIX. death I vvill be thy death (saith rist) for he is the death of death, the eath of sinne, the life of man, & the breath of god for man to liue there in vvorld vvith out end. HAMBOROUGH Januarij 24. 1620.
To his much respected good frend Mr. THOMAS BARKER one of e assistants of the worthy cōpanie f the Marchants Aduenturers residing at Hamborough. The blessing of both vvorlds in rist Iesus. WElbeloued. There is nothing more comfortable to a spirituall minded mā n to muse, & meditate of his arture hence into the blessed t of Christ in the other life:  to a vvordling that vvould ld vp a rest for his body here, & g a requiem to his soule in this le of teares nothing is more
fearefull, & hiddeous then for hi to heare death spoken of. We m therefore examine our selues vvhether vve can sing a song of in this exile, and banishmēt, vvh∣ther vve can solace our selues, in hymnes, & songs of our ends, a departure hence. For vve m hence Nothing more sure, but t tyme vvhen, the place vvhere,  the manner hovv Nothing mor vnsure. It is sufficient that g telleth vs our life is but a flov that fadeth, an hovver th passeth a shadovve that depart a vanity that vexeth, a momēt t vvarneth, a nothing vvhen vv haue done all vve can. For  thoughts, our faults, our purpos our proiects, our loues, our liu vvhen our breath departet perisheth in the tvvinckling of
O then let vs meditate, & muse our selues, and sing, & say to our les, that our end, & the last ings are not the least, but the best ngs that vve can consider of to rtifie vs, & make vs meete for e sauing mercies of god in Christ, vvhich I recomend you in my arest loue, & rest. Yours in life, & death. W. LOE.
The first muse. 1. Eare soule thou hast thought of thy end And novve muse on the vvay, he first part is a life vvell spent, The last is deaths doomes day. 2. all I call that the vvay of vvoe By vvhich vve passe to blisse? sure there is noe vvay but that To bring me vvhere Christ is. 3. nd vvhat is death novve dost thou thinke? But dovvne vvith all the stickes, f vvhich this earth, & tent of ours Is made, that gainst god kickes. 4. eath is the farevvell of old frends, Till they meete to be blest, eath is the iudge to quitt frō iayle, The soule that longs for rest. 5.
Death makes the corps of cla  slee But vvakes the soule to see, Death payes the debte, & teares th bo And all to sett thee free. 6. There is a death of deaths my soule The death of hell, and vvoe, But Christ his death hath payd fo th His vvord doth tell thee soe. 7. O Christ my soule doth thinke on th And thankes thee day, and nigh That thou hast rd me frō this deat By thy great povver, and might. 1. THOUGHT. Thy Christ o soule hath set the free vvho through feare of death vver all their life time in bonds and thrall. HEB. 2. 15.
The second muse. 1. Muse my soule sith thou art safe, Get home ene to thy rest, r god to praise in songs, & psalmes I hold it for the best. 2. y soule hovve canst thou feare to goe In stepps vvhere Christ hath bine; e hath to graue led thee the vvay O then leaue of to sinne. 3. or hire of sinne is death, and graue To death are deepe fell vvayes; here needs noe kinues, noe cords, noe svvords, It comes on nights, and dayes. 4. ne by a slatt, a flye, a grape, One by a bit of meate ne by the ayre, a flovver, a thorne Comes to his doome so great. 5.
Why then my soule feare not th dea The sting of it is lost The bed of graue is svveete, and safe Through Christ his care, & cost. 6. Our sinne made death our foe at last Our frend Christ hath it made; By death vve pass the port of rest When all things else doe fade. 7. What if this giude doe lead my corps Through graue both darke & fell Whiles at that tyme my soule doth liue And vvith my Christ doth dvvll. 2. THOUGHT. O my soule ioy, & be glad for thy Christ hath made thee say to death, o death vvhere is thy death, o graue vvhere is thy povver. 1. COR. 15. 55.
The third muse. 1. WHat if my frends doe mourne for me And sobb, and sigh in moane; What if my seed doe crie, and roare, And greeue, and vvaile, and grone? 2. This vvhile my soule sees him that vvas Once dead but novve doth liue, And that for aye my Christ in god, My lord that life doth giue. 3. What care I vvho doth shutt mine ies Whē death doth make me see As I am seene of god in Christ And then vvith him shall be. 4. What if my life the vvorld doe not Set out in vvords, of fame Whiles I liue vvith the god of life What care I for the same. 5.
If death shovvld still be foe to me He harmes but my vvorst part, My best part farre out of his reac Scornes both his ruth, and dar. 6. And more then this my corps once dea Feeles noe more sting of death, But then my soule is free, and liues In god by Christ his breath. 7. Novve then my soule sich thou do bea Tvvo things vvrapt vp in breast Lett each part turne, and goe, & se His seate, his scite, his rest. 3. THOUGHT. O god they that dvvelt in a darke place by thee haue seene the light, & they that vvalkt in the shade of death tho hast brought them to the light vvith great ioy, & peace. ESAY. 9. 2.
The fourth muse. 1. SHrinke not deare soule at sight of death Nor faint thou at gods call ovve oft hast thou hard bells to passe For frends, for foes, for all. 2. ovve oft hast thou the sicke bede seene Of vvights in woe most rife ovve oft haue things bine done to death And all to giue thee life. 3. nd canst thou hope that some vvay else For thee is made in sence Whē kings, & Prests, & rich, & poore And all must thus goe hence 4. asse on my soule, & sing, & ioy In god that makes the graue, A place for thee to pass to bliss And knovves vvhat thou vvouldst haue. 5.
Hovve oft hast thou seene eies f clo And heard by dint of svvord Hovve oft vaine men in field ha foug In fence of a vaine vvord 6. What thē novve dost thou feare my soul The stage of death is bed, And graue that rests our bones in pea That here on earth haue fed 7. Let them feare death vvhose hart, & mind Is more sicke thē their face Hovve canst thou feare since novve thy Christ Hath shed his bloud for grace. 4. THOUGHT. O giue me light that am set in a darke place, & shade of death, and giude me by thy good grace o Christ to the vvay of peace. LUCK. 1. 79.
The fift muse. 1. WHat losse is this svveet soule to loose This corps this flesh, this skinn? hen thou shalt vvinn thy god in Christ, Thy selfe fred from thy sinn. 2. hen thou shalt see the soules the Saincts n ioy, in rest, in blisse hē thou this vvorld a sea of sinne A sinke, a stye, shalt misse? 3. change most blest for thee to knovve To rid thee of these raggs. nd thy selfe clad in robes of state In spight of death his brags. 4. his skin, this shame, this dust, this dung, This earth, this mire, this clay all shine as sunne in raies of rest When thou shalt see that day. 5.
Thine eies that vvere full sad to Thine oft, and ill done deeds; Shall then see Christ still in thy sigh Where grace, & good still feeds. 6. These eares that heare the ruth & rag Of tongue, as hott as hell; Shall then the voice of Christ sh hea And saincts vvith him that dvvell 7. And thē this tongue that novv dot pla Of greefe, of vvoe, of gall Shall tune a part in that svveet qui With Christ, vvith saincts, vvith a 5. THOUGHT. O my soule thy Christ hath tooke part vvith flesh, & bloud, that by deat he might beate dovvne him that had th povver of death. HEB. . 14.
The sixt muse. 1. Ovve vvhat is death thē say my soule Ist not a sleepe in graue? ey that did feele the vvorst of it The stile of sleepe it gaue. 2. d aske thy corps, o my svveet soule Whē full vvith toyle of day, it hath not bine glad to rest As cloyd vvith a foule vvay. 3. nd novve in this svveete sleepe of death Thou art sure to be blest hy like a child vvilt thou not goe To this thy bed thy rest? 4. idst thou ere see a bird in cage, Sitt still vvith in the grate? hat might flie foorth to vvoods, to groues To meete his loue, his mate? 5.
Did Paule vvhen god his gyues  bu And rid him out of iayle? Crie out, & say, not yet o lord I doe not like this bayle. 6. Paule slepte tvvixt tvvo that did  keep But vvhē that he vvas free And rid frō iayle did he once tu To iayle those bonds to see. 7. O my svveete soule didst ere thou At sea men sing their song And vvhē to lād they āe did gr And tell their frends of vvrong 6. THOUGHT. O heare me o lord, my god, &  light to mine eies least I sleepe the  of death. PSAL. 30. 3.
The seuenth muse. 1. st thou o soule no mind to rest In all thy paine, and toyle? vvilt thou still goe on, & drudge lott on sea, on soyle. 2. ve oft haue vvights in vvoe, & greefe ought death to ease their paine h death found thee, & vvilt thou not o goe from greefe be faine 3. th name of death the fright my soule hat if mē call sleepe death lt thou be fraid to close thine eies r feare to loose thy breath. 4. hat hurt vvill cōe to thee by that The first man vvas in sleepe ē god a vvife made him for helpe The man in ioy to keepe. 5.
And vvhat if novve thy god forth Whilst thou dost sleepe in gra Doth make thy soule a spouse Ch His face, his grace to haue 6. My death o soule but parts the fr That each hath led the vvay, And novve shake hands but for sp Till meete in rest thy may. 7. Goe then my soule to this sure gai Part vvith a frend a space The tyme vvill come vvhen this  d Shall see thy Christ his face. 7. THOUGHT. The due of sinne my soule is d & graue, & hell. but the gift of god is l ioy, and blisse by Christ my lord, & god ROM, 6. 13.
The eight muse. 1. TEll me my soule vvas thou not loth At first to ioyne vvith me? hy novve art loth to part vvith that, Which much vvoe letts thee see. 2. ost thou not heare the vvise to say, The day of death is cheefe; d is more good then day of birth Which brings thee vvoe, & greefe, 3. ost not thou trust the vvise mans vvords On throne in state in glee, at thus did say of death, & birth Then harke thou once to me. 4. he lord of life that knevve deaths force Doth say that they are blest hat die in god, our lord, our Christ And from their vvoes haue rest. 5.
O death hovve svveete is that th rest To vvights in vale of teares Hovve svveete is thy grim face to those That liue in vvoe, & feares? 6. O soule vvhat man is so fell mad, And so in soule cast dovvne? To hide himselfe in base things here To loose by them a crovvne 7. My soule then see, & say in fine With men of gods ovvne lore. For me to die it is more good Then liue on this ville shore. 8. THOUGHT. O my soule if by one mans sinne death did raigne by one, much more they vvhich haue much grace, & the gift of faith shall raigne in life by one Christ my lord and god. ROM. 5. 17.
The ninth muse. 1. WHat ayles thee o my soule, my deare, Such face, such feare to shevve? Novve death doe come to cite thee home Is all thy faith, but devve 2. Is death soe fearce, soe fell, to eies, To thoughts that vvas soe free; It is a shame to thee my soule Thou dost noe more Christ see. 3. Where is thy faith? in vvords thou couldst Call oft for death in life Is all but talke? is all but smoke? Where is thy hope so rife? 4. Hath thy svveete Christ novv sent for thee And art thou loth to goe? Rouze vp thy selfe for shame o soule And doe not serue him soe. 5.
O lord raise vp this hart of mine That faints, & droopes in death O that I might thy cup once tast, And liue in thy svveete breath. 6. The spright vvould come, but fles is vvea Lord helpe this guest of thine, And rid her from this flesh of sinne Which is a broode of mine. 7. I come to thee, o lord I come Streach forth thine hand to me▪ O death, o graue vvhere is thy sting My crovvene, my god I see. 9. THOUGHT. They are blest that haue a pt i the first life for on such the last dea shall haue not strength but they shal b preests of god, and of Christ. Apoc. 20. 6. FINIS.
Alls Pauls Prayers. Metphrased into words of one syllable of great Brittains language, & are to be vsed by a devout Christian soule in his priuate soliloquies, & holy solaces vvith his god. And are set to the tune of I loue the lord because my voice. PSALM CXVI. O lord my god thou hast brought vp my soule out of the graue & thou didst hold me from those that goe dovvne to the pitt.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. NICHOLAS BACKHOUSE archant one of the assistants of the vvorthy companie of the Marchant Aduenturers residing at Hamborough. The ioy of Ierusalem, & peace of Syon. MUch endeered. The cheefest parts of gods seruice are either prayer r praise Prayer for vvhat vve vvant. Praise in thanks giuing for vvhat vve haue receaued. The svveete singer of Israell in his heauenly composed hymes vseth oth to pray to god, & to praise od. I need not recomend vnto you
prayer I hope you vse it as I knovv you doe publikely soe I doubte no but you vse it also priuatly Preaching is gods speach to you Prayer is ours to him. Preaching belongs to me, I preach to you  your pastor, & pray for you also Prayer belongs to you to pray for me, your selfe, all yours, all go childrē. For the manner hovve no better president, noe more perfect patterne, then S. Paulls practice  his prayers, vvhich I haue here metaphrased for you in the syllables of your ovvne mother tongue. Go the father is the objecte of your prayers, & prayses. God the sonne the presenter of them as the only master of requests in heauen. Go the holy ghost the very breath  your prayers, the simle of you soule. Vse this blessed exercise both
of prayer, & praise. Be in loue vvith it, & god vvill loue you. To vvhich loue of his in this modell of my best loue to you I recomend your vvell disposed thoughts in the sauing mercies of Christ Iesus your lord, & mine. Resting To be required by you, or your frends in Christs seruice W: LOE.
Eph. 1. 16. The first Prayer. 1. I cease not to giue thankes to thee O god my god most iust For all thy gifts of grace, & loue To vs that liue in dust 2. And lord I craue a glympse of light In Christ my lord thy sonne That so my faith may see that sight, And to it still may runne. 3. That I may knovve thy becke thy call My hope, my helpe, my all. That I may haue thy povver, & strength To helpe me vvhen I fall. 4. For thou o god hast made vs see What thou hast vvrought in loue For thy svveete spouse thy church thy vvife Thy ioy, thy simle, thy doue. 5.
For thou hast set our Christ, o god At thy right hand to shine And thou to that place vvilt vs bring For that deare loue of thine. 6. O god thou laidst my Christ fu lovve With in the earth so darke But thou didst raise him vp on high And settst him as a marke. 7. On vvhich vve fixe our eies of faith Our harts, our minds, our loue O bring vs all to him svveete god That is our deere, our doue. O god my hart is fixt on thee, and my tongue shall sing, & giue praise to thy name for aye. PSAL. 108. 1.
Eph. 3. 14. The second Prayer. 1. I day by, day doe bovve to thee And cease not in the night To seeke thee lord in all my thoughts And muse of all thy might 2. For of our Christ is nāde the church Of vs that liue in clay, And eke thy gaurd, & saincts on high That praise thee day, by day. 3. Graūt vs o lord that vve may knovve Thy grace, our good, our end And that vve may feele povver, & strength And Christ may be our frend 4. Let him dvvell in our harts o lord And then vve shall thee see, With all thy saincts in breadth, & length In depth, in height, in glee. 5.
Then shall vve knovve the loue of Christ That else is past our skill The shalt thou fill vs vvith thy grace In him to doe thy vvill. 6. O lord for vs this thou canst doe And more then all that is Of thy good grace to vvorke in vs In Christ hovve should vve misse. 7. Praise be to thee in all the vvorld, Thy church doe sing the same, And age to age shall eke sett forth For aye, to ours, thy name. O god thou art my god ere it be day vvill I seeke thee my soule, & flesh doe thirst, & long for thee as drie land vvhich vvants raine. PSAL. 63. 1.
Phil. 1. 9. The third Prayer. 1. GRaunt to vs lord that loue may dvvell In these poore tents of ours For vve must hence vve knovve full And fade as doe the flovvers 2. And graūt good lord that in thy loue It may grovve more, & more That vve may knovve vvhat things are ill And lead not to thy lore. 3. So may vve in the day of doome In Christ be void of shame And fild vvith his faire fruits of loue May scape the rod of blame 4. Then shall vve sing the praise to thee In midst of all thy Saincts, Then shall our soules be glad, & ioy, That novve is vveake, & faints. 5.
Icease not lord to pray for those That seeke, & sue to thee That they may knovve hovve safe, & sure In Christ their soules may be 6. And that vve all may vvalke, and vvorke In vvord, in vvorth, in all As he that hath vs cald to thi And rid vs of our thrall. 7. Who hath vs fred from povver of death Frō foggs, & doggs of hell▪ And set vs by his chaire of state With Christ fotaye to dvvell. Saue vs o lord our god, & bring vs from those that doe not call on thee that vve may call on thee, & laud, & praise hy name for aye. PSAL. 106. 47.
The. 3. 11. The fourth Prayer. 1. THe lord our god our strength & stay Make vs to loue each one; And make vs knovve hovve that vve are Made all of flesh, & bone. 2. That soe vve may grovve vp in grace And firme in hart, & minde That soe to all vve may set forth Our loue both sure, & kind. 3. Yea not to cease till that our lord Doe come in clouds full bright To iudge this earth, & all the folke Yea all the vvorld in sight. 4. For is it not the loue of Christ Who did loue vs soe deare That vve through hope of grace in him Should liue voyd of base feare 5.
Lord be thou ioy to all our harts Our vvords, our vvorkes good make▪ That vve may loue, & liue in thee For thy sonne Christ his sake. 6. O god of peace, of loue, of life Grant vs to serue thee still In spright, in soule, in hart, in mind And this of thy good vvill. 7. Yea keepe vs lord frō blame, & blott Till Christ doth come in skey. So shall vve sure be of thy loue To liue, vvhen vve shall die. Heare me o lord, & that soone for my soule doth vvaxe faint hide not thy face from me: Least I be like them that goe dovvne to the graue. PSAL. 148. 7.
om. 7. 25. The fift Prayer. 1. thanke thee lord that hast sett novve In me a fight, a iarre; My mind, my flesh, doe day by day In strife sett forth a vvarre. 2. My mind to thy svveete lavve giues vvay, My flesh in thrall is brought, My mind vvould keepe thy lavve, thy lore. And hath thy vvill still sought 3. But my base flesh is prompt, & seekes Thy lavve to cast me fro. O god vvhat shall I doe in this? With me the case is so. 4. My mind vvould doe the god full faine That thy lawes shevve to me But still my flesh doth frett, & fume Gainst this thy lavve to me 5.
For I doe not that vvhich I loue, But I doe that I hate, And all for that my mind is vext With this my flesh my mate. 6. What shall I doe o lord my god Ah vvretch vvho setts thee free? Frō this fell death of sinne, & shame That I thy grace may see. 7. I thanke my god vvho haue me fie For his sonne Christ his sake; To him for aye both night, & day My hymnes, my songs I make. O god that thou vvouldst beat dovvne the strong, & ill man that rules, & raigns in my vveake flesh that I may say to him goe farre from me. PSAL. 139. 19.
o. 16. 24. The sixt Prayer. 1. THe grace of god be all my giude His povver be all my staye His strength eke be to me a staffe By night, & eke by day, 2. For he it is that hath me taught That vvhich the vvorld nere knevve Till Christ our lord vvas made to vs Our lord, our god in vevve. 3. To god in hymnes still vvill I sing His praise is all my mirth The vvorld shall sett him forth in praise. In all parts of the earth. 4. If there be vvight that liues in life And doth not loue our god Let him tast of the lord of hosts His curse, his vvrath, his rod 5.
But let the loue of god, & grace Of Christ, be vvith you all That loue, & looke, & long for him To rid vs of our thrall. 6. And let our god that brought fro death Our Christ, our grace, our blisse Set vs vvith saincts in ioy, in light Where as our Christ novve is. 7. So shall vve tūe in that svveete qui Midst of those saincts in rest; And see his saincts in light of light And so for aye be blest. O god let them that hate thee flit from thy sight as the mist doth from the sunne, but let them that loue thee be glad, & ioy in thee. PSAL. 68. 1.
. 13. 20. The seuenth Prayer 1. O God vve are poore sheepe that stray In vvods, in vvaies of sinne ovve dovvne thine eare to vs, & heare And rid vs of this dinne. 2. hat vve may knovve thy grace in Christ That keepes vs as his flocke. hat leads vs forth to streames of ioy And setts vs on a rocke. 3. hat soe vve may ore see this vvorld And all the things in it nd then doe place vs vp on high With him in ioy to sit. 4. Graūt vs good lord that vve may see The good that doth thee please o shall vve liue in hart in mind In ioy, in rest, in ease. 5.
Graunt lord vvhat thou dost bid  do That vve may doe the same Bid vvhat thou vvilt, & graūt vs grac And vve vvill praise thy name 6. To Christ our lord the lambe of go That shed his bloud for sinnes, To rid vs from the feends of hell And all their crafts, & ginns. 7. Be praisd of vs all tymes, & tyds In vvoe, & eke in vvealth And let the folke on all the earth Giue laud to him for health. O lord god of our health I crie d & night to thee, let my grones come nig to thee, & bovve dovvne thine eare to  sighes that I make to thee.
The song of songs Or the Canticle of Solomon betweene Christ, & his spouse, the tvvo first chapters, & is set to the tune of, Blessed are they that perfect are PSAL. CXIX. 1. part.
To his much esteemed good freend Mr. WILLIAM CHRISTMAS Marchant one of the deacons of the English Church residing at Hamborough: Grace here, glory for euer in Christ. LOuing, & beloued frend. The title of this heauenly hymne shevveth the excellency thereof. For it is called the song of songs, or the Canticles of vvise Soloman. The subiecte is most sacred, for it is the uptiall loue song betvveene Christ, & his spouse. Wherein their mutuall loues by svveete resēblāces
are mystically, & maruelously ex∣pressed What more comfortable song then to sing our harts loue vve beare to Christ in the blessed vnion by one spirit vvherby vve haue euerlasting life. Tvvo of the first chapters of vvhich song I haue metaphrased into Monosyllables, vvhich I haue bequethed to your loue as a signe of mine, & to seale both ours. Receaue it as the rest of your colleagues, for I vvish you all the happines of both vvorlds in the sauing mercies of Christ t vvhich I recommend you, & a that looke vpon you vvith loue resting. Yours because of Christ W. LOE.
The first Song. The spouse speakes to Christ. 1. O that thou vvouldst on me so cast Some lookes of thy svveete loue, That thou maist make me deere to thee My hart vvith grace to moue 2. Thy loue o Christ is farre more deare, And farre more sveete to me Then wealth, or vvine, or limbe, or life, Or ought that I can see. 3. The svveete that I smell of thy name Is like an oyle most pure, And pourd it is on all thy saincts Such is thy loue soe sure. 4. O dravve me, dravve me, I vvill runne To bord, to bed vvith thee; O pull me, pull me from my sinne O rid me, set me free.
The spouses speakes. 5. The good are glad in thee, thy loue They long, and looke for still They vvalke to thee, they talke of thee And all to doe thy vvill. 6. Graunt this o Christ, and then vve shall Be all in all that is, And thou shalt find that none of v Of thy grace ought to misse. 7. O shevve me, vvhom my soule doth loue▪ Where thou dost feed at noone. O vvhy should I thus freet, & feel The losse of thee so soone.
The second Song. Christ speakes to his spouse. 1. O Thou my church vvhom I doe loue For vvhō I shed my bloud thou knovve not vvhat thou dost craue, & hast not seene the good 2. hen gett thee to those flockes of mine where as they feed by those Whom I haue sett as giuds for them That I in loue haue chose. 3. here feed, & fatt thy selfe vvith foode, That Saincts doe touch, doe tast; And tune their soules in thankes to me For loue that aye doth last. 4. For deere thou art to me my loue, For shape, for strength, for speede: That none is like to thee my deere In thought, in vvord, in deede.
Christ speakes to his spouse. 5. Those parts of thee vvhere loue doth looke Are set vvith pearls of grace With stones of price, vvith chaynes of vvorth, I loue to see thy face. 6. These signes of loue, are seales to thee, What shall be thine else vvhere When thou shalt shine in bliss vvith me O spouse, my loue most deere. 7. There spangs, & specks of gold most pure Ile add to all the rest. There shalt thou loue, & liue vvith me And eke for aye be blest.
The third Song. The spouse speakes to her mates. 1. SEe novve all ye that loue the lord Ye Nymphes, ye Mayds of grace Whiles that my lord, & king novve seemes Farre of from me in place 2. And is in midst of troopes of saincts On highe vvhere he doth dvvell; Where all doe tend on him in loue, Where all things sure goes vvell. 3. Yet see his grace doth stoope to me, I feele him vvith me here, By povver of spright, by gifts of light, He comes to me most neere. 4. And though I be much ioy to him, Yet he is all to me; As bunch of myrrhe tvvixt both my breasts, So svveete to hart is he
The spouse to her mates. 5. Oh is there ought in the wide world That smells, that smiles as he Ah svveete, ah svveete my soule doth feele His loue a life to me. 6. His loue layd close to my poore hart To sence giues such a touch. That for his loue to dye, to dye. I vvould not thinke it much. 7. Watch then, & vvayte ye maids that mourne For this my loue vvill come; And iudge he vvill in truth, & povver The folke both all, & some.
The fourth Song. Christ speakes to his spouse. 1. DEere spouse noe loue is lost on me To me thou art most svveete, To see thee clad in clothes of grace With rings, & roabs most meete. 2. ioy, I like, I loue thee deere, Hovve faire, hovve fresh art thou? None like to thee in shine of face, As I looke on thee novve. 3. Hovve chast, hovve choice art thou my deere? Thine eies like doues doe looke. Thine hart, thy mind, thy thoughts, thy all. I vvrite thē in my booke The spouse speakes to Christ. 4. Nay thou my deere thou art the cheefe The choice, the sunne, the shine. From thee o Christ I haue these raies For they are none of mine
Christ speakes to his spouse. 5. Thou art o Christ full of this grace Thou art the sea the spring; And from thee I doe take these streames & to thee thē doe bring 6. As thankes for all thy loue to me, And to thy saincts each one; Who troope in bands to serue thee still, Though here they vveepe, & mone. 7. For they are sure to rest in blisse When thou shalt call them home From out this sea of sobs, & sighes That doth soe frett, & ome
The fift Song. CAP. 2. Christ speakes to his spouse. 1. DEere spouse I am both faire, and svveete Of feild I am the rose, And sure all such as liue by me Full choice I am to those. 2. All things else that this vvorld hath, be Vile vveeds vvhich are most base am the svveet, the sence, the smell That yeald them all the grace. 3. & thou o loue art mongst the maids All choice, & cheefe in vevve Nought in the earth is like to thee, In face, in shine, in hue. The spouse speakes to Christ. 4. thou my deare, that one I loue Thou art the tree of life; Thy shade let sheeld me from all harms And I vvill be thy vvife.
The spouse speakes. 5. Thou vvith thy spright shalt lead me forth To the svveete streames of good, And I shall be fresht vvith thy loue Wrought to me in thy bloud. 6. O stay me, stay me take a care, O cheare my soule that faints, O come for I am sicke of loue To liue in midst of saincts. 7. O put thy left hand to my head Thy right hand to my side O stay me vp both head, & hart And still be thou my giude.
The sixt Song. The spouse speakes. 1. charge ye o you soules of saincts, By roes, & hindes of loue, ake heed hovve you doovexe, & greeue The spright of my svveete doue. 2. ake heed you vvrong not his great name, with life soe leaud so vaine And doe not dare to moue his ire Who vvould saue you so fayne. 3. oe I doe call, & he doth heare, And sends to me his voice; My moūts of sinnes, & hills of shame Haue not so lovvd a noice. 4. Noe roe, noe hind soe svvift cā rūne Nor make such speede as he When I doe call, or cre for him He comes, he runnes to me.
The spouse speakes. 5. And though this vaile of my base∣flesh A full sight bares me fro, Yet vvit mine eye of aith, I looke On him that loues me soe. 6. I see him as in a cleare glasse, I see him shine full bright; Through grates of vvords, & gates of life My soule of him hath sight. 7. And novve me thinkes I heare him▪ speake And thus to me doth say O church, o spouse lift vp thy head O faire one come thy vvay.
The seuenth Song. Christ speakes. 1. he storme is past of greefe, & woe The spring of ioy is seene all things novve are fresh, & faire And full, & nevve, & greene. 2. n highe is ioy, on earth is peace, To men a great good vvill; d all the quire of saincts doe sing To shevve their loue, their skill. 3. ot buds, but iggs, & fruits are seene Of grace, of ioy, of loue; come my deere, shake of thy sleepe Come on my milke vvhite doue. 4. let me heare thy voice my deere O plye me vvith thy plaints, looke thou vp though face be sad Ile place thee vvith my saincts.
Christ speakes. 5. O all ye that vvishe vvell to me, And to my church, & name Put frō my deere all those that seek Her faith, her loue to blame. The spouse speakes. 6. For he is mine by faith, & trust, And I am his by loue. We both are one by his great pow I long to see my doe. 7. O come as svvift as Roe, or Hind My loue, my life to me Till day doe breake, till sunne do shin Till shade of death doth flee.
A Canticle, or song. Of the third & fourth chapters of the song of Solomon being Meta∣hrased into Monosylables of Great Brittains language, & is to be vsed by euery deuout soule in his priuat conference vvith his god. And is set to the tune of Helpe lord for good, & godly men PSAL. XII.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. ISAAC LEE one of the assistants of the most vvorthy companie of the marchants-Adventurers re∣siding at Hamb: Encrease of glory. MOre thē much beloued when god brought man forth at the first he put him not into a vvildernes, but into a garden, a paradise, & place of pleasure wherby I see that his sacred maiestie did not reioyce in the misery, but in the delight & happines of his creatures. Cheere∣fulnes therefore pleaseth god
better then dulnes,  & heauines of hart. Let vs be▪ godly, & good in our pleasures, & it vvill neuer displease our maker) neither vvill he grudge, or repin at our ioy. To this purpose haue I framed certayne hymns for th priuat solace of such as shall take delight there in. One portion vvhereof I haue consecrated to you▪ Let yt haue acceptance of you by your practice of yt▪ I expect  other guerdon for my paines. For the highest knovves vvith vvhat an honest hart I composed this, & the rest, & vvhat a desire I had in the framing thereof for the good of many. I haue euer hated epi∣curean resolution▪ Let vs eate, & drinke to morrovve vve shall dye. But I haue euer loued entyre  exhortacion. Let
vs pray, & praise god, To mor∣rovve vve shall liue For to loue, is to liue, & vvhere vve loue, thee vve liue▪ If vve loue god, vve shall liue in him by our prayers, by our prayses, & all by one spirit. O then let vs so loue him, that vve may liue in him in our daylie voices, that they may be hard to his glory, our comfort, & good example of our brethren. The god of heauen ioy your art in all your life, & in your death that vve may all meete to sing together in the quire of heauen vvith the angells in the sauing mercies of our Sauiour Christ. Yours much more then mine ovvne. W. LOE.
The first speach. The spouse speakes to Christ. 1. IN ed I sought my loue by night, But could not find him there, I sought him but he vvas farre off, And did not come me neere. 2. I rose, & vvalkt the streates to see If my soule could him find Whom I did vvant, yet found I not The day starre of my mind. 3. Thē rā I straight to those that teach And vvatch, & vvaite for me And sayd to thē cā ye shevve novve Where I my loue might see. 4. And thus halfe spent vvith care, & cost, My soule gan faint, & faile Loe then my loue did shevve him∣selfe, & vvould not let me quaile
The spouse speakes to Christ. 5. So that by a nevve acte of faith▪ I savve vvhere he vvas not. We misse him in our beds of rest The vvorld is not his lott. 6. The streets are strayts of cost, & care Where vve doe lose him quite, But in the vvord, & soule of man We feele him in his might. 7. But vvhē I found him hold I tooke Fast hold on him I layd, Noe more to part vvith him at all Then he to me thus sayd.
The second speach. Christ speakes to his spouse. 1. NOvve that my spouse hath toyld all night And lokt, & longd for me. I charge you all that are my frends, And looke to liue in glee. 2. Stirre her not vp, nor vvake my deere With toyes, or tales of yore But let her rest in peace, & ioy, And vexe her novve noe more. 3. Oh vvho is this that comes so faire From out the foule vvorlds lane, And hath shakt of her slough of sinne That vvould haue beene her bane 4. It is my Church, my chaire of state Where I doe loue to be It is my doue my stay my deere It glads me her to see.
Christ speakes to his spouse. 5. That is so quitt from vvorld of wo From sinke of sinne, & shame▪ She seekes to me for all her vvants Shee trusts to my great name, 6. She smells as myrrh, & spice of cost Gracd vvith my chaines of loue, She is my spouse▪ no spott she hath, She is my milke vvhit doue. 7. All faire, and full of grace most bright She comes, she rūns to me Come on my deere, make thou noe stay Thy loue, thy life to see.
The third speach. The spouse speakes. 1. O novve my soule thou hast a glymse Of ioy that is on highe, O blest are they that vevve it all, Or doe that place come nighe. 2. The courts on earth of kings most greate Are rich, & rare to vevve, But this vvhere my Christ rules, & raignes For aye is faire, & nevve, 3. The gard of this great court of state Are Saincts, & sprights of might That doe his vvill at all his beckes, And dvvell vvith him in light. 4. The courts of kings are made vvith hands Their care, their cost is vaine, But heres a Court not made by mē Where my svveet Christ doe raigne.
The spouses speaketh. 5. He in him selfe is all the state, He giues his court the grace, He is the light, the hight, the all, That is still in that place 6. Come forth ye Saincts of god in▪ Christ, & see this court of rayes O take a vevve of this your life O seeke it all your dayes. 7. Christ is your Bride groome, & you are To him a spouse most bright. He hath you bought vvith bloud most decre And gaynd you vvith his might.
The fourth speach. Christ speakes to his spouse. 1. HOvve faire art thou my deare, my spouse With out, & eke vvith in. Hovve voyd of filth, or spotts of shame Of sinke, or stinch of sinne. 2. For I doe purge thee of the same My vvord doth make thee free, & they that teach to thee my lore Are all most svveet to thee 3. Their speach is full of grace, & loue To those that heare the same heir vvords are impt vvith zeale of loue To keepe thee frō all blame 4. Those that doe rule, & giude the stearne Are as the necke to head They are both strong, & stout to gard The soules that they haue fed?
Christ speakes to his spouse. 5. The tvvo svveet bookes of league most nevve Are breasts full fraught vvith milke, And all that sucke the ioyce of thē Are clad in robes of silke. 6. That is the grace of Saincts, & such Shall shine in rayes of rest Till day doth davvne, & shad doth fade, And they for aye be blest. 7. Thus art thou faire, my loue in me In thee there is noe spott. I vvill in blisse sett thee my deere Cleane voyd of sinne, or blott.
The fift speach. Christ speakes still. 1. O novve my loue I haue thee sought, And brought thee frō the lands I haue the led in bands of grace From out the curse, & bands. 2. To me from all parts of the earth I vvill the giude, & call, & quite thou shalt be frō the bands Of them that did thee thral. 3. Who once did vexe, & greeue thee sore In bane, in bloud, in vvoe, But I vvill set thee safe from them, And rid thee from thy foe. 4. For thou my hart hast caught with loue One cast of thy faire ee Of faith I meane doth vvound my hart which made me faint, & die
Christ speakes still. 5. All svveets the vvorld can yeald to me Are banes to thy svveet mell, Thou art my spouse, in life, & death The graue shall not thee quell. 6. The vvords vvhich from thy lipps doe droppe When thou dost pray, or praise. Are farre more svveet to me then svveets That sunne doth see by dayes 7. Thou art a spring to me shutt vp A vvell seald by my ring, Frō vvhēce doth flowe pure streams of loue To me thy lord, & king.
The sixt speach. Christ speakes. 1. THou art closd vp my spouse, my Deere That none might doe thee ill, That force of foes, nor rage of fēds On thee might doe their vvill. 2. That noe vvild Boore of vvood so fell Thy rootes, thy plants might marre For I looke on thee vvith mine eies, And vevve their ire a farre. 3. Thy plants are like svveet fruits of choice My deere ones all they are Of thee, & them, as of mine eies I vvatch, & haue a care. 4. Svveet sent as Myrrhe, & cane ye yeald As all cheefe spice of choice So are thy plants o Deere to me For they doe heare my voice.
Christ speakes. 5. For tast, for touch, for smell, for hevve Thy fruits are all most pure I ioy to see them in this plight, And in my loue so sure. 6. From thee o spouse doth flovve full farre Thy streames to dales, & hills▪ And I the spring doe flovve to thee To sill thy spouts, thy rills. 7. Who so of thee doth drink is drencht And thirsts noe more for aie Thou art the streames of god to flow To soules that faint in vvaye.
The seuenth speach. The Church speakes to Christ. 1. f I be then so svveet my deere My Christ, my God, my Loue he breathe on me with thy svveet breath That it my hart may moue. 2. all ye povvers of my svveete god Blovve on me North, & South hat these my plants of my poore soule May blest be by his mouth 3. And make thē svveet to him, as are The Plants of loue, & grace So shall my loue ioy still to come, And glad him in this place. 4. Yea he vvill come to me his ovvne vvhich he hath bought full deere And vvill take of the fruit that he Hath made to him so neere.
Christ speakes. 5. I come my loue to thee myne ovvne As thou hast cald to me And as thou vvilt, so vvill I take These fruits a part of thee. 6. I see thy vvorkes, thy vvords, thy thoughts They all to me are svveet, For they are mine I gaue thē thee, And all else that is meete. 7. Novve all ye blest of me, & Sainct Cheere vp, & glad your mind That yett in this deere loue of min Such grace, & loue doe find.
A Canticle, or song. Betweene Christ, & his church of the fift, & sixt chapters of the Song of Solomon metaphrased into Monosyl∣labls of Great Brittains language, & is to be vsed by euery deuout soule in his priuat conference vvith his god. And is set to the tune of Lord be my iudge, & thou shalt see PSAL. CXXVI.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. WALTER PELL one of the assis∣tants of the most vvorthy cōpanie of the marchants-Adventurers re∣siding at Hamb: Ioy of both vvorlds. LOuing frend. If you vvould die vvell, you must endeuour to liue vvell. Then let your death be neuer so suddaine, It vvill not come vnexpected neither vvill you be vnprepared. The daies, & houers of daies that you haue spent in gods seruice either in praying, or praysing him shalbe
so many cordialls of comforts,  consciences of vvell led purposes, & vvill so take vp your hart in ioye, & solace, that noe terrour of death, or darkenes shall appale yt. Who vvould not then be busie in this so serious, so sacred a busines? Let vs neuer thinke to be soundly merry, if this be not our musique. Reason, & Religion guides vs here vnto. For veary Reason shevveth vnto vs that vve must all die, & Religion enlighteneth vs hovve vve may dye vvell. Fooles iudge actions by euents, But the vvise for see by iudgmēt of reason, & faith vvhat vvill inevitably ensue. To this purpose all this is sayd. That as I haue in myne endeered loue sent you an introduction herevnto in this paper token so you vvould
accept, & practize it. So shall I euer rest your votary praying to god for your eternall happines in Christ Iesus his sauing mercies. Your perpetuall votary. W. LOE.
The first speach. Christ speakes to his spouse. 1. I am come dovvne o spouse most deere To take those fruits of thine, Which thou vvith hart of grace, & loue Dost knovve of erst vvere mine. 2. I haue thought vvell of all thy workes, As vvell of vvill as deede. I dranke thy vvine vvith milke so svveet With loue they doe me feede. 3. o you my frēds, & saincts most blest Cheere vp your selues vvith me, And ioy your harts vvith this my spouse whose cates of love you see The church speakes. 4. When once this vvorld had luld in sleepe Of sinne, my selfe, my sēce Yet vvakt mine hart to Christ my Deere, & thou didst dravve me thence.
Christ speakes to his spouse. 5. Thou camst to me, & knockst full oft At doore of my poore hart Thou knockst I say full oft my dre And pearst me vvith thy dart. 6. And saidst Ile come, & lodge vvith thee, And dvvell vvith thee in grace. Shut out the vvorld, thy sinns, thy shame▪ & let me come in place. 7. For all the night I vvayte for thee, My lockes vvith dropps of paine Are vvett, & all to stay for thee That I thy loue might gaine.
The second speach. The Church speakes. 1. I haue put of my coate sayd I, Hovve shall I put it on. My feete I vvasht, shall I them ile Oh noe, my loue be gone. 2. Thus did I plead for my long stay For vvho so loues my deere Must care, & carke, & strang things tast Of vvoe him to come neere. 3. For cleane of soyle, of vvoe, & ill Who liues that seekes my deere No, No, the vvorld vvill plague thē all That serues our god in feare 4. But vvhē my loue these vvords did heare He shrunke, & vvent me fro, & hid him selfe, & spake no more That I had searud him so.
The Church speakes. 5. And then I rouzd my hart I yearnd That had him lost so sone I rose, & lokt, & chid my selfe For that vvhich I had done. 6. I sought him but he hid him selfe, And vvould not me come nigh I roard, & cride, & vsd all meanes I card not for to die. 7. For that I had lost him my deere That sought me for his doue, But yet I foūd him not, nor knewe He hard my voice in loue.
The third speach. The church speakes still. 1. THe men that should haue had a care They smote, & did me vvound, With vvords most false, & vaine they sought, To ding me to the ground. 2. I charge you all that loue the lord If that you shall him find Tell him hovve sicke I am of loue In hart, in soule, in mind. 3. O vvhat (say they) is this thy Deere More then the sonnes of men That thou art thus farre gō in loue, And aye doe not him ken. 4. My loue sayd I is vvhite, & red His face is pure, & bright He is the cheefe, & choice, of all In him is all the light
The church speakes still. 5. For god in him is full, & faire In grace, in face, in all. His head fine gold, his lockes  flockes In him there is no gall 6. His eies like doues full of pure loue His cheeks as beds of spice, His lips as svveet, as flovvers in May. To me he is not nice. 7. His hāds are sett vvith port, & pri Pure myrrhe doth dropp him fro His vvill is rule of truth, & faith This is most true I knovve
The fourth speach. The spouses speaketh. 1. Yea all his acts are firme, & strong As sett in gold most sure. No shevve of change, but streight, & cleere Both sound, & safe, & pure 2. His mouth is as svveet things of choice Frō vvhēce doth flovve my blysse He is all svveet, in part, in vvhole, And I poore soule am his. A forraigne congregatiō speakes. 3. Since then o deere such is thy loue, Shevve vs vvhere he is found, And vve vvill seeke this loue vvith tee In all the vvorld so round 4. For nōe, but thee o church cāst him Make knowne, in vvord, in deed O tell vs then, & vve vvill ioyne, And he shall be our meede.
The spouses speaketh. 5. Thē sayd I to those that him sought He is gone dovvne to be In beds of spice vvith soules, & saincts That is my loue, thats he 6. Yea I am his in his sweet loue, And he is mine by faith. In spight of hell, or sinne, or shame His vvord to me so saith. 7. And both of vs are one in god, And knitt in soule, & spright By loue most svveete, & ioy of hart I liue still in his sight.
The fift speach. Christ speakes to his church 1. Though thou my church didst me not seeke, But putts me farre thee fro, Yet novve thou dost looke back to me I vvill not serue thee so. 2. But I vill come, & dvvell vvith thee In grace, in loue, in avve. I vvill thee ioy, in mirth, & glee, And teach to thee my lavve. 3. Turne backe thine eies frō me my deere That are thus fixt on me Thy strength of faith doth ioy me so That I mind none, but thee. 4. The men that feede thy soule vvith foode Haue all one hart, one tongue They tune all like a quire of saincts They sound forth all one songe.
Christ speaketh to his church. 5. So that their paines are not  vai They bring to me much fruit. They cry, & call to me for helpe, And I doe heare their suite. 6. Thy locks, thy lookes, are seene so faire Thy blush, thy smile so svveet. That I doe ioy in them that teach Those things that are so meete 7. Though kings, & Queenes, & all folk else My name, my loue doe vse, Yet on thee, on thee loue I looke On thee I thinke I muse.
The ixt peach. Christ speakes to his spouse. 1. THou art my spouse most chast most pure Whom all the vvorld doth loue Thou art my deere, my peere, my ioy, Noe spott in thee my Doue. 2. Those that doe looke, & see thy face Do praise, & plaud thee still, And bless thee that hast god thy lord, & didst yeald to his vvill. 3. & thus they say rapt vvith thy state Whats shee so faire as morne So pure as sūne, so bright as mone, Of vvhat state is shee borne. 4. Her face is faire through force of faith She is most bright in heue Yea in her looks is feare, & dread To cause her foes to rue.
The spouse speakes to Christ. 5. And thus all gast, & rapt vvith sight Of thy svveet port, & state They stand in stond all pale, & wan For thee they can not mate. 6. No more then glympse of starre cā dashe The sūne in hight of skye, Or light on earth the mone at full Can darke or once come nigh. 7. Cheare vp thy selfe deere loue I say For though thou didst me miss▪ I meane not thee my loue to leaue For all the vvorld that is.
The seuenth speach. Christ speakes to his spouse 1. did but goe to see my vine Hovve it did bud, & sprout To see vvhat fruits my plants did yeald And hovve they vvere come out. 2. And novve I see they bud, & blooe, And yeald me fruit good store. le care for them, & they for me That they may haue the more. 3. The soules that came to me of late I prune, I plash, I purge That they may bring forth farre more fruite With this my rod, & scourge. 4. And novve they are vvell grovvne my Deere I hast, I runne to thee, With speed at need I hast, I post With vvings of vvind to see.
Christ speakes to his spouse. 5. What thou dost vvant, or vvouldst novve haue Speake loue, Ile giue thee it. Thou shalt not feare my loue to thee In rest by thee ile sitt. 6. Come then my loue to me full fast Let all Saincts ioy, & sing. To house of god ile safe, & sound My Deere shall my loue bring. 7. Novve all ye Saincts, & soules on high Looke, see, fixe fast your eie, On this my loue, marke vvell her grace. No fault in her I spie.
A Canticle, or song. Of the seuenth, & eight chap∣ters of the song of Solomon being Metaphrased into Monosylabls of great Brittains language, & is to be vsed by euery deuout soule in his priuat conference vvith his god And is sett to the tune of Giue thanks vnto the lord our god. PSAL. CVII.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. WILLIAM WALCOT marchant, one of the most vvorthie cōpanie of Marchant Adventurers residing at Hamborough. Happines for euer. KInd frend. Forced fauours vvere euer sleighted, & thankles. But voluntary respects had euer vvith the best, and most noble minds courteous acceptāce hovve small, & meane soeuer the thing vvas. For a mā to giue his soule to his Creator vvhen he sees he must dye, & his goods to the poore,
vvhen he sees he must part vvith them, & to forgoe our sinne, vv vve can noe longer follovve yt are cold, yea vnkind obediences. But for a young man to remember his creator in the daies of his yout  & in his best, & strongest age  bequeath himself euery day to god in prayer, & praise is that∣reasonable, & seasonable sacrifice vvhere vvith the most high is most pleased. To this purpose and noe other god knovveth I haue tendered these voluntary Essaies to diuerse of my masters, & Table∣brothers. Let me not seeme to to officious, vvhile I desire to doe good, & expresse my loue. For  vnto the rest so vnto you Beloued Gā-naunt haue I sent this parcell. Receaue yt, as I meane yt both vvith hand, & hart, & then
am assured; it vvill neuer repent you of your acceptation, nor me of my dedication. The great lord keeper of heauen, & earth keepe you in his feare all the daies of your life, & preserue you for his sauing mercies in Christ Iesus in the end of your life, & for euer. Yours in Christ to be required. W. LOE.
The first speach. Christ speaketh. 1. Her feet are svveet, her gate a grace All shod vvith Peace, & Truth, Of gods ovvne spell to runne the race Frō bane, & vvoe, & ruth. 2. Her loynes are girt fast vvith the same, The price of it is rare. The skill is framd vvith hand of might All full of cost, & care 3. Her vvombe like a round cup that vvants Noe vvine to cheere her plants, As heaps of vvheate sot all vvith flovvers Pure graynes to helpe our vvāts 4. Her breast the tvvo svveet leagues of grace Are as to tvvins of birth Whose milke doth feede the babs of god Which dvvell here on the earth.
Christ speaketh. 5. Those that doe rule, & guide h folk Like necke doth beare vp head So those doe stay as tovver of strength Till they at full are fed. 6. Her eies are like tvvo fonts most clea In which vve may vvell see Our selues in face, in fact, in faith▪ And dravve thence life, & glee, 7. Her nose from vvhence vve sent the good Is as some tovver of state For she can Iudg, & find it out From tyme, to tyme past date
The second speach. Christ speakes still. 1. HEr tire of head is full of Grace To all that doe it see, And I am tyde by mine ovvne vvill O loue to be vvith thee. 2. O loue hovve full in all thy parts Dvvells loue, & life by me Hovve svveet, & faire art thou in all When I doe looke on thee, 3. Thy grovvth is like a Palme tree tall, For prest, thou dost rise more Thy teats are full of milke, & mirth And yeald thy babes great store 4. I said I vvill goe to my tree And ioyne me to my Palme, & make it yeald all salues for sores To cure all vvounds as Balme.
Christ speach still. 5. And I vvill cause her for to ye Good vvorkes of faith, & life▪ And vvh her povver to driue  her The sinnes that ae so rife▪ 6. The soules that thirsts shall haue their fill▪ Her vvords shall spring a vvine By mouthes of those that teach my lore, And preach those lavves of mie 7. Yea they shall cause the lipp of hi That sleepes, & snorts in sinne To speake, & praise the god of That rouzd him from that di.
The third speach. The church speakes. 1. Such as I am, I am not mine, But his that loud me deere, In none, but him vvill I be glad, None but him vvill I feare. 2. For he once gaue him selfe for me, And made of me his choyce. Him vvill I heare, he is my deere, Its life to heare his voice. 3. come my loue, letts lodg all night In fields, in tovvnes, letts goe, And see hovve all our flockes doe feede Letts runne as svvift as roe. 4. Vp to the vines letts hast in morne, And vevve hovve they doe bud, And see the signes of fruits, & grace And looke if they be good.
The Church speakes. 5. For hence vve shall knovve full our tyme When vve shall ioyne in one In all the blisse that I haue made To quitt thee of thy mone. 6. See loue thy plants both in them selues Doe bud, & bloome most fresh, And yeald a sent to moe them by That are but young, & neshe 7. All plants that grovve in vs I keepe, Both old, & young I loue, And all for thee o Christ my god Thy Grace, & lookes to moue.
The fourth speach. The old Ievvish Church speaketh. 1. O that I might my Christ once see Clad in this flesh of mine, & find him here on earth to dwell Made one, once of my line. 2. Thē vvould I kisse, & cull my Deere The vvorld could not me touch, But if it did I vvould not passe, Nor think of it so much. 3. Then vvould I bring thee to the light Though novve pent vp in darke, And then thou shouldst me teach to knovve My Christ, my god, by marke 4. Then vvould I feast thee vvith the best with cupps of loue, & grace. Thē vvould the soules in Christ be glad To vevve our rest, & place
The old Ievvish church speaketh 5. His left hand then should stay my head His right hand stay my hart▪ & thē I vvould not feare the vvd Nor hell, nor death his dart. 6. His heat vvould giue me life halfe dead, & raise me vp cleane gone, His light vvould make me shine a pearle O like him there is none 7. charge you o ye saincts that loue Dare not to greeue my decre▪ Nor once to stirre him vp in ire, But learne his vvrath to feare,
The fift speach. Christ speaketh▪ 1. WHo is this that from denns of sinne From lusts, & life most leaud Doth and her selfe gainst all the ill▪ & shevves her vvrath, & feud 2. I not my church? o it is shee Whom I haue loud of old, And did her take from povvers of hell When she vvas bought, & sold. 3. And her frō ire of sinne, & shame Where shee had falne from me I raisd to life from depth of hell. I quitt, I sett her free. 4. For there by faith she leand on me, And I to her gaue vvay. Then shee to me did ope her hart▪ And thus to me did say.
The Ievvisch church speaketh 5. O sett me as a signe, a seale On hart, on arme, on all. O hold me deere, my loue, my Christ For I to thee doe call. 6. Let naught me moue from thy svveet loue Lest greefe me gore, & vvoe, For the least shade vvhen thou art gone Doth shevv to me my foe. 7. The zeale vvhere vvith I loue my Deere Is like the graue most ell And burnes me vp like coles of fire To saue my soule from hell.
The sixt speach. The Ievvish church speaketh. 1. YEa more then fire, or flame it is Noe source can quench this loue▪ paines, noe gaines, or loss, or crosse From him my hart can moue. 2. oe vvealth, noe peelfe, noe feare, no force All this I scorne should me nce moue to thinke, or ioy in▪ ought But in his grace, & glee 3. e haue a plant deere loue thou knovvst The church that thou hast chose, rom out the Iles so farre frō hēce. O vve vvould not her lose. 4. he is but smale of grovvth as yet For vvant of thy good grace, ut if thou cast a looke on her. And let her see thy face.
The Ievvish speaketh. 5. Hovve fresh, hovve faire vvill the come forth And grovve, & beare to thee Hr buds, her bloomes, her fruits of faith All good, & faire to see, Christ speaketh. 6. If she be firme, & fast to me As vvall, as tovver of strength Ile make her pure, & sure in league By vvord, & deed at length. 7. And if she vvill giue vvay to me, And to my vvords giue eare Ile make her safe in league of peace And she shall be my deere,
The seuenth speach. The Ievvish Church speaketh. 1. The faith, & loue that thou dost seeke In her, thou findst in me y plea of faith found Grace, & Peace, & Ivvas ioynd to thee. 2. The vvant of vvords to feed thy saincts Which thou in her dost craue s not in me to doe thy vvill Hovve then should, she it haue. 3. Grat thee to her thy Grace in good And shee vvill to thee bend. he vvill thee serue in vvord, & deede If thou thy grace her send Christ speaketh 4. My spouse is as a vine to me, She flovvers, & fruits doth yeald he is the corne that brings me thrift & grovves faire in my feild.
The Ievvish church speaketh. 5. My vine shall aye be in my sight, Yea till the vvorld haue end. I vvill it dress, & keepe my selfe, And grace, & peace it lend. 6. Sith thus I care for thee my deere Shevv thou thy loue in praise, & teach my name, my fame to all▪ So long as last thy daies. The spouse speaketh. 7. If thou my deere vvouldst haue  do As thou hast bid to me, Then grāt me grace to act the sam And thou it sone shalt see.
A METAPHRASE. Of the first, and second chap∣ers of Ieremies Lamentations for he sacking, & burning of Ierusalem, and he temple, by Nebuchadnezer king of Babell, and by Nebuzaradan the captaine of his gard, put into monosyl∣lables of great Brittains language. And is set to the tune of I lift mine hart to thee. PSAL. XXV.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. EDWARD MEEDE one of the assistants of the most vvorthy companie of Merchants Aduenturers residing at Ham∣borough. Grace in this vvorld, and ioy in the other. ALL happines in the lord Iesus. I present vnto you a part of Ieremies Lamentations meta∣phrased. You may see herein my true hart vnto you all. In the midst of lamentable discōtents I tuned my soule, tongue, &
pen to the land of god. And the rather in these lamentations for that they sorted some vvhat to my retired meditations. One tyme, or other all men are not as they vvould be. It is the condition of gods children. Happie is that man that can vse gods scourge to his amen dement. The great modera∣tor of all things knovves his children fittest to be made palmes, to be spread vvith burthens, & vvaights, & not to be Oliues. That so vve might more thinke of our victorie, then of our rest. It is enoughe for vs that vve shall once triumph in heauen, & rest for all. To this holy rest, and eternall tranquillity god∣giude
vs all, into vvhose blessed keeping I recommend you in Christ sauing mercies. And rest. Yours much deuoted. W. LOE.
The first depth. FRō dumps, & doomes of vvoe From depth of vvrath, & reAleph. we call, vve crie, vve roare o lord With zeale as hot as fire. The state vvhere once thy name Was great in light of grace Is led a slaue by force of vvarreBet. A curse is in the place. Our streeats that flockt vvith folke Most rich, in cloths most gay. Are novve made void, & laid full vvastGimel. By night, and eke, by day.
We that did rule, and raigne▪Daleth. And brusd the vvorld vvi might Doe novve pay taxe, & tole, & disme By force of armes in spight. We vveepe full sore all night,. By day our teares doe fall Our eies are sore, our cheekes are wett Yet on the lord vve call. They that did loue vs once,Vau. & vvere our frends in shevve Are turnd to gall▪ and doe vs kill As ferce as doth our foe.
The second depth OUr prince is made a slaue To sitt vvith folke most base, We find noe rest but vvoe and moane,Zain. & shame doth fill our face. our sinne, our sinne hath greeud The lord of hosts full sore. Our shame, our shame for that doth come.Heth. On vs novve more, and more. Our things of vvorth the foe Hath seizd all to his hand They staine the church of thy great nameTeth. We cā them not vvith stand.
The facts that vve haue done Are all filths in his sight. He pluckes vs dovvne, & none doth build,Jod. Not one vvill doe vs right. We sighe for bread in vvant We giue our vvealth for yt. O helpe svveete lord for vve are vileCaph. O dravve vs from this pitt. O let all those that passe Looke on my vvoe, & seeLamed If ere they savve the like of this That novve is done to me.
The third depth. IN all my bones is fire A net my feete hath caught God turnes his face, & makes me fayntMem. His vvrath it hath me taught. His hand is on my necke, His yoke hath bound me soreNun. He beares his hād so hard on me That I can rise noe more. My men of force are gone, My young men crusht vvith might My maids, & babes are trod to dustsamech And all this in my sight.
For these things vveeps myne eie My soule is farre from glee The foe doth force me to this woe▪Ai. And none doth care for me. We stretch our hands for helpe▪ And none doth take a care We are as is the filth of allPe. They looke not hovve vve fare Yet thou art iust o lord For vve haue gone from thee Thou vvilt vs helpe for this at last.Zade. O shevve thy face to me.
The fourth dept. MY Preests gaue vp the ghost While they did seeke for meate The old men eke gaue vp their breathKoph. O lord our vvoe is great. I am in greefe o lord Mine hart is fild vvith vvoe The svvord doth kill, & Death doth rage.Resch. For that thou art my foe. When I doe sigh, & grone Noe eie doth care for me. My foes doe ioy, & glad them∣seluesShin. My vvoe, & moane to see.
O let my sighes o lord, Loud crie make in thine I haue done ill, cleāse me of thatThan. And rid mine eies frō tear. O lord vvhy vvith a cloud, So black of vvrath, & ire Hast thou vs clad, and cast vs dovvneAleph. Why are vve burnt vvith fire? The lord doth raze our race, Our stocke, our flocke, our all; Dovvne to the ground he dings vs fastBeth. Our prince, our peeres doe fall.
The fift depth. THe strength of all our houseGimel. Is spent, yea all is gone he lords ferce vvrath hath cut vs of To helpe vs there is none. e bends his bovve at vsDaleth. He shootes vs through full sore He kills the choice of all our flocke O lord vvhat vvilt thou more? Our forts of fence, & strengthHe. Our fields so fresh, so full re all laid vvast, our goods, our babes Our foes from vs doe pull.
The king, & Preest at onceV. The church, & state doe vvai The daies of feasts are turnd to fa The lord he doth vs quaile. The lord hath cast dovvne allZain. They roare, & make a noice With in thy house o'god ou king Where once vvas hard our voice Our, vvall, our vvealth, our state,Heth. Our god vvill lay full lovve. His hand is bent to stricke vs all Thy vvill o lord is so.
The sixt depth. The lavve, and all is goneTeth. Noe preest, noe peere of light he lord hath rid vs of them all Not one doth come in sight. The graue men of our stateIod. The sage, & such as giude oe sitt on groūd in dust, & clay With sacke they cloth their side ine eies to see this faile,Caph. vvith teares they drope, & melt he babes doe sovvne in midst of street Such vvoe, & vvant they felt. hey crie for bread, for drinkeLamed. To all that stand them nighe, And in their lapps that gaue thē sucke They faint, & faile, & die.
What vvoe is like to ours?Me. Our breach as seas doe roa Theres none can helpe, or heale our vvo O lord our greefe is sore. They that should see, & say,Nun. And tell vs of our sinne Haue taught vs things both vil & vain Noe good vve find there All such as pass vs bysamech Do scoffe at vs, & mocke Is this the place say they  strengt Is this the vvhole earths rock
The seauenth depth. Our foes doe hise, & gnashAin. Their teeth, & thus doe saye his is the day vve haue sought for To bring thee dovvne for aye ut lord this is thine actePe. To throvve vs dovvne each one dayes of old it vvas thy vvill To bruise vs bone by done. Our teares doe shovvre on vsZade. To thee our harts doe cry y day, & night vve take noe rest Our soules doe faint, & dye. We crye out in the nightKoph. Like babes vve hold vp hands We faint for want of bread o lord O rid vs of these bands
O see svveet lord the babesResh That are but a span long We eate for foode, our Pree are slay And cast out as the donge. The young, & old on groundShin. Are cast, & aint, & die Our maids so fresh, so faire in hevv Are kild, & cast them by▪ Naught else but feares o lordThu. Doe vvake vs day, & night It is the day of thy ferce vvrat Of foes, of vvarre, of spight.
A METAPHRASE. F THE THIRD Chap∣r of Ieremies Lamentations for e sacking, & burning of Ierusalem, and  temple, by Nebuchadnezer king of abell, and by Nebuzaradan the captaine of his gard, put into monosyl∣lables of great Brittains language. And is set to the tune of I lift mine hart to thee. PSAL. XXV.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. IOHN GREENWELL on of the Assistants of the most vvorthy companie of marchants-Adventurers residing at Hamb: All ioy, & happines in Christ. WElbeloued in the lord. We are all strangers here in the earth, our home is aboue in heauen. It vvas a great greefe to gods Israel to tune the songs of Sion in a strange country. Hovve then is it vvith vs, that vve like so vvell of the things here, & thinke not of the blessings aboue. Hierusalem vvas once
the mistrisse of the vvorld, th Metropolis of the earth, & ye vvhen the vvorlds darling fo gatt god she vvas layd in the dus That is the cause of the Prophe lamentation. Indeed vvho vvould not shovver dovvne teares to  the holy place deiled, & Ierusa made an heape of stones? But vve see noe place be it neuer so glorio in our eies, noe persons be they neuer so gratious in the sight of men that can escape gods  vvhē he vvill scourge The Turkes haue encroched into Chri∣stendome, & made that itty of Constantinople vvhich vvas once the glory of the east, a veary cage of vncleane Mahumetans. What Christians hart doth not bleed to see yt? to heare of yt? We haue cause to lament this. The prophe
ad reason to condole that. O that our harts vvere touched vvith remorse for the poore distressed Christians that liue tributaries to the misbeleeuing. Turke. Consi∣der in these hymnes the condition of gods people so subjecte to moane & misery. God directe all our arts tovvard him in vvealth, in vvoe, in all. And so I cōmending you to god vvith the rest▪ in the sauing mercies of Iesus Christ, Am. Yours because of Christ. W. LOE.
The first depth. 1. I am the man o lord Haue felt thy vvrath, thy rod O send me helpe in this my vvoe My lord, my Christ, my god. 2. Thy stormes, & clouds of ire Doe beate me day, & night Thou shevvst me vvoe, & vvast, & warre And hidst from me the light. 3. All the day long o lord Thine hand is turnd gainst me Noe helpe, noe hope, noe ioy, noe mirth That I poore vvretch can see. 4.
My flesh, & skin are vile▪ And parcht as in a drought, My bones, my hart are broke This lord thy vvrath hath vvroug 5. O lord thou makst a fo With me to vvarre, & fight With gall▪ & greefe thou dost me And none vvill doe me right▪ 6. As they that long are dead, And cleane cast out of mind So am I sett in night of death With vv, & greefe all pind.
The second depth. 1. AN hedge is pight me round To close me in this vvoe can'not stirre thy chaines me bind O lord vvhat shall I doe? 2. And vvhen I cry, & roare In all my greefe, & gall He shutts me out, & vvill not heare Ne cares he for my call. 3. He ramzes me in so fast. With stones, & clay full thicke My pathes he crokes, & giues noe ease My soule is faint, & sicke. 4.
As beares doe teare their pray, And vvaite more bloud to spill So hath my foes me rent, & tom As if it vvere thy vvill. 5. I peece, by peece am hald, And puld by hand to raggs I by my selfe do sitt, & vveepe, While my foe sitts, & braggs. 6. Thy bovve o lord is bent, To shoote at my pale face I am a marke for shafts to hitt O yett shevve me some grace.
The third depth. 1. FOr see the shafts doe sticke In all my raynes through out I am the butt, & none but I At vvhich shootes all the rout. 2. My foes make me their iest And song by night, & day Where is thy god, thy lord, thy helpe Thus they to me doe say. 3. Mine hart is fraught vvith gall, My bloud is drunke vp still With shame, & greefe I vvaile, & vvast Make hast me lord to kill 4.
My strength is dasht, my teeth Are broke vvith in my head Thou laist on loade on me poore I vvish I vvere cleane dead 5. My soule doth not once heare Of peace, of grace, of light I can▪not call to mind my state That once I had in sight. 6. O lord my strength, my hope▪ My helpe I looke from thee. But all is gone, & there is none That cares, nor lookes to me▪
The fourth depth. 1. call to mind svveet god This moane, this woe of mine his gall, this greefe, this plaint, this cry For I o lord am thine 2. y soule is faint, & failes When I to mind doe call y greefe hath made me cry, and roare To see my vvoe, & fall. 3. et haue I hope in thee That thou vvilt helpe at last, vvilt not quite my soule for aye From thy svveet sight out cast. 4.
It is thy loue o lord That I am not quite fold, And rid from earth, both braunch & roote And closd vp in the mold. 5. Thou failst me not in morne, All night I feele thy stay, Thy hand is great, & in thy truth Thou hearst vvhat I doe say. 6. For thou o lord art mine My soule doth hope in thee Thou art my lot, my land, my rent Once more lord sett me free
The fift depth. 1. O thou art good o lord To them that vvayte, & tend To soules that seeke, & sue to thee Thou dost thy grace dovvne send 2. It is right good o lord To hope for helpe from thee For of thee lord is all mans good O shevve thy smile to me. 3. It is full good for man In youth to beare thy rod For he shall learne there by to knovve The lord to be his god. 4.
Then sitts he pale, & vvan▪ And mute vvith out a peare He will take heede all tymes that Doe searue the lord in feare 5. And if he see theres hope His mouth from dust vvill cry, And to the lord make plaint, & To day that he doth dye. 6. He giues his cheeke to such As smite him, & doe taunt He vvil not giue his eare to those That vaine & vile things cha
The sixt depth. 1. He lord doth not for aye Cast of his choice of men ut though they greeue yet in his tyme. He takes them from that den. 2. or by his vvill the lord Greeues not his flocke at all ot doth he crush the sonnes of mē When they on him doe call. 3. e rights men in their ill▪ The face of the most high sett to helpe the flocke of Christ Yea he vvill dravve them nigh. 4.
Out of gods ovvne svveet mo Comes forth not good, & ill When vve are plagud it is our That doth our deare soules kill▪ 5. Let vs then search our vvaies, And turne to our good god So shall he quite put farre from His scourge, his plague, his 6. Lift vp both hand, & hart To him that dvvells on hi And shevve our sinns, ours Least that for them vve dye.
The seuenth depth. 1. Hou hast vs slayne o lord And hidst vs vvith a cloud that our sute comes not to thee Though vve doe cry full loud 2. e are as drosse, and doung, Our foes doe on vs rage feare, & snare is come on vs, And that from age, to age. 3. ine eies cease not to vveepe But day, by daye vve moane ill thou o lord dost looke from high, & ease vs of our grone. 4.
My eies, and hart doe ake, The one vvith teares doth run My hart it sobbs, & sighes full so For that vvhich I haue done. 5. Men chase me like a bird, They haue cut of my life They cast great stones to keepe m dovv They kill me in their strife. 6. Yet from these depths o lord I haue cald on thy name Thou to my voice vvilt giue an And ease me of the same.
The eight depth. 1. THou vvontst to say, Feare not, Thou vvontst my cause to plead nd to the streames of loue, & life Thou vvast vvont me to lead. 2. lord my vvronge thou seest Iudge thou my cause vvith those. hat gape, & hope to eate me vp With rage they doe me close 3. hou lord hast hard their cries Hovve they doe rage, & roare ovve they doe spite, & spitt at me And raue still more, & more. 4.
They make their songs on me They iest, & gibe, & mocke When they sitt dovvne, or rise,  wal They flout, they feare thy floc 5. Giue them their lott o lord, Looke on the vvorke the vvroug Giue them thy curse vvith greef of ha That haue my vvoe thus sough 6. Cast them all cleane from thee Let not the earth them beare For that they doe not seeke to the But rage vvith out all feare.
A METAPHRASE. Of the fourth, and fift Chap∣ters of Ieremies Lamentations for the sacking, & burning of Ierusalem, and the temple▪ by Nebuchadnezer king of Babell, and by Nebuzaradan the captaine of  gard, put into monosyl∣lables of great Brittains language. And is set to the tune of I lift mine hart to thee. PSAL. xxv.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. JOHN STAMPE, marchant one of the cōpanie of the Merchants-Ad∣venturers residing at Ham∣borough. Eternall blisse in Christ Iesus. MYNE vnfained loue in Christ vnto you. Noe vvise man vvould sell his thoughts for all the vvorld. For as they are much pleasing to a mans selfe so are they beneficiall vnto others. I little thought vvhe I began to make an Essay into this businesse that it vvould haue enlarged it selfe into eleuen
branches. What it is, & as it is▪ Euen the all of it I devote to all my table-brothers▪ Wherein your selfe haue a part. I shall desire your aecentance vvith the rest And euen so herein I commēd my loue to you, my lines to the vvorlds rensure, & the vse of thē to gods children; for vvhose ske I haue endeuored this Thus  my prayers for your succesfu prosperity in all things. I leaue yo to gods sauing grace. Remaying Your affectionate W. LOE.
The first depth. 1. HOvve is our gold so dymme? The fine gold hovve ist lost? The stones of the lords house are vvast This is our case, our cost. 2. Our sonnes that vvere so strong Are trod as clay in streete, And as the potts so are they broke They crush thē vvith their feete. 3. The formes of fish in sea, That are most strange to see Yea they to young ones yeald their breasts with vs this may not bee. 4.
The babe that suckes is drye, For bread the young ones cry, But bread, & breast they can hau no And so they faint, & dye. 5. They that did feede most fine The crusts most course vvould haue▪ They that put on their robs of silk The pigs oote seekes, & craue▪ 6. The vvoe that vve doe bere Is farre more great then vvhen our god did rayne fell fire frō skey, And burnt the sonnes of men.
The second depth. 1. THey that vvere pure as snovve, And vvhite as is the milke That lookt so red, so fresh, so faire, And clad them selues vvith silke. 2. They are as blacke as cole, By face they are not knowne; Their skin is parcht, & cleaues to bones They vvaile, they vveepe, they moane. 3. They vvhom the svvord doth kill We count in a good case, or they that liue doe pine for vvant, Both they, & all their race. 4.
The babes that sucke the We seeth for meat in po, Or else vve pine for vvant of Our limbs doe fade, & r. 5. The lord is vvrath vvith vs, On vs he shoures his ire, And vve are cleane put out of He burnes vs vp vvith fire. 6. The kings of all the earth Doe stand in maze to see. Our foes march in our streats  ro & vve poore soules to flee
The third depth. 1. BUt this is come to vs For that vve shed the bloud Of such as vvere most neere to god, And shevvd vs all the good, 2. The bloud I say of them Doth cry gainst vs to god, And novve vve feele his hand of ire His scourge, his vvhipe, his rod. 3. This bloud of men so iust, Hath bine our bane, our vvoe, And made vs turne our backes frō such As made them selues our foe. 4.
For vve card not for Preeste. Nor those that did vs good, But vvere both ferce, & fell to them We stroue to sheed their bloud. 5. For this our eies doe vvatch, And vvaite, & still doe faile. No helpe, noe hand is strecht to ▪ And so vve faint, & quaile. 6. The foe doth hunt our stepps As vve goe in the streete They kill, they cry, they roare on v They tread vs vvith their feete
The fourth depth. 1. THey hunt vs in the feilds On hills in dales they kill We dare not once loke out of dore Our streats vvith dead they fill. 2. The breath of all our liues Is caught fast in their snare, And left he is in plight full ill, Both base, & poore, & bare. 3. Let these be glad that dvvell Farre of out of this place Take heede least you doe moue the lord. Gainst you to turne his face. 4.
For he hath plagud vs sore For all our sinnes, & ill, And yet vve hope he vvill lokeb And cease our folke to ki. The V. CAP. 5. O lord call thou to mind What is come on vs all Take heede to vs that in our vv To none but thee doe call. 6. Our lands, our rents, our all The foe from vs doe take. The folke that are to vs most strang A prey of vs doe make.
The fift depth. 1. Our babes doe knovve noe sires, And they that gaue the breast Doe sitt, and sighe, & roare, & cry, Ne can they take their rest. 2. Our drinke to vs is sold, Our vvood vve buy full deare, And all this ill is come on vs For the vve did not feare. 3. Our neckes are prest vvith yokes On vs they lie full sore. We moile, & toyle, & haue noe rest O lord vvhat vvilt thou mor 4.
To those that be our foes For bread vve giue our hands They tire on vs, & make a prey, They breake in to our lands. 5. They that are dead, & gone, O lord haue done the sinne, And vve poore soules doe pay the price, These take vs in their gin. 6. Base slaues vvhom vve did beate, Ore vs novve rule, and tire, & there is none that doth vs helpe Our feete stickes in the mire.
The sixt depth. 1. OUr bread vve gett vvith dread, It costs vs halfe our life e vvaile in midst of vvoe, & waste All night, all day in strife. 2. Our skin like to a Moore Is black for vvant of meate Our parts are parcht to skin, and bone Thy vvrath o lord is great. 3. Our maids they make a prey To serue their minds, & lusts Our vviues they vvronge in all our sights, Yet lord thy hand is iust. 4. By hand our prince they hang, The old men they doe scorne Our greee doth last till it be night, And eke till it be morne. 4.
They make our young on And toyle like horse in mill. Their backes they load vvith bat of Till that they doe them kill. 5. The old men sitt noe more To iudge the cause in gate The young mē vvaile that vvont to sing Oh vvhen vvill be our date 6. Our ioy of hart is gon Our daunce is turnd to moane our minds doe muse of nought but vvoe We sitt, & sighe, & grone.
The seauenth depth. 1. THe crovvne is gone from vs, And all the rule is fled, What shall vve doe o lord our god Our sinne hath struck vs dead. 2. For sinne our hart is faynt, For sinne our eies are dymme, For sinne our foes doe vvarre on vs, And rend vs limbe, by limbe. 3. Our hills, and dales are vvaste The foxe doe roome, & range, These things to see our harts doe bleed, To vs it is most strange. 4. Yet lord thou art for aye, Thy throne is sett full sure Thou canst vs helpe, vvhen hope is gone O lord novve doe vs cure. 5.
Why then dost hide thy face? And vvilt not on vs looke Thou vvilt at last thy grace vs giue That is vvrote in thy booke. 6. Turne to vs lord vve praye, And then vve shall see grace, O giue to vs the daies of old, Thy name sett in this place. 7. What shall thy vvrath like fire Still last, and burne, & kill O cease svveet lord vve doe thee pray So shalt thou find noe ill.
Seauen dumpes ON THE SEAUEN WORDS hat Christ spake on the crosse which shevve the seauen depthes of the lavves curse, vvhich our lord did feele for our sinnes. And is set to the tune of I lift mine hart to thee. PSAL. XXV.
To his much esteemed good frend Mr. GEORGE FRANKLYN on of the Assistants of the most vvorthy companie of marchants-Adventurers residing at Hamb: Grace here, Glory hereafter in Christ. LOuing, and beloued. The vvords of a dying father, or of a dying frend are vvont to take deepe impression in the minds, & memories of good natures. Whose vvords shall pearce, if the vvords of our Christ our dying Christ, and that for vs, & his last also. Whose I say if not his? To you I send the last vvords
of Christ, in the last place, yet you are not the least in my loue. The first in intention, is last in exce∣cution. And nothing is conveayed to the intellectuall povvers that is not first in the sensible parts. It vvas gods purpose of our Christ euen in the creatiō, that he should be thus vpon the crosse. See then your Christ at his last. Tune your dolefull dumps to a sad soule, and ioy in sobbs. For he prayes, cries, yells, promiseth, perfecteth all, that vve may be all in all vvith god. What can be more? Christ passion is the modell of our profes∣sion, yea the medall of our perfe∣ction. For gods strength is per∣fected in our vveakenes. We may sovve in teares, vve shall reape in ioy. Let my spring be vvett so that I may haue a
plentifull Autume I care not. Vir dolorum can best tune his voice to dolours. If god vvill haue it so, His vvill be done. He did so vvith his ovvne. We cannot imagine our condition free. God giude vs through all by his sauing grace, To vvhich I shall euer recom∣mend you, and rest. Your more then much affectionate. W. LOE.
1. O god my soule lift vp, & stretch mine hart in tvvaine That it may feele, & faile, & die For life is in this paine. 2. My poore hart is so full, & fraught vvith thought of thee That its nighe rent to see thy loue So much, so maine for me 3. O take thy crosse, and nailes, And straine my hart at length That thy deare loue may not be pent, But shevve my soule thy strength 4. And novve my thoughts are free Thy loue to vevve in sight My hart doth pant for that noe more It feeles here of thy might 5.
O fill my hart once more, And stretch, & straine it still That I may lothe, & loue no more My sinne that brought this ill. 6. But I vvant space in hart, And grace in all my life, To end my smart in sight of this, And sinnes that are so rife. 7. But since my hart o god Holds not a sight of thee O doe thou lord hold fast my hart And shevve thy loue to me.
The first Dumpe. ON THE FIRST WORD. Father forgiue them for they knovve not vvhat they doe. Luck 23. verse 34. 1. WHat voice is this so shrill, That soūds thus in mine eare O put from them their sinns o god That knovves not vvhats thy feare. 2. Is not thy voice o Christ? On crosse vvhen thou didst hang, And eke for those that did thee kill Ist not thy voice that sang? 3. A tune to god on highe, With vvhich his eare vvas pleasd, To see thy deere loue stretch so farre & made the vvorld so easd. 4. They knevve not vvhat they did Was ere such a thing seene. To pray for those that made a prey In vvoes so sharp so keene. 5.
O soule full oft thou hast Not knovven vvhat thou hast done Noe vvay for helpe to cure that greefe But in thy Christ gods sonne. 6. O pray my soule for them That hate thee to the graue, And let not vvrath lodg vvith thee once Its Christ that must thee saue. 7. When foes doe curse, blesse them For Christ hath taught thee so; who prayd for such as did him kill And brought to curse, & vvoe.
The next dumpe. ON THE NEXT WORD. Verily I say vnto thee, This day shalt thou be vvith me in paradice. Luck. 23. v. 43. 1. O soule looke vp to this, And harke vvhat voice thou hearst, Thy Christ in midst of gripes of death Doth heare, vvhat ist thou fearst? 2. Then sure he vvill thee heare, And giue eare to thy crye, Novve that he sitts on throne in state & is thy god so nighe. 3. A theefe doth cry, & call, Christ heares him by, and by O soule thy Christ vvill heare thee sure If thou dost call, & cry 4. O learne it is but one To vvhom Christ grants an eare That sued to him in death at last, And sought him in his feare. 5.
Yet it is one my soule Least thou shouldst faynt, & dye, And that thy Christ vvould not thee heare In death vvhen thou shalt cry. 6. And yet it is but one, Least soule thou shouldst be proud, And thinke that god vvould heare thee still When that thy cry is loud 7. O learne svveet soule by this To sue to god in life, & driue not of till death doe come To die in iarre, & strife.
The third Dumpe. ON THE THIRD WORD. Behold thy mother, Behold thy sonne. John. 19. v. 26. 27 1. SEe soule if ere the like Was hard that novve is seene. That Christ should care in midst of death, And greefes that vvere so keene. 2. For those that could not helpe, But savve him in that plight. Burst soule, and die to see his loue To her that bare his might. 3. And eke to him vvhose lone Was fixt sure in his breast That Christ should care in midst of greefe That he should liue in rest 4. She that vvhose seede did bruse The head of hell, & death Hath hart all prest vvith vvoe, and greefe To see Christ lose his breath 5.
O child see that thou loue, And loke, and long for good To those that haue thee borne, & bred, & are thee nighe in bloud. 6. Shall not our Christ loue those Thinke you, that searue him still, And haue a care of all such folke That seeke to doe his vvill? 7. My soule they are all deare He cares for all their seede, Ne shall there one that serues ou god Be void of his full meede.
The fourth dumpe. ON THE FOURTH WORD. My god, my god vvhy hast thou forsaken me? MAT. 27. VERS. 46. 1. O novve my soule giue eare To this great cry, and yell. That shakes the heauens, & moues the earth And teares the povvers of hell. 2. My god, my god cries Christ Why putts thou me thee fro, And vvhy, dost hide thy face frō me As if I vvere thy foe. 3. O soule he cries for thee That thou maist haue gods light, And nere be cast in pit full lovve, And hid out of his sight. 4. This cry did darke the sunne In full smyle of its beames O soule doth not it dymme thy sight, And cause of teares full streames? 5.
My soule great is our sinnes That causd these groanes, & cries My eares that heare, are dull, and deafe. My hart it faynts, & dies. 6. What paine didst thou o Christ For me base vvretch then beare That thou didst yell, & cry, & roare In such great greefe, & feare. 7. Wast not that I might nere Feele god goe from my hart? Wast not o Christ that I might no Of hell once feele the smart?
The fift dumpe. ON THE FIFT WORD. I thirst. Iohn. 19. v. 28. 1. What thirst vvas this o Christ That thou dist feele so fell That made thee call for drinke in drought That causd thee thus to yell. 2. Wast not for my poore soule Thou didst cry in thy thirst? That I might tast the streames of ioy That man had at the first 3. And nere to thirst for aye, But haue the streames full glad That ioy the hart, & soule, & all, And blesse the mind thats sad. 4. Thou art the rocke o Christ From vvhence the source doth flovve That makes vs feele noe thirst at all But vp vvards for to grovve. 5.
Come to this source my soule, And drench thy deepe sad mind Thou cast not chuse but here thou must A vvell of blisse sure find 6. For Christ didst thirst for thee That thou mights drinke I say The streames that flovve from throne of god vvhere Christ doth dvvell for aye 7. All soules doe thirst for this All saincts for this doe crye, & bray as harts doe for the flouds, And so to faynt, & dye.
The sixt dumpe. ON THE SIXT VVORD It is finished. IOHAN 19. vers. 30. 1. NOvve all is done my soule That can be done for thee The houres of death, & povvers of hell Are all put farre from me 2. Christ novve hath paid the debt, The bond in tvvo is rent The lavve, the curse, the vvoe, the crosse Is laid on him thats sent. 3. Loe Christ hath tane from thee Thy sinne, thy shame, thy crosse, And rid thee from the hags of hell That vvould haue vvrought thy losse 4. Novve is the vvorld all iudgd All povvers of death, & hell Haue done their vvorst, & novve in vvoe Doe cry, & roare, & yell. 5.
Its done, Its done saith Christ Ye all is past, & cleare That thou my soule maist liue in blisse, & be to god most deare 6. Is this the vvay o Christ, That vve tast vvoe vvith thee, That so vve may once rule, & raigne And thy svveet face still see. 7. O lett thy vvill o lord, Be done of vs in fine. And by vs let thy vvill be done That still vve may be thine.
The seuenth dumpe. ON THE SEVENTH WORD. Father into thy hands doe I com∣mend my spirit. Luck. 23. vers. 46. 1. O come ioy of mine hart, & seaze my soule vvith this, What is there ought in the vvide vvorld That cā be more to blisse. 2. Then for my soule to heare My Christ his soule to giue, In to the hands of god my lord There still for aye to liue. 3. Novve soule thou seest thy blisse, And vvhere thou maist be sure, To haue thy rest, thy ioy, thy stay Thy loue, thy life, thy cure. 4. O blest are they that dye, They rest from all their care When once the lord doth sett them free What Death, or Hell can dare? 5.
In his o soule thy Christ For thine made suite to god Thou needst not feare the day of death Nor graue, nor hell his rod 6. For thou art safe in him That keepes thy life in store, And it is hid in Christ thy lord What canst thou vvishe novve more. 7. O soule Die in these vvords Giue vp thy selfe in fine To god in Christ, & feare no ill For he saies, Thou art mine.
To him that made these Hymnes. WHen vvith my thoughts I vevve thy saynct like muse Hovv on vvhile drencht in sobs, & sighs for sinne. And yet more lvv, the Paths of death doth vse. There seisd vvith greef: yet prayes: then sours euen in Heauens gate it self: and there true loue doth find And then its Christ doth see, and vevv: his payne His cross: his speare-pearst side, his greef of mind Thence dumpt tvvixt ioy, & greef: as: on half slayne I must, euen at thy muse hovv vvell: hovv fit it lymms. Its greef, sobs, sighs, & tears, in tunes, in songs, & hymns I. P.
To him that made these hymns THers but one god, that this vvorld one hath made, One Christ, one Truth, one faith, one hope, one loue, To serve this one, in hymns of ones, dost shade Thy zeale, to teach vs that in one vve moue. Loe, as thy hymns be ones, so is thy name but odd, Hovv fitt? both name, & hymns doe ioyne to praise one god, Thus ten, & one, in one thou hast novve framd, That vve in one should keepe the lavve often, Thus by seaven, & seaven thou hast them so namd For seaven tymes seaven day by day vve breake them. Loe, your hymns, of one▪ Ten, & one, & seaven by seaven Learns, god to laud, his lavve to keepe, the vvay to heauen. G. F.
