16612A.7 33142603 28147
An Argument, wherin the appa∣raile of women is both reproued and defen∣ded. ❀ ANNO MDLI. decorative border 1534
The printer to the reder. THe gentilwoman, whi¦che hath caused this mat∣ter to be printed, happened a litle before Shroftetide, to be at a bidden feast in London, in companie of dyuers gentle men and gentle women: where emongest o∣ther talke, first of the basenesse of our coyne, and afterwardes of excesse in apparayle (whiche are the common talkes of these daies:) One of the companie beganne to make muche a∣dooe against women, for laiyng out their heare, for wearyng of verdin∣gales, for bonne graces, for silkes, and .xx. other thynges. Wherin it seemed to this gentle woman, he vsed not that temperance, that his profes∣sion and lernyng required. And ther∣fore she mildely answered: that seus God hath created the thynges of this
worlde for the seruice of man, and not man for them: she thought, that wo∣men as well as men, myght vse the same faire thynges of this worlde in their apparaile, which without some facion woulde bee vnseemely. And lyke as their heare, or suche other, was a beautie, whiche beyng coupled with honestie, maketh the person the more acceptable: so beeyng coupled with the contrary, it disgraceth and maketh theim the more lothsome. Wherfore the thyng beyng so indif∣ferent, if it shoulde not be laufull for them that be honest, to be clenly and fayre, it might folow, that the other sort shoulde be more set by than thei: and so should honestie decaie. In dede (saied she) if you coulde bryng men as well to reforme their hertes, as ye woulde haue women doe their ap∣paraile, ye shoulde neuer nede thus to braule with vs. Whervpon the man
waxed somewhat warme in agraua∣tyng the mattier, and (by a maner of raylyng) after many sentences of scripture alleged, he fell into an ora∣cion, that Cato made against the inso∣lence of women, and so handled the matter, that it seemed he had put all men to silence: in suche wise as for a good space, no man spake a woorde. At last maister William Thomas, be∣yng in the company, began to saie. This is muche like the nonnes les∣son, that whan she had founde Omnia probate, till she was great with child, coulde not finde, Quod bonum est tene∣te. For (vnder correction, quoth he) though ye haue eloquently rehersed Catos tale, yet haue you not tolde the occasion of the mattier, nor the ende that it came to: which if ye had done, shulde rather make against you, than with you. For whan Cato had sated, as ye haue rehersed, Lucius Valeri∣us,
one of the Tribunes, arose and made answere. And so began he the oracion, that Valerius in that case had made. Addyng further, that the law Oppia was thervpon abrogate. Whiche was a playne profe (saied he) that the Senate allowed not Ca∣tos opinion. Thus thei argued to and fro, till at length thei agreed, that all clenly or∣namentes were laufull vnto wōmen, so longe as thei prouoked neither con∣cupiscence, nor vaine glorie: wherin thei ended the mattier for that tyme. Now this gentle woman restyng, not fully satisfied with the once heryng of those oracions, desired maister Thomas of frendship, to sende theim translated vnto hir. Whiche he pro∣mised to doe. And all be it, that he willed hir, to kepe it to hir selfe: yet she thinkyng it suche a matter for the honest defence of women, as ought
not to be hidden, hath intreated me, thus to sette it foorth, trustyng to pa∣cify him wel enough, though he wold take it vnkindly. Willyng me besides on hir behalfe, to beseche you all (gen∣tle reders) not to thinke she hath done it of any purpose, to mainteine ex∣cesse (whiche she hir selfe naturally abhorreth) but euen simply for the pleasaunt and well handlyng of the mattier: to stoppe their mouthes, that with raylyng on womens maners, seeme to procure theim selues a cre∣dite.
The letter sent by may∣ster Thomas to the gentle woman, with the transla∣cions that she desyred. ACcordyng to your re∣quest, I haue done my best in translatyng as well Ca∣to his oracion, alleged (by the man ye wote of) in disprayse of women, as also the other oracion, made by Lucius Valerius: whiche I recited for aunswere to the same. And because the law Oppia, mencioned in both those oracions, is not plainely set foorth in Liuie, at the time of the makyng therof: I therefore haue ga∣thered suche priuate contribucions, as the Romayne people charged theim selfes withall about that tyme, to the intent, that besides the argument of your matter, ye maie also vnderstand the great kyndnesse, that the people
at those daies vsed towardes their common wealth. Whan almost euery man had rather perysshe priuately, than through his default the common wealth should susteine any preiudice. O, if we had no more but suche wo∣men now, as were than, I woulde thinke our worlde happie. But like as thei than had golden hertes, what so euer their apparayle was, so now (if I durst speake) I wolde saie, there bee many in golden apparayle, that haue rusty hertes. And what of that? Should I therfore condemne you all? No no. If I had ben so muche your aduersarie, I woulde neither in suche a matter haue taken this peine, nor yet (whan it was) haue spoken as I did in mainteynyng your quarell. But because I saw you matched with one as rough as Cato, who not con∣tented with naturall reasons, bur∣deined you so farre with scripture,
that ye shuld not be allowed to weare any pleasant apparaile: me thought I coulde no lesse in conscience, but take your part. And though he moun∣ted in choler against you (as these men doe, that maie not be contraried) yet I trust, in a mattier of suche weight, ye woll be well aduised ere ye folow his hastie perswasion. God forbidde I shoulde pretende to main∣teine you in pompe. For I know there is so little nede therof, that I wolde be sorie ye shoulde not doe as ye list. But be it, or be it not, or be as it maie be: Sens ye required me so ernestly to dooe this for you, now I haue per∣fourmed my promise, I shall as her∣tily desyre you to take it for a wit∣nesse of my good will and frendeship: and in no wyse to lette it passe your handes, lest men shoulde thinke, with flatteryng you, I shoulde goe about
to mainteyne a thyng most necessary to be restreigned. Thus with my her∣ty commendacions. &c. Your owne to commaunde William Thomas.
The notes of the peo∣ples beneuolence promi∣sed in my letter. THE warres, that about .MM. yeres a∣goe happened betwene the Romains and Car∣thaginenses, were so notable, as lightly the greatter haue not ben hearde of, as well for the puissance or greatnesse of both those common wealthes, as for the longe tyme of their obstinate con∣tencion. The circumstances wherof are to be redde in Liuie, and other good authours, that haue written it at length. But to my purpose now, ye must vnderstand, that Annibal (the notablest enemie that euer the Ro∣maines had) not longe before these matters, had diuers times ouerthro∣wen the Romaines in plaine battaile:
and had so beaten theim, that after their fall at Cannas, where a won∣derful nombre as well of Senatours as others, were slayne, it was reaso∣soned in Rome: whether it were bet∣ter for them to abandon the citie, and euery man to shyft for hym selfe: or els to abyde the aduenture that the Goddes woulde sende them. For vn∣doubtedly if Annibal after his victo∣rie had gone streight to Rome, the ro∣mayne astate had than finysshed his glorie. But whether his slackenesse gaue them courage: or their valiant∣nesse made theim desperate: or that the sterres had predestinate a greatter felicitie vnto theim: or what so euer the occasion was, the Romaines per∣seuered, and by littell and littell so recouered, that at length they chased Annibal out of Italie, and sendyng Scipio into Affrike, didde vnto Car∣thage that, whiche Annibal myght
haue done to Rome, sacked it, spoyled it, burned it, and rooted vp the verie foundacions. Neuerthelesse ete thei coulde bryng this to passe, thei were many tymes in so great extremitees, that if the priuate persons of Rome had not with their owne mainteined the publike charges, their thynges coulde neuer haue prospered as they dyd. ¶For first whan Titus Sempronius, and Quintus Fabius Maximus, were consules, the Scipios, that than had the gouernaunce of the armies in Spayne, wrote vnto Rome specially for garmentes and vittailes: without the whiche thei coulde not mainteine the warres. And because the tributes of Sicilia and Sardinia were scarse a∣ble to furnishe the armies continuyng in those countreis, and that there were so many Romaynes slayne at Trasmenus and Cannas, that few
were left to paie any tribute at home. Therfore Fuluius the Pretor, perswa∣ded the people, that for as muche as the customers and fermours of the re¦uenues of the common wealth, were become very ryche, as well of posses∣sions as of goodes, through the vse of publike thynges: Therfore it was now necessary they shoulde bee con∣streigned, with their substance to suc∣cour the common wealthes necessi∣tee, in furnishing the army of Spayne: to be paied agayne of the first money, that shoulde come to the Treasorie. For the whiche the Pretor appointed a daie, that the people shoulde assem∣ble to determine. At whiche daie XIX. of those customers and fer∣mours offered theim selues, to dis∣charge the whole prouision. So that the armie, for that tyme, was no lesse furnished, by priuate men, than the common wealth woulde haue done, in
tyme of their most prosperitee. ¶Afterwardes, in the consulate of Quintus Fabius Maximus, and Mar∣cus Marcellus, vpon the newes, that the Sicilians rebelled, and were in armes, whan Titus Octacilius should be sent with an armie thither: there wanted a nombre of mariners and o∣ther thynges to furnyshe the nauie. Wherfore a generall order was ta∣ken, that the Romaines, after certaine rates of their substaunce shoulde pro∣uide mariners at their owne charges, some one, some .iii. some .v. and some vii. paide for an whole yere. Whiche was the first time, that euer any Ro∣mayne army was sette foorth at the charges of the priuate citesins. ¶An other tyme, whan the Treasou∣ry was cleane without money, so that the Censoures had not, wherwith to repaire the temples: nor to geue the Curules their horses, nor to doe suche
other thynges as apperteygued to their offices. The calamitee therof moued a nombre of those, that ought to haue had money of them, contrary wise to come with money vnto them, exhortyng them to doe all thynges as liberally, as if the common wealth florisshed, promisyng, not to demande repayment before the warres were fi∣nished: like as the masters, of whom the slaues were bought, refused to take their money before the ende of the warres. Whiche good disposi∣cion beyng also founde in the people, moued the officers to take vp the goodes of the widowes and orphanes vpon credite, to be aunswered of the common wealth: and so farre this good will increased, that the fame therof engendred so great a liberali∣tee emongest the souldiours in the campe, that no pryuate horse manne, nor Centurion, woulde receyue his
paies, callyng theim Mercenarij that otherwise did. ¶But the last and most notable was, after the seuere sentence geuen against the Capuans, perswaded by the ora∣cion of Marcus Attilius Regulus, the ambassadours, as well of Sicilia, as of Capua beyng than dispatched, the Consules tended to the appoinctment of the army, and that perfourmed, be∣ganne to treate of the furniture of their nauie. To the whiche, because thei wanted as well mariners as mo∣ney, thei commaunded euery priuate man, after his rate, to prouide mari∣ners and galey men: and to vittayle and paie them for .XXX. daies, as it had ben seene tofore. This procla∣macion so muche sterred mens hertes, that thei wanted rather capitaynes, than matter of rebellion, saiyng, that the Consules, after the ruine of the Sicilians and Capuans, had determi∣ned
also to destroie the romayne peo∣ple, whiche was alreadie consumed by the tributes of so many yeres: ha∣uyng nothyng left than but the bare lande spoyled by the warres: their slaues were all taken from theim, some to the feelde, and some to the sea: And betwene the findyng of ma∣riners, and paiyng of tributes, that little siluer and money that they had, was cleane spent. So that it was impossible to constreigne them, to geue that thei had not. Wherfore if they woulde sell their goodes, thei might: and than coulde thei vse no more cru∣eltee but agaynst their bodies, that onely rested: whiche if they shoulde be compelled to redeeme, they coulde not, wantyng wherwith. ¶These thinges were not spoken pri∣uately, or secretely, but openly, and to the Consules faces: the people as∣semblyng by heapes together, whom
thei pacified as well as they coulde. Neuerthelesse the next daie, the Se∣nate beyng assembled, it was after longe disputacion concluded, that whether it were right or wronge, this burdeine must needes be susteined by priuate persones, the Treasourie be∣yng vtterly without money. And e∣uery man restyng as it were amased at the mattier, the Consule Leuinus spake on this wise. LIke as our office is aboue the Senate, and the Senatours su∣periours to the people in ho∣nour: so ought we to be the chiefe and firste of all other, to enterprise any great or weighty matter. For he that woll charge his inferiours with any greuous imposicion, and first practise it in hym selfe, shall finde theim the better disposed to obey, esteemyng theyr charge the lesse, whan they see their betters freely take the greatter
part of the burdein vpon them. Wher∣fore to the ende that the Romayne people be not disapointed of this na∣uie, that we intende to make, and that priuate men refuse not to fynde the mariners: let vs commaunde as well our selues as all you that be Sena∣tours, that to morow next we put all our golde and syluer, and out coyned brasse in common, i suche wise as no man reteyne more to him selfe than his owne ynges, his wiues, and chil∣dernes: and to his sonne his table tis: and he that hath wyfe or doughters, one vnce of golde. And they that haue fitten, as magistrates, in the feate Curule, maie reserue their horses for∣nimentes, and two poundes of siluer, to vse in a salt and goblette for the di∣uine seruice. The rest of the Sena∣tours to haue but one pounde of syl∣uer, and all other householders to re∣serue onely in masse money, 5000. as∣ses
a pece. All our other golde and siluer, and brasse money, let vs imme∣diately bryng vnto the .iii. magistra∣tes of the banke, without other deter∣minacion of the Senate, to the ende that our voluntarie contribucion and vehement desyre to the maintenance of our common wealth, maie fyrst al∣lure the myndes of the chiualrie, and consequentely of the people, to dooe the like. This onely waie we the Consules haue founde after muche disputacion, which with goddes helpe let vs take in hande. For as longe as we preserue the astate of our common wealth: so longe we dooe mainteyne the suretie of our owne priuate thyn∣ges. Where as habandonyng the publike, we can kepe nothyng our owne. Wherevnto vniuersally all their voyces were so agreable, that the Consules beyng highly thanked, and the Senate dissolued, euery man
applied him selfe with so muche hast, to bryng in their golde, siluer, and money, that well was he, whiche in the regesters myght bee wrytten e∣mongest the first, in suche wise, that neither the officers sufficed to re∣ceiue, nor the clerkes to write: which conformitie of the Senate, was ge∣nerally folowed by the knightes, and consequently by the people. So that without other commaundement or perswasion of the magistrates, the common Treasourie was furnisshed with money to make the paies, and the nauie sufficiently equipped to the sea. And so all thynges necessary for the warres beyng prouided, the Con∣sules departed towardes theyr pro∣uinces.
T. L. Decad. 4. lib. 4. EMonge the cares of the greatte warres, eyther yet scarsely fini∣shed, or like to continue, there happened a small thyng to be spoken of, though neuerthelesse it increased by parttakynges to great contencion. Marcus Fundanius, and Lucius Va∣lerius tribunes, proponed vnto the people the abrogacion of the law cal∣led Oppia. This law was set foorth by Caius Oppius, one of the tribu∣nes, whan Quintus Fabius, and Titus Sempronius were Consules, as the greattest heate of the punike war that no woman shoulde haue aboue halfe an ounce of golde in his appa∣rayle, nor weare garmentes wrought of diuers colours, nor shoulde ryde in chariottes in Rouse or other towne, or within a myle of any of them, onlesse it were to the open sacrifices. Mar∣cus
and Publius Iunij Brutij lyke wyse beeyng tribunes of the people, defended the law Oppia, saiyng: They woulde not suffre it to be an∣nulled. And many noble men drew to∣gether some to perswade, and some to disswade the mattier. In so muche that the Capitoll was replenyshed with a multitude of men, aduaunsyng and repugnyng this law. The ma∣trones, neither for feare of autho∣ritee, nor for shame, nor yet for the commandement of theyr housbandes coulde bee kept in: but fitted all the stretes of the citee, and kept the waies enteryng in to the high strete, entrea∣tyng all men as thei passed: that see∣yng theyr common wealth florisshed, and euery mans priuate good fortune daiely increased, they wolde be con∣tented, that the matrones might also be restored vnto their auncient orna∣mentes. This frequensie of women
daiely increased. For the women of the townes and villages nere there a∣bout resorted to the citee, and toke on theim so muche courage, that they went to the Consules, the Pretors, and the other magistrates, besechyng theim to fauour their cause. But Marcus Porcius Cato was so extreme an aduersarie agaynst theyr desyres, that for the maintenance of the law, whiche they sought to abrogate, he made this oracion. The oracion of Cato agaynst womens libertee. IF euery one of you, O Ro∣maynes, had determined to haue preserued the ryght and maiestie of a husbande ouer his owne wife, we shoulde now haue had lesse businesse with all these women together. But as our liber∣tee,
by our owne weakenesse is ouer∣come of the women in our owne hou∣ses: euen so here in the open stretes it is ouerthrowen and troden vnderfote. And because we wolde not euery man particularly resyst his owne: ther∣fore now we are abasshed to resyst them all together. In dede I thought it had ben but a fable feigned, that in a certayne Ilande all the man∣kinde, by conspiracie of the women, was vtterly destroied: but now I see, there is no kynde so small, in whom consisteth not extreme perill, it thei be suffred to assemble, to deuise, and to haue secrete consultacions. And I can scarsely in my mynde dyscerne, whether be the worse, the thyng it selfe, or the example, by whiche it is attempted. The one wherof apper∣teyneth vnto vs Consules and magi∣strates: and the other vnto you Ro∣maynes. For whether the thyng pro∣poned
bee conuenient, or not for the common wealth, it toucheth you, by whose voyces it must be determined. This sturre of the women, whether it be growen of it selfe, or raysed by you Marcus Fundanius and Lucius Valerius, sens vndoubtedly the blame thereof apperteyneth vnto the magi∣strates, I wotte not, vnto whom it is more reprocheable, vnto you the Tri∣bunes, or vnto vs the Consules. To you, if ye haue allured the women to moue Tribuniciall sedicions: And to vs, if we shalbe now constreigned to accept lawes by the compulcion of women, as we haue done here to fore by the common people. Treuly I came euen now through the middest of the women, not without blushyng. And if the respect of the maiestee and shame fastnes of euery of them apart, had not reteined me more than the re∣garde of theim al together (that they
shulde not seeme rebuked of the Con∣sule) I wolde haue saied: what new trycke is this? to renne abrode to stoppe the waies, and to intreate strange men? Coulde not euery one of you haue desyred this of hit owne at home? what, are you more plea∣sant abrode, than within the doores? and more of other mens, than of your husbandes. For in deede if men can not of their owne ryght kepe their wiues within their due termes, it shal little auayle what lawes bee made or vnmade here. Our auncestours woulde not consent, that women shoulde dyspose any thyng though well it were their owne, without the authoritee of their superiours: And therfore they were alwaies directed by their fathers, their bretherne, and their husbandes. And we neuerthe∣lesse (by goddes leaue) woll suffre theim to meddle with the rule of the
common wealth, to myngell theim selfes with vs in the open strete, in the parliament, and in the Squit∣tines. For what els doe thei now in the stretes, and at the corners, but comfort, some to forder the Tribunes purpose, and some other, that the law maie be abrogate. Bridle (I saie) this arrogant sexe, and these vntame∣able beastes. For if ye doe not bri∣dle theim now, neuer loke to bridle theim. This is the least thyng, that offendeth the women of all the thyn∣ges, that by the customes or lawes they are burdened, but they desyre a libertee of all thynges, or rather to saie the trouth, a lasciuiousnesse. For if thei preuaile in this, what woll they not attempt? Consider all the lawes that concerne women, by the whiche our auncestours restreigned their libertee, makyng theim obedi∣ent to their housebandes: and whan
you haue all gathered, it is euident, ye can yet scarsely rule them. Wher∣fore if ye now suffre your wyues to reproue lawes, and thus by one and one to wrest them out of your handes, and at length to make theim selfes e∣quall vnto their husbandes: thynke you than, ye shalbe hable to support them? For whan thei are become your felowes: foorthwith thei woll bee your betters. By god, thei not onely refuse to bee burdened with any new mattier, but also requiryng not the right thei offer a wronge: that a law, which by due order hath ben decreed, and with the vse and experience of so many yeres allowed, shoulde now be annulled: Meanyng, with the abro∣gatyng of one law to weaken the rest. There is no law, that serueth to eue∣ry mans profite: but this ought to be regarged, whether it bee commodi∣ouse for the greatter part and gene∣rally.
For if euery man myght re∣peale or condempne that part of the law, that priuately annoyeth hym selfe: what shulde it auayle the nom∣bre to make lawes? whan inconti∣nently they, agaynst whom it were made, myght annull theim. I wolde fayne heare neuerthelesse, for what cause the matrones shoulde royle foorth so amased, that scarsely they can forbeare the hygh strete, or the counsayle house. Is it for the re∣dempcion of their fathers, their hous∣bandes, their children, or their bre∣therne out of the handes of Annibal? There is no suche cause why. And god defend our common wealth shuld be in any suche necessitee. And yet whan it was so in deede, their pitious praiers were reiected. Perchaunce they wyll saie: neither pitee nor care for theyr owne, but religion onely hath drawen theim together to re∣ceiue
the mother Idea of Pesinunte, commyng out of Phrygia. O, what pretence or surmyse maie be deuised to cloke the sediciouse assemble of these women? They maie saie, it is because we wolde glister in golde and purple, that we maie ryde in chari∣ottes through the citee both worke∣daies and holydaies, triumphyng o∣uer the law now ouercome and abro∣gate: and ouer your suffrages taken and wrested out of your handes: to the ende our sumptuousenesse and ex∣cesse be not restreigned. You haue hearde me often complayne of wo∣mens superfluouse expences, and ma∣ny tymes of mens, not onely of the priuate, but also of magistrates: and that this citee is pestred with two sondry vices, Auarice and Prodigali∣tee: whiche two pestilences haue ben the subuersion of all great empyres. For now the more that the good for∣tune
of our common wealth dayly in∣creaseth, and that our Empyre is en∣larged, we beeyng entred into Greece and Asia, countreis replenished with al deliciouse thyng{is}: and that also we beginne to draw vnto vs the treasures of kynges: the more doe I feare, least those thynges haue rather taken vs, than we theim. These pictures and images brought hither from Siracu∣sa, are daungerous vnto this towne. Yea I here dyuers men ouermuche preyse the ornamentes of Corinth, and of Athens, makyng theim as wonders, and laughyng these earthen goddes of the Romaines to scorne. But I had rather we shoulde stycke to these our fauourable goddes, as I trust they will be, if we conserue them in their places. In our fathers time kynge Pirrhus, by his ambassadour tempted not only the mindes of men, but also of women, with presentes, e
euer the law Oppia was made to prohibite their excesse: and yet was there none that wolde receiue theim. And for what cause trow you? Euen for the same cause that our ancestours had, not to thinke that euer any suche law shoulde nede to be made. For there was than none excesse that re∣quyred it. Yea like as it is necessarie, diseases be fyrst knowen er euer the remedies bee had: So euill desyres are syredde er euer lawes be made to refourme theim. What was the cause that the law Licinia for fiue hundred acres of lande was made?Law Licinia. Was it any other, but the vnsaciable desyre of men to ioygne lande vnto lande? And wherefore was the law Cincia,Law Cincia, of gyftes and presentes or∣deigned? but because the people than were beecome tributaries and vas∣salles vnto the Senatours. It was no meruayle, that neyther the law
Oppia, nor any other lyke was than made for the bridelyng of womens pompe, whan golde and purple be∣yng freely geuen and offred, coulde not be receyued. Mary if Cineas, with those presentes, should now goe about the towne, he shoulde fynde them, that openly wold receiue them. And truely I can not imagen either the cause or the reason of some mens gredines. For like as the prohibityng of somewhat vnto one, whiche to an other is permitted, seemeth to bee grounded on some naturall shame∣fastnesse, or vncomelynesse: Euen so, if all the apparayle of you women were of one sort, wherof shoulde any of you feare to be noted? Truely the shame eyther of auarice or of pouer∣tee is verie great: but the law clereth you of both, whan you haue not that, which is not lauful for you to weare. O, (saieth the ryche woman) I can¦not
awaie with this equalitee. Why shoulde not I be decked with golde and purple? And why shoulde other folkes pouertee bee hydde vnder the colour of this law? that wantyng the thynges they can not haue, it shoulde seme thei might haue them, if it were not prohibited. But will you Ro∣maynes put this in stryfe emongest your wiues? that the riche shall haue that, whiche other maie not? And that the poore (because they woulde not therfore be contempned) shall strayne them selfes aboue their pow∣ers? For seus thei beginne to be asha∣med of that that needeth not: at length thei shal not be ashamed whan they nede. She that can prouide of hir selfe, maie doe it, but she that can not, must craue of hir housebande. And happie shall that housebande be, that whether he be praied or not prai∣ed (if he geue not) shall see that ge∣uen
by an other, that he hath not ge∣uen him selfe. Euen now ye see, thei openly intreate other womens hus∣bandes, and more then that, they re∣quire the law and the voyces: and through their importance doe of some opteine graunt, against him selfe, his goodes and children. For as soone as the law quayleth from bridelyng thy wifes excesse, loke thou no lon∣ger to bridell hir. Nor beleue not (O, Romaynes) that euer the matter will returne vnto the astate it was in before the makyng of this law. For it were better, not to accuse an euyll man, than to leaue him vnpunyshed. And this excesse shuld haue ben more tollerable, if it had neuer ben spoken of, than it will be now, if ye breake these bandes. Like vnto the prouo∣kyng of a fierse wylde beast, beyng lefte goe after he hath ben chafed in holde. Wherfore myne opinion is, ye
shoulde in no wyse abrogate the law Oppia. Not withstandyng I be∣seche all the goddes to prospere your determinacions, what so euer they shalbe. After this, whan the Tribunes of the people, that had professed also to interrupt this matter, had spoken somwhat to the same purpose, At the last Lucius Valerius, for the optey∣nyng of the contrarie (by hym sette foorth before) spake on this wise. The oracion of Lucius Valerius agaynst Catos. IF priuate men onely had ta∣ken in hand to perswade or disswade that that we de∣sire, I for my part, thinking there had ben enough saied on both sides, wold with silence haue abidden your iudgementes. But now that so
graue a man, as the Consule Marcus Portius, not onely with his authori∣tee (which though he had not spoken, had yet ben of great importaunce) but also with a longe exact and well han∣dled oracion hath impugned our re∣quest. I am constreigned, with a few woordes to answere hym, though he hath consumed mo wordes in womens correction, than in disswadyng our purpose, and all to the ende, that he wolde bryng in doubt, whether the thyng by him reproued, proceded of the women voluntarily, or by our pro∣curement. Wherfore I shall defende the matter, but not our selfes: whom the Consule hath burdeyned more in woordes than in deede. He calleth this companie of women, sometyme a sedicion, and sometyme a rebellion: that the wiues, in the time of a peace∣able florisshyng and fortunate com∣mon wealth, shoulde openly desyre
the abrogacion of a law, made against theim in the terrible sharpe tyme of warres. I know, that to aggrauate the matter, both these and other such woordes are gathered. And we all know Marcus Cato to be, not onely a graue oratour, but also sometyme ve∣ry bitter: not withstandyng that he is gentill of nature. But for all that, what noueltee haue these wyues at∣tempted in commyng by companies abrode to pursue their owne cause? Came they neuer abrode before? I will turne ouer thyne owne bokes of Originalles against the, and see there, how often tymes thei haue done this, and all to the profyte of the common wealth. And to beginne, First whan Romulus reigned, the Capitoll beyng already taken by the Sabines, and thei feightyng with baners displaied in the middest of the high strete: was not the battaile staied by the womens
rennyng betweene both armies? And after the expulsion of kynges, whan the army of the Volsci were incam∣ped within fiue myles of this towne, vnder the leadyng of Marcus Corio∣lanus, did not the women turne backe that army, that els had destroied this citee? And whan this towne was ta∣ken by the frenche men, dyd not the matroues of theyr owne free will, o∣penly geue the golde, wherwith the citee was redeemed? Yea and (to passe ouer these antiquities) euen in the last warres, whan most neede of money was, dyd not the widowes re∣leeue the Treasoury with their owne money? And whan the new goddes were fet home to helpe vs in our great neede, went not the matrones to the sea syde, to receiue the mother of the goddes? He will perchaunce saie, the causes are not lyke. In dede I meane not to compare the causes together.
For it suffiseth me to proue this no new thyng. And where in thynges indifferently belongyng as well to men as to women, no man hath won∣dered at theyr comyng abrode: why doe we now meruayle, they shoulde so dooe in a matter of their owne? And what (I praie you) haue they done? Helas we are verie hearde of hearyng: if whan maisters disdeigne not to heare the requestes of theyr slaues, we shall refuse to here our ho∣nest wiues. But now to come to the matter, wherin the Consules oracion tendeth vnto two pointes. First, it shal be against his wil, that any law shuld be abrogate: and specially, that a law, whiche concerneth the restreinct of womens excesse, shulde be annulled. So that the fyrst part of the Con∣sules oracion seemeth a common de∣fence of all lawes: and the other a∣gaynst superfluitee, seemeth agreable
to his seuere customes. Wherfore it I allege not the vanitee that is in both these poyntes, it were to be fea∣red, lest some of you myght be per∣swaded to an errour. For like as I confesse, that none of those lawes, whiche were made, not of the neces∣sitee of a certayne tyme, but for the perpetuall profite to endure for euer, ought in no wise to be annihilate: on∣lesse it be suche, as eyther experience condemneth, or some state of the com∣mon wealth declareth to be vnprofi∣table. Euen so doe I see those lawes that speciall tyme hath ben the occa∣sion of, to bee mortall (if I maie so call them) and mutable as tymes are. For those that are made in peace, the warre many tymes doth breake: and the peace likewise them that are made in warre. As in guidyng of a shippe, the caulme requyreth one thyng, and the storme an other. So that these
thynges beyng of diuerse natures, I wolde know, of whether kinde thinke you this law to be, that we doe abro∣gate? Is it one of those auncient kyngely lawes, made at the founda∣cion of this towne? Or (in the second degree) is it any of them, written in the .XII. tables by the .X. men, crea∣ted to prescribe lawes? without the whiche (beecause our auncetours thought the honour of women not possible to bee conserued) we also shoulde feare, that with the breakyng hereof the shamefastnesse and holy∣nesse of our wyues shoulde perisshe? Who knoweth not this to bee a new law, made .XX. yere agoe, in the time of Quintus Fabius and Titus Sem∣pronius Consules, without the which the matrones, hauyng liued so many yeres with excellent customes: why should it be feared, vpon the takyng awaie of this law, that thei shoulde
fall to so disordinate expenses? In deede, if this law had ben made to bridell the excesse of women, it might bee suspected, that the breche of it might reuoke their lasciuiousenesse. But why it was made, the tyme it selfe doth well declare. Annibal in Italy had wonne the battaile at Can∣nas, and hauyng gotten Tarentum, Arpos, and Capua, it seemed he was commyng with his armie to Rome, Our subiectes rebelled. There were no souldiours to furnishe the armie. None to defende the nauie. No mo∣ney in the Treasoury. The slaues were bought to arme the galeis, on condicion their maisters shoulde bee paied for them after the warre. At the selfe same tyme, corne, and all other thynges, that the warre required, be∣yng lackyng, the publicanes vnder∣toke the prouysion. We paied out gallie slaues of our owne purses, e∣uery
man after the rate of his taxyn we gaue al our gold and syluer to the publike, the Senatours being the first that beganne so to do. The widowes and orphanes brought theyr money to the Treasoury, and a certaine pro∣porcion was prescribed: aboue the rate wherof, no persone might kepe in his house, golde or syluer, or any coyned money of syluer or brasse. It is much like, that the matrones shuld be than so decked with ornamentes and excesse, that the law Oppia was necessary to bridell them. Whan (the sacrifice of Ceres beyng deferred, and the matrones all occupied in mour∣nyng) the Senatours commaunded theim to cease their doule, within XXX. daies. Who knoweth not, that because it was requisite, all the pri∣uate money shoulde bee conuerted to the publike vse, that the very pouer∣tee and miserie of the citee hath writ∣ten
this law to continue so longe as the cause, wherfore it was made, shuld endure? For it those thynges shoulde be obserued for euer, that by the Se∣nate was decreed, are by the people commaunded through the necessitee of that tyme: why doe we repaie money to priuate men? why doe we pledge our publike reuenues for present mo∣ney? why dooe we not bie slaues to sende into the warres? why dooe not we that be priuate, fynde galey men, as we dyd than? All other degrees, and all men doe feele the amendement of our astate: our wyues onely shall not atteygne the fruite of our publike peace and prosperitee? we men weare purple embrodered, beyng magistrates and priestes: and our sonnes like wise weare gownes of purple garded: the like wherof is permitted vnto the ma∣gistrates of our Colonies, and to our burgeses enfraunchesed: as here in
Rome the basest sort of magistrates, euen the strete maisters, haue theyr gownes garded. and not the quycke onely haue this preheminence, but the dead also may be burnt in purple: and shall we kepe the vse thereof onely from our wiues? And beyng laufull for the that art a man, to haue purple in the coueryng of thy bed: wilt thou not suffre the mother of thy house to weare a garment therof? Shall thy horse bee better apparayled than thy wyfe? Mary in purple, which wea∣reth and will consume, (though not rightfull) yet I see some cause of spa∣ryng: but in golde, wherin beside the workemanshyp, can be no losse, what euill can there be? But rather a store beneficiall, as well to the publike as to the priuate behofe, proued by ex∣perience? He saieth, that whan the women haue it not, there can bee no priuate enuie betwene theim. But
truely they are all in sorow and dis∣pleasure, to see those ornamentes per∣mitted vnto the wiues of our subiectes the latines, which are prohibited vn∣to our owne: and seeyng those decked with golde and purple, ride about the towne, and them selfes folow a foote, as though the empyre were in their citees, and not in ours. Such thynges are enough to sterre mens hertes: and what trow you than it will doe vnto simple women, whiche will be moued with a little? Thei haue no part, nei∣ther in magistrates, nor in priest∣hod, nor in triumphes, nor in armes, nor in guyftes, nor in the spoyles of warre. The onely glory of women is their clenlines, their ornamentes and apparayle: wherein thei reioyce and triumph. Which thynges our aunce∣tours called the womens worlde. And what other thyng can they leaue of whan they mourne, but purple and
gold? Or whan thei leaue mournyng▪ what els can thei take againe? In the time of reioysyng, or of supplicacions, what can they adde but their better apparaile? what though the law Op∣pia were abrogate, should it no more be in your powers, to forbidde your doughters, your wiues, your sisters, and as many as be vnder your rule, the thynges that the law now forbid∣deth? The women will neuer thinke them selfes ridde out of seruitude, as longe as ye kepe their derest thynges from them. And thei abhorre that li∣bertee, that is like vnto widowhead, or the death of their parentes or chil∣dren. Thei had rather the rule of their apparayle were in your power, than in the lawes. And you ought to haue them in your protection and defence, and not in seruitude▪ that ye might ra¦ther be called fathers or housbandes, than masters. The Consule euen now
vsed greuouse termes, callyng this the womens sedicion and rebellion: as though it were to be feared, they should take the holy hill or the Auen∣tine vpon them, as the obstinate peo∣ple somtime did. Neuerthelesse, what so euer ye shal determine: thei simple soules must abide it. Wherfore the greatter your power is, so muche the more temperately ought ye to vse it. ¶These thynges beyng spoken both with and agaynst the law: the next daie the nombres of women encreased abrode, and all in a flocke besette the dores of the Brutij, whiche were the Tribunes, that resisted the purpose of their Colleagues: and wolde not de∣part thense, till these Tribunes re∣lented vnto theim. Whervpon there rested no more doubt, but that all the Tribes wolde abrogate the law. So that .XX. yeres after it was made, it was annulled.
A table of suche wordes as the reder smally skilled, shall not well perceiue. ASses, cometh of as, assis, a small coyne amonge the Ro∣maynes .x. of them dyd coun∣trevayle our sterlyng grote. fiue thousande amounteth to viii. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterlyng. Auentinus, an hill at Rome. Banke, is the place of exchange, or takyng of money vpon interest. Capitoll, was the fortresse and chiefe place of Rome, where the Senate assembled in councell. Consules, were two chiefe officers of the citee of Rome, whiche were chosen euery yere, and bare hyghest authoritee in the common wealth. Censor, a iudge of mens maners. Also such one as was appoynted to value mens goodes. Colonies were certaine nombres of people sent out of Rome to inhabite the coun∣treis conquered by theim. Curules, were little cartes or dreies, ha∣uyng in theim chaiers of yuory, wherin there satte certayne officers, whiche had the charge and ouersyght of the buildyn∣dynges in Rome: sometyme it is vsed for
the same officers. Holy hill, whan the people rebelled against their rulers, they toke those places for their strength: and kept them till they had their willes. Idea, the mother of the goddes. Mercenarii, hyred souldiours. Matrones, were the citesyns wyues of Rome. Martius Coriolanus, a noble Romayne, who beyng vnkyndely exiled out of his countrey, prouoked a people cald Volsci to warre against them: and woulde by no meane be pacified: but by the onely in∣treatie of his mother, that made him re∣tire from his enterprise. Pretor, in the olde tyme was euery officer, that had the rule of any army. Afterward he that had iudicial authoritee, as it were the chiefe iudge, and had other iudges sit∣tyng vnder him. Phrygia, a realme in Asia the lesse. Pyrrhus, a king of Epyre, that made warre to the Romaynes. Publicanes, were certayne fermours that toke the customes and other publike re∣uenues in fee ferme. Publike, is as much to say, as the common. Punike warres, were the warres betwene the Carthaginenses and the Romaynes. Siracusa, a notable citee in Sicilia, called at this daie Sarragose. Sabines were a people dwellyng neere
Rom  ynes (hauys ) raui∣shed, for enci  cion. Suffrages, the  sembled, in geuyng their sent. Tribunes, were certayne officers ordeyned as proctours for the common people to mainteyne the peoples libertee. Tribuniciall sedicion, sedicion sturred vp by the Tribunes in the behalfe of the people. Tribe, a warde, a part of the people, some∣tyme diuided in three partes. Volsci, were a people of Italie, enemies to the Romaines. FINIS TABVLAE.
JMPRINTED AT London in Fletestrete, in the house of Thomas Birthelet. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
erunt om̄ia u{er}ba oris tui· Et cantent in uiis dn̄i{punctel} q̄m magna est gła dn̄i· Qm̄ excelsus dn̄s & humilia respicit{punctel} & alta a longe cognoscit. Si ambulauero in medio tibulationis uiuificabis me{punctel} & su{per} iram inimico{rum} meo{rum} extendisti manum tuam· & saluum me fecit dextera tua. Dn̄s retibuet {pro} me{punctel} dn̄e miscd̔ia tua in sm o{per}a manuum tuarum ne despicias. Dn̄e {pro}basti me & cognouisti me{punctel} tu cognouisti sessionem meam & resurrectionem Intellexisti cogitationes meas de longe{punctel} semitam meam & funiculum meū inuestigasti▪ Et om̄es uias meas preuidesti▪ quia non est sermo
est  ex me{punctel} & non potero ad eam. Quo ibo a sp̄tu tuo? & quo a facie tuo fug Si ascendero in celum tu illic es{punctel}  fernum ades· Si sumpsero pennas meas dilucolo{punctel} in extremis maris·
