16989 99842062 6686
A RIGHT COM∣FORTABLE TREA∣TISE CONTAINING fourteene pointes of consolation for them that labor and are laden: VVRITTEN BY D. MARTIN Luther to Prince Friderik Duke of Saxonie, he be∣ing sore sicke, thereby to comfort him in the time of his great distresse. Englished by W. GACE. Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier dwelling in the Blacke Friers. 1578.
Martin Luther. I Did write this booke in the beginning of my procedings, to the most gracious Prince Fride∣rik Duke of Saxony, when he was sore sicke. Now many thought good that it should be imprinted, but when it had bene eftsones imprinted, it was so corrupted and made vnperfect, that I found many wordes wanting, which I my selfe could not con∣iecture what they were: howbeit the sentences I haue restored after a sort, and such as I thinke I had in the beginning. Neither haue I thought it good now to chaunge or adorne them as I could: For I will in this booke shewe a testimonie of my proceeding, and gratifie the aduersaries, that they may haue wherewith to exercise their malice. It is sufficient for me if I please my Lord Christ & his Sainctes: I reioyce from my hart, and giue thankes to my God that I am enuied and hated of the de∣uill and his Impes.
TO THE VVOR∣SHIPFVLL M. HENRIE DALE CITIZEN AND MAR∣chant of the citie of London, VV. Gace wi∣sheth grace and peace from God the Father through Christ Iesus our Lord. MAnifold are the miseries of mans life, wherewith he is greatly grie∣ued and sundry wayes molested, insomuch as Iob sayth that man that is borne of a woman hathe but a short time to liue, and is re∣plenished with miserie. For he beginneth his life with teares & weeping, he pas∣seth it with sorrow & trouble, and endeth it with dolour and payne. Wherefore it is no maruell if some haue thought that it is the best thinge not to be borne, and the next to dye quickly: and that o∣ther some haue mourned and wept at the birthes of their friendes, and solemnly reioyced at their burialls. For what could they being destitute of the light of God and true religion, see in this life but trouble & miserie? Yea the godly themselues, as they haue in all ages suffered many afflictions in this life, so haue they passed through the same
as through a straunge countrie. For if heauen be our countrie, what is the earth els but a place of banishment? wherein being exiled from true de∣lightes and pleasures, we liue in a state vnquiet, troublesom, and many wayes miserable, as to him that shall duely consider the sundry troubles that are incident to all sortes of men in this life, wil ea∣sily appeare. Forasmuch then as this life is so miserable, as both the Saincts of God haue pronounced of it, the very heathen haue accounted it, & daily expe∣rience proueth it, & yet neuerthelesse we, seeing God hath placed vs in it, must remaine therein till he call vs away: great neede we haue of such con∣solation & encouragement as may be a meane to make vs passe the time thereof without grudging & impatiencie. For of our selues we are very fraile & weake, not able to resist, much lesse of power to ouercome, as is manifest by them, who in the time of affliction haue through impaciēcie murmured against God, albeit there both haue bene, and are many, who being not of them selues but by other meanes supported, haue patiently sustained many troubles and miseries. Wherefore I trust that my labor shall not be thought ill bestowed, but rather profitably em∣ploied, which I haue taken in translating this trea∣tise into the Englishe tongue, for that it tendeth chiefly to the consolation of such as are in afflicti∣on and distresse. For that which the title of this booke portendeth, the matter thereof sufficiently proueth, namely that it containeth consolations for them that labor and are laden, that is, that suf∣fer
afflictions and troubles in this life: so that they which shall diligently read and peruse the same, may be so confirmed thereby, that when they be troubled with hardnes of aduersitie, they may not be ouercome or throwne downe therewith: when they be molested with griefe & sorrow, they may be also delited with spirituall ioy: when they be e∣uen distressed with troubles and afflictions, they may receiue courage againe, being cheared with sundry consolations, & so patiently suffer accor∣ding to Gods will whatsoeuer it shall please him to lay vpon them. Howe great this commoditie is, it plainely ap∣peareth not onely by this, that the feelinge of the present affliction is thereby asswaged, but by this also, that it is a meane to moue and make vs to obey Gods will, which otherwise we woulde be readye to resist, and to suffer patient∣ly, whereas otherwise we woulde by impatien∣cie be stubborne agaynste the righteousnes of God. Wherefore forasmuche as I am not ignoraunt that the crosse is vsually incident to the godly, and that through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdome of God, I am bolde to com∣mende this treatise to all the godly in generall, to be read of them to their singular commoditie and comfort, but especially to your worshippe, whose godly conuersation both of a longe tyme hath bene, and dayly is an euident testimonie of your syncere and vnfeyned profession of Christe his religion: desiringe you to esteeme thereof, not accordinge to the quantitye or
outward appearance (for then shall you make but small account of it, being both litle in quantitie, & adorned with no eloquent tearmes or glorious wordes) but according to the frute that the godly shall reape by diligent reading therof. For pearles and precious stones for the most part are in quan∣titie but small, and in outward appearance simple, which in value notwithstanding are great and in vertue excellent. Howbeit being sufficiently per∣swaded of your well accepting hereof, I will not stand vpon this point, lest I shoulde seeme in any wise to dout of it, but doe desire Almighty God, that as you haue hitherto liued in his feare, so ye may dayly increase, and con∣stantly continue in the same euen vnto the ende. Your vvorships at commaundement W. GACE.
TO THE MOST FAMOVS PRINCE AND LORD, THE LORD FRIDERIK, Duke of Saxonie, &c, his very good Lord. OVR Lorde and Sauiour Iesus hathe left a commaundement which pertay∣neth indifferently to all Christians, that we should performe the duties of hu∣manitie, or rather (as the Scripture calleth them) the workes of mercy to the afflicted and miserable: that we should visit the sicke, endeuour to deliuer the captiues, and doe such like to our neigh∣bour, whereby the present euills may be somewhat as∣swaged. Hereof our Lord Iesus Christ hath in him selfe set forth vnto vs a most manifest & singular example, wheras of his exceeding loue toward mankind, he came downe from the bosom of the father into our miseries and into our prison, that is, into our flesh and most mi∣serable life, and tooke the punishment of our sinnes vp∣on him selfe, that we might be saued: according as E∣sai sayth chap. 43: Thou hast laden me with thy sinnes, and wearied me with thy vngodlines, &c. If there be any whom this so manifest & singular an example doth not stirre vp, and the authoritie of Gods commaunde∣ment
added therunto doth not moue to performe these workes of charitie, surely he shall worthely in the last iudgement heare the voice of the angrie Iudge: Goe thou cursed into euerlasting fire. For I was sicke and thou didst not visit me, but being altogether vnthank∣full for the exceeding benefits which I bestowed on thee and all the world, thou didst not euen in the most sclender duties relieue or helpe thy brethren, no not me Christ in my brethren. Forasmuch therefore most famous Prince, as I see your Grace to be sore sicke, and that Christ also is sicke in you, I haue thought it my dutie to visit your Grace by writing somewhat vnto you. For I can not dissemble, that I doe not heare the voice of Christ our of your Graces body and fleshe crying to me, and saying: Be∣hold I am sicke here. For these euills, namely sicknes and such like, not we Christians onely, but Christ him∣selfe also our Lord and Sauiour, in whom we liue, doth suffer, as he manifestly witnesseth in the Gospell: VVhatsoeuer ye doe to the least of mine, ye doe it vnto me. Nowe although we owe this duetie to all that are sicke in generall, that we doe visit and comfort them, yet doe we owe it chiesly to them that be of the hou∣shold of saith. For Paule doth plainely distinguish be∣tweene aliens, and them that professe the same faith with vs, or with whome we haue some alliance. Ga∣lat. 6. Howbeit I haue other reasons also of my duetie. For I know that I as one of your Graces subiectes, togither with the rest of your subiectes ought to be moued with your Graces sicknes, and to be as it were sicke togither with you, as the member with the head, in whom all our good estate, safetie, and prosperitie consisteth. For we
acknowledge your Grace to be as a certain Naamā by whom God at this day giueth health to Germanie, as in time past by him he gaue health to Syria. VVhere∣fore euen the whole Romane Empire hath your Graece in admiration, doth reuerence and honour you as a fa∣ther of the countrie, as a singular ornament and safe∣gard of the whole Empire, but especially of the Ger∣mane nation. Neither do we owe this only to your Grace, to com∣fort you as much as we are able, and as it were to beare the present case with you, but much rather to pray vn∣to God for your health and recouerie: which I hope is done with all diligence and endeuour of your Graces subiectes. As for my selfe, whom many notable bene∣fits and pleasures haue made a dettour to your Grace more then the rest, I acknowledge that I ought by some singular duetie to declare my thankfulnes. But because in this sclendernes of abilitie and power, I am able to performe no notable thinge, D. George Spalatine, who is your Graces Chaplen, aduertized me that I shoulde doe well to make some spirituall consolation & send it to your Grace, for that that would be a thing very ac∣ceptable vnto you. VVherefore I thought it not good to doe contrary to the aduertizement of my frende, and therefore haue I gathered togither these fourteene chapters, being comprised as it were in a table, and haue intitled them That is, fourteen, or that which consisteth of that number. Tessaradecas, that they might be in steede of fourteene Sainctes which our superstition made and called the driuers away of all euills. How∣beit this is not a siluer but a spirituall table, where∣with, not the walls of temples are to be adorned, but the godly mind is to be comforted and confirmed. And I hope that it will be very profitable to your Grace in
this present state. Nowe it is diuided into two partes, whereof the former contayneth seuen considerations of euills, whereby the present griefes and troubles are mi∣tigated and asswaged. The latter containeth likewise seuen considerations of good thinges tending to the same ende. VVherefore I desire your Grace to take this my simple labour in good parte, which I pray God ye may so enioy, that by diligent reading and consideration of this trea∣tise ye may haue some ease. I humbly commend me to your Grace. Your humble and obedient sub∣iect MARTIN LVTHER.
THE PREFACE. THe Apostle Paul in the 15. chapter of his Epistle to the Romanes speaking of chri∣stian comfort, sayth: Bre∣thren, VVhatsoeuer things haue ben written afore time, were written for our learning, that we through pati∣ence, and comfort of the Scriptures might haue hope. VVhereby he plainly teacheth that our comforts must be taken out of the holy Scriptures. Nowe the holy Scrip∣tures vse two sortes of comfort, inasmuch as they commend vnto vs the considera∣tion of two sortes of things, namely of e∣uill things and of good things, according as the wise man sayth: In the day of affli∣ction remember prosperitie: & in the day of prosperitie be mindful of affliction. For the holy Ghost knoweth that euery thing is of such sort & so great to man, of what sort and how great his opinion is thereof. For that which is counted vile & nothing esteemed, doth litle moue, either with loue if it come, or with griefe if it depart. VVherefore he laboureth most earnestly
to call man from the opinion & affection of thinges, which vvhen he hath brought to passe, all thinges are then indifferent. Novve forasmuch as this calling is done especially by the vvorde, vvhereby the opinion is transferred from the thinge, vvhich is presently felt to the thing vvhich either is absent or not presently felt, it is by good reason that vve shall haue no cō∣fort but by the Scripture, which in the day of affliction calleth vs to the considerati∣on of prosperitie, vvhich is either present or to come: also in the day of prosperitie calleth vs to consider affliction. But that these considerations may be more easie vnto vs, vve vvill diuide either of them in∣to seuen partes. To the former shall be re∣ferred the euills vvhich are to be conside∣red of a man: First vvithin him selfe: Se∣condly before him: Thirdly behind him: Fourthly beneath him: Fiftly on the left hande: Sixtly on the right hand: Seuenthly a∣boue him.
THE FIRST CHAP∣TER OF THE FIRST CON∣sideration, which is of the in∣ward euil. THis is certaine and moste true, whether man beleeue it or not, that there can be none so great trouble & ver∣ation in man, which is the worst of the euills which are in him, so ma∣ny moe and greater euils are there in him then which he feeleth. For if he felt his e∣uill, he should feele euen hell: for he hath hel in him self. Doost thou demaund, how? Man hath hell in him selfe, which is the grea∣test euill in him. The Prophet sayth: All men are lyars. And againe: Euery man liuing is altogi∣ther vanitie. Now to be a lyar and vaine is to be voyd of veritie, & not to be in deed: but to be without veritie, and not to be in deede, is to be without God, and to be no∣thing: and this is to be in hell, and to be condemned. Therefore God mercifully chastening vs, openeth vnto vs and layeth vpon vs the smaller & lighter euils, know∣ing, that if he should bring man to ye know∣ledge of his euill, he should forthwith pe∣rish
in a moment: howbeit he hath giuen it to some to haue a feeling and taste of it, of whome it is sayd: He bringeth downe to the graue, and fetcheth vp againe. Where∣fore they say rightly who cal corporal suf∣ferings certaine aduertizements of the in∣ward euill. And the Apostle Heb. 12 cal∣leth them ye fatherly chastenings of God, saying: VVhy God scourgeth euery sonne whom he re¦ceiueth. He scourgeth euery sonne that he receiueth. Which he therefore doth, that by these scourges and small euills he may expell those great euills, least we should at any time feele them, as it is sayd Prouerb. 22: Foolishnes is bound in the hart of the child, and the rod of correction shall driue it away. Are not godly parents also more grieued by their childrē if they be theeues or euill, then if they be wounded? yea they doe them selues beat and wound them that they may not be euill. What therefore is the cause that this very euil is not felt? Godsuffe∣reth not mā to feele his greatest euill, and why. truely as I haue said, God disposing it it commeth so to passe, that man may not be vtterly discouraged, if he should see his most inward euils. For God hideth them, and will haue them seene by only faith, while he sheweth them
by the euill that is felt. Therefore in the day of affliction or when thou sufferest euil thinges, remember good thinges: consi∣der howe great a good thinge it is not to know all the euill, be mindfull of this good thinge, and the euil which thou feelest shal lesse disquiet or trouble thee. So againe in the day when thou enioyest good thinges, remember euill things, that is, while thou art not grieued with those that be very e∣uills in deede, in this want of griefe be thankefull, and remember the very euills, then will it come to passe that thou shalt lesse feele the euill that is felt. It is manifest therefore that the want of griefe is alwayes greater in man in this life, then griefe, not for that the whole euill is not present, but because there is no opinion or affection thereof by the goodnes of God, who hideth it. Hereupon we see them to whom it is giuen to behold their very euill, howe rigorous and cruell they are against them selues, howe they count it nothing whatsoeuer they can suf∣fer in their whole life, so as they feele not their hel. So would euery one doe, if he ei∣ther felt or firmely beleeued his inward e∣euill:
he would of his owne accord call for outward euills, he would sport in them, & would neuer be more sad or sorrowfull, thē when he had no euills, as we know some of the Sainctes to haue done. Wherefore in the first comfortable con∣sideration, The com∣fort of the first consi∣deration. a man may say to him self: thou doost not yet, O man, feele thine euill, re∣ioyce and giue thankes, that thou art not compeld to feele it: and so a small euil be∣ing compared with one that is very great, shall be made light and easie. This is that which some saye: I haue deserued farre worse things, yea euen hel it selfe: an easie thing surely to be spoken, but intolerable to be felt. And this euil albeit it be hid, yet doth it shew forth his frutes sufficiēt grie∣uous: Frutes of the greatest euill which is in man. these are feare and the vncertainty of a trembling conscience, whereby faith is impugned, whiles man knoweth not or douteth whether he hath God fauorable vnto him, which frute is so much more bit∣ter as faith is weaker. And this only infir∣mitie being wel weyed, forasmuch as it is spiritual, is farre more grieuous then that of the body, which it doth make euen most light, being diligently compared vnto it.
Beside these, to the inward euils pertai∣neth all that tragedy, which the Preacher describeth, whereas he so often maketh mention of vanitie and affliction of the spi∣rit. For how many counsels doe we take in vaine? how many of our desires are fru∣strate? how many thinges doe we see, how many things do we heare which we would not? Euen those thinges which tende to our desire, fall out contrary to our desire, so that there is nothing entire and perfect. Moreouer all these thinges are so muche greater as one is placed in higher place or state, who must needes be rost with farre more and greater sourges, waues, & tem∣pests, then the rest that are troubled with the same thinge, so that the 103. Psalme sayth well: small and great beastes, and thinges creeping innumerable, are in the sea of this worlde, that is, infinite sortes of tentations, wherefore Iob chap. 7. calleth the life of man a tentation. Now these are not therefore no euils because they are litle felt, but because through vse and daily cu∣stome they are nothing accounted of, and affliction & opinion in these is worne out, by the worke of God: wherefore those that
be rare doe rather moue, which as yet we haue by no vse learned to contemne. So that it is true, that we doe feele scarce the thousandth part of our euills: it is also true that out euills are measured, felt, or not felt, not by the veritie of the thinge, but by our opinion and affection. The second chapter of the second consi∣deration, which is of the euill to come or before a man. IT will not a litle lighten euery present euill, if thou turne thy mind to them that are to come, which are so many, such, & so great, that hereunto alone is referred that great and one of the principall affections which is called feare, Feare what it is. which some define to be an affection of the euill to come, accor∣ding as the Apostle saith Rom. 11: Be not hie minded but feare. The euil to come. This euil is so much greater, as it is more vncertaine, of what sort and how great it wilbe when it come, so that it is a common saying: There is no age to whom ye scabb may not come, which notwithstanding is an euill that is wont to happen to children and infants. So that no
man is free and exempt from any euills of any man, but whatsoeuer one man suffe∣reth, the same also may an other suffer. This is verified by the histories & tra∣gedies of all ages, by all the complaints of the whole world: by more then three hun∣dred sorts of diseases, whereby mans body may be troubled, as some haue well noted. If there be so many diseases, how many o∣ther il chaunces thinkest thou wil there be of other thinges, of frendes, finally of the minde it selfe, which is the principall sub∣iect of all euills, and the onely receptacle of sorrow and euills? Moreouer the force & feeling of euils is so much more increased, by howe much the state is greater & more worthy, whē as po∣uertie, ignominie, & all il chaunces, seeing that they may euen sodenly come, must needes, forasmuch as all thinges hange as it were by a sclender thread, be feared eue∣ry howre, no otherwise then that sworde, which Dionyse the tyran hoonge ouer the head of his guest. It ought greatly to comfort vs, & moue vs to loue and praise God, that we be∣ing in daū∣ger of so many euils, few or none come vnto vs. Now whatsoeuer of these do not come, it is to be counted for aduasi∣tage, & for no smal cōfort against that euill that chaunceth, so that thou art here com∣pelled
to say with Ieremie: it is through the mercies of ye Lorde that we are not de∣stroyed. For whatsoeuer of them doth not chaunce, it chaunceth not, the right hand of ye Highest letting or prohibiting it, which mightely preserueth vs on euery side as it is declared in Iob, so that Satan and euils doe euen grudge and beare it vnpatient∣ly that they are letted and prohibited. Wherfore we see, how sweetely the Lord is to be loued, as often as any thing chaun∣ceth vnto vs, forasmuch as by this one euil our most louing father admonisheth vs to consider howe many euils are ready to as∣saile vs, if he did not stay and let them: as if he sayd: Satan and a huge heape of euills desire to sifte thee: but I haue set boundes to the sea, and haue sayd vnto it, hitherto shall thy swelling waues come, Death the most terri∣ble & most certaine e∣uil to come, yet the time of the com∣ming ther∣of most vn∣certaine. and here shall they stay, as he sayth in Iob chap. 28. But none of them shall come, perhaps the will of God being so: howbeit that which of all terrible things is sayd to be the grea∣test, namely death, shall most certainely come, and nothing is more vncertaine then the hower thereof. Which euil is so great, that we see that many men had rather liue
euen with all the foresayd euils, then they being ended to dye once. And to this one the Scripture also, wheras it contemneth the rest, referreth feare, saying: Remem∣ber the end and thou shalt neuer do amisse. Consider how many meditations, howe many bookes, how many meanes and re∣medies are ordained hereunto, so that with the remembrance of this onely euill it is v∣sual to fray men from sinnes, and make the world contemptible, to lighten sufferings and euills, and to comfort the afflicted by comparing their euills with so horrible & great an euill, which shall at one time or o∣ther of necessitie come. There is no man, who would not wish to suffer all euills, if thereby he might auoide the euill of death. This the Sainctes also haue feared: this Christ suffered with feare and sweat like dropps of blood. So that the diuine mercy hath bene careful to strengthen & comfort the weake & faint harted in nothing more then in this euill as we shall see hereafter. As for Christians they haue a speciall and proper cause to feare the euill to come, VVhat euil to come Christians ought to feare. which exceedeth all the other euils: this is that which ye Apostle setteth forth I. Cor.
10. saying: Let him that thinketh he stan∣deth, take heede lest he fal. So slipperie is the way, so mighty is the enemy, being ar∣med with our owne proper strength (that is, with the aydes of the flesh & of all euill affections) accompanied wt infinite hands & companies of the world, with delights & pleasures on the right hand, with troubles & the euil wils of men on ye left, beside that art, a thousand wayes to hurt, seduce, & de∣stroy, whereof he is most kilfull. We liue so that we are not sure of our good purpose so much as a moment. Cyprian speaking of many such things in his epistle of mor∣talitie, teacheth that death is to be wished as a speedy helper to auoyde these euils. And for the most part where men haue a good hart, True Chri∣stians con∣ene death, & all euils, that they may be de∣liuered frō the euill of sinne. & duely reuolue in their minde these infinite perils, we see them, despising life and death, that is all the aforesaide e∣uills, wish to be losed, that they may be al∣so losed from this euill of sinnes wherein they are, as we haue sayd in the first chap∣ter, and into which they may fall, whereof we speake nowe. And surely these are two most weighty reasons, to moue vs not one∣ly to wish for death, but also to contemne
all euills, not to beare one euil onely light∣ly, if the Lorde shall giue to any to be mo∣ued with them, for it is the gift of God to be moued with them. For what true Chri∣stian will not wish euen to dye, and not on∣ly to be sicke, who seeth and feeleth, that he while he liueth in healthe, is not onely in sinnes, and continually may and daily doth fall into moe, and so without intermission doth contrary to the moste louing will of his most louing Father? With this vehe∣mencie of indignation Paule beinge mo∣ued (as it is declared Rom. 7.) when he had complayned that he did not the good which he woulde, but the euill which he would not, cryed out: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodye of this death? The grace of God sayth he by Iesus Christ, &c. He litle lo∣ueth God his Father, who doth not choose rather the euill of death, then this euill of sinning, seing that he hath ordayned death hereunto that this euil may at the last haue an ende, and death may be the minister of life and righteousnes, whereof shal be spo∣ken hereafter.
The third chapter of the third conside∣ration, which is of the euill past or behind vs. HErein more then in ye rest notably shi∣neth the sweete mercye of God the fa∣ther, which is able to comfort vs in all our distresse. VVe shall then chie∣fly perceiue the goodnes of God to∣ward vs, & the care which he hath ouer vs, when we cōsider our life past. For euery man neuer feeleth the hand of God more present vpon him, then when he calleth to minde the yeares of his life past. Sainct Augustine saith: If a man should choose either to dye, or to leade a∣gaine his life past, he would choose rather to die, considering so great perills & euils, which he hath scarce and hardely auoided. Which saying is most true, if it be well & duely weyed. For here a man may see, how often he hath without his owne studye, without his owne care, yea without and contrary to his desire, done and suffered many thinges, whereof he did not so much as thinke before they were done, or in do∣ing, that the worke being ended, he is then first compelled to say: Howe hath it come to passe that I haue done these thinges, which I did not thinke on, or thought of o∣ther
thinges? so that the prouerbe is true: Man purposeth, but God disposeth, that is, altereth, and bringeth to passe an other thinge then man purposeth, that euen in this one thinge we can not denie, that our life and actions are gouerned & directed, not by our owne wisedom, but by the mar∣uelous power, counsel, & goodnes of God. Hereby we perceiue howe often God hath bene wt vs, when we neither saw nor felt it, and how truely Peter sayd: Cast all your care on him, for he careth for you. Wherfore if there were no bookes nor sermons, yet our life it selfe led through so many euills and perills, if it be well consi∣dered, doth abundātly commend the good∣nes of God to be present with vs, & most sweete vnto vs, who hath farre otherwise then we either thought or felt, borne vs as it were in his bosome, and as Moses sayth Deut. 32: The Lord hath kept him as the apple of his eye, he hath led him about, and caried him on his shoulders. And hereun∣on came those sayinges in the Psalter: I remember the time past, I meditate in all thy works, yea I do meditate in the works of thy handes: I will remember the won∣ders
of olde: And againe: I remembred thy iudgements of old, VVe ought greatly to be comfor∣ted in the present euil when we cō¦sider from how many euills God hath preser¦ued vs in our life past and haue bene com∣forted. All these and such like tende to this ende, that we should knowe, that if we see that God was then present with vs, when we did not thinke thereof, neither he did seeme to be present, we shoulde not doubt that he is nowe also present, when he see∣meth vnto vs to be absent. For he that pro∣tected and preserued vs in many necessi∣ties without our owne care or thinkinge thereof, he I saye will not forsake vs in a small matter although he seeme to forsake vs, according as he sayth in Esai: A litle while haue I forsaken thee, but with great mercifulnes shall I take thee vnto me. Hereunto thou mayst adde: Who hath had care of vs so many nightes when we flept? who was carefull for vs as often as we la∣bored, plaied, and did infinite other things, wherein we were nothing carefull for our selues? So we see how al our care, whether we will or no, VVhy God leaueth vs sometime to our owne care, he him selfe see∣ming not to care for vs. must be referred to God alone, we being very seldom left to our owne coū∣sell or care, which notwithstanding ye Lord sometime doth, that he may teach vs to ac∣knowledge
his goodnes, that we may per∣ceiue howe muche difference there is be∣tweene his care and ours. Wherefore he sometime suffereth some light sicknes or other euil to come vnto vs, making sem∣blance yt he hath no care of vs (for in deede there is no time whē he careth not for vs) notwithstanding he doth in the meane sea∣son prohibit & let, that so many euils as are ready to assaile vs, do not together on eue∣ry side come violētly vpon vs, that he may try vs as most deare children whether we will commit our selues to his care being knowne of vs through all ye rest of our life, & marke how vnprofitable & impotent our owne care is. For what doe we profit our selues, or what cā we profit our selues in al our life, who in a litle while can not cure & remedie one onely payne of the legge? Why then are we so careful in the point of one perill or euill, and doe not leaue the care to him, when as our life it selfe being witnes, we are kept and preserued in so many euills without our owne labour or trauel? To know & duely to consider these things, is to know ye works of God, to me∣ditate in his workes, & by ye remembrance
of them to be comforted in aduersitie and troubles: But they that are ignorant here∣of shall fall into that which is mentioned Psal. 29. Because they haue not vnder∣stood the workes of the Lord, nor the ope∣ration of his handes, thou shalt breake them downe, and not build them vp. For they are vnthankful for all the care which God hath taken for them in all their life, who do not commit the care of them selues to him for a litle while. The fourth chapter of the fourth conside∣ration, which is of the euill be∣neath vs. AS yet we haue seene no other in all the euills which we suffer, but that ye good∣nes of God is so great, and so present with vs, that among innumerable euills, where∣with we are compassed in this life, & wher∣in we are euen imprisoned, scarce a very few, and those not at all times are suffered to assaile vs, so that euery present euill wherewith we are troubled, is but an ad∣uertizement of certaine great aduauntage, which we haue through the goodnes of
God, whiles that he suffereth vs not to be oppressed with ye multitude of euills wher∣with we are compassed. For it is a mira∣cle, if one be assailed with infinit blowes, & be touched but with one alone, yea it is a grace that he is not stricken with all, a mi∣racle that he is not stricken with many. Nowe the first of the euills that are be∣neath vs, is death, the second, hell. The euills beneath vs what they are, & how we may take comfort by the consi∣deration of the first of them. If we consider the shamefull and vile death of o∣thers, wherewith sinners are punished, we shall easily perceiue with howe great ad∣uauntage we suffer lesse then we haue de∣serued. For how many are hanged, drow∣ned, or stricken with the sword, which per∣happes haue done farre lesser sinnes then we, so that their death and miserie is sette before vs of Christ as a glasse, wherein we maye see what we haue deserued: as Luke 13. when certaine shewed him of the Galileans, whose bloode Pilace had mingled with their sacrifices, he aunswe∣red: suppose ye that these Galileans were greater sinners then the other Galileans, because they haue suffered suche thinges? I tell you, nay: but except ye amend your liues, ye shal all likewise perish. Or thinke
you that those eighteene, vpon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slue them, were sinners aboue all men that dwell in Ieru∣salem? I tel you, nay: but except ye amend your liues, ye shal all likewise perish. For we may not thinke that lesser euils are due vnto vs, who haue committed greater or like sinnes. Neither will the iustice and truth of God be vniust & false for vs, who hath determined to giue to euery man ac∣cording to his deedes. Moreouer, How we may take comfort by consi∣deration of the second euill be∣neath vs. in hell, & eternal damnation howe many thousand are there, who haue not committed the thousandth part of our sinnes? how many virgins are there, chil∣dren, & they whom we call innocents? how many religious men, Priestes, &c. who in their whole life semed to serue God, & per∣happs through some one fall are punished for euer? Here must be no dissembling: the iustice of God is ye same in euery sinne, he hateth & condemneth sinne alike in whom∣soeuer it be found. Doe we not here see the inestimable mercy of God, which hath not condemned them who haue so often deser∣ued it? Howe muche, I praye you, is it which we can suffer euen in all our life, in
respect of the eternall punishment, which they suffer hauing deserued it perhaps by one offence, we in the meane time being free, and saued from many sinnes which God passeth ouer and remitteth? Where∣as we do not regard these benefits of God, or make light accoūt of them, it is through vnthankfulnes & a certaine senseles hard∣nes of incredulitie. Hereunto moreouer are to be referred so many Infidels, Gentiles, Iewes, vnto whom if those things had ben giuen which are giuen to vs, they had bene, not in hell, but in heauen, and had farre lesse sinned. Examples hereof Christ setteth before our eyes Matth. II. saying: Wo be to thee Corazin: Wo be to thee Bethsaida: for if the greate workes which were done in you, had bene done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented long agone in sackcloth & ashes: but I say to you, it shalbe easier for Tyrus & Sidon at the day of iudgement, then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted vp vnto heauen, shalt be brought downe to hell: for if the greate workes which haue bene done in thee, had bene done among them of Sodom, they had re∣mained
to this day: but I say vnto you, that it shal be easier for them of the land of So∣dom in the day of iudgement, then for thee. We see therefore what great praise & loue we owe to our most gracious God, in eue∣ry euill of this life, for that we cast scarce of one drop of them which we haue deserued, which Iob compareth to the sea, and to the sande of the sea. The fift chapter of the fift consideration, which is of the euill on the left hand. HEre we must set before our eyes that great companie of aduersaries and e∣uill men, The first comfort which the considera∣tion of the euill on the left hand ministreth vnto vs. & in them we must first consider, that they haue not done that euil to our bo∣dy substāce, fame, soules, which they would haue done, but that God did stay and let them: and the higher calling and state that one is placed in, to so many more deceits, subtle deuises, sclaunders and troubles of the aduersaries is he subiect, in all which he may perceiue & feele the present hande of God. What maruell is it then if we be sometime touched with some one? Secondly their owne euills are to be
considered of vs also, The second comfort which we may take by conside∣ring the e∣uill on the left hand. not that we should re∣ioice at them, but that we should haue com∣passion on them. Nowe they also are sub∣iect to all the same euils, whereunto we are subiect, as it may be easily perceiued by the former cōsiderations. Howbeit herein they are more miserable then we, that they are out of our societie, as well corporall as spi∣ritual. For this euil which we suffer is no∣thing in comparison of that, that they liue in sinnes, in infidelitie, vnder the wrath of God, vnder the dominion of the deuil, most miserable slaues of vngodlines and sinne, so that if the whole worlde shoulde curse them, it coulde wishe them no worse. All which if we doe throughly perceiue, we shall also perceiue, with how great fauour and blessing of God we, liuing in faith, in the kingdome of Christ, in the seruice of God, do suffer some litle euill of the body, which in so great plentie of most excellent thinges, should not be so much as felt: yea their miserie ought to be so grieuous to him that hath a Christian and godly hart, that he should thinke his owne griefes de∣lightes. For so Paule willeth Philip. 2: Looke not euery man on his owne things,
but euery man on the things of other men. Let the same minde be in you, that was e∣uen in Christ Iesus, who being in ye forme of God, tooke on him the forme of a ser∣uaunt, &c. That is, with most louing affe∣ction he tooke on him our forme, behauing him selfe no otherwise in our euills, then if they had bene his owne, so, as it were for∣getting his owne good thinges, and ma∣king him selfe of no reputation, that he might be found altogether made like vnto men, refusing to be subiect to no humane thinge, being occupied onely in our euills. The Saincts being animated by this af∣fection, and by this example stirred vp, are wont to pray euen for the euills of their e∣nemies, & to do all things according to the example of Christ, & forgetting their owne iniuries or righteousnes, to be careful how they may deliuer them from their euills, wherwith they are wtout comparison more troubled then wt their owne, as Peter wri∣teth of Lot 2. Pet. 2, who dwelled among them, which vexed his righteous soule from day to day wt their vnlawfull deedes. Thou seest therefore how deepe a pit of euils here appeareth, & that we haue occa∣sion
to take pity and compassion, & to for∣get our owne small euil, if the loue of God be in vs: thou seest also how litle God per∣mitteth vs to suffer in respect of those thinges which they suffer. VVhy the euills of our aduersaries and euill men do litle moue vs. But whereas these things do litle moue vs, the cause is, for that the eye of the hart is not sufficient cleare, whereby we should see how great ye ignominie and miserie of man is lying vn∣der sinne, that is, being separate from God & in subiection vnder the deuill. For who is so harde harted, which is not great∣ly moued with pitie and compassion at the miserable sight of them that lye in the por∣ches of Churches, & in the streetes, their faces being gnawne, their noses and eyes eaten with corruption, and their other members wasted with filth and rottennes, so that the mind detesteth to thinke therof, much lesse can ye eie abide to behold it. But what doth God intend and purpose by these miserable creatures, who haue like flesh as we haue, & are our brethrē like vnto vs, but that he may open the eies of our mind, whereby we may see in how more oughly a sort the filth and corruption of the soule of a sinner appeareth, albeit he weare
purple and gold, roses & lillies, as though he were a child of Paradise. But how ma∣ny sinners are there in the world, to one of them whose bodies are full of sores? Now these euills which are infinite as well in greatnes as in multitude, being contemned or not regarded in our neigh∣bours, this contempt is the cause that our owne euill being euen one of the least sort, seemeth vnto vs to be very great, and that we thinke that no other are troubled with the like. Euill men euen in re∣spect of out ward cuills are in worse case then the godly. But it must needes be that euen in outwarde euills also they are in worse case then we. What, I pray you, can be de∣lightfull or throughly pleasant vnto them, albeit they haue and enioy all thinges that they desire, when as their conscience can not be quiet? Is there a more grieuous e∣uill then the trouble of a stinging consci∣ence? For Esai sayth chap. 57: The wic∣ked are like the raginge sea that can not rest, whose water someth with the myre and grauell: euen so the wicked haue no peace sayth God. Wherefore thou mayst see that verified in them which is written Deut. 28: The Lord shall giue thee an vn∣quiet hart, and dasing eyes, and sorrowe of
mind, and thy life shal hange in dout before thee: thou shalt feare both day and night, and shalt haue none assurance of thy life. In ye morning thou shalt say, Would God it were night: and at night thou shalt say, Would God it were morning, for feare of thine hart wherewith thou shalt be terrifi∣ed, and because of those things which thou shalt see with thine eyes. Briefly, if one did with due affection see and consider all the euills of euill men, ci∣ther of enemies or frendes, he woulde not onely forgette his owne euills, and seeme vnto him selfe to suffer nothinge, but also with Moses and the Apostle Paule earne∣stly wishe that he might dye for them, and be rased out of the booke of life, and sepa∣rate from Christ, as it is written Rom. 9, that they might be deliuered. Christ bur∣ning with this zeale and inflamed affecti∣on died for vs, and descended into hell, lea∣uing vs an example, that we also should be so carefull for the euills of others, forget∣ting quite our owne, yea desirous of our owne.
∣terward it bringeth the quiet frute of righ∣teousnes vnto them which are thereby ex∣ercised. Thus much sayth Paule. Who would not be terrified with these wordes of Paule, where he expresly affir∣meth, that they are not the sonnes of God, which are without the correction of God? And who can be more strongly confirmed, & more effectually comforted, then he that heareth that they are loued of the Lorde which are chastened of him, that they are sonnes, that they haue communion with all the Sainctes, and that not they alone doe suffer? This vehement exhortation is able to make chastening and correction euen a∣miable and to be loued. There ought not therefore to be impati∣encie in suf¦fering, be∣cause all seeme not to suffer a∣like. Neither is here a∣ny place for excuse, for that some doe suf∣fer lighter euills, some those that be more grieuous, for euery one is tried according to measure, not aboue his strength, as it is sayd Psal. 80: Thou shalt feede them with the bread of teares, and giue them teares to drinke with measure. The same Paule also sayth: God is faithfull, which will not suffer you to be tempted aboue that you be able, but will euen giue the issue with the tentation, that ye may be able to beare it.
Where therefore there is a greater euill, there are more meanes to escape out of tentation, and more helpe, so that the in∣equalitie of suffering is rather in appea∣rance then in very deede. Doth not the example of Iohn Baptist, A notable example of the euill on the right hand, most diligently to be consi∣dered. whose feast we celebrate at this day that he was beheaded of Herode, greatly amaze vs all, that so great a man, then whome a greater hath not risen amonge them that are begotten of women, the speciall friend of the bridegrome, ye forerunner of Christ, greater then all the Prophets, that such a one I say, was not put to death at the least by publike iudgement, was not at the least accused of some fayned crime, as Christ was, nor for the peoples sake, but at the re∣quest of the daughter of an harlot which had daunced before Herode, was beheaded in the prison? The ignominious death of this one Sainet; and his life so vilely and after so vnworthy a sort yeelded vp into the handes of a moste malitious and cruell a∣dulteresse, ought to lighten and asswage all our euill. Where was God here, who might see such things? where was Christ, who hearing this, did quite hold his peace?
He dieth as though he were vnknowne vn∣to God, men, and all creatures. What doe we suffer, wherein, I will not say we may boast, but not at al be troubled, if it be com∣pared to the death of this man? Or where shall we appeare, if we wil suffer nothing, when as so great men do vndeseruedly suf∣fer so shamefull and ignominious death, and their bodies are mocked and scorned of their enemies after their death? Behold, sayth the Lord in Ieremie, they that men thought were vmneete to drinke of the cup haue drunke with the first, & thinkest thou then to be free? No no, thou shalt neither be quit nor free, but thou must drinke also. Rightly therfore did that Eremite, A singular example of an Eremite who when he had bene sicke euery yeare, being at the last one whole yeare in health, was very sorrowfull, and wept bitterly, saying that God had forgotten him, & denied vnto him his grace. So necessary and wholsom is the chastising of the Lorde to all Chri∣stians. The suffe∣rings of the Saincts ve¦ry comfor∣table being wel consi∣dered. Wherefore we shal see that it is litle or nothing which we suffer, if we cōsider how the Sainctes were thrust vnder the nayles with sharpe pricks, how they were impri∣soned,
slaine with the sword, burned, torne in peeces wt wild beasts, & suffered infinite tormēts: yea if we doe but wey ye tentations of them which are present wt vs in this life, and suffer most grieuous persecutions of the deuill. For there are which suffer more sharpely and grieuously then we doe, as well in spirit as in body. Some say here: This I lament, that my suffering is not comparable to the suf∣ferings of the Saincts, because I am a sin∣ner, & not worthy to be compared wt them. They suffered for their innocencie, I suffer for my sinnes, wherfore it is no maruell if they suffered all things cheerefully. Our sinnes ought not to hinder vs from ta∣king com∣fort by cō∣sidering the sufferings of the Sainctes. This is a very vnwise saying. For if thou suf∣fer for thy sinnes, thou must reioyce, that thy sinnes are scoured: were not ye Saincts also sinners? But fearest thou that thou art like Herode & the theefe on the left hande? Thou art not, if thou be patient: for what made difference betweene the theefe on the left hand and him on the right, but patience in faythe? If thou be a sinner, well, the theefe was a sinner also, but by patience he attained to the glory of righte∣ousnes and sanctitie: which that thou maist
doe, doe likewise as he did. For thou canst not suffer but thou shalt suffer either for sinnes, or for righteousnes: either suffering doth sanctifie and make blessed, if thou loue it, and suffer in faith: wherefore there is no excuse remaining. Finally as soone as thou hast faithfully confessed that thou do∣est suffer iustely for thy sinnes, thou art righteous and holy, as the theefe on the right hande. For the confession of sinne, in∣asmuch as it is of faith, doth iustifie and make holy, and so in a moment after suche confession thou doost not suffer for sinnes, but for innocencie: for he that is righte∣ous doth not suffer but innocently: but thou art become righteous after faithfull confession of thy worthy suffering, and of thy sinnes. Wherefore thy suffering may truely and worthely be compared to the sufferinges of the Sainctes, euen as thy confession of thy sinnes may truely and worthely be compared to the confession of them: for there is one faith of all, one con∣fession of sinnes, one suffering of euils, and one true communion of Saincts in all and through all.
The seuenth chapter of the seuenth consi∣deration, which is of the euill aboue vs. LAstly we must lift vp our hart on hie, & ascend vp the mountaine of myrre with the spouse. Here is Iesus Christ crucified, The euil a∣boue vs, & the comfort which the considera∣tion thereof ministreth. the head of all the Sainctes, the chiefe of all that suffer. The memory of him is com∣mended to the spouse, where it is sayd: Set me as a seale vpon thine hart, & as a signet vpon thine arme. The blood of this lambe beinge striken on the postes, suffereth not the angell the destroyer to approch. Here∣of is the spouse commended, that her heare is like purple (that is, her meditation is red by the memorie of Christes passion.) This is the tree which Moses was com∣maunded to cast into the waters of Marah, that is, bitter passions, & they were made sweete. There is nothing that this passion doth not make sweete, euen death, as the spouse sayth: His lippes are like lillies, Cantic. 5.14 that droppe pure myrrhe. Nowe concer∣ning this likenes of lillies and lippes, for∣asmuch as these are red, & those are white,
surely she speaketh mystically, that the words of Christ are most gentle and pure, wherein is no cruell bitternes or spite, but are sweete and mylde, which notwithstan∣ding droppe and perswade pure and prin∣cipall myrre (that is most bitter death.) These most pure & sweete lippes are able to make most bitter death (which as pure myrre taketh away at once all the stincke of sinne) sweete, mild, gentle, & acceptable. How shal this come to passe? Euen while thou hearest that Iesus Christ the Sonne of God, hath by his most holy suffering consecrated & made holy all passions, euen death it self, hath blessed malediction, hath glorified ignominie, hath enriched pouer∣ty. So that death is compelled to be ye gate of life, malediction the beginning of bles∣sednes, ignominie the way to glory. Now how canst thou be so hard harted & vnthāk∣ful, that thou wouldest not euen wish for & loue all the passions which by ye most pure and holy flesh and blood of Christ are san∣ctified, made harmeles, wholsom, blessed and happy vnto thee? For if by the touching of his most pure flesh he hath sanctified all waters to bap∣tisme,
how much more by the touching of ye same his most pure flesh and blood, hath he sanctified all death, all sufferings, all iniu∣ries, all sclaunders, all ignominie to ye bap∣tisme of the spirit or blood? as he sayth of the same baptisme of suffering Luke 12: I must be baptised wt a baptisme, & howe am I grieued till it be ended? Thou seest how he is disquieted, how he is grieued, how he thirsteth to sanctifie & make amiable, pas∣sions & death. For he saw that we were ter∣rified wt passions, he saw that we did great∣ly feare & dread death. Therfore as a most louing shepeheard, and faithfull phisition, minding to moderate this euil, he maketh hast & with griefe desireth to die, & by suffe∣ring to commēd the same vnto vs. The death of a Chri∣stian. So that the death of a Christian is to be counted like the brasen serpent that Moses set vp, which in euery respect resembled ye forme of a serpent, but was wholy without life, without motion, without venim, without stinging: so the righteous seeme in ye eyes of the vnwise to die, but they are in peace. We are like to them that die, neither doth our death appeare any otherwise then the death of others, notwithstanding it is an
other thinge, for death is deade vnto vs. So also all our other sufferinges are like the sufferings of others, howbeit in appea∣rance onely, but in very deede our suffe∣rings are the beginnings of rest, as death is the beginning of life. And this is that which Christ sayth Iohn 8: If a man keepe my worde he shall neuer see death. Howe commeth it to passe that he shall ne∣uer see it? because he dying, beginneth to liue, so by reason of the life which he seeth, he can not see death. For here the night shineth as the day, for that the light of the life beginning is more cleare, then of the death ending. These thinges are certaine to all them that beleeue in Christ, but to them that doe not beleeue they are other∣wise. Wherefore if thou wouldest kisse, loue and embrace the coate of Christ, the ves∣sells, waterpots, and whatsoeuer thinges Christ hath touched, and which he hath v∣sed, for most sweete relicks, as consecrated by his touching & vsing them: why doost thou not much more loue, embrace & kisse paynes, troubles of the world, ignominie and death, not only consecrated by his tou∣ching,
but also embrued and blessed with his most precious blood, moreouer embra∣ced wt harty wil and exceeding loue, which vehemently moued him thereunto? especi∣ally seeing yt in these thou hast farre grea∣ter benefits, rewards & good things, then in those relicks. For by these thou obtay∣nest victory of death and hell, and of all thy sinnes, and not by them, O, if a man might haue beheld the hart of Christ, when han∣ging on ye crosse he was distressed, that he might make death dead & contēptible, how earnestly & sweetely he embraced death & paines for the fearfull and them that dread death & paynes, how willingly he droonke of this cup to the sicke, that we also might not be afraide to drinke thereof, while we see that no euill, but onely good came vnto him by risinge againe: without doubt it would be pure myrre, distilling from his lippes, moste pleasaunt and sweete, as the sauour and goodlines of the lillies. Hereof speaketh Peter in his first Epistle and 4. chapter: Forasmuch as Christ hath suffe∣red for vs in the fleshe, arme your selues likewise with the same mynde. And Paule sayth Hebr. 12: Consider him that en∣dured
suche speaking against of sinners, least ye should be wearied & faint in your mindes. Wherefore if in the former considerati∣ons, which are of things set as yet beneath vs or by vs, we haue learned to suffer euill patiently: surely by this last, which is of that yt is now aboue & not by vs, we lifting vp our harts vnto Christ, and being made victors ouer all euills, VVhat af∣fection the considera∣tion of the euill aboue vs ought to breede in vs. are taught not onely to suffer them, but to loue, wishe, seeke thē. And the farther a man is of from this affe∣ction, of so much lesse force is the crosse of Christ in him, as it is in them that vse the signe of the crosse, and Christes passion a∣gainst euills and death, that they may not suffer nor die, endeuoring to attaine vnto that which is quite contrary to the crosse and death of Christ. Wherefore in this se∣uenth consideration it must needes be swal∣lowed vp and consumed, whatsoeuer euill we suffer, so that now it doe not onely not grieue, but also delight, howbeit if this cō∣sideration perse the hart, & be fixed in the inward affection of the mind. Thus much concerning the former table: the latter followeth.
VVE will deuide the second table into seuen considerations also, contrary to the former: whereof the first shall be of the inward good: The second of that which is to come: The thirde of that which is paste: The fourth of that which is beneath vs: The sift of that which is on the left hande: The sixt of that which is on the right hande: The seuenth of that which is aboue vs. THE FIRST CHAPTER of the first consideration, which is of the inward good. WHo is able to number euen those good thinges onely which euery one possesseth in his one person? The giftes of the body First how many are the giftes of the bodye? as beautie, strength, health, quicknes of sense, whereunto in the male kinde may be added the moste noble sex, whereby he is fit to doe many things both
priuate and publike, and to atchieue many notable exploytes, How we may take comfort by considera∣tion of the giftes of the body. whereunto a woman is vnapt. Nowe what a great matter is it, if by the blessing of God thou enioyest these excellent gifts ten, twenty, thirty yeares wt pleasure, & at the last art troubled in some one of them for the space of ten daies? It is a common saying among notorious offen∣ders: It is but one ill howres matter, and agayne, A good howre is worth an ill howre. What shal be sayd of vs, who enioy many good howres, and wil not suffer euil so much as one howre? We see therefore in how great plenty we enioy the benefits of God, and with how fewe euills we are scarce touched, at the least the most of vs. Our most gratious God not content with these good thinges, giueth moreouer ri∣ches, abundance of all things, if not to all, surely to many, and to them especially that are weake to beare euills. For as I haue sayd before, vpon whom he bestoweth lesse riches, or giftes of the body, vpon them he bestoweth more giftes of the mind, that all thinges may be equall, & he a iust iudge of all. For abundance of riches doth not so much comfort as a ioyful mind. Moreouer
he giueth vnto some goodly children, great pleasure, power, rule, honour, fame, glory, fauour, &c. which if he permitte to enioy a long time, yea but a small time, they will easily admonish what is to be done in a li∣tle euill. But the giftes of the mind are more ex∣cellent then all these, as witte, knowledge, How we may be cō∣forted by considera∣tion of the giftes of the mind. iudgement, eloquence, wisedom, & as in the other, so in bestowing of these he vseth a meane and equalitie, so that vpon whom he hath bestowed more of these good thinges, he hath not therfore preferred them before others, whom in steede of these he hath gi∣uen more peace or pleasure of the minde. Nowe in all these we must with thankful∣nes acknowledge the large liberalitie and bountifulnes of God, & comfort our infir∣mity, that in the multitude & plenty of good things we do not meruel, if some sharpenes be mingled therwith, seeing that to delicat persons neither rostedmeate is liked with∣out sauce, neither almost any other meate, which eyther hath not some sharpe taste of it selfe, or is tempered with some thinge that hath a sharpe taste: so vntolerable a thinge is continuall and onely sweetenes,
that one sayde rightly: All pleasure by continuance maketh it selfe lothesome. And an other said: Pleasure it selfe at the last is a labour, euen because this life is more weake, then that it is able without the temperature of euills, to enioy onely good thinges, by reason of the ouermuch aboundance of good thinges, whereupon hath risen this prouerbe, The bones must be stronge which shall beare good dayes, which prouerbe I oftentimes considering do greatly maruell what a maruelous and true meaning it hath, that mens minds are contrary to them selues, who seke no other but good dayes, which notwithstanding when they haue obtained, they can worse away with them then with euill. Now what other thinge are we taught hereby, but that euen in the very enemies of the crosse, the crosse is maruelous, so that by the meanes thereof all ought to be tempered and sanctified least they perish, as flesh must be seasoned with salt, lest it stincke and corrupt. Why then doe we not most willingly receiue this tēperature sent of God, which if he should not send, our life which is not a∣ble
continually to suffer pleasures & good thinges, woulde procure it of it owne ac∣corde? We see therefore howe truely the wise man said of God: He reacheth from one ende to an other mightely, and louing∣ly doth he order all things. If we through∣ly consider these thinges, that also will ap∣peare to be true which Moses saith Deut. 32: He hath borne him on his shoulders, he hath caried him about, and kept him as ye apple of his eye. Hereby we may stoppe the mouthes of them which vnthankefully babble that there are more euill then good thinges in this life, when as there are not wanting infinite good thinges and sweete commodities, but they are wanting which should see & acknowledge them with him that sayd: The earth is full of the goodnes of the Lorde. And agayne: The earth is full of his prayse. And Psal. 103: The earth is full of thy riches: thou hast made me glad by thy workes. Hereupon we dai∣ly singe: Heauen and earth are full of thy glory. Why so? because there are many good thinges whereby he may be praysed, howbeit of them onely which see and ac∣knowledge this fulnes. For as we haue
sayd in the first consideration of euils, that the euills of euery one are so great, as is his opinion & knowledge of them: so also good thinges although they come vnto vs abundantly on euery side, yet are they only so great as they are estemed. For al things that God hath made are exceeding good, yet are they not so acknowledged of all, as of them of whom ye 103. Psalme speaketh: They contemned that pleasant lande. Of this consideration we may in Iob see a most goodly & singular example, Iob may be a most ex∣cellent ex∣ample to moue vs patiently to suffer euills if the Lord send them, seeing we receiue so many good thinges at his hande. who, all his goods being takē away, said: Shal we receiue good at the hande of God, & not re∣ceiue euil? a very golden saying, & a migh∣ty comfort in tentation. For he did not one∣ly suffer him selfe, but was tempted of his owne wife to impatiencie, who sayde vnto him: Doost thou continue yet in thy perfe∣ctnes? curse God & die: as if she should say: It is manifest that he is not God, who hath so forsaken thee, why therefore doost thou trust in him, & not rather denying and cur∣sing him, acknowledgest thy selfe mortall, vnto whom nothing shal remaine after this life? These & such like thinges doth euery mans wife, that is his sensuality & corrupt
vnderstanding put into his mind in ye time of tentation, because the sense sauoureth not the things that are of God. Howbeit these are good things common to all: The inward good things of a Chri∣stian. but a Christian is endued with farre better inward good things, as with ye faith of Christ, wherof is spoken Psal. 44: The Kings daughter is al glorious within, her clothing is of broidered golde. For as we haue said entreating of the consideration of ye first euill, that there can be none so great euil felt in man, which is the worst of those euils that are in him: so the best of ye good things that are in a Christian he him selfe can not se. For if he did, he should be forth∣with in heauen, forasmuch as the kingdom of heauē, as Christ saith, is within vs. For to haue faith is to haue the truth & word of God: to haue the worde of God is to haue God the maker of all things. Which good thinges howe great are they? if they were reuealed to the minde, it shoulde in a mo∣ment be losed from the bodye, by reason of exceeding sweetenes and pleasure: where∣fore ye other good things that we haue spo∣ken of are rightly said to be as it were cer∣tain aduertizements of those good things,
which we haue wtin, which God will haue commended vnto vs by them, for yt this life can not suffer that they should be reuealed, and therfore God mercifully hideth them, vntill they haue increased vnto their full measure: no otherwise then louing parents doe sometime gyue vnto their children trifles or thinges of small value, thereby to allure their mindes to hope for greater. Notwithstanding they doe sometimes shew out and put forth them selues, Frutes of the most ex¦cellēt good thinge in man. when the ioyfull conscience reioyceth in trust in God, willingly speaketh of him, heareth his word with delight and pleasure, is rea∣dy and cherefull to serue him, to doe good works, to suffer euils, &c. All which are in∣fallible tokens of an infinite and incompa∣rable treasure hidden within, which distil∣leth forth these litle droppes in small mea∣sure: although it sometime commeth to passe that it is more manifestly reuealed to mindes that are giuen to diuine contem∣plation, so yt being as it were in a traunce, they can not tell where they are. Such were Augustin and his mother as they confesse of them selues, and many o∣thers.
The second chapter of the second consi∣deration, which is of the good to come or before a man. TO them that are not Christians litle comfort can be giuen in their euills by the good things to come, for that al things be to them vncertaine. Howbeit that nota∣ble affection which is called hope, is here cause of great trouble. Vncertaine hope. By which affection men comfort them selues and bid one an o∣ther hope for better thinges, whereby we vncertainely seeke after great thinges, be∣ing for the most part deceiued, as Christ teacheth of that man in the Gospell Luke 12, who sayd: I wil pul downe my barnes, and builde greater, and therein will I ga∣ther all my frutes and my goods: and I will say to my soule: soule, thou hast much goods layde vppe for many yeares, liue at ease, eate, drinke and be merie. But God said vnto him, O foole, this night will they fetch away thy soule from thee, then whose shall those thinges be which thou hast pro∣uided? So is he that gathereth riches to him selfe, and is not rich in God.
Howbeit God leaueth not the children of men so, God doth not alwayes suffer our vncertaine hope to be frustrate, & why. but in this affection to put away euill and attayne that which is good he comforteth them: albeit they be vncertaine of the thinges to come, yet doe they hope well, whereby in the meane while they are susteyned, lest that falling into the euill of desperation, they suffer not the present e∣uill, and so doe worse thinges. Wherefore euen the affection of such hope is the gifte of God, not that he will haue them trust vnto it, but be moued to sounde and true hope which is in him alone. For he is therefore slow to anger that he may bring them to repentance, as it is sayde Rom. 2: neyther doth he suffer men to be decey∣ued by this deceitefull hope, if so be that they beginne from the hart and truely to hope in him. But to Christians, beside these good things, two sortes of especiall good things shal assuredly come, howbeit by death and sufferinges. Now they also reioyce in that common vncertain hope yt the present euill shall ende, & the contrary good shall be en∣creased, although they doe not so much re∣gard that, as they doe that their owne pro∣per
good is increased, which is truth in Christ, wherein they goe forwarde from day to day, for which they both liue & hope. Christians receiue cō∣fort by con∣sideration of two espe∣ciall good thinges to come, wher of one is, that by death their afflictions of this life being en∣ded, they shall be in rest and peace. But beside these I haue sayd that two es∣peciall good thinges shall come vnto them in deathe. The first is, that by deathe the whole tragedie of the euills of this life is ended, as it is written: Precious in the sight of the Lord is ye death of his Saincts. And againe: I will lay me downe, and al∣so sleepe in peace. Againe: Though the righteous be preuēted with death, yet shal he be in rest. Whereas contrariwise to the wicked death is the beginning of euils, as the Psalmist sayth: The death of the wic∣ked is very euill. Againe, Euils shal come vppon the wicked man in destruction: so Lazarus shall be comforted, who hath suf∣fered his euills here, whereas the riche glutton shall be tormented, who hath here enioyed his pleasures. So it commeth to passe, that a Christian whether he dye or liue, hath alwayes the better: so blessed a thinge is it to be a Christian, and to beleue in Christ, whereupon Paule saith: Christ is to me life, & death is to me aduauntage. And Rom. 14. he sayth: Whether we liue,
we liue vnto the Lord: or whether we die, we die vnto ye Lord: whether we liue ther∣fore or die, we are the Lordes. This safety Christ hath obtained for vs, inasmuch as he dyed and rose agayne that he might be Lord of the liuing and dead, being able to make vs quiet and safe as well in life as in death, as the 22. Psalme sayth: Though I walke through the valley of the shadow of death, I will feare no euill, for thou art with me. If this commoditie of death doe litle moue vs, it is a signe that the faith of Christ is weake in vs, which doth not suffi∣ciently esteeme the treasure and commodi∣tie of a good death, or doth not yet beleue that death is good, the olde man which as yet liueth too much, & the wisedome of the fleshe hindering vs. We must endeuour therefore that we may know and loue this benefit of death. It is a great matter that death which to others is exceeding euill, shoulde be made to vs exceeding good and cōmodious. And if Christ had not brought this to passe for vs, what thinge should he haue done worthy of so great a price as he payed? It is a very diuine worke which he did, and therefore it should be no maruel to
any, that he made the euill of death excee∣ding good. Wherefore death is nowe deade to the faithful, and hath nothing terrible but one∣ly a certaine semblance and appearance. Death can not hurte the faithful No otherwise then a serpent that is slaine, in outwarde forme and appearance he is cerrible as before, but in very deede it is onely a seeming or appearance of euil, the euill it selfe is nowe dead and harmelesse. Yea as in the 21. chapter of Numb. God commaunded a brasen serpent to be set vp, by the sight wherof the liuing serpents did perish: so also our death by faithfull and stedfast beholding of the death of Christ, doth perish, and onely appeareth terrible, but can not hurt vs in very deede. So doth the mercye of God aforehande exercise vs that are weake, with these goodly figures or semblances, that forasmuch as death cā¦not be taken away, he may at ye least make the force thereof to be nothing but in out∣ward shew and appearance only, for which cause also death in the Scriptures is cal∣led sleepe rather then death. The other good thing that commeth by death, is, that it doth not onely ende the
troubles and afflictions of this life, The other special good thinge to come, the considera∣tion wherof is comfor∣table to Christians. but which is more exccllent, it maketh an end of vices and sinnes, which maketh death farre more acceptable to the faithfull, as we haue sayd before, then the good which we haue nowe spoken of. For the euills of the soule which are sinnes, are without comparison worse then the euills of the bo∣dye. Which onely if we did knowe, they would make death most amiable vnto vs. Now if they do not so, it is a signe that we doe not sufficiently feele nor hate the euils of our soule. Whereas therfore this life is most perilous, daungerous sinne seeking to deceiue vs on euery side, and we can not liue without sinne: moste commodious death setteth vs free from these perills, and cutteth of sinne quite from vs, whereupon in the booke of wisedom it is sayd in praise of the righteous: He pleased God and was beloued of him, so that whereas he liued a∣monge sinners, he translated him. He was taken away least wickednes shoulde alter his vnderstanding, or deceit beguile his minde. For wickednes by bewitching ob∣scuteth the thinges that are good, and the vnstedfastnes of concupiscence peruerteth
the simple minde (O howe true are these things and confirmed by daily experience? Though he was soone deade, yet fulfilled he much time, for his soule pleased God: therefore hasted he to take him away from wickednes. So by the mercie of God, death, which to man was the punishment of sinne, is made to Christians the ende of sinne, and the beginning of life and righteousnes. Wherefore he that loueth life and righ∣teousnes, must needes, not feare, but loue deathe, which is the Minister of them, and meane to come vnto them: o∣therwise he shall neuer attayne neyther to lyfe nor righteousnes. Nowe he that can not doe this, let him praye vnto God, that he may. For therefore are we taught to saye, Thy will be done, because we of our selues are not able to doe it, whoe fearinge deathe, doe loue death and sinne rather then life and righteousnes. For, that God ordayned deathe for the aboli∣shinge of sinne it maye hereof be gathe∣red, for that he enioyned deathe to Adam by and by after he had sinned, as it were amendes of sinnes, and that before he
caste him out of Paradise, that he might shewe vnto vs that deathe worketh no e∣uill, but all good in vs, seeing that it was enioyned in paradise as it were repentance and satisfaction. It is true in deede that death entred into the worlde by the malice of the Deuill, but it is to be attributed to the singular goodnes of God that death being so entred, he not onely suffered it not to hurt, but ordayned it euen from the be∣ginning thereof for the punishment and death of sinne. For this he signified, whereas when he had first denoūced death vnto Adam, in his commaundement that he should not eate of the tree of knowledge, he afterward not∣withstanding did not holde his peace, but did againe enioyne death, & tempered the rigour of his first denouncing, yea did not so much as make mention of death in any sillable, but onely sayde: In the sweate of thy face shalt thou eate bread, till thou be turned againe into the ground, for out of it wast thou taken: Dust thou art, and into dust shalt thou be turned again. As though he then hated death, which he would not so much as name, according to that saying:
He endureth but a while in his anger, but in his fauour is life. He seemed in thus speaking, that, vnlesse death had bene ne∣cessary for ye abolishing of sinne, he woulde not so much as mention or name it, much lesse enioyne it. So against sinne which had wrought death, the emulation of God armeth no other thing but death it selfe, so that here thou mayst see that saying of the Poet verified, The worker destroyed by his owne work: sinne abolished by death which is it owne proper frute. that the worker of death doth perishe by his owne worke, and that sinne is destroyed by it owne proper frute, and is slayne by death which it brought forth, as the viper of her ofspring. This is a most goodly sight, to see how sinne is, not by an others, but by it owne proper worke destroyed, slayne with it owne weapon, & as of Goliath, so ye head thereof cut of with it owne sworde. For Goliath was a figure of sinne, a terrible Champion to all, except litle Dauid, that is, Christ, who alone o∣uercame him, and cut of his heade with his owne sworde. If therefore we meditate vp∣on the ioyes of this power of Christ, and vpon the giftes of his grace, why should a litle euil trouble vs, when as in so great an euill to come we see so great good thinges?
The third chapter of the third considerati∣on, which is of the good past, or behind a man. THe consideration of this good is easie, by the contrary consideration of the e∣uil past, we thinke it sufficient only to help him that shal cōsider hereof. VVe are moued to the consi∣deration of the good past, that is of Gods goodnes be¦stowed vp∣on vs here∣tofore, and to take cō∣fort there∣by, by the examples of Augustin Dauid, and by our own experience. Herein B. Au∣gustin doth excellently well in his confessi∣ons, where in a most goodly sort he rehear∣seth ye benefits of God bestowed vpon him from his mothers wombe. The same doth Dauid in that notable 138. Psalme, ye be∣ginning wherof is: O Lord, thou hast tri∣ed me, where among other things wonde∣ring at ye prouidence of God ouer him, he sayth: Thou vnderstandest my thoughts long before: thou compassest my paths & my lying downe. As if he sayd: Whatsoe∣uer I haue euer thought, whatsoeuer I haue wrought, and whatsoeuer I was to obtayne or possesse, I see now, how it was not done by mine owne industry, but ordai∣ned by thy care long before. Finally thou hast foreseene all my wayes: and there is not a word in my tongue, where then? euen in thy power. These thinges we learne by
our owne experience. For if we call to minde our life past, is it not a wonderful thinge that we haue thought, willed, done, and sayd such thinges, as we neuer coulde foresee, but would haue done farre other thinges, if we had bene left to our owne free will, which we nowe first perceiue, namely we see that the hande of God hath bene so present with vs, that his care hath bene so constant ouer vs, that we could nei∣ther haue spoken, neither willed nor thought those thinges which we haue, vn∣les he had giuē abilitie, as it is sayd in the booke of wisedom chap. 7: In his hande are both we and our wordes. And Paule saythe: who worketh all thinges in vs. Why then are we not ashamed being sens∣lesse and hard harted, who being taught by our owne experience, doe see howe careful the Lorde hathe bene for vs vntill this howre, and hath giuen vs all good things? and yet we can not committe the same care of vs to him in a small present euill, but we so behaue our selues, as thoughe he had forsaken vs, or coulde by any meanes forsake vs. Dauid did not so in the 39. Psalme, where he sayeth: As for me,
him. For we see this most manifestly ap∣peare vnto vs commonly in all infantes, so that so many examples let forth to our fol∣ly & hardues, ought worthely to make vs greatly ashamed, if we dout that euen the least good or euill commeth vnto vs with∣out the singular care of God. VVe must cast our care on God for that he ca∣reth for vs. Blessed Pe∣ter sayth: Cast all your care on him, for he careth for you. And Dauid sayth Psal. 36: Cast thy care vpon the Lorde, and he shall feede thee. Moreouer B. Augustine sayth vnto his soule in his confessions: Why stā∣dest thou vpon thy selfe and standest not in deede? cast thy selfe vpon him, for he will not withdrew his hand that thou maist fal. And againe Peter sayth, 1. Pet. 4: Wher∣fore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their soules to him in wel doing, as vnto a faithfull Creator. O, if a man knew his God after this sort, how secure, how quiet, how pleasāt should he be? Such a one should haue God true∣ly, knowing assuredly that all his thinges whatsoeuer they be, haue come & doe come vnto him, by the direction and disposing of God his most sweete will. The saying of Peter standeth certaine, he careth for you.
What can we heare more sweete & plea∣sant then this saying? therefore sayth he, cast all your care vpon him. VVhat will ensue if we cast not our care on God. If we doe not this, what doe we else, but endeuour to let & hinder the care of God, & also make our life vnto our selues troublesom, painefull, careful, by many feares, cares & troubles? and that in vaine, for we doe not any thing hereby further our rest or quietnes, but as the Preacher in his booke sayth: This is a vanitie of vanities, & vexation of the spi∣rit. For in all the same booke he speaketh of experience hereof, inasmuch as he had tried many things for him selfe, and in all notwithstanding he founde nothing but la∣bour, vanitie & vexation of the spirit: so that he concludeth, that it is the gift of God, if a man eate & drinke, & reioice with his wife, that is, liueth without care, committing ye care of him selfe vnto God. Wherefore we ought to haue no other care of our selues, thē yt we may not be careful for our selues, & may commit the care of vs vnto God. As for other things that might be spokē here, euery one may as I haue sayd know them by the contrary consideration, and by cal∣ling to mind his whole life past.
The fourth chapter of the fourth conside∣ration, which is of the good be∣neath vs. Hitherto we haue seene the good things which are our owne, and in our selues, we will nowe consider those that are in o∣thers, and without vs: the first whereof is in them which are beneath vs, that is the dead and damned. Howbeit it seemeth ve∣ry straunge, that any good can be found in the deade and damned. But the power of ye diuine goodnes is euery where so great, By compa∣ring the state of the dāned with our owne, we shall per¦ceiue the exceeding mercy of God toward vs, & the inestimable cōmodities which we enioy through his goodnes. that it maketh that we may se good things euen in the greatest euils. Now let vs first compare them with our selues, then shall we see our inestimable commodities, as it may easily be vnderstoode by the contrary consideration of euills. For as great euils of death and hel as we see in them, so great without dout doe we see our commodities to be, yea and so much greater, as their e∣uills are greater. All which are not to be lightly passed ouer, forasmuch as they doe greatly commende vnto vs the exceeding mercie of God. And it is to be feared, that
if we make small account of these, we shall be found vnthankefull, and condemned to∣gither with them, or tormented worse, for that the more we see them to be grieued & sorrowfull, so much more ought we to re∣ioyce for Gods goodnes toward vs, accor∣ding to that saying in Esai chap. 65: Be∣hold, my seruaunts shall eate, but ye shall haue hunger: behold, my seruaunts shall drinke, but ye shall suffer thirst: beholde, my seruaunts shall be merie, but ye shallbe confounded: behold my seruaunts shall re∣ioyce for very quietnes of hart, but ye shal crie for sorrowe of harte, and complayne for vexation of minde: your name shall ye leaue accursed amonge my chosen, &c. Fi∣nally as I haue said, the examples of them that die ill, and are condemned, as B. Gre∣gorie sayth in a certaine Dialogue, ought to bringe this good vnto vs, that they shoulde admonishe and teach vs, that he is happye, whome other mens harmes doe make to beware. Howbeit this good, foras∣much as it is commonly knowne, doth litle moue vs, when as notwithstanding it is to be counted amonge the chiefe, and is not lightly esteemed of them that are wise: for∣asmuch
as a great part of the holy Scrip∣ture tendeth hereunto, namely where it is taught of the wrath, iudgements & threat∣nings of God. Which most wholsome do∣ctrine, the examples of the most miserable should make most wholsom vnto vs, which then begin to be effectuall, when we are so affected as they are which suffer them, and as though we were in their place and per∣son. For then they wil moue and admonish vs to prayse his goodnes, who hath preser∣ued vs from those thinges. These dead & damned must be compared also with God him selfe, The consi∣deration of the state of the dam∣ned ought to moue vs to reioyce in God, and to praise & extoll his iustice. whereby we may see the diuine iustice in them. This albeit it be harde, yet must we endeuour to doe it. For seeing that God is a iust Iudge, his iustice muste be loued and praysed: and therfore must we reioice in God euen then when he destroyeth the euill both in body and soule, because in all these his entire and vnspeakeable iustice shineth. Wherefore hell also is full of God and the souereigne good as well as heauen. For the iustice of God is God himselfe, and God is the so∣uereigne good. As his mercie therefore, so also his iustice or iudgemēt ought with
most hartie affection to be loued, and most highly to be extolled and praysed. Where∣upon Dauid sayeth: The righteous shall reioyce when he seeth the vengeance: he shall washe his handes in the blood of the wicked. For this cause the Lorde forbad Samuell 1. Kinges. 16, that he shoulde mourne no more for Saul, sayinge: Howe longe wilt thou mourne for Saul, seeing I haue cast him awaye from reigning o∣uer Israell? As if he sayde: Doth my wil so displease thee, that thou preferrest mans will before myne? Finally hereupon come those sayinges of prayse and ioye through the whole Psalter, that the Lorde is a Iudge of the widowes, and a Father of the fatherlesse, that he will auenge the af∣flicted and iudge the poore: that his ene∣mies shall be confounded, the wicked shall be destroyed, and many suche like. If a∣ny will with foolishe pitie haue compassi∣on on that bloody generation, which slay∣eth the righteous (yea euen the Sonne of God) & of that exceding great company of the wicked, he shal be found to reioyce at their wickednes, and to allow those things that they haue done, being worthy to pe∣rish
together with them, whose sinnes he would not haue punished: and he shal heare that saying which is in the second booke of Kinges chap. 19: Thou louest thine ene∣mies, and hatest thy frendes. For so sayde Ioab to Dauid, when he too much mour∣ned for wicked Absolon his sonne. Wher∣fore we ought here to reioyce at all the godlines of the Sainctes, and the iustice of God, who most iustly punisheth the perse∣cutors of godlines, that he may deliuer his elect from them. And so thou seest that not small but exceeding good thinges doe manifestly appeare in the deade and dam∣ned: namely, that the iniurie of all the Sainctes is reuenged and punished, and thine also if thou be righteous with them. What maruell is it then, if by thy present euill he punish thine enemie, that is the sinne of thy body, yea thou oughtest to re∣ioyce because of this most excellent benefit of Gods iustice, who, thou not desiring it, so slayeth and destroyeth in thy selfe thy worst enemie, that is, thy sinne. Whereof if thou haue compassion, thou shalt be foūd a frend of sinne, and an enemie of iustice working in thee: which thou must especi∣ally
take heede of, lest it be sayd vnto thee also: Thou louest thine enemies, and ha∣test thy frendes. As therfore thou oughtest to reioyce on the behalfe of iustice being seuere against thy sinne, so thou oughtest to reioyce on the behalfe of the same also, being seuere against the wicked, which are enemies of men and God. Thus thou seest that in the greatest euills are seene singu∣lar good thinges, and that we may reioyce in the greatest euills, not because of the e∣uills them selues, but because of the soue∣reigne goodnes of iustice that deliuereth and auengeth vs. The fift chapter of the fift consideration, which is of the good on the left hand. HEre we must enter into consideration of our aduersaries, who as yet remaine in this life (for in the chapter going be∣fore we haue spoken of them that are al∣ready damned and in like case with the de∣uills) these we must beholde with an other affection, and consider two sortes of their good thinges. First that they abound with
temporall good thinges, The wicked most com∣monly a∣bound with temporall good things so that the Pro∣phets haue bene almost moued euen to en∣uie by their prosperitie, as Dauid Psal. 72: My feete were almost gone, my steps had wellneare slipt: for I freated at the fo∣lish, when I saw the prosperity of the wic∣ked. And afterwardes: Loe these are the wicked, yet prosper they alway, and in∣crease in riches. Ieremie chap. 12 sayth: O Lorde thou art more righteous then that I should dispute with thee, neuerthe∣lesse let me talke with thee in thinges rea∣sonable: Howe happeneth it that the way of the vngodly is so prosperous? and that it goeth so well with them, which without any shame offend and liue in wickednes? Why doth he freely poure forth so ma∣ny good things vpon them, God bestow¦eth abun∣dance of temporall good things vpon the wicked, that he may thereby cō∣fort vs. and lose them, but that he may comfort vs, and declare how good he is vnto them which are pure in hart as the same 72 Psalme sayth. He that is so good to the wicked, howe much more good will he be to the godly? albeit he tryeth them with many euills, so that not onely in the present good thinges, but also in them that be hid and as yet to come, they acknowledge him to be good vnto
them, and saye with Dauid in the same Psalme: As for me, it is good for me to drawe neare to God, to put my trust in the Lorde. As if he sayde: Albeit I am som∣what troubled, inasmuch as I see them free, notwithstanding I trust that God is muche more gracious vnto me then vn∣to them. And so the visible good thinges of the wicked are a meane to stirre vs vp to hope for inuisible good thinges, and to contemne the euills that we suffer, ac∣cording to the commaundement of Christ Matth. 6, where he biddeth vs to beholde the foules of the ayre, and the Lillies of the fielde, and sayth? If God then so clothe the grasse of the fielde, which is to daye, and to morrow is cast into the ouen, shall he not doe much more vnto you, O ye of litle faythe? Wherefore by comparing to∣gether the good thinges wherewith the e∣uill abounde, and the euill which we suf∣fer, our faythe is exercised, and wee ob∣tayne comfort in God, which onely is ho∣ly and true comfort, so that all thinges work together for the best vnto ye Saincts. The euills of the wic∣ked turne vnto good to the god∣ly. The other good, which is much more meruelous, is, that their euills are vnto vs
good, such a care hath God of vs. For al∣though their sinnes be offensiue to the weaker sort, yet to the stronge they are an exercise of vertue, and an occasion more strongly to fight, & to obtaine a more glo∣rious victorie. For blessed is the man that endureth tentation, for when he is tryed he shall receiue the crowne of life. Now what is a greater tentation then that multitude of most wicked examples? Hereof is the worlde called one of the enemies of the Sainctes of God, for that by the entice∣ments and wicked workes thereof it mo∣ueth, prouoketh and allureth from the way of God vnto his owne waye, as it appea∣reth Gen. 6: The sonnes of God sawe the daughters of men that they were fayre, & they tooke them wiues such as they liked from amonge them all. And Num. 25 it is sayd that the children of Israel committed whoredom with the daughters of Moab, so that it is wholsom for vs to be alwayes afflicted with some trouble, lest that being weake, and stumbling at the offences of the world, we fal and sinne. Wherfore Lot is commended of Peter 2. Pet. 2, for that he suffered many thinges by the most wic∣ked
example of the Zodomites, and increa∣sed in righteousnes hereby. It is needefull therefore that these offences come, which may be an occasion to vs to fight & obtaine the victorie. Notwithstanding wo vnto the world because of offences. Nowe if in the sinnes of others God procureth vnto vs so great good things, how much more ought we to beleeue with our whole hart that he will worke good vnto vs in our owne euil, although the sense and fleshe iudge other∣wise. No lesse good doth the worlde bringe vnto vs on the otherside of his euils, The trou∣bles and afflictions which the godly suffer of the world turne to their com∣moditie & profit. which is aduersitie. For whom it can not winne by enticements, neither adioyne to it selfe by euill examples, them it endeuoureth by afflictions to expell from it selfe, and to trouble them by painefull euills, alwayes either seeking deceitfully to entrap them by the example of the wicked, or cruelly raging against thē by grieuous torments. For this is that monster Chimera hauing a head fayre like the head of a virgin, a bel∣ly terrible like the belly of a Lyon, a tayle deadely like the tayle of a Serpent: for the ende as well of the pleasure as of the
tyrannie of the worlde is poyson and eter∣nall deathe. As therefore in the sinnes of the world God hath made vs to finde good thinges, so also the persecutions thereof are not in vaine and frustrate, but are or∣dained for the increase of our good things, that euen in that wherein they hurte vs, they may be compelled to profit vs, as B. Augustine speaketh of Herode who slue the children: He coulde neuer haue profi∣ted so much by obedience, as he profited by hatred. And B. Agatha went reioycing to the prison as vnto a banket, saying after this sorte: Vnlesse thou make my bodye to be handled throughly of thy tormen∣tors, my soule can not with glorious vi∣ctorie enter into Paradise: euen as the grayne if it be not well threshed & beaten out of the huske, is not layde vppe in the garner. But why doe we here stande vp∣on these fewe examples? seeing we knowe that the whole Scripture, the writinges and sayinges of all the Fathers, the works and deedes of all the Sainctes doe agree in this, that they are moste profitable to the beleeuers, who seeme to be vnto them moste hurtefull, so that they be rightly
suffered and borne: as Peter sayeth in his first Epistle chap. 3: And who is it that can harme you, if ye followe that which is good? And Dauid sayeth Psal. 88: The enemie shall not oppresse him, neyther shall the wicked hurte him. Howe shall he not hurte him, when he oftentymes e∣uen killeth him? surely because by hur∣ting he doth greatly profitte him. So we see that we doe on euery side dwell in the middes of good thinges, if we be wise, and yet also in the middes of euills, so mer∣uelously are all thinges ordered by the po∣wer of the diuine goodnes. The sixt chapter of the sixt con∣sideration, which is of the good on the right hand. THis is the Church of the Saincts, The good on the right hand. the newe creature of God, our brethren & frends, in whom we see nothing but good, nothing but consolation, howebeit not al∣waies wt fleshly eies (for according to ye out¦ward appearāce they are for ye most part to be referred to the contrary consideration
of euils) but with spiritual eyes. Although euen those their good thinges also which are seene with fleshly eies, are not to be re∣iected, but we may perceiue that euen in these God doth comfort vs. For Dauid in the 72 Psalme durst not disalow of all that possessed riches in the world, saying: If I should say that I woulde iudge after this sort, lo then I should cōdemne ye generati∣on of thy children, that is, if I shoulde say that all are euill, which are rich, healthful, and had in estimation, I shoulde then con∣demne thy Sainctes, of whome many are such. The Apostle moreouer teacheth Ti∣mothe to charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not hie minded, not for∣bidding them to be rich. And ye Scripture declareth that Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob were rich. Daniel with his fellowes were had in honour and reputacion euen in Ba∣bylon: finally many Kinges of Iuda were holy men. Dauid therfore cōsidering these sayth: If I should say that I would iudge so, I shoulde condemne the generation of thy children. God I say giueth to his abun∣dance of these good thinges, to the comfort of them & of others, but these are not their
proper good thinges, yea they are but sha∣dowes in respect of the true good thinges, which are faith, hope, loue, and other gra∣ces and giftes, all which are made com∣mon by loue. This is the Communion of Sainctes, VVhat great ioy & comfort we haue by the com∣munion of Sainctes, which is the good on the right hande. wherin we reioyce. And who doth not glo∣ry here euen in great euills, who beleueth, as it is in deede, that the good thinges of all the Saincts are his good thinges, that his euill is theirs also, For this considera∣tion is most sweete and pleasaunt, whereof the Apostle admonisheth in the Epistle, to the Galathians in this saying: Beare ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Is it not good for vs to be here, where if one member, as the Apostle saith 1. Cor. 12, suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had in honour, al the members reioyce with it? Therefore when I suffer, I suffer not now alone, all Christians suf∣fer with me, yea Christ him selfe, as it is sayd: He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of myne eye. So others beare my burden, their power is mine, the fayth of the Church helpeth my infirmitie, the cha∣stitie of others beareth the tentation of my
lust, the fastings of others are for my com∣moditie, the prayer of an other is carefull for me, and briefly the members are so carefull one for an other, that those which are more honest doe couer, keepe, honour them that seeme vnhonest, as the Apostle notably describeth 1. Cor. 12. And so I may truely reioyce in the good thinges of an other, as if they were mine owne. Be it then that I be foule and filthye, yet they whom I loue, and with whome I reioyce, are fayre & goodly; by which loue I make not onely their good thinges, but euen them selues mine. Wherefore my ignomi∣nie shal be easily honoured vnder their glo∣rie, their abundance shal supply my want. Who then can despeire in sinne? who doth not reioyce in afflictions, for that he doth not now beare his sinnes and paynes, or if he beare them, he beareth them not alone, being holpen with so many Sainctes that are the sonnes of God, yea being holpen of Christ him selfe? So excellent a thing is the Communion of Saincts, & the church of Christ. Now if there be any that doth not be∣leue that these things are thus, he is an in∣fidell,
and hath denied Christ & the church. For although these thinges were not felt, yet are they so in deede: but who doth not feele them? For that thou doost not de∣speire, that thou doost not become impati∣ent, who is the cause? Thyne owne power? no surely, but the communion of Saincts. Otherwise thou wert not able to beare e∣uen a small sinne, thou couldest not suf∣fer the worde of a man agaynste thy selfe: so nighe is Christ and the Churche. This is that which we saye: I beleeue in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholike Church, the Communion of Sainctes. Nowe wherein doe the Sainctes communicate? As in the Lordes sup∣per the bread is one though it consist of many graines, & the wine one though pressed out of many grapes: so the Saincts being par∣takers of this Supper, though they be many, yet are they me body, and there∣fore com∣municate both in good and euill. euen in good and euill thinges, all things are common amonge them all, as the Sa∣crament of the Lordes supper doth signifie in the breade and wine, we are sayde of the Apostle to be one breade, one body. Nowe who offendeth a part of the body, wherein he offendeth not the whole bodye? what doth ye litle toe suffer, which ye whole body doth not suffer? what good is done euen to the feete, wherein the whole body doth not reioyce? But we are one body: whatsoe∣uer an other suffereth, I suffer and beare
it, and whatsoeuer good is done to him, it is done to me. So sayth Christ, that it is done to him, whatsoeuer is done to the least of his. Who taking a peece of the bread of the Lordes Supper, is not sayd to take bread? who contemning a peece thereof, is not sayd to contemne bread? Wherefore if we be grieued, if we suf∣fer, if we die, let vs remember and firmely beleue and be assured, that not we, or that not we alone, but Christ and the Church are grieued, suffer and die with vs. Christ would not haue vs to be alone in the way of deathe, which euery man dreadeth, but the whole Church accompanying vs, we enter into the way of suffering and death, and the Church doth suffer more strongly then we our selues, so that we may truely apply to our selues yt which Eliseus said to his seruaūt being afraid: 4. King 6: Feare not, for they that be with vs are moe then they that be with them. And Eliseus pray∣ed and sayd: Lord I beseech thee open the eyes of this yong man that he may see: and the Lord opened the eyes of the yong man and he looked: and behold the mountayne was full of borses & charrets of fire rounde
about Eliseus. This onely also remayneth vnto vs, that we pray that our eyes may be opened, that we may see the Church about vs, that, I say, the eyes of our faith may be opened, then shall we feare nothing, but shall perceiue that to be most true which Dauid sayeth Psal. 124: As the moun∣taines are about Ierusalem, so is the Lord about his people from henceforth and for euer. Amen. The seuenth chapter of the seuenth consi∣deration, which is of the good aboue vs. I Speake nothing of the eternall and hea∣uenly good thinges which the blessed en∣ioy in the manifest sight of God, or at the least I speake of them in faith, The good aboue vs, & the most sweete ioy & comfort which the due consi∣deration thereof bringeth. and as they may be comprehended of vs. So this se∣uenth consideration is of Iesus Christ, the King of glorye, raysed from the deade: as the seuenth consideration of euills was of him suffering, dead, and buried. Here we may see the chiefe ioy of our hart, and cer∣taine and sure good thinges: here is no e∣uil at all, because Christ being raised from
ye dead, dyeth no more: death hath no more dominion ouer him. This is the furnace of loue, and the fire of God in Sion, as Esai sayth. For Christ is borne vnto vs, and not onely that, but also giuen vnto vs. Wherefore his resurrection is mine, and all thinges that he hath wrought ther∣by. And as the Apostle most notably glo∣rieth Rom. 8: Howe shall he not with him giue vs all thinges? But what hathe he wrought by rysing agayne? He hath de∣stroyed sinne, set vp righteousnes, swal∣lowed vp death, & restored life: ouercome hell, and purchased eternall glorie. These thinges are inestimable, so that the minde of man dare scarce beleeue, that they are giuen vnto him: as Iacob Gen. 45, when he hearde that his sonne Ioseph was a∣liue and gouernour ouer the lande of E∣gypt, as it were awaking out of a deepe sleepe, he did not beleeue them that tolde him, vntill they telling vnto him all the wordes of Ioseph, which he had sayd vn∣to them, shewed him also all the charretts, which Ioseph had sent to carie him. So surely it is harde to beleeue that so great good thinges are in Christ bestowed vpon
bs that are vnworthye, vnlesse in many wordes he declare the same vnto vs, and as he made him selfe manifest to his Dis∣ciples by often appearing vnto them, so he teach vs so to beleeue, as it were by char∣rets, that is, by vse and experience. It is a most goodly and pleasaunt charret, that of God he is made vnto vs wisedome, righteousnes, sanctification and redemp∣tion, as the Apostle sayth 1. Cor. 1. For I am a sinner, but I am caried in his righte∣ousnes, which is giuen vnto me: I am vncleane, but his holines is my sanctifica∣tion, wherein I am sweetely caried: I am foolish, but his wisedom carieth me: I am damnable, but his liberty is my redempti∣on: so that a Christian which beleueth may glory of the merits of Christ, and of all his good thinges no otherwise then if he him self had done them, so properly do they be∣long vnto him, so that he dare now quietly looke for euen ye iudgement of God, which notwithstanding is intolerable. So great a thing is faith, so great good things doth it obtaine for vs, so glorious sonnes of God doth it make vs. For we can not be sonnes, vnlesse we inherit the good thinges of our
father. A Christian therefore may boldly say: Death, where is thy victorie? death, where is thy stinge, that is, sinne? for the stinge of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law, but thankes be vnto God, which hath giuen vs victorie through our Lord Iesus Christ: that is, the lawe ma∣keth vs sinners, sinne maketh vs guiltie of death. Who hath ouercome these two? Our owne righteousnes? our owne life? No surely, but Iesus Christ raysed from death, who hath condemned sinne & death, hath imparted his righteousnes vnto vs, hath giuen vs his merites, hath layed his hand vpon vs, so that we are in good case, and doe fulfill the law, and ouercome sinne and death, for which honour, prayse and thankes be to God for euer, Amen. This therfore is the last consideration, whereby we are now lifted vp not onely a∣boue our owne euills, but also aboue our owne good thinges, and doe now enioy the good thinges of an other, gotten by an o∣thers labour, who before were oppressed with the euills caused by the sinne of an o∣ther, and increased by our owne: We en∣ioy I say the righteousnes of Christ, wher∣by
he him selfe is righteous, because we cleaue vnto it, by which he pleaseth God, and maketh intercession for vs, & maketh him selfe wholy ours, being our most gra∣tious Priest and Patron. As vnpossible therefore as it is that Christ in his righte∣ousnes should not please, so vnpossible is it yt we should not please by our faith where∣by we cleaue to his righteousnes. Where∣by it commeth to passe that a Christian is omnipotent, Lorde of all, possessing all thinges, doing all thinges, A Christian is said to be without sinne, not in respect of the action of sinne, but inas∣much as sinne is not imputed to him for Christes sake. wholy without any sinne. And although it so be that he haue sinnes, yet can it not be yt they should hurt him, but they are remitted because of ye inuincible righteousnes of Christ which swalloweth vp all sinnes, whereunto our faith trusteth, firmely beleuing that Christ is such a one vnto vs, as we saye. For he that doth not beleue that, heareth in vaine, acknowledgeth not Christ, neither know∣eth whereunto he profiteth or serueth. Wherefore euen this one considerati∣on, if there were no other, may minister vnto vs so much comfort, if it be well and duely had, that we may not onely not be grieued at our euils, but also reioyce in tri∣bulations,
scarce feeling them by reason of the ioy which we haue in Christ. Of which ioy our Christ our Lorde and God blessed for euer make vs partakers, Amen. By these my cogitations most famous Prince, The con∣chision. witnessing after a sort the duety of my small abilitie, I commende me to your most noble grace, being ready to performe greater thinges, if the power of my spirit were according to my desire. For I will alwayes be a dettour both to euery of my neighbours, but especially to your most noble Grace, whom our Lord Ie∣sus Christ by his gracious good∣nes long preserue among vs, & at the last bring to him selfe by a blessed and happy ende, Amen. Your Graces most humble and obedient subiect MARTIN LV∣THER.
