17115 99844601 9430
¶The beginning and endynge of all po∣pery, or popishe kyngedome. scene with pope And then shall that wicked be vtte∣red, whom the lord shal cōsume with the sprete of his mouth, and shal de∣stroy with the apperaunce of his cō∣mynge, euen him whose comming is after the workinge of Sathan.
The epistle. ¶To the moost excellente and worthye prince, Edwarde the .vi. by the grace of god, Kyng of Englande, Fraunce, and Irlande, defender of the fayth, & in earthe supreme head of this church, of England and Ireland, immediatly nexte vnder god, and to his most deare vncle, Edward duke of Somerset, lorde protector of all the kinges maiesties realmes and dominions, and go∣uernoure of his moost royall person: His faithfull and obediente sub∣iecte Gwalter Lynne, wis∣sheth the continuall as∣sistence of goddes grace. WHEN SATHAN percey¦ued the ground worke and founda¦cion of the papacie to be so weake & slender, that it shulde not be able to sustaine and beare, the weight of the great heap that he intended to erect and buylde theron: then dyd he (mooste deare soue∣raine) beynge the angell of darcknes, put on him the fourme of an aungel of lyght. And vnder that cloke, he endeuoured all that he mighte, to fortifye and strengthen it: by the most sacred and holy scrip¦ture, to thintente that the impietie and wickednesse therof, might the better be cloked and hid. And ther¦fore dyd he subtylly inuent, and diligently instruct all his faithfull children the byshops of Rome craf∣tely to wreste and falsely to interpretate, this place of scripture in Math. Thou art Peter, and vppon
this stone or rocke I will buyld my churche. Vpon this foundacion, buylded he so strongelye, and ere∣cted so beautyfull and gloriouse a peece: that all the whole worlde wondered therat. The wise and lear∣ned men employed all their studye to enlarge, and decke this princely palayce, and see of Rome. Yea princes and rulers, thought it their duty, to become labourers, & drudges in the erecting & vpholding of this so gorgiouse a buldynge. Finally the mater was so handled, that thoroughe all christendome ye see was taken for the fountaine and well of all mer¦cie. Remission and forgeuenesse of sinne, were not to be had in any other place then there. But now, that it hath pleased the lorde (accordynge to the wordes of his prophet Ioel) in these oure dayes (the latter daies of the worlde) to powre out of his spirite vpō all flesh, yt this secrete and hid mistery of abomina∣ble iniquitie, is come to lyghte, and so opened that the suckelynges and younge babes of this tyme, knowe more then dyd the auncient and gray heared fathers in the time of blyndnesse and ignoraunce. That most victoriouse & triumphāt prince, your dearely beloued and naturall father, perceyuynge that more then hell darkenesse, wherin we (his pore subiectes) were led: opened vnto vs the moste holy and sacred bible, wherin are declared the misteries of this so gorgiouse a buyldyng. Cease not therfore (most graciouse prince) to set forwarde this godlye worke that your father began. And to thentent that your graces louinge subiectes may know by what craft and pollicie this buylding first began, and af∣terwarde proceded, I haue thought good to trans∣late
out of the Germaine tongue into Englysshe, this little boke. wherin is declared what maner of thinges the bishops of Rome were at the first, what was their estate and condicion, and what was their office or deutye. Then how they abusynge their of∣fice aspired, and came to so inordinate honour and dignitie. Howe they leuinge Christ and his mooste holy worde, enployed all their study to please men. The secular power was it that they loked for. And no dout it was that, and not Christ, that gaue to the byshops of rome, ye preeminence to be called fathers of fathers, and to be preferred before other bishops. But because so secrete a misterie, can not wel be ope¦ned without plaine demonstracions: the Author of this boke hath most plainly set forth by figures, the estate, that this Antichrist is in, hath bene in, or shal be in, euen to the day of his vtter distruction. These figures are not of the authors owne inuencion, ne of late daies inuented: but they were found in aun∣cient libraries aboue .ccc. yeres sence. The common experience, that is daylye sene of the greate blynde∣nesse and ignoraunce of that time, wold moue your highnesse to doubte of the truth, and veritie of this reporte: but to certifie your maiestie therin, there is at this daye remaining in the abbaye of saint Lau∣rence in Luyke, a table of great antiquitie, contai∣nynge portrature of like matter. Wherby it is ma∣nyfest that the fathers of auncient tyme, sawe in the papacie, the thinge that they durst not vtter, eyther by wordes or writinge, but trustynge that the time wolde come when men might be bolde to speake it: they dyd in the meane tyme kepe it in painting and
portrature, that suche as could coniecture, might gather knowledge therby, & that the thynge myght remayne tyll such tyme as god had appoynted it to be declared bothe in wrytynge and wordes. The Author therfore of this little boke: hath not onelye added vnto these figures an exposicion to declare ye meanynge of euery of them: but manifest scriptures also, to proue the thinges that they represente, to be true, so that these figures may appeare rather to be the figures of some Apocalipsis or reuelacion, then the inuencion of any man. The spirite of the lyuing god, the geuer of all goodnesse, instructe you in al godly knowledge, that for the time of your reigne in this worlde, your highnesse may vse the sword to you committed, to the honor of god, and wealth of his members, lyuyng here vnder your domi∣nion. And then no doubte ye shall en∣ioye the kyng∣dome, that shall continue for euer. AMEN. Your faithfull and obedient subiecte Gwalter Lynne.
IN MONSTRVM QVOD libellus, iste graphicè depingit, ad Lectorem Candidum. CApripedes Satyri: tetrae Stymphalides Hydra Dira: Canis Stygius: Gorgones anguicomae Igne Chimaera furens rapido: Scyllae{que} triformes: Monstra{que} si qua usquam fabula prisca refert: Portento huic nostro uictricia sagmina cedunt, Nec monstro immani cedere turpe putant. Incesta siquidem & uecordae libidine feruet. Depascit{que} inopes, expoliat{que} bonis. Mille, quibus miseros circumuenit, obtinet artes: Tutatur leges mordicus us{que} suas Vertice uittato stultè nimium{que} superbit! In{que} pios flammis saeuit & igne nocens. Orbis opes conquirit, opum sinuosa uorago Aestuat, & nummis cuncta profana facit. Portenti nomen Pestis tibi Maxima binis Exprimit haud dubiè, Lector amice, notis.P. M. Romuleae quan{que} Pater augustissimus urbis Cenceri falso iure proternus amat. Scilicet est turpis Dominae meretricis alumnus, Quam sacri arcanum uatis adumbrat opus. Cui, genius pronus studia in contraria Christo.Antichri∣stus. E Graio nomen non malê fonte dedit. Nam uerè (mihi crede) pios qui torret: egenos Deglubit: sceleri Praemia magna locat. Qui pede ceruices Regum premit imperioso: At{que} tumet fastu turgidus Arsacio: Venales{que} malis sacros proscribit honores: Obruit & uerbi semina sancta dei:
Connubij{que} suis socialia foedera nescit, Pacem almam frangit, dissidium{que} serit Collidit{que} armis totum feralibus orbem: Foenerat: annonas aere flagellat iners: Diuinos{que} suis titulis postponit honores: Et redimi sacris coelica regna docet: Monstrū haec cuncta Deo patrans pugnantia, christi Dici hostem meritô, quis dubitare queat? Sollicito hunc studio lector peruolue libellum, Sat scio, uel lectus ter, mage gratus erit. Non fuco, at uero depicta colore placebit Portenti facies prodigiosa trucis. Dispeream, nisi uera magis, quàm oracula Phoebi Delphica, uel sortes Diua Sibylla tuae. I.A.
Paule in his seconde epistle, and seconde chapiter to the Tessolonians. BRethrē we beseke you by ye cōmyng of our LORD Iesus Christ, & in that we shal assēble vnto hym, that ye be not sodenly mo¦ued from youre mynde, and be not troubled, nother by sprete, nother by wordes,2. pet. 3. a nor yet by letter which shuld seme to be sent from vs, as though the daye of Christ were at hande. Let no man deceaue you by ony meanes.Danie. 9. c 1. Tim. 4. a. Luce. xi. c For the Lorde cōmeth not excepte the departyng come fyrst, and that that mā of synne be opened, euē the sonne of perdiciō, which is an ad∣uersary, & is exalted aboue all that is called god or gods seruyce, so that he sytteth as God in the tē¦ple of god, and boasteth himselfe to be God.1. Co. .  and. 6. c. Dan. xi. c Remēbre ye not, that whā I was yet with you, I told you these thynges? And now ye knowe what witholdeth it, euen that it myghte be vttered at his tyme.1. Ioh. . (For the mysterie of the iniquite worketh alre¦dye, tyll he whiche now onely letteth be takē out of the way.) And then shal that wicked be vttered, whome the LORD shal cōsume with the sprete of his mouth,Iob. 15. d. Esay. 11. a. Danie. 8. d. Ioh. 8. d. Deu 13. Math. 24 v & shall destroye with the appearaunce of his cōmynge: euen hym, whose cōmynge is after the working of Sathan with all lyenge power, and signes and wonders, & with all deceueablenesse of vnryghteousnesse among thē that peryshe, because they receaued not the loue of the treuth, that they might haue bene saued.zacha. 5. a. Rom a. 1. d. Therfore shall God sende thē stronge delusion, that they shulde beleue lyes, that they almyght be dāned,Osee 7. a which beleued not the trueth but had pleasure in vnrighteousnesse.
But we are bound to geue thākes alway vnto God for you, brethrē beloued of the Lorde, because that God hath frō the begynnyng chosen you to salua∣cion, in the sanctifyenge of the sprete & in beleuyng of the treuth, whervnto he hath called you by our Gospel, to optayne the glorye of our LORDE Iesus Christ. Therfore brethren stonde fast, & kepe the ordinan∣ces which ye haue learned, whether it were by oure preachynge, or by epistle. But oure Lorde Ihesus Christ hymselfe & God our father, which hath loued vs & geuen vs euerlastynge conso∣lacyon, and a good hope thorow grace, comforte your hartes, and stablyshe you in all doctryne & good doynge.
scene with pope And than shall that wicked be vtte∣red whom the lord shal cōsume with the spirite of his mouth, and shal de∣stroy him with apperaunce of his cō∣mynge euen him whose comming is after the workinge of Sathan.
¶The beginnynge and endynge of all poperie (beinge taken oute of certaine olde prophecies more then .ccc. yeres agone, here faythfully set forth to the a∣mendement of this pre∣sente worlde, out of hye Almayne by Gwalter Lynne. The interpretacion of the wordes of christe. Math .xvi. Thou art Peter. &c. whiche the pope ascribeth vn∣to hym selfe. THe pope (because his estate myght seme the hollyer) toke the holy scrip¦tures and christ him selfe to defend and maintaine it withall As Lu∣cius Silla by the romaines, hauing vnder the pretens of goodnes dely∣uered them from the Marianes, afterwardes be∣trayed the riche and honest men of them, impriso∣ned, spoiled and kylled them. Myght not such ano∣ther parte be plaied with vs? yes and it is (the more pite) come to passe alredy. And styll he hath kepte vs vnder, with the wordes which Christ spake vn∣to Peter, Thou art Peter. &c. which wordes in no wise do serue for his purpose. But commonlye is it seene, that all thinge so begonne, come to an euill ende, as is to be seene by ye hole popery. They might better haue ben suffred, yf they hadde ruled more wt goodnes in peace and tranquillite then with rigour
and mere tirannie, yf they hadde likewise rather for geuen, then still persecuted to death. But truelye, the wolfe (the whiles he is in prison) deuoureth no shepe, althoughe there were neuer so manye with him in captiuitie, but being at libertie, let euery mā beware of him. CHriste said to Peter. Mathew .xvi. Thou art Petrus. &c. Petrusin the greake tonge, is as muche to saye as in the latyne tonge saxum. In ye englyshe tonge a rocke, and there∣fore of christ he was named a rocke, bicause he hadde ben constant in the knowledging al the holy catholique faithe, and not wauering hi∣ther and thither, as the commune people did. And vpon the same rocke, that is vpon the same stedfast knowledge of faith, will I buyld my churche. And who soeuer stedfastly standeth to the same, the very hell shall not preuaile against him, muche lesse shal men. Lyke as saint Augustine in his sermon vpon this place dothe attribute these wordes, vpon this rocke, to our Lord Iesu Christ, and not to Peter saieng, this is the meaning of it. Thou arte Petrus, and vpon the same rocke whiche thou hast confessed and knowledged, saienge, Thou art christ the sonne of the liuing god, wil I buyld my church, vpon me I wyll buylde the, and not me vppon the. But suche as wolde men to be buylded vpon men, said thus, I holde of Paule, I holde of Apollo, I
hold of Cephas, which is Peter. The other sort whi¦che wold not be buylded vpon men, but onely vpon the rock Iesu christe, saide. I holde of Christe. &c. Augustinus. Erasmus Roterodamus. I Maruell therfore (not a littell) that certaine people there be that wrest and wring this place and forcely apply and asscribe him, to the pope as if it onely apperteined vnto him. But the why∣les his churche (whiche he nameth the catholyke church) is not buylded vpon christe, but vpon hym selfe, so muste lykewise the foundacion euen be so stronge, mightye and durable. Yet doth he set forth him selfe, with the holy scripture which in no maner of wise doth serue for him. Neither is Cyprian with him, where as he speakethe of sainte Peter, vppon whome the churche was buylded. For S. Peter in his confession and knowledge, and the pope agree, euen as fier and water. what comparison is there be¦twene Christ and Beliall? if the popes both in faith and lyuinge were to be compared with Peter, so were there some hope to be hadde.Math. v Mat. ix. Luc. xiiii. But whiles he is but a corrupte and vnproffitable lalte, hauing lost his sauour, wherto doth he serue? scasse to the dong hill? And therfore is he dekeied. Yet the pope that the scriptures wolde not maintaine him, he hathe sought another meane or waie. As is to be sene and redde in the popes Cronicles. ¶How longe that the byshops haue bene in the churche, and when, with the begin∣ninge lykewise of the pope.
THe christians hadde but bishoppes vntill the time of Constantine. An¦no .ccc. xi. And these byshops did no∣thing but study the holye scripture, and taught the holy gospell to the people, and exercised ye same, & liued soberly. The bishop of rome had no dominion ouer rome as he hathe nowe, he was a curate vnto thē, & that was al. And bishops generallye (according to their vocation) taught ye people ye kingdom of god, & comforted and fedde the poore. The communes gaue thē mony with other necessary thinges whiche they dealed among the poore people, as ye apostles dydde lyke wise. There was moche spite wroughte againste them by diuers great and mightye men. They were there to suffre. Fewe of the magistrates were of their syde, yf by chaunce one were with them tenne were against them: as both themperoures and popes Cronicles testifie,The perse∣cutiō of the christē peple & how they came togy∣ther. yet dyd they suffer al thin∣ges for gods sake. Item the commune people labo∣red truelye and holpe one another, and where as they might be sewrest, there did they gather togi∣ther. So hathe lykewise the holy Anthony done in egipt, and brought many to christ, and they encrea∣sed. Insomuche that there dwelt certaine thowsan∣des of christians in the wildernesse of Egipt, and li¦ued by the gospell, geuinge them selues to mortify the flesh, & daily labours, This witnesseth s. Ierom.Ierom. x BVt whē ye foresaid Constātinus Magnus had ouercome & subdued cruell Maxētius whiche persecuted al christiās, he gaue licēce to ye christiās being scattered abrode, to build chirches & openlye
to preache the gospell, geuinge them also certaine greate giftes towards the same, but not the citie of rome, neither yet landes nor people, as the pope al∣ledgeth in his lawes.Constanti∣nus gaue not rome to the pope. Distinct .xcvi. Constantinus, but kept them to him self, his heyres and executors, & Constantius his sonne had the possession of rome euen as Constantinus his father had before him. After Constātius, Iulianus lykewise, Iouinianus Valentinianus, Gratianus, and so forth. WE read no where that the byshop then inuaded the Romains, neither that he kept anye maner of warres,Suche em∣perour such byshops. but lyued poorelye. And the byshop with the christians were many times inuaded by ye emperoure. BVt when Iustinianus (after the birth of christ. vc .xix.) became emperour, he redemed the bys∣shops oute of their miserye, and dydde muche good vnto them. After hym reigned Iustinianus his susters sonne, which was so righteous, that he compiled & set in order all the institucions of them∣perours of rome, whiche nowe we name themperi∣all lawes, he buylded diuers goodly churches at cō¦stantinople, and gaue them greate riches, yearelye fode and sustinaunce.The begyn¦nyng of the popes ry∣ches. And by this meane the bys∣shops and preistes became somewhat more welthye then they were before. ANno. vc .lxxx. was Gregorius Magnus (the first of that name) made byshop of rome, and one named Mauricius de Cappadocia (ye first that came out of grecia) emperour when (as before) the byshop of rome was become somewhat myghty and riche, they coulde not agree betwene them: In∣somoche
that Mauricius became ennemy vnto Gre¦gorye: At the same tyme, were the byshoppes some∣thinge yet persecuted, as yet being faithfull. And themperour continuyng in persecution of thē, god permitted a plage to come ouer hym, that he was takyn prisoner by Phoca, that was chosen emperour in hys rome, and causyd hym to be headyd. When nowe Phocas. Anno. vic. & iii. kept hys seate at Constantinopell, And ye occidental empire (that is, Rome, Italy, France, and Germanie) were withoute a heade,Practise to get londes and people the vice emperoure beinge slaine of the Gottishe kinge Theodorico. The byshop of Rome thoughte in his mynd, what & yf thou hadste the dominion of the vice Emperowre, that rowme neded not to stond open for a preye to euerye man? For that cause wente Bonifacius the thirde vnto themperour Phoca, to obteyne of hym, that as in worldly dominion euery mā toke themperoure for the chief heade of all the worlde, lykewyse ye byshop of Rome might be the chief bishop within Christen¦dome. Then muste nedes followe that he must haue landes and men. WHyles themperowre of Rome, kepte his seate at Cōstantinople, the byshop of Cōstantinople wrote hym selfe the chiefe bishop, bicause of the empire. Thys shrodely troubled ye byshop of Rome called Bonifacius,when and ī what bys∣shops time this name papa begā. who went for the same cause to themperoure Phoca, praienge hym instantlye to graunte to the seat of Rome hys Imperialle priui∣lege, frō henceforth to be a bishop aboue al bishops,
that is Papa patrum. And the byshoprike of Rome to be named the chiefe of all bishoprikes. ALthoughe this priuilege wolde not so lyghtly be graunted, yet he obteined it by continuall seute and begging. This will they not be a knowen of nowe, but saye that the pope is the supreme head and his romishe byshoprike to be aboue all byshop¦rikes by goddes ordenaunce .xxi. Quamuis. and Distinct .xxii. omnes. And themperour Constanti∣nus (say they) sholde lykewise haue giuen this pri∣uilege to be pope, and his bisshoprike to be aboue al other which likewise appereth by their own Decret. Distinc .xcvi. Constantinus. They make of the pri∣uilege, whatsoeuer they wil the whiles it is to their profite. And thus haue they writen it in their owne Decrees. Thence commith the name of the most ho¦liest father the pope. The same haue they afterward colored with Christ, his holy worde, and Peter. It sholde haue hadde no lykenesse to truth elles. BVt how agre these thinges, Constantinus did graunte the priuilege, Gregorius the thirde broughte it to passe by Phoca. And afterward must Christ confirme the same. Haue the faithful olde bis¦shops before Constantynes tyme bene so ignorante that they vnderstode not the holy scriptures? then is it no maruail that they were persecuted. Yf they had set forth them selues by tymes, with christes wordes, they myghte haue bene in better case. YF they hadde suche power of christe, what ne∣ded they to entreate and flatter the vngodlye
emperours for it? when christus chose Paule to be an apostle amonge the heithēs, he must nedes be it, went also, & did as he was commaunded, neding ne¦ther emperours nor kinges confirmacion to ye same, And cōtinued vntil such time as thēperour did hed him. After that sorte was Paule made pope, and Petrus was crucified. Therfore hath it another me¦nyng then the pope allegeth. And of ye same wordes Tu es Petrus They haue made them a lawe contra∣rie to the doctrine of christe and the Apostles, & the lyues of faithfull byshops. THe same Bonifacius the third, when he hadde begged the chief byshoprike of Phoca, imme∣diately after he wrote him selfe pope Bonifacius the thirde of that name. He gathered al his bishops & preistes togither, and kept a concile at Rome. And declared there openly that from that time forward a pope beinge chosen by the priesthode & the cōmon people, shuld be taken of asmuch authorite, as if he were created by themperour & admitted. Lo there may we se ye first thankes or reward yt the pope gaue to themperour for the priuilege graunted vnto him takyng away from him his old rightes which were & had ben themperours, since ye first christen empe∣rour was. That thēperour shuld make no more bys∣shops, but ye pope, & so shuld ye bysshops lykewise be more obedient to the pope thē to themperour, & de∣spetch al their matter at Constantinople wtout thē∣perour. And thus began he priuily to rule & cōmād his maister themperour, of whom he hadde begged the priuilege. The same was not done immediatly
by rigeur, but the pope suffred themperour to haue styl for a time his deputie at Rome, which admitted the pope. NOwe was it come to suche a point, that the po∣pes power wolde breake out, and take vppon hym to be aboue themperoure. And therfore, when after the birth of Christe .viic. & .xviii. yeares Leo the third of that name, beinge emperoure, dyd put downe Germanum a Patriarche at Cōstantinople, and in his place set Anastasium. The pope of Rome sent Gregory the third vnto themperoure, & wrote vnto him, that he shuld putte Germanum into his place againe, whiche themperoure wolde not do. There beganne all the mischeife at ones. The pope found the meanes that all Italy fel from thempe∣rour and forsoke him (whiche none other pope hath done, but they paciently suffered persecution) he cur¦sed also themperour. Thinking whē thempire were deuided within it selfe, he wold be emperour, for he had alredy gotten him a greate name, amonge the princes and gouernours. Reason wold also require that he were not only the cheifhead by name, but al¦so in might and power, and so wolde he kepe Rome and graunt thempire to whom he wolde and listed. WHen now Constantinus the fifte, the sonne of Leo the thirde was emperoure, and somwhat offended with the pope zacharia, by reason of his fa¦ther, whome Gregorius suffered to dye vnder his curse in Messambria, and caused all Italye to fall awaye from him. He purposed to haue brought thē
againe vnder his subiection. zacharius the pope fearing leaste Constantinus might shorten his win¦ges againe, soughte another maner of meane, then super hanc petram, vpon this rocke, that is to saye,Howe the pope came by rome. him selfe. He sent for helpe vnto Pipinus thadmini¦stratour of fraunce, promisinge to make him kynge of Fraunce, with the fauoure and good will of the Magistrates and rulers. Was not this lykewise done in despite of themperoure? And thus was the romishe empire deuided, one toke here, and another there. The pope kept Rome as his owne. HEre haue you the first kinge made by ye popes power, and the fauour of the rulers and gouer¦nours, accordinge to the tenoure of his spiri∣tuall lawes .xi. q. i. Te quidem.Pipinus the firste kyng made by pope za∣chariā But this pope dyed the nexte yeare after, and Stephanus the seconde came in his stede, The whiche hadde muche sorowe and trouble by kynge Astulphum, and likewise cal∣led vnto Pipinus to assiste the churche of Rome, Insomuche that the kinge Pipinus toke his parte, and dyd driue kinge Astulphum awaye from rome, and gaue the pope Stephane Rauēnam, with dy∣uers other cities. ANd so is the pope successiuely become a ruler aboue emperours and kynges, and al christē∣dome vniuersallye. And hath forsaken ye holy scrip∣tures, the gospell, the footesteppes of the auncients pouertie, sorrowe, care, and all other kyndes of per∣secutions and troubles &c. Howe can he then be the mooste holy vycare of christe, and successor of sainte
Peter? we fynde writen, Deare brethern be my fol∣lowers, as I am the folower of christ .i. cor. xi. yf the pope with his company do folowe Christ, then is it reason that we lykewise followe him. But for their deuylish and abominable rule and doctrine, is ther not one iote in scripture. There is neither Peter, nor Paule that wyl know them, muche lesse wil Chryst hym selfe knowe them. Thus shal they be answered nescio uos. I know you not. Quia operati estis ini∣quitatē. you haue set forth your own noughtynes in summa ebrietate sicut fortes Ephraim. in all filthy∣nes and diuers other kyndes of vngodlynes (which be not to be wrytten) with the myght of this world. LO, hitherto haue you hadde in wryting the be¦ginninge of the pope, thaugmētacion of his state, and thirdly his full power and myght. Nowe shall you lykewyse beholde and se the same in the olde painted figures folowynge. HOw be it many olde and faithful fathers per∣ceyued, and sawe it well, yet durste they not clearelye sette it forthe, excepte only by fygures. Trustyng alwais, that thorow the mercy of god a tyme shulde come when they myght be brought to lyghte. And so clearly sette forth, that it were impos∣sible more sightlye to paint them. This wyll we now do for the plaisure, and to the pro∣fit of suche as can not reade. To proue whether they be able to knowe a lyon by his clawes.
❧The pope in his pontificall robes on euerye syde a beare, castynge them money in their mouthes, and the holy ghost a syde of hym. scene with pope and bears IN this estate began the byshop of Rome to sette hym selfe. Anno .ccc.xi. at the tyme of Constantinus Magnus, the which when he had ouercome, Maxentiū graunted the Christianes to buyld churches, and gaue excedynge greate giftes towarde it but nei∣ther londes nor people, nor yet the cure of Rome, as they saye he dydde. When they smelled ryches, and daylye coueted more and more, then was
goddes worde laide aside. And afterwarde ouer∣came they all thinges (as they do yet) with monney Lordes, dukes, emperours, kinges, landes and peo¦ple haue made subiect vnto them. They hadde well studied the wordes of Philip the king of Macedo∣nia, where as he saithe, that there is no castell, no towne, ye no land, so stronge, which cannot be won, yf a moyle laden with money maye entre into it. And thus mony ouercommeth all thinges. And so haue they sette a syde the very true rocke, which is Christe, the fotesteppes of Peter, and finally al ma∣ner of tribulations and persecutions. Their church haue they buylded vpon them selues, and therefore they may not endure or cōtinue. They haue sought also their helpe by the worldly powers, whiche the beares signifie and represent in this figure. Yf they had continued in their vocation, christe wold neuer haue forsaken them. But when they fell from it, and yet wolde (notwithstandinge) maintaine all their doinges with these wordes, vpon this rocke. &c. Christe went from them. And immediatly after thei soughte helpe, wherewith they yet continuallye (ye and againste Chryste hym selfe) wyll defende them¦selues. And this fall of the byshoppes firste broke oute clearly, by pope zachariam, and Stephan the secōd against Constantine the fifth, when they persuaded Pipin the lieutenaunte of Fraunce to helpe ye pope againste themperoure, and so doing, the pope wold make him kyng of Fraunce, Italy, and Germanye, with the fauoure and good wyll of the magistrates
and rulers. WHerwith defendeth the pope his church nowe with Christe or with beares? that is with worldlye powre and strengthe. It hath tyghte well bene perceaued hitherto, and is as clere as ye sonne. That the beares sygnifie worldlye myght and cru∣ell people: We fynde it in the seconde booke of Sa¦muell, the seuententh chapter,ii. Sam. 17. where as Eusai repro¦ued the counsell of Ahitophell, Sayeng vnto Ab∣solon, thou knowest thy father and his men, howe they be stronge, and they be chased in their myndes, and are euen as a beare robbed of her whelpes in the felde. &c. IT suffiseth not to saye, I am the chiefe bysshop I haue the roume of an apostle, I sytte in the Apostel stole, Petrus muste preache, Paulus muste also preache. Whyles the pope nowe followeth not Peter and Paule (the whiche he taketh for his au∣thores) in preachinge, teachinge, and feadinge of Christes flocke, as the commaundement specifieth, so sytteth he besides the apostell stole, and the spirit of god shrinkethe frome hym, the whiche more stren¦gthened hym then al the beares of the world. But the chylde of perdicion with also his great tirannye (euen as Iu∣das) must nedes be set forth and be knowen.
¶ The pope in his robes thrusteth downe the Aigle with the floure deliis at the ende of his slaffe. THe crowned aigle doutles signifi∣eth themperour of Rome, whom the pope vnder the pretens of holines hath alwaies stopped with ye floure deliis, whiche is the frensh kinge. And hathe robbed themperoure, of all maner of thinges, landes, and people, substance and riches, as aboue sufficiently is declared. The pope fearing lest in proces of time, the same thinges might be taken from him again, and that the righte¦ouse heire and lorde might fortune to recouer them againe (as often times hath bene seene by certayne
emperours). He wined him dailye more and more to other worldlye princes and rulers, & resisted them∣perour, contrarie to all righte and reason. Neither was he so contented, but prouokinge likewise other to inuade themperoure. And by this meane he re∣mained a ruler aboue them all. The same appea¦red by Constantine the syxthe. For when zachari∣as the pope coulde not obtaine his purpose of him, he matched him selfe with Pipin, a lieutenaunte of fraunce, and made hym king therof. The same was a waye and meane to bring thempire vnto France. Is this any other thing, then with the assistence of the flowre deliis, to resiste themperoure? Ye, and vnto this present daie haue ye popes alwaies more fauoured fraunce, then thempire. For what soeuer these two haue, hath bene in time past, vnder the oc∣cidentalle empire. And to thentente it be not taken frome them againe, they styke harde togither Et uiuit ex rapto, non hospes ad hospi∣te tutus. That is. And the pope ly∣ueth by thinges robbed of them∣pire. But he that saith so now, is named an he∣retike, and no where free. ¶ Here kneleth the pope, and the hande of god threateneth and rebukethe hym, but a fox doth counsell the contrary?
IN the seconde boke of Moyses the thirde chapter, god shewed vnto Moyses oute of a fyrye busshe, what he shulde do. Euē so is here the hand of god pain¦ted in a busshe oueragainst the pope, sitting vpon his knees, threatning and rebuking the pope, bycause he doth vtterly applye him selfe to the riches & dominion of this worlde, which is contrary to the vocation and nature of the apostolicall function. Suche threate∣ninges, admonitions, and warninges, haue manye yeres agone bene geuen to the pope, of manye and dyuers faithfull men. Ye, and thoughe certaine po∣pes faine wolde haue amended it. It coulde not be. For it were agreat abuse to the church of rome: Ne∣ther wolde the foxesse suffre it to be done, that is to say, the Cardinalles, Notaries, and other of that see
the whiche euen at this present, pull backewardes, fearinge, that if the pope shulde followe Peter and Paule, their doctrine and lyfe, then must they like∣wise become poore. And that the foxes signifie such as attaininge to the vnfaithfull princes and gouer¦nours, the same shalte thou fynde. Luc. xiii. where as Christe calleth Herode themperours deputy at Ierusalem a foxe.Luc. xiii. Whiles nowe the pope hearethe not the voice of god, he imagineth and practisethe al waies and meanes, to haue ye Aigle by the throte, that is to subdue, and bringe themperour vnder his power and dominion, ¶ The pope hath the Aigle by the throte, and foy∣neth at the other byrdes lykewyse with hys threforked scepter, and the same affir∣meth a monke to be agreable to scripture.
WHen a man is taken by the throte, then must he nedes do what soeuer his aduersary requirethe: Howe longe, and what maner of practise & sutteltie the pope hath vsed vntyll suche tyme as he had gotten them∣pire vnder his subieccion, is not necessarie here to be written, seing it is mencioned before. But this is ve¦ry necessarye to be knowen, after what sorte he han∣dled themperoure, when he toke thaigle by the throte? In the time of Iohan the .xii. and Otto the firste there was stablyshed a greuouse intolle∣rable, hurtefull and exitiable othe to all thempire, to be sworne of all emperours,The oth of themperor to the pope in this maner. I Otto the good, promyse and swere vnto the pope Iohn, my soueraine lorde, by the father, sonne, and holy goste. &c. That (if I come to the citye of rome) I shal exalt and promote the holy churche of rome, and the, as ruler of the same, to my power and abi∣litie. And farthermore that thou shalt lose no parte of thy liuinge nor dignitie, whiche thou haste with my will, counsell or assente. And within the citie of rome nothing to command or institute (concerning thinges belonging vnto you, or the Romains) with out thy counsel. And all the londes longinge to s. Peter (so that they come vnder oure iurisdiction) to restore vnto you. And whome soeuer I permytte to the gouernaunce of Italye, hym will I lykewise bynde by his othe to be assistente vnto you, and a defender of the Landes and possessions of sainte Peter to his power.
THe pope had the power to stablyshe and sette forthe this othe, by the auctorite (and accor∣dinge to the tenoure) of his spirituall lawe .xii. q.i. clericus. is this any better, then takinge the Ai∣gle by the throte? Thus became Otto the first em∣perour of Germany with al his successors very bōd∣men. And the moste richest & also myghtyest empire and kyngedome of all the worlde, was in bondage, and remained vnder the popes power, & dominion. THus is the temporall gouernaunce euen here ouerthrowen. The popes before were seruaun¦tes, and themperoure a prince and gouernour ouer all thempire. Nowe is the pope become the gouer∣noure ouer all, and themperoure a seruaunt, In so∣muche that he must kysse the fete of his subiecte. A faithfull and true Germaine emperoure oughte ra∣ther to graunt to be torne in peces. But doutles, if he dyd well beginne it, wel sholde come of it. Fye of soche shame before god and the worlde, for this kna¦uery can wt no maner of scripture be proued, except onely by their owne deuilysshe and vngodly lawes, whiche the mounke standinge here by the pope con∣firmeth. Ye and to be euen as true as the holy scrip∣tures. WHen a right natural Germain hart remēbreth wel this stinking pride and presumptiō of the pope, it is for anger lyke to burst a sunder, that the valeante and myghtie Germaine emperours haue suffred them selues to be made such fooles & iesting stockes, as to kysse the feete of so vngodlye a crea∣ture. I beleue that if it were not to vyle a thynge,
they muste haue kyssed the popes hindermost part. And yet euery man may not come so nyghe to the ho¦ly father. AT the firste was it not so, Constantinus ye first and all his successors (as many as were Chri∣stianes) made and chose byshops at rome and euery where. Nowe make the popes, emperours, kynges and byshops, and therefore foineth he lykewise with his scepter at the other byrdes, WHyles nowe the pope takethe vpon hym the gouernaunce and rule of this world, so must he lykewise promise and swere to the hyghest prince of this worlde, whiche is the de∣uyll. And the same declareth the figure nexte following. ¶Here commeth the Deuyll with the pope and giueth hym his commaūdements, accordinge to whiche he must behaue hym selfe in thys hys king∣dome in earth.
WHyles (as aboue is mencioned) by the forsakinge of goddes worde, the persuasion and illusion of the deuyll, whiche onelye is a prynce of this worlde) the popes be be∣come successours, and deputies vnto hym, as their cheife gouer∣noure here in earthe. So haue they nothinge more to do with god, Christe nor his doctrine. For Christ saith. Ioh. xiiii. The prince of this world commeth and hath nothinge in me, and so shall nowe (whiles I am here) the prynce of the worlde be thruste oute. Iohan. xii. Thus can the pope haue no parte with Christe, concerninge the kyngedome of this worlde, whyles his chiefe minister the deuyll hathe nothinge in hym.Math. 8▪ Howe can they now defend the patrimonie and possession (as they name it) of
Christe and Pieter?Math. 8. c. Luc. 9. f. Christus hadde not where to lay his head in. And Peter forsoke his poore fisher bote, with his patched fishernet also. CHriste sought not in this worlde (as many co∣uetous parsons do, the which gather and heap great substance togither, neither dare they spend it them selues, to the ende that they might leue muche behinde them for their executours) but was sente frome his father to teache and suffre persecution, which he fulfilled. Euen the very same left he to thē that be his seruauntes,Mat. 10. b. Luc. 10.  for a testament, sayenge, I sende you forth, as my father hath sent me, as shepe among ye wolues, yf they persecuted me,Ioh. 13.15 they shall lykewise do the same vnto you, for ye seruaunt is no greater then his lorde. Here fynde we very lyttle of the kyngdome of this worlde. ANd thus is all the popes boaste and presump¦tion nothing worthe. For he is none of the chil¦dren of Abraham, (Howe be it, he wryteth and sayth hym selfe to be the folower of Christ) but a childe of the deuill, whiche fathers wordes and workes he foloweth diligently alwaies. And the same verifieth his owne doctrine and lyfe, forbidding meates, ty∣mes, and wedlocke, to maintaine horedome, with more other abuses whiche be not to be spoken. Io. 8. d. 10 a 13. e. 1. Ioa. 4.HE that hearethe goddes wordes, and dothe therafter, is of god. But whosoeuer hearethe them not, is not of god. Then must he nedes be of ye
deuyll, which is also a father, but of lyes,Gen. . a. Ioh. 8. d. 1. Ioh. 3. b. And who so euer followeth hym, goethe about with lyes. THe deuill is the prince of this worlde. And the pope writeth him selfe also a gouernoure of ye worlde, as hauynge receaued the same of him that had power to delyuer it. The deuyll from the begin¦ninge hathe bene a murderer and lyer, and the au∣thore and father of all lyes. The same chargeth he like wise his officers and seruauntes withall, for he wolde gyue them nothinge, doinge not his will. Euen so is all that longeth to the pope, nothinge but murther, lies, and deceite, Ita patrem sequitur sua proles. No crowe becommeth white with was∣shinge. There is nowe both Crisame and baptyme loste. And therfore will the lorde subuerte and ouerthrowe them, as it is (laudes and praise vnto god) begon alrea∣dye, yet they thinke styll, euen as they gotte it, euen so to kepe it. As is to be seene in the fi∣gures folo∣winge.
¶The pope thrustethe the lambe thorowe with his sworde. And therefore gy∣ueth him the deuyll the keyes that is, power and might. HOwe be it the pope boasteth & day∣lye cryeth, his keyes to be of Christ, though it be nothinge so. The olde fathers perceaued the same righte wel, and therfore haue they painted here the deuil with the keyes by the pope. Because that all the auctoritie whiche he hath here in earthe, commeth not from god, but from the deuyll. For howe coulde the power of god be with the sworde that kylleth the lambe.
THe deuill is the father, and the pope the sonne The deuill is a prince of this worlde, and the same hath he geuen vnto the pope, as his heyre, wt all maner of worldly might and power, the same si∣gnifie the keyes, the rodde, and the sworde. And who soeuer obeyeth him not in this his power and dignite, the same doth he scourge first with ye rodde admonisheth him, and curseth. &c. And yf that wyll not helpe, then muste he dye with hys sworde as an heretike. The sworde of the spi∣rite whiche Paule speakethe of, oughte rather to procede out of the popes mouth,Ephes. 6. Hebre. 4. yf he wold be named the successoure of Peter. But euen suche a mannes seruaunte as he is, such kinde of li∣uery weareth he. And the same shewethe the figure fo∣lowinge. ❧The pope with his keyes, them kepeth a serpente, in his pon∣tificall robes and treasor ful of ducates, and the power lābe is the harde cote of.
THe deuyll is the wylye serpente, the which yet still by wilynes auaū¦ceth the popes power, ruleth ye same and kepeth in strength. Insomuch that by that meane, he hath almost subdued, and broughte vnder his dominion all Christendome, some he seduceth, wt mony, & so be his ornamentes full of ducates, some againe with his false and fained ypocrisye, hauynge a crosse in his handes. Some by might and power, So that partly by the sence of the crosse and keies, and partely by the deuill and Fraunce he subdueth altogether. And it goeth with the pope, euen as A∣poca .xiii. is writen: That as many as will not wor∣shyp hym, shalbe kylled. And all his men be mar∣ked,
so that no man dare by or sell, saue he that hath the marke in his righthande or in his foreheade.The poeps marke. There falleth the lambe euen to the grounde. The pope headeth him, and he muste dye. In all these doinges he hathe kepte hym selfe with the kocke, that is Fraunce, signified by the kocke, whiche hel∣peth him to suppresse goddes worde. And all this vnder a pretence of fained holines. So hathe he obteyned the rule both in spiritualle and temporalle matters ouer all Chri∣stendome. And with the assistence of his wolues he trea∣deth vnde his fete all rulers & gouernours that they can go no farther then he permitteth them. As the fi∣gure folowinge declareth. ¶The pope standeth vpon the emperiall crowne hauynge a rasoure in his hande, and the wolfe the sworde.
TO be a fotestole, is ouer all ye world a vyle and abiecte thinge. Neither myghte themperoure come to a lo∣wer degree, then that he and all o∣ther worldly rulers,Psal. 109. Math. 22. d Marc. 12. d. Actu 2. d. 1. Cor. 15. c. Heb. 1. b. 10. muste lye vn∣der the popes fete. Dauid coulde write no greater honour vnto Christ in the Psalter, thē that his enemies shuld become a fotestole vnto hym. And so was it the most paine and spite to the ennemyes to ly vnder the fete of him that ouercame them. Those that be ouercome muste do vnto the conquerer, what soeuer he wyll. And so ruleth nowe the pope themperialle crowne euin as he will, and hath laid it vnder his fete that is, vnder his power. And hathe so vtterly subdued the same, that it is
more to be lamented, then largely described. IT was not ynoughe that the pope hadde spoi∣led thempire both of landes & goodes. But he muste also haue the sworde withall.Sap. 6. a Ro. 0.4. c rom. 13. a itū. 3. 1 Pet. 2. b. To thend that euen as the sworde appertaineth to the highe powers hauinge landes and people, for the wealth of the good, and punishment of the euill. He might lykewise defende and kepe all whatsoeuer he had taken from thempire. Neither is it against raison. For a wolfe is a tiranne beast,3. reg. 13 u Iud. 8. c Deut. 13 a Mat. . b 1. Ioh. 4.  specially amonge shepe, And therefore muste he also haue weapons to playe the butcher and murderer withall but one∣ly amonge the christianes, farther dare he not swel. Concerninge these raueninge wolues hath Christ and his apostles left many warninges behind them to teache vs to beware of them. But the popes ra∣soure is so sharpe, that before a man can loke behind hym, (ye and scarsse feleth it) he is wounded with ye popes mischeif, wickednes, and vngracyousnes. And the same signifieth the rasour.Psal 52. a Psal. lii. THerfore nowe,Dan. 11. e. Isai. 11. 2. Tessa. 2. 1. Ioh. 2. seinge the pope hath sette hys seate aboue bothe spirituall and temporal po∣wers, ye and entreth into the iudgementes of god, rulynge the consciences of men. And soche as heare hym not, he punysheth with the blody sword. Christ thorowe his promise and the glory of his name, wil suffer it no longer, but hathe alreadye thruste hym awaye from hym, as the figure folowinge sheweth.
The angell taketh the keyes from the pope, but yet he remayneth prowde in hys power A. reg. 13. c. A. reg. 15 . reg. 16. c . reg. 28.HEre it goeth to work with the pope as it did with Saule, whiche was putte downe by god, and another annointed kinge before he was all togither putte oute of his dominiō. Saul thought forasmoch as the prophete had annointed him kyng by ye commaun∣demente of god, that he mighte do what soeuer he wolde, ye and by the lawe. Soche pryde and diso∣bedience suffred god for a tyme.. reg. 31. a. . par. 11. a But it was not re∣wardide with a meane deathe, for he kylled hym
selfe in despeare. And so the pope now,Iudi. 9. v. beinge nei∣ther ordened of God, Christe nor his Apostles, and thinkinge quietlye to lyue the whyles he hath, hathe broughte all thinges vnder him, so sendethe god an Angell whiche pullethe awaye the lions skinne frome the asse, and makethe him a mockinge stocke to all the worlde with his holye woorde. In somoch that he knowith not nowe which way to go oute or in. And althoughe he be suppressid of God, yet, wyll he not shrinke or abash, but kepith ye rodde still in his hande, therwith to subdue ye consciences of men, & remaineth pufte vp as a todde or a bolde pecocke in his pryde by certaine people. Whiche to mainteyne againste the wyll of god,. reg 28.  Liui. 20. b. Deut. 8. b. Detu. 16  he se∣keth counsil (as Saul did by the Phytonissa) not by God but by the deuyll, and by all the deuylyshe people and tyrannes of this worlde. Therfore is he set forthe in the figure folowing withoute any crosse, and his boke shytte vp, and sette aboute with beares. ¶The pope sette aboute with beares.
THe popes holynes wyl now almost come to lyght. And it is so farre gone with hym, that he saith, yf no∣thinge helpe me so helpe me the de∣uyll and all his housholde. It was not vnknowen vnto hym, that he mighte not defende him selfe with the holye scrip∣ture, whiche is directly againste hym, and therfore hath he shytte his boke and taken it to him self. Commaundynge vpon great paines and the curse, no man to reade in it, leste men shulde perceiue that his dignitie coulde not be proued by the same. And hathe sette him selfe amonge the beares before and behinde, aboue and beneth, that is, with myghtye
prynces and men of warres, whiche helpe hym to maintaine his dignitie, to the ende that thys boke, with also his power be not taken away from hym. HAth not all this tyranely anoughe continued almost these thirtye yeares? Let them suffre more that lyste. Neither is it come to an ende yet, god helpe vs. And yet wyl (notwithstandyng) these beares, bloudsuppers, and murderers, be the moost Christianes. These beares nede no farther exposi∣tion, for we see daily before oure eyes what & which they be. Neither is it greatly necessary to recite the great pitie, in wyddowes, fatherles and motherles children, the destruction and murder of the people. For it is al cleare, as the sonne. The sonne hath not yet clearly lycte vp the bloude of the innocent Abel neither hath the earthe dronke it in: O god, in thy kyngedome hathe the bloud of an Innocente man called vengeaunce vpon Cayne the fyrst murderer. Howe can the innocentes bloude holde his peace, so longe? when the tyrantes haue bathed them selfes almost to the very kne in bloud, neither thinke they as yet to hold vp. Here neded well an Helias, which thorowe the worde of the lorde spake to kyng Ahab in Israell.3. reg. 11. 2. reg. 12. Thou hast killed and taken possession of Naboths vineyarde. Therfore in the place where the dogges lycked the bloode of Naboth, there shal the dogges lycke euen thy bloude also, &c. But it semeth (parauenture) vnto the righteouse and mer∣cifull god, as yet to be no tyme. willynge his people to learne to be the more paciente,Psal. 9 vntyll the pytte be dygged vp for the vngodly. Psal. xciiii. when ye
power of the Tiphones ones shalbe gathered togi∣ther euen as Pharao,As these gy¦auntes cal∣led Tipho∣nes (throughe the cōfidēce they had in their greate stature) en∣deuoured to cōquire the heauens, so dyd Pharo the chyldrē of Israell, through the trust he had in his great multitude. then shall it be sodenly done with them. ¶ An vnicorne thrusteth the popes crowne from his heade. HOwe be it the pope with his owne falseheade and subteltie hath got∣ten the reigne of this worlde by the deuyll (for no christian euer helped another to suche a kyngdome) he, kepeth him self therin, And though god haue putte him downe, he wil not yet auoide, yet shal the righteousenes of god come and iudge, and euen vtterlye destroye the pope, and expel and
driue hym out of his reigne, which is the deuylles, by whome he gotte it, with worldly power. And the same signifieth the vnicorne, LEt no Christiane be greued thoughe the pope and other tyrannes do yet sticke to their domi∣nion before the face of the world. Be it sufficient vn¦to him to know the iudgement of god, and that the pope muste so longe remaine and walke in the same state and lyfe, vntyll he happen ones sodenlye to come vnder the gallowes, And than must he hange without redemption. ALthough the keyes, that is the power of abso¦lucion, is taken away from the pope, yet is he sette here in spyte of all faithfull personnes, to for∣gyue synne, vntyll suche tyme as the zodomiticall synne be accomplisshed. And then will god (euen as he did send to the Iewes a Titum) sende a Iehu to Baales preistes, and suffre them,3. re. 18.  4. re. 9. 10.  one to destroye another. BVt that the pope shoulde and muste be putte downe from a great dignitie and power. And (the whiles he hathe the deuyll the prince of this worlde to assist hym on his syde) can not so soone be done as we meane, so must his enemies be as strong as vnicornes. DAVYD calleth vnto the God. Psalm .xxii. Delyuer me frome the vnicornes.Psal. xxii.  By them he meaneth doutles his myghty and stronge enemyes of the whiche he fearethe that he shall in no wise be
delyuered, except god helped him, as namely, was Saule with his company. Lykewise the persecu∣tours of Christe be named in this Psalme vnicor∣nes, by reason of their tirannye, wherein they were lyke to the kynde and nature of the vnicorne. Ther¦of writeth Iob lykewise. cap. xxxix. Thinkeste thou that the vnicorne wilbe so tame as to do the seruice?Iob. 39. or to abyde styll by thy cryble? Canste thou bynde the yoke aboute an vnicorne in thy forow, to make hym plowe after the in the valeis? maiest thou trust hym (bycause he is stronge) or commyt thy laboure vnto hym, that he wyll brynge home thy corne, or to cary any thinge to thy barne? In no wise. For it is to excedynge stronge, fearfull and vnruely a beast. THe very true horne of saluacion that shal ouer¦throw all vngodlynes (yf thou wylte spiritu∣allye vnderstande it) zacharias reciteth.Luce. 1. Luc. i. And what soeuer god hath spiritually, that is, ordeyned by hym selfe, that must alwayes procede in ye world There can he well fynd an assure when his plaisure is, and afterwarde breake the rodde also, and cast it into the fyre. Seynge the pope wyll haue it so, that no man shalbe able to resiste his power, So muste there ne∣des come a more puissant and mightier than he that shall lyft him out of his neste, that must he nedes a byde, and must perish in the meane tyme, let him de∣fende him well.Mat. 3.17. luce. 3. Apo. 18. For then is all lost. The axe is put vnto the roote of the tree and the workeman stry∣keth alreadye therein, to pul out his roote from the
grounde, in somuch that men shall aske,Apo. 18. where dyd Babylon the great citie stande? ¶By the pope lyeth a stronge oxe pray∣enge, and the worldly gouernours beholde it styll. IN the .xxii.Psa. 22. Psalme complai∣nethe Dauid vnto god saieng, manye Oxen are come aboute me, and fatte bulles close me in on euery syde. There signifye the bulles and oxen, doubteles, the stronge enemyes of Dauid
the kynge Saule with his adherentes. But spiritu¦ally it appartaineth vnto the death and passion of Christ, these twaine haue thorowe the helpe of god ouercome all their enemies, as hauinge righte, the pope as hauynge no right. The whiche hath almost brought vnder him all princes, landes, cities, and people, for all these muste lye downe at the popes fete and kysse them deuoutly wisshing neuertheles to be disamist of it, if possible were. SEcondarely is lykewise this Oxe compared to the common poore artificer and husband man. Seinge the Oxe is a common rude beaste, and apt to all rude and hard laboures, in the feldes and vil¦lages, but selden in the greate cities, fedde with no delicate meates, but onely with heye and chapped strawe. &c. And is by the popes vngodly and tiran∣nishe institutes so farre consumed, that he can no more pul or drawe, and so sore sucked out (ye the ve¦ry marye out of his bones) that he is no more able to stonde, but lyeth there, wishinge delyueraunce of the popes tyrannye, but all in vayne, for suche as shulde helpe therin, stand styll and loke vpon it. And euery one putteth from hym, as if it appertai∣ned not vnto hym. By raison ought emperours, kinges, and prin∣ces here to putte to their handes, and to helpe the poore oxe out of his miserye, and so mighte their owne busines likewise prosper the better afterward And the subiectes shoulde become the more obedy∣ent.
For the holy gospell hath taughte them how they shall behaue them selues towarde the potesta∣tes and rulers, ye and they wold dowtles do it. But in the reuelacion may we sone see, what they be that worship the beaste.Apo. 13.  And then shall we haue the rea∣son and cause why it happeneth not. And therfore becommeth of the paciente oxe a grimminge beare, as shewethe the figure folowinge. Falleth on the pope a griminge beare with her whelpes.
WHyles nowe the pope and his adhe¦rentes euen at this present day wil not retourne vnto the right waye, it is no maruell though euery man be vnwillynge, and both the Oxen and also calues become beares. And is to be feared that if they wyll so procede withoute better hede, that at the laste littell goodnes wyll come of it.Anno .xxv. was there an insurrec¦tiō betwene the commō¦le of germa¦ny and the spirytual∣tie. Fewe remembre nowe that which moste pitiousely chaunced. Anno .xxv. God saue vs from soche another fall. I feare me that if it shulde ones againe come to suche a pointe, the beare with her whelpes wolde otherwise vse them selues, and to earnestly set them to worke. But here from wyll god preserue his people, & for al that drowne Pharao in the reade seas neuertheles. what is it, of a longe tyme, with greate pompe and pryde (other abominaci∣ons I speake not of) to kepe coun∣cels, or parlyamentes, for the worde of god? God the crea∣tour of vs all hath not so gloriouselye set forthe his actes, with shepe∣herdes and fishers kept he his coun¦cels, & breif∣ly fyny∣hed his matters. But truelye euen as we mind it, euen so doth Christ auaunce it.
¶A foxe runneth awaye with the popes banner. YE and rather than the pope shulde passe vndestroyed, his owne famy∣lye or householde shoulde rather do it. The same signifieth the foxe. Before he swaded hym from god, and nowe seing the pope can reigne no lenger, he departeth from him euen as a maister of a hundreth craftes, as he boasteth hym selfe to be in Esopo. against ye catte which had but one thinge to helpe her wythall, but when the hounter came with his dogges behynd them bothe, the symple cat
ranne vpon a tree, and the suttel foxe paide for all with his skinne. Euen so feareth here the popes fa∣mili lykewise, in manye matters haue they ben hi∣therto good enoughe, but nowe in tyme of nede, to kepe them in their nestes, they can do nothinge. Therfore they runne awaye with shame frome the poope, with goodes and substaunce, whiche they haue gotten from hym with their suttelties and fals¦hed, and thus must he stand alone. Neither is it suf¦ficient vnto them, to runne awaye from him them selues, but moreouer take also with them, all that longethe vnto hym, hys possessyons, honoure, and myghte, that is, they can no more helpe him wt his decrees, for the godly scripture is against them and to stronge for them. And so do both the foxes, & myghte and power runne togither away. Here may the pope rightwell thinke on the poet, where he sin∣geth. Donec eris foelix multos numerabis amicos. Tempora si fuerunt nubila, solus eris. When it was well with me, then hadde I manye frendes, but in myne aduersitie they be all fled awaye. But truelye the rewarde is but reasonable. Soche as haue clo∣thed saint Peter, be most worthye to spoile him a∣gaine. With craft and sutteltie didde the poperye fyrst come vp, and with the same must it come down againe, to the ende that the salte might retourne a∣gaine, wheras it was before, to the water. Therfore he sitteth nowe naked and bare vppon his pardon cheste, as a iesting stocke to all men.
☞The pope sitteth here naked vpon his pardon chyste, the husbandman mocketh hym sayeng, his foly to be right well knowen to euery man. ASmuche as we haue written hi∣therto haue we sene in our tyme, but nowe resteth this onely, that he sytteth not naked. But yf we speake according to the holy scri∣ptures, we shall lykewise fynd ye same prophecie to be on a good way toward. In diuers places in the holy scripture is mencyoned, howe god hathe dyscouered Sodo∣ma and Gomorra, Iherusalem, and more other
landes, and made them mockynge stockes to al mē, and at last made them naked altogether. Ezechielis xvi. speaketh god in this maner, I wyll gather to∣gither all thyne enemyes against the, and wyll dys∣couer thy shame before them, that they maye see thy fylthynes. I wyll geue the ouer into their power that they strype the out of thy clothes. All thy faire and beautifull Iewels shall they take frō the. And so let the sytte naked and beare. &c. THese wordes with more other, witnesse nothing elles, but that god will trouble their worldlye rule and power, and vtterly destroie it. So muste this figure likewise be set forth here. That the pope at the last leseth all hys power, honour, riches, plea¦sure, hys coffers with monye, and finallye is with∣out all comfort or assistence of all the worlde, and syttethe bare and naked, And is so much despysed, that the verye husbandman mocketh hym sayeng. Lo what a goodly pope be you nowe? Lo what a ru¦ler arte thou nowe aboue kynges and emperours? lo, where is thy godlynes? Lo where is thy pardon? Lo where is thy cursynge & banninge? &c. I thinke you be but poore nowe, I thinke you abyde honger and colde, we wyll handell you better yet, thou shalte be burnt in the fyre, euen as thou hast measu¦red vnto other. &c. To this ende muste it come, and lette no man be abashed,4. re. 24. &. 25 2. Para. 36 thoughe it semyth otherwaies yet to be. The chyldren of Ierusalem muste nedes to Babel and there suffer out their tyme, But what followeth
vpon the same?esd. .2.5. Hiere. 3.52 when your tyme then shalbe accom∣plisshed, I wyll remembre you, visite you againe, and minister my good worde vnto you, and brynge you home againe. And the landes of that kynge shalbe obediente to many kinges and people. And finally be brought vnder the Medianes. Haue we ben faine to suffre a while? and as yet be? the vngod lye be not shylde quyte of it, as if they were in the righte waye. But they shall paye twise for it, which they haue at once deuoured, as we fynde it to be hap¦pened vnto all the vngodlye Emperours, kynges, and princes, and high preistes, in the holy scripture THe same witnesseth not only the holy scripture wherin they beleue but a lytell,The prophe¦cy of Hylle∣garde. but the prophe¦cye likewise of a certaine Nonne named Hillegard, beinge one of their owne marke, saieng. Al world∣ly princes and the common people also shal fiersely fall vpon you preistes, which hitherto haue abused me. They wyll turne you awaye from them, & putte you to flyghte. They shall take awaye youre sub∣staunce and riches, because that in youre tyme you haue not well kepte the ordre of youre preisthode. These wordes will they speake by you. Let vs caste out these othebreakers, robbers, and people reple∣nyshed of all iniquitie out of the holye catholicalle churche, for the holy churche is contaminated and polluted by them. And therfore will god suffer also suche thinges to come ouer you. And the kinges of the worlde shall assiste them that shall auoide you with their earthly power, and myght. Your priest∣ly dignitie and annointinge wyl they exteme as no
thinge worthe, And so that propose wil they gather togither in counsell, that they may driue you out of their iurisdictions, because you haue driuen a waye the innocente lambe frome me with your most vn∣godly and habominable workes. THerefore wyll the heauens raine diuers pla∣ges, which shalbe against men, as a reuenge∣aunce of god. The mist shall couer the whole earth, so that all your grasse shall drye vp, and your orna¦mentes become paile. The profunditie shall sustre earthequakynge, and then shall appeare the verye anger of god, and smart bothe heauen and earth. GOd wyll sende a righteouse and streighte iud∣gement againste the transgressours of righte∣ousnes. And then shall we saye altogether. Howe longe shall we forbeare and suffre these raueninge wolues? They oughte to be feaders of the soules, and they be destroyers of them. They bynd and vn∣bynde (which nothinge longethe to them) at their owne pleasure, and as moost fearefull beastes they vtterly cast vs awaye. And thus remaine we styl in oure, and they in their synnes, Insomuche that all Christendome perisheth thorowe them. And what soeuer is right that write they not, but onely it whi∣che is contrary to the law. They deuour vs, as the wolfe deuoureth the shepe, they lyue styll in luste & gloutenye, they be very robbers of the church. And what soeuer they cancome by, they take & deuour it. They make vs also with their occupacion poore &
beggarly. They dampne them selues and vs also. THerefore wyll we iudge them righteouselye, and separate them from vs, for they be rather saducers then teachers. &c. yet care they not for it, and remaine so styll, makynge all kyngdomes sub∣iect vnto them. For all this they muste awaye, and leaue behynde them all that they haue, neither shall they afterwarde rule any more ouer the people a∣gaine, with landes, possessions, vyneyardes, and o∣ther temporall goodes, which the worldly princes be sette for. A pope shulde be a pope, a knyghte, a knyght. A gentilman, a gentilman. And therefore shall be taken away from such thinges as they pos∣sede vnrighteousely, and not righteousely. &c. BVt againste the same wyll rebelle the heades of this worlde, the spirituall people, as the pope cardinalles, byshops, abbates and other pre∣lates. Fyrste with their curse, and wyth shyttinge vp of the heauens, but the same wyll men feare but a lytle,An ende of the prophe∣cye of the nonne Hille¦garde. after that wyll they gette them to theyr har∣nashe and weapons, therewithe to defende them sel¦ues. But againste the iudgemente of God they can do nothynge, for their tyme is come. &c. This pro∣phecied the nonne Hillegarde. So muste nowe the bloudye hoore drynke of her chalys,Dan. 7. b Mat 25. d. Apo. 19. d and .20. c and the beaste wyth also the false pro¦phetes be caste downe in the botthomlesse pytte where as is no reste, nighte nor daye, eternallye there to suffre paines. And then wyll Chryst
raise vp faithfull shepe herdes to fede his flocke. WHat these shalbe, we fynde lykewise in the scri¦ptures openly enoughe declared, they that come from hym. And howe maye it faile in suche as god sendeth? God is righteouse, and sendethe also whē he seeth his time, righteouse shepeherdes. And they do righteousely, for euen as they teache, euen so they lyue. ANd these be the true seruauntes whiche Chri∣stus speaketh of,Math. 24. d. and .25. b. Lu. 12. e. 19. b the whiche in due tyme sette forthe the giftes and glory of the father of ye house holde, and not their owne tradicions, whiche as yet (god amende it) the whole worlde is full of. But god wyll nowe shortlye scume awaye all filthynes, and therevnto helpe Iesus Christe. Amen. Conclusion. THere be dyuers suche other prophecies not ne¦cessarye to be written here. I hope there wil a∣mendement folowe after this, excepte they haue ne∣ther eyes nor eares: But whom wolde not this olde and true and faithfull declaration of the romishe & Babylonyshe bryde, bringe to conuersion & know∣ledge? She is so clearely set forth and painted with all her falsehead and colours, that it coulde no lyue lyer be done. Hathe not she with her chalice made dronke, and with her sutteltie and deceite ouercome Emperours, kinges, princes and lordes? and with her snares ouerthrowen all Christendome? Lette
euery man marke it well. When dyd they any other thinge, but powi and shaue, lye and deceiue, burne, banne, kepe warres and murder? vntyll soche tyme continually, as they were become the heades of al kingedomes. &c. The same hath (as aboue is menci¦oned) lasted manye yeares, but now will it take an ende. For the tyme of the hoore is come about.Apo. 1. a. 21. a and .21. c Esai. 41. a. & 44. b. &. 48. c And he commeth that speaketh in Apocalipsi. I am A. and O. the beginninge and the endinge, the firste and the laste, blessed be they that folowe his com∣maundementes, to the ende that he maye come to ye tree of lyfe,Apo 22. c. 2 a Gene. 2. b and enter into the gates of ye celestial Ie¦rusalē. But out of ye same shalbe exclosed al doggs enchaunters, hoores murdrers, Idolotrers, and al suche as loue and folowe lyes. SO hath nowe Iesus Christe sente his aungell againe to shewe the people that he is the verye roote of Dauid, and the cleare morning starre.Ap. 22. d. 2, d, Mat. 2. Luc. 12. . cor 4 b 2. Pet. 1. d. And in none other is there any saluacion, but in him on∣lye, for it is written.Act 4  Math 1 c Philip. 2.  There is none other name vn∣der the heauens, wherin we maye be saued, but this onelye. &c. Now he that is faithfull, be he still faith full. He that is holy, lette hym become more holyer, and continue to the ende, and let him not longe for ye time approcheth. And thus let euery man be war∣ned, for he knocketh, & if ye do open, wel and good. yf not, you knowe the daunger, both baptisme and crifame is loste on such people, and thus Christe sende vs all his holy spirite. Amen,
BVt whether these or suche like pro∣phecies be of god, and by the holye gooste, or no, moueth not me. For as muche as I se, when god wyll shewe his displeasure and indigna∣tion, and will bringe to passe some great acte, that all creatures do prophecy before, & geue warninge, although it helpe but litel. Euen so when he wolde subuerte Ierusalem, his prophetes dyd prophecye it before, but it auailed not, Christe hadde threatened it vnto them. The apostles had warned them therof it preuailed not, They hearde voices in the Temple, They sawe signes in the ele∣ment, they hearde battailes in the cloudes, madde men and suche as were out of their wittes, did pro∣phecy it vnto them, but al these thinges preuailed not, they sawe it in acte, it preuailed not. And they myght haue remedied it, yf they wolde haue suffred the emperoure to rule ouer them.The empe∣roure Titū Vespasia∣num. And al preuailed nothinge. They were destroyed, for they had dispi∣sed gods worde. Euen so shall it happen vnto oure papistes also. It is prophesied vnto them by Dani¦el in the seuenth and eyght chapter, it is prophecied vnto them by Sacharia, in the eleuenth chapter, it prophecieth vnto them Iohn in his reuelacions, it prophecieth vnto them Christ him selfe. Mat xxiiii it is prophecied vnto them by Paule .ii. Tessalo .ii. also .i. Timo. iiii. It is prophecied vnto them by Peter .ii. Pe. ii. It preuaileth not. There prophecy∣eth vnto them their owne byshops, abbots, monkes and nonnes, it preuaileth not, it is prophecied vnto them by the astronomers, it is prophecied vnto thē
by the commun rumour with certaine prouerbes, it is prophetied vnto them by visions and signes in ye element, but all preuayleth not. They heare it and see it in acte, it preuaileth not. They myght tourne it, if they wolde not be aboue gods worde and mens consciences. But woulde suffer god and his worde, to rule ouer them, and all mens consciences, but all preuayleth nothinge. Therefore must they also be destroyed, there is no remedy, that muste they see. Therefore let no good christian frette hym selfe wt them. But rather suffer and take pacience and pray vnto God, that it will please hym to reuenge ye shed bloude of his saintes, and shortly to delyuer vs of these cruell tirantes. Thereby shall a man get more vppon them, then by sworde and harnysshe. God knoweth well a Titus, that shal destroye these Iewes also. Amen. Thus endeth the beginning and ending of all poperye or popysshe kyngdome, taken out of olde prophecies, more then thre houndreth yeres past to the amendemente of thys present worlde. set forth out of hye Almayne into englyshe by Gwalter Lynne.
❧Printed at London in Aldergate strete, by Iohn Herforde, at the costes and charges of Gwalter Lynne. Cum priuiligio ad imprimen∣dum solum.
