17643 99847683 12737
THE VNNATVRALL COMBAT. A Tragedie. The Scaene Marsellis. Written BY PHILIP MASSINGER. As it was presented by the Kings Majesties Servants at the GLOBE. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for IOHN WATERSON, and are to be sold at his shop, at the signe of the Crowne, in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1639.
The persons presented. BEaufort senior, Governour of Marsellis. Beaufort junior, his sonne. Malefort senior, Admirall of Marsellis. Malefort junior, his sonne. Chamont Montagne Assistants to the Governour. Lanour Montrevile, a pretended friend to Malefort senior. Belgarde, a poore Captaine. Three Sea Captaines of the Navy of Malefort junior. Servants. Souldiers. Theocrine, daughter to Malefort senior. Two waiting women. Usher. Page. Bawde. Two Wenches.
To my much Honoured Friend, ANTHONY SENTLIGER, Of Oukham in Kent, Esquire. Sir, THat the Paronage of trifles, in this kinde, hath long since rendred Dedications, and Inscriptions obsolete, and out of fashion, I perfectly understand, and cannot but ingenuously confesse, that I walking in the same path, may be truly argued by you of weaknesse, or wilfull errour: but the reasons and defences, for the tender of my service this way to you, are so just, that I cannot (in my thankefulnesse for so many favours received) but be ambitious to publish them. Your noble Father, Sir Warham Sentliger (whose remarkeable vertues must be ever remembred) being, while hee lived, a master, for his pleasure, in Poetry, feared not to hold converse with divers, whose necessitous fortunes made it their profession, among which, by the clemency of his judgement, I was not in the lat place admitted. You (the Heire of his honour anestae in∣herited his good inclinations to men of my poore quality, of
which I cannot give any ampler testimony tha y ee and glad profession of it to the world. Besides, (and not the least encouragement to mee) many of eminence and the best of such, who disdained not to take notice of mee, have not thought themselves disparaged, I dare not say honoured, to be celebrated the Patrons of my humble stu∣dies. In the first file of which, I am confident, you shall have no cause to blush, to finde your Name written. I pre∣sent you with this old Tragedie, without Prolog, or Epilogue, it being composed in a time (and that too, per∣adventure, as knowing as this) when such by ornaments, were not advanced above the fabricque of the whole worke. Accept it I beseech you, as it is, and cotinue you fa∣vour to the Author. Your  PHILIP MASSINGER.
THE VNNATVRALL COMBAT. Actus primus, Scaena prima. Montrevile, Theocrine, Vsher, Page, wayting Women. MONTREVILE. NOW to bee modest Madam, when your are A suitor for your father, would appeare, Courser then bouldnesse you a while must part with soft silence, and the blushings of a virgin, Though I must grant (did not this cause cōmand it) They are rich jewells you have ever worne To all mens admiration, in this age, If by our owne forc'd importunity, Or other purchasd intercession, or Corupting bribes we can make our approches To justice guarded, from us by sterne power, We blesse the meanes, and industry. Vsh. Heres musicke
In this bagge shall wake her, though shee had drunke Opium, Oraaten Mandrakes, let commanders talke Of cannons to make breaches, give but fire To this petarde, it shall blow open Madam The iron doores of a judge, and make you entrance, When they (let them doe what they can) with all Their mines, their culverins, and Basiliscos Shall coole their feete without, this being the pickelocke That neverfailes. Mon. Tis true, gold can doe much, But beauty more, were I the governour, Though the Admirall your father stood convicted Of what he's only doubted, halfe a dozen Of sweet close kisses from these cherry lips, With some short active confrence in private, Should signe his generall pardon. Theo. These light words ir Doe ill become the weight of my sad fortune And I much wonder you that doe professe Your selfe to be my fathers bosome friend, Can raise mirth from his misery. Mon. You mistake me, I share in his calamity, and only Deliver my thoughts freely, what I should doe For such a rare petitioner, and if Youle follow the directions, I prescribe With my best judgement I'll marke out the way For his inlargement. Theo. With all reall joy, I shall put what you counsell into act, Provided it be honest. Mon. Honesty In a faire she client (trust to my experience) Seldome or never prospers, the world's wiked. Wee are men, not saints sweet Lady, you must practice The manners of the time, if you intend To have favour from it, do not deceive your selfe
By building too much on the false foundations Of chastity and vertue, bid your wayters Stand farther of, and i'll come neerer to you. 2. Wom. Some wicked counsaile on my life. 2. Wom. Nere doubt it, If it proceed from him. Page. I wonder that My Lord so much affects him. Ush. Thou art a child and dost not understand on what strong bases this frindship's raisd between this Mountrevile and our Lord Monsieur. Malefort, but ile teach thee from thy yeares they have been joynt purchasers, in furs, & water-works, and truckt together. Page. In fire and water works, Vsh. Commodities boy Which you may know hereafter. Page. And deale in'em When the trade has given you over, as appeares (by the increase of your high forehead. Vsh. Heare's a cracke, I thinke they sucke this knowledge in their milke. Page. I had had an ignorant nurse else I have tide sir My Ladies garter, and can ghesse. Ush. Peace infant, Theocrine falls off. Tales out a schoole take heed you will be britchd else. 1. Wom. My Ladies colour changes. 2. Wom. She falls off too. Theo. You are a naughty man, indeed you are, And I will sooner perish with my father Then at this price redeeme him. Mon. Take your owne way, Your modest legall way, tis not your vayle Nor mourning habit, nor these creatures taught To howle, and cry, when you beginne to whimper, Nor following my Lords coach in the dirt, Nor that with you relie upon,  bribe Will doe it when there's something he likes better.
These courses in an old crone of three score, That had seaven yeares together tirde the court With tedious petitions and clamors, For the recovery of a strangling husband, To pay forsooth the duties of one to her, But for a Lady of your tempting beauties, Your youth and ravishing features to hope only In such a suite as this is, to gaine favor Without exchange of courtesie, you conceive me, Enter Beau∣fort and Bel∣garde. Were madnes at the height, heres brave yong Beaufort The meteor of Marsellis, one that houlds The governour his fathers will and power In more awe then his owne, come, come advance, Present your bag cramm'd with crowns of the sunne, Doe you thinke he cares for money? he loves pleasure, Burne your petition, burne it, he dotes on you, Upon my knowledge, to his cabinet, doe And hee will point you out a certaine course, Be the cause right or wrong to have your father Releasd with much facility. Exit Men∣trevile. Theo. Doe you heare? Take a pander with you. Iu. Beauf. I tell thee there is neither Imployment yet nor money. Belg. I have commanded And spent my owne meanes in my countries service, In hope to raise a fortune. Iu. Beauf. Many have hop'd so, But hopes prove seldome certainties with souldiers. Belg. If no preferment, let me but receive My pay that is behinde, to set me up A taverne, or a vaulting house; while men love Or drunkennesse, or lechery, they'l nere fayle me: Shall I have that? Iu. Beauf. As our prises are brought in, Till then you must be patient. Belg. In the meane time,
How shall doe for cloths? Iu. Beauf. As most captaines doe Philosopher like, carry all you have about you. Belg. But how shall I do to satisfie Clon Mounsieur, There lies the doubt. Iu. Beauf. Thats easily decided, My fathers tables free for any man That hath borne armes. Belg. And theres good store of meat? Iu. Beauf. Never feare that. Belg. I'le seeke no other ordinarie then, But be his daily ghest without invitement, And if my stomacke hould, lle feed so heartily As he shall pay me suddainely to be quit of me. Iu. Beauf. Tis shee. Belg. And further. Iu. Beauf. Away you are troublesome, Designes of more weight. Belg. Ha faire Theocrine, Nay if a velvet peticote move in the front Buffe jerkins must to the rere, I know my manner This is indeed great businesse,  ne a gugawe I may dance attendance, this must be dispatchd, And suddainly, or all will goe to wracke. Exit. Charge her home in the flank my Lord, nay I am gone sir, Belgarde Iu. Beauf. Nay pray you Madam rise, or I'll kneele with you. Page. I would bring you on your knees, were I a woman. Iu. Beauf. What is it can deserve so poore a name, As a suite to me? this more then mortall forme Was fashioned to command and not intreate, Your will but knowne is served. Theo. Great Sir, my father My brave deserving father, but that sorrow Forbids the use of speech. Iu. Beauf. I understand you, Without the ayds of those interpreters That fall from your faire eies, I know you labour,
the libertie of your father, at the least an equall hearing to acquit himselfe: and 'tis not to endeere my service to you, though I must adde and pray you with patience heare it, 'tis hard to be effected, in respect the State's incens'd against him: all presuming the world of outrages his impious sonne, turn'd worse than Pirat in his cruelties expres'd to this poore Countrey, could not be with such ease put in execution, if your father (of late our great Admirall) held not or correspondencie, or conniv'd at his proceedings. Theoc. And must he then suffer, his cause unheard? Beauf. jun. As yet it is resolv'd so, in their determination. But suppose, for I would nourish hope, not kill it in you, I should divert the torrent of their purpose, and render them that are implacable, impartiall Judges, and not sway'd with spleene: will you, I dare not say in recompence, for that includes a debt you cannot owe me, but in your liberall bountie, in my suit to you be gracious? Theoc. You entreat of me, Sir, what I should offer to you, with confession that you much undervalue your owne worth, should you receive me. Since there come with you not lustfull fires, but faire and lawfull flames. but I must be excus'd, 'is now no time for me to thinke of Hymeaell joyes. Can he (and pray you, Sir, consider it) that gave me life, and faculties to love, be, as he is now ready to be devour'd by ravenous wolves, and at that instant, I but entertaine a thought of those delights.
in which perhaps my ardor meets with your? dutie and pieie forbid it, Sir. Beauf. jun. But this effected, and your father free, what is your answer? Theoc. Everie minute to me will be a tedious age till our embraces are warrantable to the world. Beauf. jun. I urge no more, confirme it with a kisse. Theoc. I doubly feale it. Vsher. This would doe better a bed, the businesse ended, they are the lovingest Couple. Enter Beaufort senior, the Governour Mntaigne, Chamnt, Lanour. Beauf. jun. Here comes my father with the Councell of war, deliver your petition, nd leave the rest to me. Beauf. sen. I am sorrie, Lady, your fathers guilt compels your innocence aske what I in justice must denie. Beauf. jun. For my sake, Sir, pray you receive, and read it. Beauf. sen. Thou foolish boy, I can deny thee nothing. Beauf. jun. Thus far we are happie. Madam quit the place, ou shall heare how we succeed. Theoc. Goodnesse reward you. Exeunt Theocrius, Vsher, Page, Women. Mont. It is apparent, and we stay too long o censure Malefort as he deserves. Cham. There is no colour of reason that makes for him: ad he discharg'd the trust committed to him, ith that experience and fidelitie he practis'd heretofore, it could not be our Navie should be block'd up, and in our sight our goods made prize, our Sailors sold for slaves, y his prodigious issue. Lan. I much grieve, fter so many brave and high atchievements, he should in one ill forfeit all the good he ever did his Countrey.
Beauf. sen. Well, 'tis granted. Beauf. jun. I humbly thanke you, Sir. Beauf sen. He shall have hearing, his irons too strucke off, bring him before us; but seeke no further favour. Beauf. jun. Sir, I dare not. Exit Beauf. jun. Beauf. sen. Monsieur Chamont, Montaigne, Lanour, assistants by a Commission from the most Christian King in punishing, or reeing Malefort our late great Admirall: though I know you need not instructions from me, how to dispose of your selves in this mans triall (that exacts your cleerest judgements) give me leave with favour to offer my opinion: we are to heare him, a little looking backe on his faire actions, loyall, and true demeanour, not as now by the generall voyce, already he's condemn'd. But if we finde (as most beleeve) he hath held intelligence with his accursed sonne, fale off from all allegeance, and turn'd (but for what cause we know not) the most bloudy and fatall enemie, this Countrey ever repented to have brought forth, all compassion of what he was, or may be, if now pardon'd, we sit ingag'd to censure him with all extremitie and rigour. Ch. Your Lordship shewes us a path which we will tread in. Lan. He that leaves to follow, as you lead, will lose himselfe. Mont. I'le not be singular. Enter Beausort junior, Montreville, Malefort sen. Belgarde, Officers. Beauf. sen. He comes, but with a strange distracted looke. Mal. sen. Live I once more to see these hands and armes fre? these, that often
In the most dreadfull horror of a fight, Have beene as sea-markes to teach such as were Seconds in my attempts, to steere betweene The rocks of too much dating, and pale feare, To reach the Port of victory? When my sword, Advancd thus, to my enemies appear'd A hairy comet, threatenning death and ruine To such as durst behold it. These the legs That when our ship were grappl'd, carried me With such swift motion from decke to decke, As they that saw it, with amazment cri'd; He does not runne, but flies. Montte. He still retaines The greatnesse of his spirit. Mal. sen. Now crampt with irons, Hunger, and could, they hardly doe support me. ut I forget my selfe. O my good Lords That it there as my judges to determine The life and death of Malefort, where are now Those shoutes, those chearefull lookes, those loud applauses With which when I return'd loaden with spoile You entertain'd your Admirall  all's forgotten, And I stand here to give accompt for that Of which I am a free, and innocent As he that never saw the eyes of him, or whom I stand suspected. Beauf. sen. Monsieur Malefort et not your passion so farre transport you to believe from any private malice, r envie to your person you are question'd, or doe the suppositions want waight, That doe invite us to a strong assurance, Your sonne. Mal. sen. My shame. Beauf. sen. Pray you heare with patience, ever Without assistance, or sure aids from you, Could with the pirates of Argers and Tun,
ev'n those that you had almost twice defeated, acquire such credit, as with them to be made absolute commander? (py you observe me) if there had not some  pas'd betweene you, that when occasion v'd you would  y with 'em to the ruine of Marcellis? Mont. More, what urg'd your sonne to turne Aposta? Cham. Had he from the State, or Governour, the least nglect which envie could interpret for a wrong? Lan. Or if you slept not in your charge, how could so many ships as doe infest our Coast and have in our owne Harbor shut our Navie come in unfought with? Beauf. jun. They put him hardly o it. Mal. sen. My Lords, with as much brevie as I can, I'll answer each particular objection with which you charge me. The mai ground, on which you raise the building of your accusition, hath reference to my soe should I now curse him, or wish in th' agonie of my troubled soule, lightning had found him in his mothers you'll say is from the purpose, and I therefore betake him to the Devill, and so leaveth Did never loyall father but my selfe beget a treacherous issue? was't in me with as much ease to fashion up his minde, as in his generation to forme, the organs to his body? must it follow because that he is impious, I am false? I would not boast my actions, yet is lawfull to upbraid my benefits to unthankfull men. Who suncke the Turkish gallies in the Scraights. but Malefort? who rescu'd the French , when they were boorded, and stowed under harches by the Pirats of Argiewhen everie
they did expect to be chain'd to the oare, but your now doubted Admirall? then you fill'd the aire with shouts of joy, and did proclaime when hope had left them, and grm, look'd Despaire hover'd with saile-stretche wings over their heads, to me, as to the Neptune of the Sea, they ow'd the restitution of their goods, their lives, their liberties. O can it then be probable, my Lords, that he that never became the master of a Pirat ship, but at the maine yard hung the Captaine up, and caus'd the rest to be throwne over boord, should after all these proofes of deadly hae, so oft expres'd against'em, entertaine a thought of quarter with'em, but much lesse (to the perpetuall ruine of my glories) to joyne with them to lift a wicked arme against my mother Countrey, this Marsellis, which with my prodigall expence of bloud I have so oft protected. Beauf. sen. What you have done is granted, and applauded, but yet know this glorious relation of your actions must not so blinde our judgements, as to suffer this most unnaturall crime you stand accus'd of, to passe unquestion'd. Cham. No, you must produce reasons of more validitie, and weight, to plead in your defence, or we shall hardly conclude you innocent. Mont. The large volume of your former worthy deeds, with your experience, both what, and when to doe, but makes against you. Lan. For had your care and courage beene the same as heretofore, the dangers we are plung'd in had beene with ease prevented. Mal. sen. What have
Omitted in the power of flesh, and bloud, Even in the birth to strangle the designes Of this hell-bred wolfe my sonne? alas my Lords, I am no god, nor like him could foresee His cruell thoughts, and cursed purposes, Nor would the sun at my command forbeare To make his progresse to the other world, Affording to us one continued light. Nor could my breath dispresse those foggie mists Coverde with which, and darkenesse of the night, Their navie undiscernd, without resistance Beset our harbor? make not that my fault, Which you in justice must ascribe to fortune. But if that nor my former acts, nor what I have deliverd, can prevaile with you To make good my integritie and truth: Rip up this bosome; and plucke out the heart That hath beene ever loyall. Beauf sen. How! a trumpet! Enquire the cause. A trumpet within. Montrevle goes off. Mal. Thou searcher of mens hearts, And sure defender of the innocent, (My other crying sinnes, a while not lookd on) If I in this am guiltie strike the dead, Or by some unexpected meanes confirme, I am accusd unjustly. Enter Montrevile and a sea Captai Beauf. sen. Speake the motives That brings thee hither. Capt. From our Admirall thus, He does salute you fairely, and desires It may be understood no publike hate, Hath brought him to Marselis, nor see  he The ruine of his countrie, but aimes only To wreake a private wrong; and if from you He may have leave, and libery to decide it In a single combate, he'll give up good pledges
If he fall in the triall of his right, Wee shall waigh anchor and no more molest This towne with hostile armes. Beauf. sen. Speake to the man, (If in this presence he appeare to you) To whom you bring this challenge. Cap. Tis to you; Beauf. sen. His father Montre. Can it be! Beauf. jun. Strange and prodigious. Mal. sen. Thou feest I stand unmovd were thy voice thunder It should not shake mee, say what would the viper? Cap. The reverence a fathers name may challenge, And duty of a soone, no more remembred He does defie thee to the death. Mal. sen. Goe on. Cap. And with his sword well prove it on thy head, Thou art a murtherer, an Atheist And that al attributes of men turnd furies Cannot expresse thee, this he will make good If thou darst give him meeting. Mal. sen. Dare I live, Dare I when mountaines of my sins ore whelme me At my last gaspe aske for mercie? how I blesse Thy comming Captaine, never man to me Arriv'd so opportunely; and thy message, However it may seeme to threaten death, Does yield to mee a second life in curing My wounded honour, stand I yet suspected As a confederate with this enemie, VVhom of all men, against all ties of nature He markes out for destruction? you are just Immortall powers, and in this merciful, And it takes from any sorrow, and my shame For being the father to so bad a sonne, In that you are pleasd to offer up the monster To my correction. Blush and repent
As you are bound my honourable Lords Your ill opinions of me, not great Brutus The father of the Roman liberty With more assured constancy beheld His traytor sons, for labouring to call home The banished Tarquins, scourgd with rods to death, Then I will show when I take backe the life This prodigie of mankinde receivd from me. Beauf. sen. We are sory Monsieur Malefort for our errour And are much taken with your resolution But the disparity of yeares, and strength Between you, and your sonne, duely considerd We would not so expose you Mal. sen. Then you kill me Under pretence to save me. O my Lords As you love honour, and a wrongd mans fame Denie me not this faire, and noble meanes To make me right againe to all the world. Should any other but my selfe be chosen To punish this Apostata with death, You rob a wretched father of a justice That to all after times will be recorded, I wish his strength were uple, his skill equall To my experience, that in his fall He may not shame my victory, I feele The powers, and spirits of twenty strong men in me. Were hee with wild fire circl'd, I undaunted Would make way to him, as you doe affect Sir My daughter Theocrin, as you are My true and ancient friend, as thou art valiavt, And as all love a souldier, second me They all su to the governour. In this my just petition, in your lookes I see a grant my Lord. Beauf. sen. You shall orebeare me, And since you are so confident in your cause, Prepare you for the combate. Mal. sen. With more joy
Then yet I ever tasted, by the next sunne, The disobedient rebell shall heare from me And so returne in safety, my good Lords, To all my service, I will di or purchase Rest to Marsellis, nor can I make doubt, But his impietie is a potent charme, To edge my sword and adde strength to my anne. Exeunt. Actus secundi Scaena prima. Enter three Sea Captaines. 2. CAPTAINE. HEE did accept the challenge then? 1. Cap. Nay more, Was over joyd in't; and as it had beene A faire invitement to a solemne feast, And not a comb to conclude with death, He chearefully imbrac'd it. 3. Cap. Are the articles Sign'd to on both parts? 1. Cap. At the fathers suit, With much unwillingnesse the governour Consented to'em. 2. Cap. You are inward with Our Admirall; could you yet never learne VVhat the nature of the quarrell is, that renders The sonne, more then incensed, implacable Against the father? 1. Cap. Never; yet I have As far as manners would give warrant to it, VVith my best curiousnesse of care observ'd him, I have sae with him in his cabin a day together,
Yet not a sillable exchang'd between us, Sigh he did often, as if inward griefe, And melancholy at that instant would Choke up his vitall spirits, and now and then A teare, or two, as in derision of The toughnesse of his rugged temper would Fall on his hallow cheekes, which but once felt, A sudden flash of fury did dry up, And laying then his hand upon his sword, He would murmure, but yes so as I oft hard him, We shall meete cruell father, yet we shall, When i'll exact for every womanish drop Of sorrow from these eies, a strict accompt Of much more from thy heart. 2. Cap. Tis wondrous strange. 3. Cap. And past my apprehension. 1. Cap. Yet what makes The miracle greater, when from the maine top A sayle's descride, all thoughts that doe concerne Himselfe layd by, no Lyon pinchd with hunger, Rowzes himselfe more fiercely from his den, Then he comes on the decke, and there how wisely He gives directions, and how stout he is In his executions, we to admiration, Have beene eye-witnesses, yet he never minds The bootie when tis made ours, but as if The danger, in the purchase of the prey Delighted him much more then the rewarde, His will made knowne he does retire himselfe To his private contemplation, no joy Expressd by him for victory, Enter Malefort junior. 2. Cap. Heare he comes But with more chearefull lookes then ever yet I saw him weare. Mal. jun. It was long since resolv'd on Nor must I stagger now, may the cause That forces mee to this unnaturall act,
Be buried in everlasting silence, And I finde rest in death, or my revenge, To either I stand equall. Pray you Gentlemen Be charitable in your censures of me, And doe not entertaine a false beleefe That I am mad, for undertaking that Which must be, when effected, still repented. It addes to my calamitie that I have Discourse and reason, and but too well know I can nor live, nor end a wretched life, But both wayes I am impious. Doe not therefore Ascribe the perturbation of my soule To a servile feare of death: I oft have view'd All kindes of his inevitable darts, Not are they terrible. Were I condemn'd to leape From the cloud-covered browes of a steepe rocke Into the deepe; or Curtius-like to fill up, For my Countries safetie and an after name, A bottomlesse A bysse, or charge through fire, It could not so much shake me, as th' encounter Of this dayes single enemie. 1. Cap. If you please, Sir, You may shunit, or defer it. Mal. jun. Not for the world: Yet two things I entreat you, the first is, You'll not enquire the difference betweene My selfe and him, which as a father once I honour'd, now my deadliest enemie, The last is, if I fall, to beare my body Far from this place, and where you please interre it. I should say more, but by his sudden comming I am cut off. Enter Beaufort junior, and Montrevile leading in Malefort senior; Belgards following with others. Beauf. jun. Let me, Sir, have the honour To be your second.
Montr. With your pardon, Sir, I must put in for that, since our tried friendship Hath lasted from our infancie. Belg. I have serv'd Uder your command, and you have seen me fight, And handsomely, though I say it, and if now At this downeright game, I may but hold your cards, I'll not pull downe the side. Mal. sen. I rest much bound To your so noble offers, and I hope Shall finde your pardon, though I now refuse'em, For which I'll yeeld strong reasons, but as briefly As the time will give me leave. For me to borrow (That am suppos'd the weaker) any aid From the assistance of my Seconds sword, Might write me downe in the blacke list of those, That have nor fire, nor spirit of their owne; But dare, and doe, as they derive their courage From his example, on whose help and valour They wholly doe depend. Let this suffice In my excuse for that. Now if you please On both parts to retire to yonder mount, Where you, as in a Roman Theater, May see the bloudy difference determin'd, Your favours meet my wishes. Mal. jun. 'Tis approv'd of By me, and I command you lead the way, And leave me to my fortune. Beauf. jun. I would gladly Be a spectator (since I am deni'd To be an Actor) of each blow, and thrust, And punctually observe'em. Mal. jun. You shall have All you desire; for in a word or two I must mak bold to entertaine the time, If he give suffrage to it. Mal. sen. Yes, I will,
I'll heare thee, and then kill thee: nay farewell. Mal. jun. Embrace with love on both sides, and with s Leave deadly hate, and furie. Mal. sen. From this place You nere shall see both living. Belg. What's past help, is They embrace on both sides, and take leave severally of the father and sonne. Beyond prevention. Mal. sen. Now we are alone, Sir, And thou hast libertie to unlode the burthen Which thou groan'st under. Speake thy griefes. Mal. jun. I shall, Sir; But in a perplext forme and method, which You onely can interpret; would you had not A guiltie knowledge in your bosome of The language which you force me to deliver, So I were nothing. As you are my father I bend my knee, and uncompell'd professe My life, and all thats mine, to be your gift; And that in a sonnes dutie I stand bound To lay this head beneath your feet, and run All desperate hazards for your ease and safetie. But this confest on my part, I rise up, And not as with a father, (all respect, Love, feare, and reverence cast off,) but as A wicked man I thus expostulate with you. Why have you done that which I dare not speake, And in the action chang'd the humble shape Of my obedience, to rebellious rage And insolent pride? and with shut eyes constrain'd me To run my Barke of honour on a shelfe, I must not see, nor if I saw it, shun it? In my wrongs nature suffers, and lookes backward, And mankinde trembles to see me pursue What beasts would flie from. For when I advance This sword, as I must doe against your head, Pietie will weepe, and filiall dutie mourne, To see their altars which you built up in me,
In a moment raz'd and ruin'd, that you could (From my griev'd soule I wish it) but produce To qualifie, not excuse your deed of horror, Ou seeming reason that I might fix here, And move no father. Mal. sen. Have I so far lost A fathers power, that I must give account Of my actions to my sonne? or must I plead As a fearefull prisoner at the bar, while he That owes his being to me sirs a Judge To censure that, which onely by my selfe Ought to be question'd? mountaines sooner fall Beneath their vallies, and the loftie Pine Pay homage to the Bramble, or what else is Preposterous in nature, ere my tongue In one short fillable yeelds satisfaction To any doubt of thine, nay though it were A certaintie disdaining argument. Since though my deeds wore Hel blacke liverie, To thee they should appeare triumphall robes, Set off with glorious honour, thou being bound To see with my eyes, and to hold that reason, That takes or birth or fashion from my will. Mal. jun. This sword divides that slavish knot. Mal. sen. It cannot, It cannot wretch, and if thou but remember From whom thou hadst this spirit, thou dar'st not hope it. Who train'd thee up in armes but I? Who taught thee Men were men onely when they durst looke downe With scorne on death and danger, and contemn'd All opposition, till plum'd victorie Had made her constant stand upon their helmets? Under my shield thou hast fought as securely As the young Eglet, covered with the wings Of her fierce Dam, learnes how and where to prey. All that is manly in thee, I call mine; But what is weake and womanish, thine owne.
And what I gave, since thou art proud, ungratefull, Presuming to contend with him, to whom Submission is due, I will take from thee. Looke therefore for extremities, and expect not I will correct thee as a sonne, but kill thee As a Serpent swolne with poyson, who surviving A little longer, with infections breath, Would render all things neere him, like it selfe Contagious. Nay, now my anger's up, Ten thousand virgins kneeling at my feet, And with one generall crie howling for mercie, Shall not redeeme thee. Mal. jun. Thou incensed Power, A while forbeare thy thunder, let me have No aid in my revenge, if from the grave My mother. Mal. sen. Thou shalt never name her more. Above Beauf. jun. Montr. Belg. the three Sea Capt. Beauf. They are at it. 2. Cap. That thrust was put strongly home. Montr. But with more strength avoyded. Belg. Wellcome in, He has drawne bloud of him yet, well done old Cocke. 1. Cap. That was a strange misse. Beauf. jun. That a certaine hit. Belg. Hee's falne, the day is ours. Young Malefort slaine. 2. Cap. The Admiral's slaine. Montr. The father is victorious! Belg. Let us haste To gratulate his conquest. 1. Wee to mourne The fortune of the sonne. Beauf. jun. With utmost speed Acquaint the Governour with the good successe, That he may entertaine to his full merit, The father of his Countries peace and safetie. They descend. Mal. sen. Were a new life hid in each mangled limbe, I would search, and finde it. And howere to some
I may seeme cruell, thus to tyrannize Upon this senslesse flesh, I glorie in it. That I have power to be unnaturall, Is my securitie, die all my feares, And waking jealousies, which have so long Beene my tormentors, theres now no suspition; A fact, which I alone am conscious of, Can never be discover'd, or the cause That call'd this Duell on. I being above All perturbations, nor is it in The power of Fate, againe to make me wretched. Enter Beaufort jun. Montrevile. Belgarde, the three Sea Captaines. Beauf. jun. All honour to the Conquerour. Who dares tax My friend of treacherie now? Belg. I am verie glad, Sir, You have sped so well. But I must tell you thus much, To put you in minde that a low ebbe must follow Your high swolne tide of happinesse, you have purchast this our at a high price. Mal. sen. 'Tis Belgards, Above all estimation, and a little To be exalted with it cannot savour Of arrogance: that to this arme and sword, Marellis owes the freedome of her feares, Or that my loyaltie not long since eclips'd, Shines now more bright than ever, are not things to be lamented. Though indeed they may Appeare too dearely bought, my falling glories Being made up againe, and cemented With a sonnes bloud. 'Tis true, he was my sonne While he was worthy, but when he shooke off His dutie to me, (which my fond indulgence Upon submission might perhaps have pardon'd) And grew his Counties enemie, I look'd on him As a Stranger to my family, and a Traytor
Justly proscrib'd, and he to be rewarded That could bring in his head. I know in this That I am censur'd rugged and austere, That will vouchsafe not one sad sigh or teare Vpon his slaughter'd body. But I rest Well satisfi'd in my selfe, being assur'd That extraordinarie vertues, when they soare Too high a pitch for common fights to judge of, Losing their proper splendour, are condemn'd For most remarkable vices. Beauf. Tis too true, Sir, In the opinion of the multitude: But for my selfe that would be held your friend, And hope to know you by a nearer name, They are as they deserve, receiv'd. Mal. My daughter Shall thanke you for the favour. Beauf. jun. I can wish No happinesse beyond it. 1. Cap. Shall we have leave To beare the corps of our dead Admirall, As he enjoyn'd us from this Coast? Mal. Provided The articles agreed on be observ'd, And you depart hence with it, making oath Never hereafter but as friends to touch Vpon this shore. 1. Cap. Wee'll faithfully performe it. Mal. Then as you please dispose of it. Tis an object That I could wish remou'd. His sins die with him, So far he has my charitie. 1. Cap. He shall have The Sea Captaines beare the body off with sad musicks. A Souldiers funerall. Mal. Farewell. Beauf. jun. These rites Paid to the dead, the Conquerour that survives Must reape the harvest of his bloudy labour.
Sound all ld instruments of joy and triumph, And with all circumstance, and ceremonie Wait on the Patron of our libertie, Which he at all parts merits. Mal. I am honour'd. Beyond my hopes. Beauf. jun. 'Tis short of your deserts. Lead on: Oh Sir you must: you are too modest. Exeunt with loud musicke. Actus secundi Scaena secunda. Theocrine, Page, Women. Theoc. Talke not of comfort, I am both wayes wretched, And so distracted with my doubts and feares, I know not where to fix my hopes. My losse Is certaine in a father, or a brother, Or both, such is the crueltie of my fate, And not to be avoyded. 1. Wom. You must beare it With patience, Madam. 2. Wom. And what's not in you To be prevented, should not cause a sorrow Which cannot help it. Page, Feare not my brave Lord Your noble father; fighting is to him Familiar as eating. He can teach Our moderne Duellists how to cleave a button, And in a new way, never yet found out By old Caranza. 1. Wom. May he be victorious, And punish disobedience in his sonne, Whose death in reason should at no part move you, He being but halfe your brother, and the neernesse, Which that might challenge from you, forfelted By his impious purpose to kill him, from whom He receiv'd life. A shout within.
2. Wom. A generall shout. 1. Wom. Of joy. Page. Looke up deare Lady, sad newes never came sherd with loud applause. Enter Vsr. Theo. I stand prepard, To indure the shocke of it. Vsh. I am out of breath With running to deliver first. Theo. What? Vsh. Wee are all made, My Lord has wont the day, your brother's slaine, The pirats gone, and by the governour, And states, and all the men of war he is ought home in triumph, nay no musing, pay me For my good newes hereafter. Theo. Heaven is just! Vsh. Give thankes at leasure, make all hast to meete him I coulde wish I were a horse that I might beare you To him upon my backe. Page. Thou art an asse, And this is a sweete burthen. Vsh. Peace you crackrope. Exeunt. Actus secundi Scaena tertia. Loud musicke, Montrevile, Belgarde, Beaufort junior, Beaufort senior, Malefort, followed by Mon∣taigne, Chament Lanour. Beauf. sen. All honours we can give you and rewards Though all that's rich, or precious in Marsellis Were layd downe at your feet, can hold no waight With your deservings, let me glory in Your action as if it were mine owne, And have the honour with the armes of love, To embce the great performer of a deed,
Transcending all this Countrey ere could boast of. Mont. Imagine, noble Sir, in what we may Expresse our thankfulnesse, and rest assur'd It shall be freely granted. Cham. Hee's an enemie To goodnesse and to vertue, that dares thinke There's any other thing within our power to give, Which you in justice may not boldly challenge. Lan. And as your owne, for we will ever be At your devotion. Mal. Much honour'd Sir, And you my noble Lords, I can say onely, The greatnesse of your favours overwhelme me, And like too large a saile, for the small barke Of my poore merits, sinks me. That I stand Vpright in your opinions, is an honour Exceeding my deserts, I having done Nothing but what in dutie I stood bound to: And to expect a recompence were base, Good deeds being ever in themselves rewarded. Yet since your liberall bounties tell me that I may with your allowance be a Suitor, To you my Lord I am an humble one, And must aske that, which knowne, I feare you will Censure me over. bold. Beauf. sen. It must be something Of a strange nature, if it finde from me Deniall or delay. Mal. Thus then my Lord, Since you encourage me: You are happie in A worthy sonne, and all the comfort that Fortune has left me is one daughter; now If it may not appeare too much presumption, To seeke to match my lownesse with your height, I should desire (and if I may obtaine it, I write Nilultra to my largest hopes) She may in your opinion be thought worthy
To be receiv'd into your family, And married to your sonne: their yeares are equall, And their desires I thinke too, she is not noble, not my state contemptible, And if you thinke me worthy your alliance, is all I doe aspire to. Beauf. jun. You demand That which with all the service of my life I should have labour'd to obtaine from you. O, Sir, why are you slow to meet fo faire And noble an offer? Can France shew a virgin That may be parallel'd with her? Is she not The Phoenix of the time? the fairest star In the bright sphere of women? Beauf. sen. Be not rap'd so: Though I dislike not what is motion'd, yet In what so neere concernes me, it is fit I should proceed with judgement. Enter Vsher, Theocrine, Page, Women. Beauf. jun. Here she comes, Looke on her with impartiall eyes, and then Let envie if it can, name one grac'd feature In which she is defective. Mal. Welcome Girle: My joy, my comfort, my delight, my all, Why dost thou come to greet my victorie such a sable habit? this shew'd well When thy father was a prisoner, and suspected; ut now his faith and loyaltie are admir'd, Rather than doubted, in your outward garments You are to expresse the joy you feele within; Nor should you with more curiousnesse and care, Pace to the Temple to be made a Bride, Than now, when all mens eyes are fixt upon you, You should appeare to entertaine the honour From me descending to you, and in which You have an equall share.
Theo. Heaven has my thankes With all humility payd for your faire fortune, And so farre duty bindes me, yee a little To moune a brothers losse however wicked, The tendernesse familiar to our sex May if you please excuse Mal. Thou art deceiv'd, Hee living was a blemish to thy beauties, But in his death gives ornament, and lustre To thy perfections, but that they are So exquisitly rare, that they admit not The least addition. Ha! here yet a print Of a sad teare on thy cheeke, how it takes from Our present happinesse! with a fathers lips, A loving fathers lips, i'll kisse it off The cause no more remembred. Theo. You forget Sir The presence we are in. Mal. Tis well considered, And yet who is the owner of a treasure, Above all valew, but without offence, May glory in the glad possession of it. Nor let it in you excellence beget wonder, Or any here that looking on the daughter, I feast my selfe in the imagination Of those sweet pleasures, and allowd delights, I tasted from the mother, who still lives In this her perfit modell, for she had Such smooth & high archd brows, such sparkling eies Whose every glance stord Cupids emptied quiver; Such ruby lips, and such a lovely browne, Disdaining all adulterate ayds of art, Kep'd a perpetuall spring upon her face, As death himselfe lamented being forc'd To blast it with his palenesse, and if now, Her brightnes dimd with sorrow, take and please you, Thinke think young Lord, when she appeares her selfe
(This vayle remov'd) in her owne naturall purenesse How farre she will transport you. Beauf. jun. Did she need it, The praise which you (and well deservd) give to her Must of necessity raise new desires In one indebted more to yeares; to me Your words are but as oyle powr'd on a fire, That flames already at the height. Mal. No more; I doe believe you, and let me from you Finde so much credit, when I make her yours I doe possesse you of a gift, which I With much unwillingnesse part from. My good Lords For beare your further trouble, give me leave, for on the suddaine I am indisposd to retire to my owne house, and rest. Tomorrow As you command me I will be your ghest, And having deckt my daughter like her selfe, You shall have farther conference. Beauf. sen. You are Master Of your owne will but fayle not i'll expect you. Mal. Nay I will be excusd, I must part with you My dearest Theocrine give me thy hand, To young Beaufort and the rest. I will support thee. Theo. You gripe it too hard Sir. Mal. Indeed I doe, but have no farther end in it, But love and tendernesse such as I may challenge And you must grant. Thou art a sweet one ye And to be cherished. They goe off several wy Theo. May I still deserve it.
Actus tertii Scaena prima. Enter Beaufort senior, Servant. Beaufort senior. HAve you beene carefull? Serv. With my best endevours, Let them bring stomacks, theres no want of meat Sir: Portly and curious viands are prepar'd, To please all kindes of appetites. Beauf. sen. Tis well. I love a table furnishe with full plentie, And store of friends to eat it, but with this caution, I would not have my house a common Inne, For some men that come rather to devoure me, Than to present their service. At this time too It being a serious and solemne meeting, I must not haue my boord pester'd with shadowes, That under other mens protection breake in Without invitement. Serv. With your favour then, You must double your gard, my Lord, for on my knowledge There are some so sharp se, not to be kept out By a file of Musketes, And 'els lesse danger, I'll undertake, to stand at push of pike With an enemie in a breach, that undermin'd too, And the Cannon playing on it, than to stop One Harpie, your perpetuall ghest, from entrance, When the dresser, the Cookes drum, thunders come on, The service will be lost else. Beauf. sen. What is hee? Serv. As tall a trencher-man, that is most certaine, As ere demolisht Pie-fortification As soone as batter'd; and if the rim of his belly
Were not made up of a much tougher stuffe Than his Buffe jerkin, there were no defence Against the charge of his guts: you needs must know him, He's eminent for his eating. Beauf. sen. O Belgarde! Serv. The same, one of the Admirals cast Captaines, Who sweare, there being no war, nor hope of any, The onely drilling is to eat devoutly, And to beever drinking, (that's allow'd of) But they know not where to get it, there's the spie on'. Beauf. sen. The more their miserie, yet if you can For this day put him off. Serv. It is beyond th'invention of man. Beauf. sen. No: say this onely, Whispers to him. And as from me; you apprehend me? Serv. Yes Sir. Beauf. sen. But it must be done gravely. Serv. Never doubt me Sir. Beauf. sen. Wee'll dine in the great roome, but let the musick And banquet be prepar'd here. Exit Beauf. sen. Serv. This will make him Lose his dinner at the least, and that will vex him. As for the sweet meats, when they are trod under foot, Let him take his share with the Pages and Lacqueyes, Or scramble in the rushes. Enter Belgarde. Belg. Tis neere twelve, I keepe a watch within me never misses. Save thee Master Steward. Serv. You are most welcome, Sir. Belg. Has thy Lord slept well to night? I come to enquire. I had a foolish dreame, that against my will Carried me from my lodging, to learne onely How he's dispos'd. Serv. He's in most perfect health, Sir. Belg. Let me but see him feed heartily at dinner, And I'll beleeve so too, for from that ever
I make a certaine iudgement. Serv. It holds surely In your owne constitution. Belg. And in all mens Tis the best symptome, let us loose no time, Delay i dangerous. Serv. Troth Sir if I might Without offence deliver what my Lord has Committed to my trust, I shall receive it As a speciall favour. Belg. Weell fee't, and discourse As the proverbe sayes for health sake after dinner, Or rather after supper, willingly then I'll walke a mile to here thee. Serv. Nay good Sir I will be briefe and pihee. Belg. Prethee be so. Serv. Hee bid me say of all his ghests, that he Stands most affected to you, for the freedome, And plainnesse of your maners. He ne're observ'd you To twirle a dish about, you did not like of All being pleasing to you; or to take A say of venison, or stale fowle by your nose, (Which is a solecisme at anothers table) But by strong eaing of 'em did confirme They never were delitious to your palat, But when they were mortifi'd, as the Hugonot sayes, And so your part growes greater, nor doe you Find fault with the sawce, keen hunger being the best, Which ever to your much praise, you bring with you; Nor will you with impertinent relations Which is a master-peece, when meates before you Forget your teeth to use your nimble tongue But doe the feae you come for. Belg. Be advis'd Ad end your jeering; for if you proceede You'll feele, as I can eate I can be angrie,
And beating may insue. Serv. I'll take your counsell, And roundly come to the point, my Lord much wonders That you, that are a courtier as a souldier, In all things else, and every day can vary Your actions and discourse, continue constant To this one suite? Belg. To one? tis well I have one, Unpawnd, in these dayes, every cast commander is not ble with the fortune, I assure you, but why this question? does this offend him? Serv. Not much: but he believes it is the reason, You nere presume to fit above the salt, And therefore this day (our great Admirall With other states being invited ghests) He does intreate you to appeare among'em, In some fresh habit. Belg. This staffe shall not serve To beat the dogge off, these are souldiers garments, And so by consequence grow contemptible. Serv. It has stung him. Belg. I would I were aquainted with the players, In charity they might furnish me, but there is No faith in Brokers, and for believing Taylors They are only to be read of, but not seene, And sure they are confinde to their owne hells, And there they live invisible, well I must not Be fubd off thus, pray you report my service To the Lord governour. I will obey him And though my wardrop's poore, rather then loose His company at this feast, I will put on The richest sie I have, and fill the chaire, That makes me worthy of— Exit Belgarde. Serv. We are shut of him, he will be seene no more here, how my fellowes Will blesse me for his absence, he had starv'dem Had he stayd a little longer, would be cood, For his owne sake shift a shirt, and thats the utmost
Of his ambition, adew good Captains— Exit: Enter Beaufort Sen, and Beaufort jun. Beauf. sen. Tis a strange fondnesse. Beauf. jun. Tis beyond example, His resolution to part with his estate, To make her dower the waightier is nothing, But to observe how curious he is In his owne person to adde ornament To his daughters ravishing features, is the wonder. I sent a page of mine in the way of courtship, This morning to her to present my service, From whom I understand all: there he found him Sollicitous in what shape she should appeare, This gowne was rich, but the fashion stale, the other Was quaint, and neate, but the stuffe not rich enough, Then does he curse the Taylor, and in rage Falls on her Shoomaker, for wanting art To expresse in every circumstance, the forme Of her most delicate foote, then ss in counsell With much deliberation to finde out What tire would best adorne her; and one chosen Varying in his opinion, he teares off, And stamps it under foot, then tries a second A third and fourth, and satisfied at length With much a doe in that, he growes agen, Perplexd and troubl'd where to place her Jewells To be most mark'd, and whether she, should weare This diamond on her forehead, or betweene Her milke-white paps, disputing on it both wayes, Then taking in this hand, a rope of pearle, (The best of France) he seriously considers Whither she should dispose it on her arme Or on her necke, with 20 other tries, too redious to deliver. Beauf. sen. I have knowne him from his first youth, but never yet observ'd In all the passages of his life, and fortunes, Vertues so mix'd with vices, valiant the world speakes him, But with that bloody; liberall in his gits too.
But to maintaine his prodigall expence, A fierce extortioner, an impotent lover Of women for a flash, but his fires quench'd, Hating as deadly, the truth is I am not Ambitious of this match: nor will I crosse you in your affections. Beauf. jun. I have ever found you, (And tis my happinesse) a loving father, Loud musicke. And carefull of my good:—by the loud musicke, As you gave order for his entertainment, He's come into the house two long houres since, The Colonels, commissioners and captaines, To pay him all the rites his worth can challenge, Went to wayt on him hither. Enter Malefort, Montaigus, Chamont, Lanour, Montrevile, Theocrine, Vsher, Page, Women. Beauf. sen. You are most welcome, And what I speake to you, does from My heart disperse it selfe to all. Mal. You meet my Lord your trouble. Beauf. sen. Rather Sir increase of honour, When you are pleas'd to grace my house. Beauf. jun. The Favour  doubl'd on my part, most worthy Sir, Since your faire daughter, my incomparable Mistresse, Daines us her presence. Mal. View her well brave Beaufort, But yet at distance, you hereafter may Make your approaches neerer, when the priest Hath made it lawfull, and were not shee mine, I durst alowd proclaime it. Hymen never Put on his son coloured robe to change A barren virgin name with more good omen, Then at her nupialls, looke on her againe, Then tell me if she now appeare the That she was yesterday. Beauf. sen. Being her selfe She cannot but be excellent, these rich And curious dressing, which in others might
Cover deformities, from her take lustre Nor can adde to her. Mal. You conceive her right, And in your admiration of her sweetnesse, You only can deserve her; blush not girle, Thou art above his praise, or mine, nor can Obsequiou flery though she should use Her thousand oyldtongues to advance thy worth, Give ought (for thats impossible) but take from Thy more then humane graces, and even then When shee hath spent her selfe with her best strength, The wrong she has done thee shall be so apparent, That loosing her owne servile shape and name, She will be thought detraction, but I Forget my selfe, and something whispers to me, I have said too much. Mont. I know not what to thinke on't, But there's some mystery in it, which I feare Will be too soone discover'd. Mal. I much wrong Your patience noble Sir, by too much hugging My proper issue, and like the foolish crow Believe my blacke brood sw. Beauf. sen. There needes not Sir The least excuse for this, nay I must have Your arme, you being the master of the feast, And this the mistris. Theo. I am anything That you shall please to make mee. Beauf. jun. Nay tis yours Without more complement. Loud musicke. Exeunt Beaufort senior, Malefort, Theocrine, Beaufort jun Montaigne, Chamont Lanour, Montrevile. Mont. Your will's a law ir. Vsh. Would I had beene borne a Lord 1. Wom. Or I a Lady. Page. It may be you  both be got in court,
Though bred up in the Citie, for your mothers, As I have heard lov'd the lobbie, and there nightly Are seen strange apparitions, and who knowes But that some noble fawne, heated with wine, And cloyde with partridge, had a kinde of longing To trade in sprats? this needs no exposition, But can you yeeld a reason for your wishes? Vsh. Why had I beene borne a Lord, I had beene no servant. 1. Wom. And where as now necessity makes us wayters, We had been attended on. 2. Wom. And might have slept then, As long as we pleas'd, and fed when we had stomackes, And worne new cloths, nor liv'd as now in hope Of a cast gowne, or petticote. Page. You are fooles, And ignorant of your happinesse, ere I was Sworne to the pantofle, I have heard my tutor Prove it by logicke, that a servants life Was better then his masters, and by that I learne from him, if that my memory falle not, I'll make it good. Vsh. Proceed my little wit In decim sexe. Page. Thus then from the king To the beggar, by gradation all are servants, And you must grant the slavery is lesse To studie to please one, then many. Vsh. True. Page. Well then, and first to you Sir, you complaine You serve one Lord, but your Lord serves a thousand, Besides his passions (that are his worst masters) You must humor him, and he is bound to sooth Every grime Sir above him, if he frowne, For the least neglect you feare to loose your place, But if, and with all slavish observation, From the mignions selfe, to the groome of his close stoole, He hourly seekes not favour, he is sure
To be eas' of his office, though perhaps he bought it. Nay more, that high disposer of all such That are subordinate to him, serves, and feares The fury of the many-headed monster, The giddy multitude And as a horse Is still a horse, for all his golden trappings, So your men of purchas'd titles, at their best are But serving-men in rich liveries. Vsh. Most rare infant, Where learnd'st thou this morality? Page. Why thou dull pate, As I could thee, of my tutor. 2. Wom. Now for us boy. Page. I am cut of the governour. Enter Beaufort sen. Beaufort junior, Servants setting forth a banquet. Beauf. sen. Quicke, quicke irs, See all things perfit. Serv. Let the blame be ours else. Beauf. sen. And as I said when we are at the banquet, And high in our cups, for tis no feast without it, Especially among souldiers: Theocrine Being retir'd, as that's no place for her, Take you occasion to rise from the table, And lose no opportunity. Beauf. jun. Tis my purpose, And if I can winne her to give her heart, I have a holy man in readinesse To joyne our hands, for the Admirall her father repents him of his grant to me, and So far transported with a strange opinion of her faire features, that should we desire it, I thinke ere long he will beleeve, and strongly, The Daulphine is not worthy of her, I Am much amazd with't. Exeunt Beaufort sen. Beauf. sen. Nay dispatch there fellowes. Beaufort junior. Serv. We are ready when you please, sweet formes your pardon, It has beene such a busy time I could not
Tender that ceremonious respect Which you deserve, but now the' great worke ended, I will attend the lesse, and with all care Observe, and serve you. Page. This is a pend speech, And serves as a perpetuall preface to A dinner made of fragments. Vsh. Wee wayt on you. Loud Musicke. Actus tertii, Scaena tertia. Beaufort senior, Malefort, Montaigne, Chamoni, Lanour, Beaufort, junior, Montrevile, Servants. BEAVFORT SENIOR. YOU are not merry Sir. Mal. Yes my good Lord, You have given us ample meanes to drowne all cares, And yet I nourish strange thoughts, which I would Aside. Most willingly destroy Beauf. sen. Pray you take your place, Beauf. jun. And drink a health, and let it be if you please To the worthiest of Women, now observe him. Mal. Give mee the bowle, since you doe me the honour, I will beginne it. Cham. May wee know her name Sir? Mal. You shall, I will not choose a forraigne Queenes, Nor yet our owne, for that would relish of Tame flattery; nor doe their height of title, Or absolute power confirme their worth and goodnesse, These being heavens gifts and frequently confer'd On such as are beneath em; nor will I Name the king Mistresse howsoever shee In his esteeme may carry it, but if I As wine gives liberty, may s my freedome;
Not swayd this way, or that with confidence, (And I will make it good on any equall) If it must be to her, whose outward forme Is better'd by the beauty of her minde, She lives not that with justice can pretend An interest to this so sacred health, But my faire daughter. He that only doubts it, I doe pronounce a villain, this to her then. Drinkes. Loud musicke. Mont. What may we thinke of this? Beauf. sen. It matters not. Lan. For my part I will sooth him rather then Draw on a quarrell, Chamont. Mont. Tis the safest course, and one I mean to follow. Beauf. jun. It has gone round Sir. Exit Beaufort junior. Mal. Now you have done her right, if there be any Worthy to second this, propose it bouldly, I am your pledge. Beauf. sen. Lets pause here if you please, And entertaine the time with something else, Musicke there in some lofty straine, the song too That I gave order for; the new one cald The souldiers delight? The song ended: enter Belgarde in armor a case of Crbies by his side. Belg. Who stops mee now? Or who dares only say that I appeare not In the most rich and glorious habit that Renders a man compleate? what court so set off With state and ceremonious pompe, but thus Accoutred I may enter? or what feast Though all the elements at once were ransack'd, To store it with varietie transcending The curiousnesse, and cost, on Traians birth day, (Where princes only, and confederat kings Did sit as ghests, serv'd, and attended on By the senators of Rome, sat with a souldier In this his naturall, and proper shape Might not and bouldly fill a seat, and by
His present make the great solemnity More honour'd and remarkeable? Beauf. sen. Tis acknowledg'd, And this a grace done to me unexpected. Mont. But why in armor? Mal. What's the mysterie? Pray you reveale that. Belg. Souldiers out of action, That very rare, but like unbidden ghests Bring their stooles withem, for their owne defence, At court should feed in gauntles, they may have Their fingers cut else; there your carpet knights, That never charg'd beyond a mistresse lips, Are still most keene, and valiant, but to you Whom it does most concem, my Lord, I will Addresse my speech, and with a souldiers freedome In my reproofe returne the bitter scoffe, You threw upon my poverty, you contemn'd My courser outside, and from that concluded, (As by your groome you made me understand) I was unworthy to sit at your table, Among these tissues, and imbroideries, Unlesse I chang'd my habit, I have done it, And show my selfe in that which I have worne In the heate and servor of a bloudy fight, And then it was in fashion, not as now Ridiculous, and despis'd, this hath past through A wood of pikes, and every one aim'd at it, Yet scornd to take impression from their fury Wih this, as still you see it fresh and new I have charg'd through fire that would have sing'd your sables Blacke fox, and ermins, and chang'd the proud colour Of Skatlet though of the right Tirian die; But now as if the trappings made the man, such only are Admir'd that come adorn'd With what's no part of them, this is mine owne My richest suit, a suite I must not part from,
But not regarded now, and yet remember Tis we that bring you in the meanes of feasts, Banquets, and revels, which when you possesse, With barbarous ingratitude you deny us To be made sharers in the harvest, which Our sweat and industrie reap'd, and sow'd for you. The silks you weare, we with our bloud spin for you; This massie plate, that with the ponderous waight Does make your cupboods crack, we (unaffrighted With tempests, or the long and tedious way, Or dreadfull monsters of the deepe, that wait With open jawes still ready to devoure us) Fetch from the other world. Let it not then In after ages to your shame be spoken, That you wih no relenting eyes looke on Our wants that feed your plentie; or consume In prodigall, and wanton gifts on Drones The Kingdomes treasure, yet draine from us. The debt that with the hazard of our lives, We have made you stand ingag'd for: or force us Against all civill government in armour To require that, which with all willingnesse Should be tender'd, ere demanded. Beauf. sen. I commend This wholsome sharpnesse in you, and prefer it Bfore obsequious tamenesse, it shewes lovely: No shall the raine of your good counsell fall Upon the barren sands, but spring p fruit Such as you long have wisht for. And the rest Of your profession like you discontented For want of meanes, shall in ther present payment Be bund to prase your bldnesse: and hereafter I will take order you shll have no cause, For want of change to put your armour on But in the face of an enemie; not as now Among your friends. To that which is due to you,
To furnish you like your selfe, of mine owne bountle I'll adde five hundred crownes. Cham. I to my power Will follow the example. Mont. Take this Captaine, Tis ll my present store, but when you please, Command me further. Lan. I could wish it more. Belg. This is the luckiest jest ever came from me. Let a Souldier use no other Scribe to draw The forme of his petition. This will speed When your thrice humble supplications, With prayers for encrease of health and honours To their grave Lordships shall as soone as read Be pocketred up, the cause no more remembred. When this dumb Rhetorique.—Well, I have a life, Which I in thankfulnesse for your great favours, My noble Lords, when you please to command it, Must never thinke mine owne. Broker, be happie, These golden birds flie to thee. Exit Belgarde. Beauf. sen. You are dull, Sir, And seeme not to be taken with the passage You saw presented. Mal. Passage? I observ'd none, My thoughts were elsewhere busied. Ha! she is In danger to be lost, to be lost for ever, If speedily I come not to her rescue, For so my Genius tels me. Montr. What Chira's Worke on your phantasie? Mal. Phantasies? They are truth. Where is my Theocrine? You have plotted To rob me of my Daughter  bring me to her, Or I'll call downe the Saints to witnesse for me: You are inhospitable. Beauf. sen. You amaze me Your Daughter' sake, and now exchanging
With my sonne her servant, why doe you heare this With such distracted lookes? since to that end You brought her hither? Mal. Tis confess'd I did, But now pray you pardon me, and if you please Ere she deliver up her virgin fort, I would observe what is the art he uses In planting his artillery against it, She is my only care, nor must she yield But upon noble termes. Beauf. sen. Tis so determind. Ma. Yet I am jealous. Mont. Overmuch I feare. What passions are these? Beauf. sen. Come I will bring you Where you, with thse if they so please, may see The love-saene acted. Montre. There is something more Then fatherly love in this. Monta. We wayt upon you. Exeunt omnes. Actus tertij Scaena Vltima. Beaufort jun. heocrine. Beauf. jun. Since then you meet my flames with equall order As you professe, it is your boty mistresse, Nor must I call it debt, yet tis your glory, That your excesse supplies my want, and makes Strong in my weakenesse, which could never bee, But in your good opinion. Theo. You teach me Sir, What I should say, since from your san of favour, I like dimme Phoebe, in her elfe Borrow that light I have. Beauf. jun. Which you returne With large increase (since that you will recome And I dare  pleas'd
To make what's yet divided one. Theo. I have Already in my wishes, modesty Forbids me to speake more. Beauf. jun. but what assurance, (But still without offence) may I demand That may secure me that your heart tongue Joyne to make up this harmonie? Theo. Choose any Suiting your love distinguished from lust, To aske and mine to grant. Enter (as unseene) Beaufort senior, Malefort, Montrevile, and the rest. Beauf. sen. Yonder they are. Mal. At distance too, is yet well. Beauf. jun. I may take then This hand, and with a thousand burning kisses, Sweare tis the anchor to my hopes? Theo. You may Sir. Mal. This is somewhat too much. Beauf. iun. And this done, view my selfe In these true mirrors. Theo. Ever rew to you Sir, And may they loofe th' abilitie of fight, When they seeke other object. Mal. This is more Then I can give consent to. Beauf. iun. And a kisse, Thus printed on your lips will not distast you? Mal. Her lips! Montre. Why where should he kisse? are you distracted? Beauf. iun. Then when this holy man hath made it lawfull. brings in a Priest. Mal. A priest so ready too I must breake n. Beauf. iun. And what's spoke here is registred above, I must ingtosse those favours to my selfe Which are not to be nam'd. Theo. All I can give,
But what they are I know not. Beauf. jun. I'll instruct you. Mal. O how my bloud boyles! Montr. Pray you containe your selfe, Me thinkes his courtship's modest. Beauf. jun. Then being mine, And wholly mine, the river of your love To kinsmen and allies, nay to your father, (Howere out of his tendernesse he admires you) Must in the Ocea of your affection To me be swallow'd up, and want a name Compar'd with what you owe me. Theoc. Tis most i, Sir, The stronger bond that bindes me to you, must Dissolve the weaker. Mal. I am ruin'd if I come not fairely off. Beauf. sen. Theres nothing wanting But your consent. Mal. Some strange invention aid me. Aside. This! yes, it must be so. Montr. Why doe you stagger, When what you seem'd so much to wish is offerd? Beauf. jun. Both parties being agreed to. Beauf. sen. I'll not court A grant from you, nor doe I wrong your Daughter, Though I say my sonne deserves her. Mal. Tis far from My humble thoughts to undervalue him I cannot prize too high. For howsoever From my owne fond indulgence I have sung Her praises with too prodigall a tongue, That tendernesse laid by, I stand confirmd All that I fancied excellent in her Bllanc'd, with what is really his owne, Holds waight in no proportion. Montr. New turnings!
Beauf. sen. Whither tend this? Mal. Had you observ'd, my Lord, With what a sweet gradation he wood, As I did punctually, you cannot blame her, Though she did listen with a greedie eare To his faire modest offers: but so great A good as then flow'd to her, should have beene With more deliberation entertaind, And not with such haste swallowd, she shall first Consider seriously what the blessing is, And in what ample manner to give thanks for't, And then receive it. And though I shall thinke Short minutes yeeres till it be perfited, I will defer that which I most desire, And so must she, till longing expectation, That heightens pleasure, makes her truly know Her happinesse, and with what out-streacht armes She must embrace it. Beauf jun. This is curiousnesse Beyond example. Mal. Let it then begin From me, in whats mine owne I'll use my will, And yeeld no further reason. I lay claime to The libertie of a subject. Fall not off, But be obedient, or by the haire I'll drag thee home. Censure me as you please, I'll take my owne way, O the inward fires That wanting vent consume me! Exit with Theocrine. Montr. Tis most certaine Hs mad, or worse. Beauf. How, worse? Montr. Nay, there I leave you, My thoughts are free. Beauf. jun. This I foresaw. Beauf. sen. Take comfort, H shall walke in clouds, but I'll discover him: And he shall finde, and feele, if he excuse not,
And with strong reasons this grosse injurie, I can make use of my authoritie. Exeunt omnes. Actus quarti Scena prima. MALEFORT solus. WHat flames are these my wild desires fan in me? The torch that feeds them, was not lighted at Thy altars, Cupid: vindicate thy selfe, And doe not own it: and confirme it rather, That this infernall brand that turnes me cyndars, Was by the snake-hair'd Sisters throwne into My guiltie bosome. O that I was ever Accurs'd in having issue: my sonnes bloud, (That like the poyson'd shirt of Hercules Growes to each part about me) which my hate Forc'd from him with much willingnesse, may admit Some weake defence; but my most impious love To my faire daughter Theocrine, none. Since my affection (rather wicked lust) That does pursue her, is a greater crime Than any detestation, with which I should afflict her innocence. With what cunning I have betray'd my selfe, and did not feele The scorching heat that now with furie rage Why was I tender of her? cover'd with That fond disguise, this mischiefe stole upon me. I hought it no offence to kisse her often, O twine mine armes about her softer neck, And by false shadowes of a fathers kindnesse I long deceiv'd my selfe: but now the effect Is too apparent. How I strove to be In her opinion held the worthiest man In courtship, forme, and feature, envying him
That was preferd before me, and yet then My wishes to my selfe were not discover'd. But still my fires increas'd, and with delight I would call her mistresse, wilfully forgetting The name of daughter choosing rather she Should stile me servant, then with reverence father, Yet mocking I nere cherish'd obscene hopes, But in my troubled slumbers often thought Shee was too neere to me, and then sleeping blush'd At my imagination which pass'd My eyes being open, not condemning it, I was ravish'd with the pleasure of the dreame, Yet spight of these temptations I have reason That pleades against'em, and commands me to Extinguish these abhominable fires, And I will doe it, I will send her backe To him that loves her lawfully, Within there? Enter Theocrine. Theoc. Sir did you call? Malef. I looke no sooner on her, But all my boasted power of reason leaves me, And passion againe usurpes her Empire, does none else wait me? Theoc. I am wretched sir, should any owe more duty. Malef. This is worse then disobedience, leave me. Theoc. On my knees sir, as I have ever squard my will by yours. And lik'd, and loath'd with your eyes: I beseech you To teach me what the nature of my fault is, That hath incensd you, (sureis one of weakenesse And not of malice) which your gentler temper On my submission I hope will pardon, Which granted by your piety, if that I Out of the least neglect of mine hereafter, Make you remember it, may I sinke ever Under your dread command. Malef. O my stars! who can but dote on this humility That sweetens, lovely in her teares? the fetters That seem'd to lessen in their waight; but now
By this grow heavier on me. Theoc. Deare sir: Malef. Peace, I must not heare thee. Theoc. Not looke on me. Malef. No, thy lookes and words are charmes. Theoc. May they have power then To calme the tempest of your wrath, alas sir, Did I but know in what I give offence In my repentance I would shew my sorrow, For what is past, and in my care hereafter Kill the occasion or cease to be Since life without your favour is to me a load I would cast off. Malef. O that my heart were rent in sunder, that I might ex∣pire, The cause in my death buried: yet I know not With such prevailing Oratory 'tis beg'd from me That to deny thee would convince me to Have suck'd the milke of Tigers, rise, and I But in a perplexd, and misterious method. Will make relation that which all the world Admires and cries up in thee for perfections, Are to unhappy me foule blemishes, And mulcts in nature. If thou hadst beene borne Deformd and crooked, in the features of Thy body, as the manners of thy mind, Moore lip'd, flat not'd,  ey'd, and beetle brow'd With a dwarfes  to a gyant wase, Sower breath'd, with clawes for fingers on thy hands, Splay footed, gouty leg'd, and over all A loathsome leprosie had spread it selfe, And made thee flaun'd of humane fellowships: I had beene blest. Theoc. Why would you wih a monster For such a one or worse you have describ'd, To call your father. Malef. Rather then a now, Though I had drowd thee for it in the sea Appearing as thou do a new Pando,
With Iunos faire cow eyes, Minerva's brow Aurora's blushing cheekes, Hebes fresh youth, Venus soft paps, with Thetis silver feet. Theoc. Sir you have lik'd and lov'd them, and oft forc'd (With your hyperboles of praise powrd on them) My modesty to a defensive red, Strowd ore that palenesse, which you then were pleasd To stile the purest white. Malef. And in that cup I drank the poison I now feele dispersd Through every vaine and artery, wherefore art thou So cruell to me? This thy outward shape Brought a fierce warre against me, not to be By flesh and blood resisted: but to leave me No hope of freedome from the Magazine Of thy minds forces, treacherously thou drewst up Auxiliary helpes to strengthen that Which was already in it selfe too potent, Thy beauty gave the first charge, but thy dty Seconded with thy care, and watchfull studies To please, and serve my will in all that might Raise up content in me, like thunder brake through All opposition, and my rankes of reason Disbanded, my victorious passions fell To bloody execution, and compeld me With willing hands to tis on my owne chaines, And with a kinde of flattering joy to glory in my captivity. Theoc. I, in this you speake, sir, am ignorance it selfe. Male. And so continue, for knowledge of the armes thou bearst against me Would make thee curse thy selfe, but yield no yds For thee to helpe me, and 'twere cruelty In me to wounde that spotlesse innocency How ere it make me guilty, in a word The plifie of goodnesse is thy ill, Thy vertues vices, and thy humble lownesse Far worse than stubborne ullennesse, and pride, Thy lookes that ravish all beholders lse As killing a the , their
Expressd in sorrow for the much I suffer, A glorious insultation, and no signe Of pitty in thee, and to heare thee speake In thy defence, though but in silent action, Would make the hurt already deepely festerd Incurable, and therefore as thou wouldst not By thy presence raise fresh furies to torment me I doe conjure thee by a fathers power, (And tis my curse I dare not thinke it lawfull To sue unto thee in a neerer name) Without reply to leave me. Theoc. My obedience never learnd yet to question your com∣mands, But willingly to serve 'em, yet I must Since that your will forbids the knowledge of My fault, lament my fortune. Exit. Malf. O that I have reason to discerne the better way And yet pursue the worse, when I looke on her I burne with heat, and in her absence freeze With the cold blasts of jelousie, that another Should ere taste those delights that are denide me, And which of their afflictions bring lesse torture I hardly can distinguish, is there then No meane? no, so my understanding tels me, And that by my crosse fates it is determind That I am both waies wretched. Enter Vsher, and Montrevile Vsher. Yonder he walkes sir, In much vexation: he hath sent my Lady His daughter weeping in, but what the cause is Rests yet in supposition. Mtr. I guesse at it, but must be further satisfied, I will sift him In private therefore, quit the roome. Vsher. I am gon, sir. Exit. Malef. Hal who disturbes me? Montrevile? your pardon, Montr. Would you could grant one to your selfe. (I speake it With the assurance of a friend) and yet Before it be too late, make reparation Of the grosse wrong, your indiscretion offered
To the governour and his sonne, nay to your selfe, For there begins my sorrow. Malef. Would I had no greater cause to mourne Then their displeasure, for I dare justifie. Montr. We must not doe all that we dare private friend I observd your alterations with a stricter eye Perhaps then others, and to loose no time In repetition, your strange demeamour To your sweet daughter. Malef. Would you could finde out some other theame to treat of. Montr. None but this; and this Ile dwell on, how ridiculous And subject to construction? Malef. No more. Montr. You made your selfe, amazes me, and if The frequent trials enterchanged betweene us Of love and friendship, be to their desert Esteem'd by you, as they hold waight with me, No inward trouble should be of a shape So horrid to your selfe, but that to me You stand bound to discover it, and unlocke Your secretst thoughts: though the most innocent were Lowd crying sinnes. Malef. And so perhaps they are. And therefore be not curious to learne that Which knowne must make you hate me. Montr. Thinke not so, I am yours in right and wrong, not shall you finde A verball friendship in me, but an active, And here I vow, I shall no sooner know What the disease is, but if you give leave I will apply a remedy, is it madnesse? I am familiarly acquainted with a deepe read man That can with charmes aad hearbs Restore you to your reason, or suppose You are bewitch'd, he with more potent spels And magicall rites shall cure you, is't heavens anger? With penitence and sacrifice appease it, Beyond this, there is nothing that I can
Imagine dreadfull, in your fame and fortunes You are secure, your impious sonne removd to That rendred you suspected to the state, And your faire daughter. Malef. Oh presse me no farther. Montr. Are you wrung there? why what of her? hath he Made shipwracke of her honour, or conspird Against your life? or seald a contract with The divell of hell, for the recovery of her young Inamorato? Malef. None of these, And yet what must increase the wonder in you Being Innocent in her selfe, she hath wounded me, But where enquire not. Yet I know not how I am perswaded from my confidence Of your vowd love to me, to trust you with My dearest secret, pray you chide me for it, But with a kind of pity, not insulting On my calamity. Montre. Forward. Malef. This same daughter. Montre. What is her fault? Malef. She is too faire to me. Montre. a! how is this? Malef. And I have lookd upon her More than a father should, and languish to Enjoy her as a husband. Montre. Heaven forbid it, Malef. And this is all the comfort you can give me, Where are your promisd ad, your charm, your herbs? Your deepe read scholler, spels, and magicke rites? Can all these disenchau me? no, I must be My owne Physitian, and upon my selfe Practice a desperate cure. Montr. Doe not conteme, Injoyne me what you please with any hazzard, Ile undertake it, what meanes have you practis To quench this hellish fire?
Malef. All I could thinke on, But to no purpose, and yet sometimes absence Does yeeld a kinde of intermission to The fury of the fit. Montr. See her no more then. Malef. Tis my last refuge, and twas my intent And still tis, to desire your helpe. Montr. Command it. Malef. Thus then, you have a fort of which you are The absolute Lord, whither I pray you beare her: And that the sight of her may not againe Nourish those flames, which I feele something lessend, By all the ties of friendship I conjure you And by a solemne oath you must confirme it, That though my now calmd passions should rage higher Then ever heretofore, and so compell me Once more to wish to see her; though I use Perswasions mixd with threatnings; nay adde to it That I this fayling should with hands held up thus Kneele at your feet, and bathe them with my tete, Prayers or curses, vowes or imprecations Onely to looke upon her though at distance, You still must be obdurate. Montr. If it be Your pleasure sir that I shall be unmov'd, I will endeavour. Malef. You must sweare to be Inexorable as you would prevent The greatest mischiefe to your friend, that fate Could throw upon him. Montr. Well, I will obey you. But how the governour will be answer'd, yet And tis materiall, is not considered. Malef. Leave that to me.  presently give order How you shall surprize her, be not frighted with Her exclamations. Montr. Be you constant o Your resolution I will noe faile
In what concernes my part. Malef. Be ever blessed for't. Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scaena secunda. Enter Beaufort jun. Chamont, Lanour. Cham. Not to be spoke with, say you? Beauf. jun. No. Lan. Nor you Admitted to have conference with her? Beauf. jun. Neither. His doores are fast lockd up, and solitude Dwels round about em, no accesse allow'd To friend or enemy, but— Cham. Nay be not mov'd sir, Let his passion worke, and like a hot rein'd horse 'T will quickly tire it selfe. Beauf. jun. Or in his death Which for her sake till now I have forborne I will revenge the injury he hath done To my true and lawfull love. Lan. How does your father The Governour rellish it? Beauf. jun. Troth he never had Affection to the match: yet in his pitty To me, he's gone in person to his house, Nor will he be denide, and if he finde not Strong and faire reasons Malefort will heare from him In a kinde he does not looke for. Cham. In the meane time Pray you put on cheerefull lookes. Enter Montaigne. Beauf. jun. Mine suite my fortune. Lan. O heer's Montaigne. Mont. I never could have met you More opportunely. Ile not stale the jest
By my relation: but if you will looke on The malecontent Belgard, newly rigde up With the traine that followes him, 't will be an object Worthy of your noting. Beauf. jun. Looke you the Comedy Make good the Prologue, or the scorne will dwll Upon your selfe. Mont. I'll hazard that, observe now; Wenches. Nay, Captaine, glorious Captaine: Enter Belgarde in a gallant habit; stayes at the  with his sword drawne; severall voyces within. Belg. Fall backe Rascall, Doe you make an Owle of me? this day I will Receive no more Petitions, Here are bills of all occasions, and all fi! If this be the pleasure of a rich suite, would I were Againe in my buffe jerkin, or my armour, Then I walk'd securely by my creditors noses, And not a dog mark'd me, every officer shd me, And not one lowzie prison would receive me; But now, as the Ballade sayes, I am turnd gallant: There does not live that thing I ow a sowse to, But does torment me, a faithfull Cobler told me With his awle in his hand, I was behind hand with hi For setting me upright, and bad me looke to my selfe. A Sempstresse too, that traded but in socke, Swore she would set a Sejeant on my backe For a borrowed shirt: my pay and the benevolence, The Governour and the States bestow'd upon me, The citie cormorants, my monie-mongers, Have swallow'd downe already, they were summes, I grant, but that I should be such a foole Against my ohe, being a cashir'd Captaine, To pay debts, though growne up to one and twenty, Deserves more reprehension, in my judgement,
Then a shop-keeper, or a Lawyer that lends money, In a long  vacation. Mont. How doe you like His meditation? Chamont. Peace, let him proceed. Belg. I cannot now goe on the score for shame, And where I shall begin to pawne, I marry, That is consider'd timely, I paid for This traine of yours Dame Estridge foureteen crowns, And yet it is so light, 'will hardly passe For a Taverne reckoning, unlesse it be To save the charge of paynting, naild on a post For the signe of the feathers; px upon the fashion, That a Captaine cannot thinke himselfe a Captaine, If he weare not this like a fore-horse; yet it is not Staple commodity; these are perfum'd too, Of the Roman wash, and yet a stale red herring Would fill the belly better, and hurt the head lesse: And this is Venice gold, would I had it againe In french crownes in my pocket. O you commanders That like me have no dead paes, nor can couzen The Commissary at a muster, let me stand For an example to you, as you would Injoy your priviledges: videlicet, To pay your debts, and take your lechery gratis To have you issue warm'd by others fires, To be often drunke, and sweare, yet pay no forfeit, To the poore, but when you share with one another, With all your other choyce immunities, Onely of this I seriously advise you: Let Courtiers trip like Courtiers, And your Lords of dirt and dung hills mete Their woods and acres, in velvets, sttins, tissues, But keepe you constant to doth and , Mont. Have you head of such a penite homily, Belg. I am studying now Where I shall hide my selfe till the rumor of
My wealth and braverie vanish, let me see, There is a kinde of a vaulting house not farre off, Where I us'd to spend my afternoones, among Suburb shee-gamesters; and yet now I thinke on't I have crackd a ring or two there, which they made Others to solder, no, Inter a Bawd and two wenches, with two children. 1. Wench. O, have we spide you. Bawd. Upon him without ceremonie, now the time While he is in the paying veine. 2. Wench. Save you brave Captaine. Beauf. jun. S'light, how she stares, they are worse then she-wolves to him. Belg. Shame me not in the streets, I was comming to you. 1. Wen. O Sir, you may in publique pay for the fidling You had in private. 2. Wen. We heare you are full of crownes, Sir. 1. Wen. And therefore knowing you are open-handed, Before all be destroyd, I'll put you in mind, Sir, Of your young heire here. 2. Wen. Here's a second, Sir, That lookes for a childs portion. Bawd. There are reckonings For Muskadine and Eg too, must be thought on. 1. Wen. We have not beene hasty, Sir. Bawd. But staid your leasure; But now you are ripe, and loden with fruit. 2. VVen. Tis fi you should be puld; here's a boy, Sir, Pray you kisse him, tis your owne, Sir, 1. Wench. Nay, busse this first, It hath just your eyes, and such a promising nose, That if the signe deceive me not, in time Twill prove a notable striker, like his father. Belg. And yet you laid it to another. 1. Wen. True, While you were poore, and it was polcy, But she that has varietie of fathers, And makes nor choyce of him that can maintaine t, Nere studied Aristotles Problemes.
Lan. A smart queane. Belg. Why braches will you whurry me? 2. Wen. No, but ease you Of your golden burthen, the heavie carriage may Bring you to a sweating sicknesse. Belg. Very likely, I soame all ore alreadie. 1. Wen. Will you come off, Sir? Belg. Would I had ne're come on: heare me with patience, Or I will anger you. Goe to, you know me And doe not vexe me further: by my sins And your diseases, which are certaine truthes, What ere you thinke, I am not master at This instant, of a livre. 2. Wen. What, and in Such a glorious suite? Belg. The liker wretched things To have no mony. Bawd. You may pawne your clothes, Sir, 1. Wen. Will you see your issue starve? 2. Wen. Or the mothers beg? Belg. Why, you unconscionable strumpets, would you have me Transforme my hat to double elout and biggins? My corselet to a cradle? or my belt To swaddlebands? or turne my cloke to blankets? Or to sell my sword and spurs for sope and candles? Have you no mercy? what a chargeable divell We carry in our breeche? Beaf. jun. Now tis tme. To etch him off. Enter  sen Mont. Your father does it for us. Bawd. The Governour! Beaf. sen. What are these? 1. Wen. And it like your Lordship, Very poore spner. . I am his Nurse and ,
Belg. You have 'd and lander'd me, hell take you for it Vanish. Cham. Doe, doe, and talke with him hereafter. 1. Wen. Tis our best course 2. Wen. We'll find a time to fit him. Exit Bawd and Whores. Beauf. sen. Why, In this heat, Belgarde Belg. You are the cause of 't. Beauf. sen Who, I? Belg. Yes, your pied liverie, and your gold Draw these vexations on mee, pray you strip me And let me be as I was: I will not lose The pleasures and the fredome which I had In my certaine povertie; for all the wealth Faire France is proud of? Beauf. sen. Wee at better leasure Will learne the cause of this. Beauf. jun. What answer, Sir, From the Admirall? Beauf. sen. None, his daughter is remov'd To the sort of Montrevile, and he himselfe In person fled, but where is not discover'd, I could tell you wonders, but the time denies mee Fit libertie. In a word, let it suffice The power of our great master is contemn'd, The sacred lawes of God and man prophan'd, And if I sit downe with this injury, I am unworthy of my place, and thou Of my acknowledgement: draw up all the troopes, As I goe, I will instruct you to what purpose. Such as have power to punish, and yet spare From feare, or from conivence, others ill Though not in act assist them in their wll .
Actus quinti Scena prima. Montrevile, Theocrine, servants. MONTREVILE. BInde them, and gag their mouthes sure, I alone Will be your convoy. 1. Wom. Madam, 2. Wom. Dearest Lady, Pag. Let me fight for my Mistresse. Serv. Tis in vaine, Little Cockerell of the kinde. Montr. Away with them, And doe as I command you, Theocr. Montrevile Exeunt Servants, Page, Women. You are my fathers friend, nay, more a souldier, And if a right one, as I hope to find you, Though in a lawfull war you had surpriz'd A Citie, that bowd humbly to your pleasure, In honour you stand bound to guard a virgin From violence; but in a free estate Of which you are a limb, to doe a wrong Which noble enemies never consent to Is such an insolence. Montr. How her heart beats! Much like a Partridge in a Sparhawkes foot, That with a panting silence does lament The fate she cannot flie from! sweet, take comfort, You are safe, and nothing is intended to you But love and Service. Theocr. They came never cloth'd In force, and outrage, upon what assurance (Remembring only that my father lives) Who will not tamely suffer the disgrace.
Have you presum'd to hurry mee from his house, And as I were not worth the waiting on, To snatch me from the duty, and Of my poore servants. Montr. Let not that afflict you, You shall not want observance, I will be Your Page, your Woman, Paraite or Foole, Or any other property, provided You answer my affection. Theocr. In what kind? Montr. As you had done young Beauforts. Theocr. How? Montr. So Lady, Or, if the name of wife appeare a yoke Too heavie for your tender necke, so I Enjoy you as a private friend, or mistresse, Twill be sufficient. Theocr. Blessed Angels guard me What frontlesse impudence is this? What dvell Hath to thy certaine ruine tempted thee To offer me this motion? by my hopes Of after joyes, submission, not repentance Shall expiate this soule intent. Montr. Intent? Tis more, I'll make it act Theocr. Ribald, thou darest not, And if (and with a feaver to thy soule) Thou but consider that I have a father And such a father, as when this arrives at His knowledge, as it shall, the terrour of His vengeance, which as sure as sae must follow, Will make thee curse the houre in which lust caught thee To nourish these bse hopes, and tis my wonder Thou darest forget how tender he is of mee And that each shadow of wrong done to me Will raise in him a tempest not to be But with thy heart-blood calm'd: this when I see him.
Montr. A thou shalt never. Theocr. Wilt thou murther me? Montr. No, no, ti otherwise determin'd, foole, The master which in passion kills his slave That may be usefull to him, does himselfe The injurie: Know thou most wretched creature, That father thou presum'st upon, that father, That when I sought thee in a noble way, Deny'd thee to me, fancying in his hope A higher match from his excesse of doage, Hath in his bowels kindled such a flame Of impious most unnaturall lost, That now he feares his furious desires, May force him to doe that he shake to thinke on. Theocr. O me most wretched. Montr. Never hope againe To blast him with those eyes, their golden beam Are unto him arrowes of death and hell, But unto me divine artillery. And therefore since what I so long in vaine Purfu'd, is offerd to me, and by him Given up to my possession: doe not flatter Thy selfe with an imaginary hope, But that I'll take occasion by the forelock, And make use of my fortune; as we walke I'll tell the more. Theocr. I will not stirre. Montr. I'll force thee: Theocr. Helpe, helpe, Montr. In vaine, Theocr. In mee my brothers blood I punish'd at the height. Montr. The Coach there. Theocr. Deare Sir, Montr. Teares, curses, prayer,  alike to me, I can, and must enjoy my present pleasure, And shall take time to  for it at leasure. Exit.
Actus quinti, Scaena secunda. Enter Malefort solus. Malef. I have playd the foole, the grosse foole, to believe The bosome of a friend will hold a secret, Mine owne could not containe, and my industry In taking liberty from my innocent daughter, Out of false hopes of freedome to my selfe, Is in the little helpe it yeelds me, punish'd. Shee's absent, but I have her figure here, And every grace, and rarity about her, Are by the pencill of my memory In living colours paynted on my heart. My fires too, a short interim closd up Breake out with greater fury. Why was I Since 'twas my fate, and not to be declin'd In this so tender consciened? Say I had Injoyd what I desir'd, what had it beene But incest? and there's something here that tels me I stand accomptable for greater sinnes, I never checkd at: neither had the crime Wanted a praesident. I have read in story Those first great Heroes that for their brave deeds Were in the worlds first infancie stil'd gods, Freely enjoyd what I deny my selfe. Old Saturne in the golden age embraced His sister Ops and in the same degree The thunderer Iuno, Neptune, Thetis, and By their example after the first deluge Deucalion Pirrhae. Universall nature As every day tis evident allowes it To creatures of all kinds. The gallant horse Covers the Mare to which he was the fire, The bird with fertile seed gives new encrease
To her that hatchd him. Why should envious man then Brand that close act which adds proximity To whats most neere him, with the abhorred title Of incest? or our later lawes forbid What by the first was granced? let old men That are not capeable of these delight And solemne superstitions fooles prescribe Rules to themselves, I will not curbe my freedome But constantly go on, with this assurance, I but walke in a path which greater men Have trod before me, h this is the fort, Open the gate. Within there. Enter two Souldiers with Muskets. 1 Sould. With your pardon We must forbid your entrance. Mal. Doe you know me? 2 Soul. Perfectly my Lord. Mal. I am this Captaines friend. 1 Sould. It may be so, but till we know his pleasure You must excuse us. 2 Sould. Wee'l acquaint him with Your waiting here. Mont. Waiting slave, he was ever By me commanded. 1 Sould. As we are by him. Montr. So punctuall, pray you then in my name intreat His presence. 2 Sould. That we shall doe. Exeunt Souldiers. Mal. I must use Some strange perswasions to worke him to Deliver her, and to forget her vowis, And horrid oaths I in my madnesse made him. Take to the contrary, and may I get those Once more in my possession, I will beare her Into some close cave, or desert, where wee'l end Our lusts and lives together. Enter Montreile and souldirs. Montr. Faile not, on
The forseit of your lives to execute What I commanded. Mal. Montrevile, how  friend? Mont. I am glad to see you weare such chearefull lookes, The worlds well altred. Mal. Yes I thanke my star But me thinks thou art troubled. Mont. Some light crosse, But of no moment. Mal. So I hope, beware Of sad and impious thoughts, you know how far They wrought on me. Mont. No such come neere me sir. I have like you no daughter, and much wish You never had been curs'd with one. Ma. Who I? Thou art deceiv'd, I am most happy in her. Mont. I am glad to heare it. Mal. My incestuous fires Towards her are quite burnt out, I love her now As a father, and no further. Mont. Fix there then Your constant peace, and doe not try a second Temptation from her. Mal. Yes friend though shee were By millions of degrees more excellent In her perfections, Nay though she could borrow A forme Angel call to take my fraylty It would not doe, and therefore Montrevile (My chiefe delight next her) I come to tell thee The governour and I are reconcil'd, And I confirm'd, and with all possible speed To make large satisfaction to young Beaufort And her whom I have so much wrong'd, and fo thy trouble in her custody, of which Ile now discharge thee, there is nothing in My nerve or , but shall ever be
At thy devotion. Montr. You promise faintly, No doubt I the performance, yet I would not Hereafter be reported, to have beene The principall occasion of your falling Into a relaps, or but suppose out of The easinesse of my nature, and assurance You are firme, and can hold out, I could consent: You needs must know there are so many lets That make against it, that it is my wonder You offer me the motion, having bound me With oathes and imprecations on no termes, Reasons, or argumens, you could propose, I ever should admit you to her sight, Muchlesse restore her to you. Mal. Are we souldiers, and stand on othes? Montr. Tis beyond my knowledge In what we are more worthy, then in keeping Our words, much more our vowes. Malef. Heaven pardon all, How many thousands in our heate of wine, Quarrels and play, and in our younger daies (In private, I may say) betweene our selves In points of love, have we to answer for, Should we be scrupulous that way. Montr. You say well, And very aptly call to memory Two oathes against all ties and rites of friendship Broken by you to me. Malef. No more of that. Montr. Yes tis materiall, and to the purpose The first (and think upon't) was when I brought you As a visitant to my mistresse then, the mother Of this same daughter, whom with dreadfull words Too hideous to remember, you swore deepely For my sake never to attempt, yet then, Then, when you had a sweet wife of your owne,
I know not with what arts, philtres, and charmes, (Unlesse in wealth and fame you were above me) You won her from me, and her grant obtain'd, A marriage with the second wayted on, The buriall of the first (that to the world Brought your dead son) this I sate tamely down by, Wanting indeed occasion and power To be at the height revenged. Malef. Yet this you seem'd Freely to pardon. Montr. As perhaps I did. Your daughter Theocrine growing ripe, (Her mother too deceas'd) and fit for marriage I was a suitor for her, had your word Upon your honour, and our friendship made Authenticall, and ratified with an oath, Shee should be mine, but vowes with you being like To your religion, a nose of wax To be turn'd every way, that very day The governours sonne but making his approaches Of Courtship to her, the winde of your ambition For her advancement scatter'd the thin sand In which you wrot your full consent to me, And drew you to his party. What hath pas'd since You beare a register in your owne bosome That can at large informe you. Malef. Montrevile I doe confesse all that you charge me with To be strong truth, and that I bring a cause Most miserably guilty, and acknowledge That though your goodnesse made me mine owne judge I should not shew the least compassion, Or mercy to my selfe. O let not yet My foulenesse int your puresse, or my falshood Divert the torrent of your loyall faith. My ills, if not return'd by you, will adde Lustre to your much good, and to orcome
With noble sufferance will expresse your strength, And triumph ore my weakenesse. If you please to My blacke deeds being onely knowne to you, And in surrendring up my daughter buried: You not alone make me your ve (for I At no part doe deserve the name of friend) But in your owne brest raise a monument Of ty to a wretch on whom with justice You may expresse all cruelty. Mont. You much move me. Mal. O that I could but hope it, to revenge An injurie is proper to the wishes Of feeble women, that want strength to act it: But to have power to punish, and yet pardon Peculiar to Princes, see these knees, That have beene ever iffe to bend to heaven To you are supple, Is there ought beyond this That may speake my submission? or can pride (Though I well know it is a stranger to you) Desire a feast of more humility To kill her growing appetit? Mont. I requir'd not To be sought to this poore way, yet tis so far A kind of satisfaction that I will Dispence a little with those serious oths You made me take, your daughter shall come to you, I will not say as you deliverd her, But as she is you may dpose of her As you shall thinke most requisite. Exit Montrevile. Mal. His last words are niddles to me. Here the lyo force Would have prov'd uselesse and against my nature Compeld me from the Crocodile to borrow Her counterfeit , ther May I but quench these fires th rage ,The And fall what can fall, I am  to  is, 2 Sold. You must be packing
The. Hath he ob'd me of Mine honour, and denies me now a roome To hide my shame? 2 Sould. My Lord the Admirall Attends your Ladiship. 1 Sould. Close the port, and leave . Exeunt . Mal. Ha! who is this? how alter'd! how deform'd! It cannot be. And yet this creature has A kinde of a resemblance to my dghter, My Theocrine! but as different From that she was, as bodies dead are Their best perfections, from what they were When they had life and motion. Theo. Tis most true fir, I am dead indeed to all but misery. O come not neere me sir, I am infectious, To looke on me at distance is as dangerous As from a pinacles cloud-kissing spire, With giddy eyes to view the steepe descent But to acknowledge me a certaine ruine. O sir. Mal. Speake Theocrine, force me not To farther question, my feares already Have chok'd my vitall spirits. Theo. Pray you turne away Your face and heare me, and with my last breath Give me leave to accuse you. What offence From my first infancie did I commit That for a punishment you should give up My Virgin chastity to the trecherous guard Of Gotish Montrevile? Mal What hath be done? Theo. Abus'd me fir by violence, and this told I cannot live to speake more: may the cause In you finde pardon, but the speeding curse Of a ravish'd maid fall heavie, heavie on him, Beaufort my lawfull love, farewell for ever. She dies.
Malef. Take not thy flight so soone immaculate spirit. Tis fled already, how the innocent As in a gentle slumber passe away, But to cut off the knotty thred of life In guilty men, must force sterne Atropos To use her sharpe knife often. I would helpe The edge of hers with the sharpe point of mine But that I dare not die, till I have rent This dogs heart peecemeale. O that I had wings To scale these walls, or that my hands were Canons To bore their flinty sides, that I might bring The villaine in the reach of my good sword, The Turkish Empire offer'd for his ransome Should not redeeme his life. O that my voice Were loud as thunder and with horrid sounds Might force a dreadfull passage to his eares, And through them reach his soule, libidinous monster Foule ravisher, as thou dust doe a deed Which forc'd the Sun to hide his glorious face Behinde a sable Masque of clouds appeare, And as a man defend it, or like me Shew some compunction for it. Montrevile above the curin, suddenly drawn. Montr. Ha, ha, ha. Malef. Is this an object to raise mirth? Montr. Yes, yes. Malef. My daughter's dead. Mont. Thou hadst best follow her, Or if thou art the thing thou art reported, Thou shoulst have led the way. Doe teare thy haire ike a village nurse, and mourn while I laugh at thee. Be but a just examiner of thy selfe And in an equall ballance poise the nothing Or little mischiefe I have done compard With the ponderous weight of thine, and how canst thou Accuse or argue with me?  was a rape And she being in a kinde contracted to me,
The fact may challenge some qualification: But thy int made natures selfe run backward, And done, had cu'd an earth-quake. A sold above. 1. Sold. Captaine. Montr. Ha, 2. Sold. Our outworkes are surpriz'd, the centinell slaine, The corps du garde defeared too. Montr. By whom? 1. Sold. The sudden storme and darknesse of the night Forbid the knowledge, make up speedily, Or all is lost. Montr. In the dive is name, whence comes this! They descend. Mal. Doe, doe, rage on, rend open AEolus Thy brazen prison, and let loose at once Thy stormy issue blustring Boreas, A stor. Aided with all the gales, the Pilot numbers Upon his compasse, cannot raise a tempest Through the vast region of the yre, like that I feele within me: for I am possess'd With whirle-winds, and each guilty thought to me is A dreadfull Hurricano; though this centre Labour to bring forth earthquake, and bell open Her wide stretch'd awes, and let out all her furies, They cannot adde an atome to the mountaine Of feares and terrors that each minute threaten To fall on my accursed head. Ha, is't fancie? Enter the Ghost of young Maleor, akd from the full of wounds,  in the shadow of a Ladi, her face pro. Or hath hell heard me, and makes proofe if I Dare stand the tryall? yes, I doe, and now I view these apparitions I feele, I once did know the  For what come you? Are youreriall oes depriv'd of language, And so deni'd to tell me? that by ignes
You bid me aske here of my selfe? tis so The Ghosts use seve∣rall gestures. And there is somthing here makes answer for you. You come to launce my sear'd up conscience? Yes, And to instruct me, that those thunderbol, That hurl'd me headlong from the height of glory, Wealth, honours, worldly happinesse, were forg'd Upon the anvile of my impious wrongs And cruelty to you? I doe confesse it; And that my lust compelling me to make way For a second wife, I poison'd thee, and that The cause (which to the world is undiscover'd) That forc'd thee to shake off thy filiall duty To mee thy father, had it's spring and sourse From thy impatence to know thy mother, That with all duty, and obedience serv'd me (For now with horror I acknowledge it) Answer'd still bygnes. Remov'd unjustly: yet thou being my sonne, Were't not a competent judge mark'd out by heaven For her revenger, which thy falling by My weaker hand confirm'd. Tis granted by thee. Can any penance expiate my guilt? Or can repentance save me? they are vanish'd. Exeunt Ghosts. What's left to doe then? I'll accuse my face That did not fashion me for nobler uses Or if those starres crosse to me in my birth, Had not deni'd their prosperous influence to it With peace of conscience like to innocent men, I might have ceas'd to be, and not as now, To curse my cause of being. He's kill'd with a flash of lightning. Ee Belgrde wih soul Belg. Here is a night To season my silkes. Bue-jerkin, now I mie thee, Thou hast endur'd many oule nights, but never One like to this; how fine my feather looks now! Just like a Capons tail stol out of the pen
And hid in the sinke, and yet't had beene dishonour To have charg'd me without it, wilt thou fever cease, Is the petarde, as I gave directions, fasten'd On the portcullis? Another Sold. It hath beene attempted By divers, but in vaine. Belg. These are your gallants, That at a feast take the first place, poore I, Hardly allow'd to follow; marry in These foolish businesses they are conent That I shall have precedence, I much thanke Their manne, or their feare; second me Souldier, They have had no time to undermine, or if They have, it is blowing up, and setching A caper or two in the ayre, and I will doe it, Rather then blow my nailes here. Sold. O brave Captaine! Exeunt. A  noise and cryes within, a flourish. Enter Beaufort senior: Beaufort junior: Montague: Chamont: Lanour: Belgarde: Montrevile: Souldiers. Montr. Rackes cannot force more from me then I have Already told you. I expect no favour I have cast up my accopt. Beauf. sen. Take you the charge Of the fort Belgarde, your dangers have deserv'd it. Belg. I thanke your excellence, this will keepe e safe yet From being pull'd by the sleeve, and bid remember The thing I wot of. Beau. jun. All that have eyes to weepe, Spare one teare with mee. Theocrin's dead, Montr. Her father too lies breathlesse here, I thinke, Strucke dead with thunder. Cam. 'Tis apparent: ow His carkase smell.
Lan. His face is alter'd to Another colour. Beauf. jun. But here's one retaine Her native innocence, that never ye Call'd downe heavens anger. Beauf. sen. Tis in vaine to mourne For whats past helpe. We will refer bad ma Your sentence to the King: may we make use of This great example, and learne from it, that There cannot be a want of power above To punish murther, and unlawfull love. Exeunt . FINIS. Imprimatur. TO. WY`KES. IAN. 21. 1638.
