18333 99855055 20525
AN APOLOGY OF ENGLISH ARMINIANISME OR A DIALOGVE, betweene Iacobus Arminius, Professour in the Vniuersi∣ty of Leyden in Holland; and Enthusia∣stus an English Doctour of Diuinity▪ and a great Precisian. WHEREIN Are defended the Doctrines of Arminius tou∣ching Freewill, Predestination, and Re∣probation▪ The said doctrines being man∣tained & taught by many of the most Lear∣ned Protestants of England, at this pre∣sent time. WRITTEN By O. N. heertofore of the Vniuersity of Oxford. Quoties volui congregare filios tuos, &c. & noluisti? Matth. 23. Qui se existimat stare, vide at ne cadat. 1. Cor. 10. Permissu Superiorum, 1634.
THE ARGVMENT of the Dialogue. CERTAINE Gentlemen of Qua∣lity, being sent out of England, to negotiate with the States of Holland, touching Publike Af∣faires, one Enthusiastus is appointed (as their Chaplayne) to accompany them. This Enthu∣siastus, being supposed a Doctour of Diui∣nity, made in one of our English Vniuersities, is a Man (as his name importeth) much re∣lying vpon his owne Illuminations frō God, touching matters of Faith, and interpretation of Scripture. He is a great Precisian, and (though learned) much aduerse to the Positi∣ons, and Theses, maintayned by the Armi∣nians. Now this English company lying at the Hage, and hauing conueniency of leasure, Enthusiastus intreateth some of the chiefest of them to accompany him to Leyden, being some few houres iourney from the Hage. He
telleth them, that his meaning is, to dispute with Arminius (Professour in that Vnuiuer∣sity) touching three Questions belieued by the Arminians of England. The Gentlemen ac∣cord to his request. The questions do concerne Freewill, Predestination, and Reproba∣tion. At their comming to Leyden, they fynd Arminius, reading his Publike Lecture in the common Schooles of the Vniuersity. The Lecture ended, and salutations done, Enthu∣siastus acquainteth Arminius with the occa∣sion of himself & his cōpanies repaire thither. Arminius willingly yieldeth thereto. There∣upon they begin a serious disputation touching the former Points of Doctrine, according to their different Tenets of them, in the open Schooles, and eye of the present Auditory. What is the euent of this disputation, the end of the Dialogue relateth. Thus far concerning the fictiō of this Dia∣logue. The Authour whereof supposeth Ar∣minius to be liuing at this present, & to haue read all such Bookes of Protestants, as haue beene written, touching the Questions heere disputed of. All which liberty the Nature of a Dialogue permitteth to any Writer.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the Right Reuerend Lords, the LL. Arch∣bishops of England: And to the right Wor∣shipfull, the Heads, and Maisters of the Col∣ledges of both Vniuersities. MOST Reuerend Lords, and you other Learned men of our Vni∣uersities (vvhose due Panegyricks, and Lauda∣tiues deserue to proceed from a more skillfull Penne, then mine:) you are not to thinke strange, that I make bould to dedicate this my small Trea∣tise to your selues. The reason is manifest, and it is this.
Common Report (and you knovv the vulgar saying, Ʋox populi, vox Dei) though it of∣ten erre in its ovvne agitation, hath neuerthelesse voyced it much throghout this Realme, that diuers of You do entertai∣ne in your iudgments, certai∣ne Positions in doctrine, not long since reuiued by Iacobus Arminius, heertofore the pu∣blike Poofessour of Leyden in Holland: To vvit; 1. Tou∣ching mans hauing Freevvill. 2. That no man is infallibly assu- of his Saluation. 3. That iustify∣ing Fayth may be lost. 4. And finally, that God doth not repro∣bate any man to damnation, vvithout preuision, or reference
to his bad and vvicked vvorkes. Yea some of you haue in your publike Sermōs learnedly de∣fēded certaine of these Points. And of my ovvne knovvledge there are diuers in the Ʋniuer∣sities, most strong in the sayd doctrines. The truth of this then be∣ing so fully acknovvledged, I (vvho do runne one, and the same line of doctrine vvith you heerin) haue vndertaken to vvarrant and make good in these ensuing leaues, the most Ancient, & Orthodoxall Verity of the said Points: & therfore in regard of this assumed At∣tempt, my Ambition hath em∣bouldned this my Dedication.
I presume, that most of you, vvho are Patrones of these▪ Theorems, haue already forti∣fyed your Iudgments (throgh your ovvne▪ Reading) vvith most of the Arguments, pro∣duced in this Treatise; & ther∣fore in this respect, to You it vvill proue lesse necessary, or profitable▪ Neuerthelesse, that▪ those, vvho are Anomalous, and irregular Professours a∣mong you (as I may terme them,) and vvho through the crookednes of their ovvn paths, do tread different steps from You therein, may see, vpon vvhat grounds (both Diuine and Humane) the for∣mer Articles are seated, and▪
consequently hovv incompa∣tible the contrary Tenets are vvith the holy Scriptures; I haue to that end vndertaken this Prouince. The matter is heer deliuered in the forme of a Dialogue, as best comporting vvith the fa∣stidious humour of the present times The Interlocutours are, Arminius himselfe (vvhome I suppose to be novv liuing) & one Enthusiastus an Imagina∣ry English Doctor of Diuinity; a man, sufficiētly learned, but a great Precisian, & a resolute Enemy to the former Positiōs of Arminius. What othervvise this aēry Doctour is, You may casely coniecture; since to you
vvho are learned, his name (as comming from the Greeke Verbe ) is his Character. Novv touching the further fi∣ction of this Dialogue, I refer you to the Argument thereof prefixed before. If this my labour may be∣come seruiceable to any▪ I shal hould my selfe sufficiently re∣compensed: but hovvsoeuer, my cōfort is, that the Highest euer setteth a poise more vpon the intention of the Worker, then vpon the vvorke it selfe: & vvell I am assured, that my▪ intention heerin is Azimous, and pure, as leuelling only at the spirituall good of others. That I partly become Ano∣nymous,
or rather (in outvvard shevv) Fatherlesse to this my ovvne Issue, contēting my self only (as it vvere) to Anagrā∣matize my name vnder tvvo letters, your Ingenuity & Cā∣dour (I hope) vvill pardō. The maine reason of thus masking my self, is this follovving: ad∣mitting once the Author heer∣of to be certainley knovvne, vvhat sallies, and incursions (more against my Person, then against my Treatise) vould the▪ maintainers of the contrary doctrines make vvith their Pens? And hovv vvould they, and their follovvers (being so infinite in number, and vvarranted vvith the streame
& current of the tymes) euen shovvre dovvn vvords (of Dis∣grace, & Cōtumely vpon me▪ So loath I am to stand vvithin the breath of such men. But novv, Reuerend men, I vvill exptiate no further; noi¦ther vvill I distune your eares vvith any longer difcourse; as being more vvilling to spread my selfe in Matter, then in VVords▪ Therefore referring this small vvorke (I could vvish to your Patronage) I hope, to your perusall, I commit You to the Protection of him, vvho is the Protectour of Israel, and do rest, Yours in all dutifull Obseruancy, O. N.
AN APOLOGY OF ENGLISH ARMINIANISME OR A DIALOGVE, VVherein is proued, 1. That Man hath freewill: 2. That no Man is certaine of his owne Saluation: 3. That no man is reprobated, with∣out preuision of his VVorks. The Interlocutors are, Ar∣minius, & Enthusiastus. Enthusiastus. LEARNED Arminius; Now after your Lecture is ended, God saue you. We were loath to interrupt you in the midle thereof. We haue beene at your lodging to enquire for you, and
your Seruāts directed vs to these publi Schooles; assuring vs, that we should fynd you reading at this houre. Glad I am, that it hath so fallen out, that my eares haue beene witnesse thereof. Arminius. Gentlemen. You are all strangers to me, and therefore I know not how to proportion my resalutatiō; but yet I will make bould to vse towards you those words of Holy Writ: Pet. 1. Gratia vobis, & pax multiplicetur. Indeed you haue foūd me performing my Calendary & weekly task of Reading. I could wish that my Lecture had been worthy your Audience. But I pray you Sir (if so I may make bold) what is the occasion of your, and the rest of your Compa∣nies arriuall at this place? Enthusiastus. I will relate to you the Motiue of our comming hither. Take notice then, that whereas his Maiesty of England (whom God long preserue in a most happy gouerment ouer vs) hath sent ouer certaine Knights, and others of Quality here present (and with them
my selfe) to negotiate with the High Lords States of Hollād, touching matters of State: And hauing stayed some wee∣kes at the Hage without effecting any thing (so intricate, and delaying is this  of State busines) & my selfe vnwilling to rauell out weeke af∣ter weeke in doing nothing, haue taken the aduantage of the Vacancy of some few dayes, in cōming with these wor∣thy Knights and Gentlemen, to visit this your Vuiuersity of Leyden (being not past half a dayes iourney off from vs) and particularly your Selfe. Arminius. You are all as welcome, as my po∣wer and ability can affoard. I will shew you our Vniuersity before your depar∣ture; though indeed it must needs ap∣peare in your eyes, but drouping, and of meane esteeme, in regard of your Two of England, famous throughout all Christendome; in respect whereof our poore Academy may stand, but for a foyle. But Syr, if without offence, I would intreate your Name in particu∣lar, seeing discoursing with men, whose names are not knowne, is, as if men
should walke togeather in darknes. Enthusiastus. My name is Enthusiast; and I an a Doctor (though vnworthy) of Diui∣nity, created in our owne Vniuersities. And know you further (Worthy Ar∣minius) that I haue often heard of you in England; though I could wish, that the report of you had taken its rise, and beginning from some other grounds then it doth. That you are learned, w all know, and by this your Lecture, now read, we may rest no lesse assured. But part of your learning resteth (I feare) in maintaining vnwarrantable Asser∣tions, and such as are repugnant to the Word of God. For it is knowne, that (among o∣ther peculiar Doctrines, broachd by you) you teach, with a strong deliuery of your selfe therein, That Man hath Freewill; that Iustifying fayth may be lost, and finally, Vncertainty of Saluation, and Reprobation: Points, which (I much doubt) no good Professour of the Ghos∣pell doth maintayne. And which is th worst, these your Doctrines by me r¦hearsed (vpon all which you briefly
touched euē now in this your Lecture) aue already inuaded (if Report do not vaynely and idly multiply it selfe) the Iudgments of diuers most remar∣kable men in England; and such, who both for learning and places of dignity which they hould, are in our owne E∣uangelic all Spherc, Stars of the greatest Magnitude. Nay the Very stones of our Episcopall and Cathedrall Chur∣ches, as also the walls of the Colledges in our Vniuersities (euen in a speaking silence) do Eccho forth the great hurt by you perpetrated: Hinc illae lachrymae. Furthermore, which I relate with disconsolate sighes and lamentation; Such men in our owne Conntry, who haue imbraced these your doctrines, do among vs in this respect take their De∣nomniation euen from your Name, they being in the vulgar speach styled, for the better distinguishing them from o∣ther more pure mēbers of our Church, Arminians: A demonstration euicting, that your Doctrines are Innouations; since in euery innouation of doctrine the Professours commonly take their Name from the first Coyner of the sa: So true is that saying of Chryso∣stome:
Prout Hom. 33. in Act. A post. Haereliarcha noman, it Secta vocatur: Pardon, yr, this my playnesse, & vnfyled words, I pray you. Now then, seeing I do hould▪ yo former doctrines, as incompatible with the Scriptures; Therefore, I confesse, my chiefe Allectiue of Visiting you, (Arminius) is to enter into a Scholasti∣call Duellisme, or dispute in all Christian feruour and sobriety: Pede pes, densus∣que viro vir, that so, in the sight of these Gentlemen heere present, I may either alter your iudgment, or be by you al∣tered. But why do I intimate in the least orte this later, since my owne Profession doth warrant my attempt, and the Illustrious radiancy of the Truth on my syde doth infallibly pro∣mise me the better of the day? Arminius. Enthusiastus (since it seemes, you so are called) and you worthy Men hither accompanying him, I must tell you all, that the Occasion of your Comming to me is most strange, and vnexpected. Yet seeing euery good Christian is o∣bliged (when iust reason therof is pre∣sented) to giue an account of his fayth
and Religion; Corde Rom.  creditur ad iusti∣ia, ore fit Confessio ad salutem: I shall not, according to my ability, be slow therein. But before you begin, I must put you in mynd, that where you confesse, that diuers of the Chiefest men in your Country (both for learning and Au∣thority) maintayne my former Theses and Positions; this greatly turneth to the honour of my Cause. For why should such eminent and selected Deui∣nes giue their full assent thereto (and this contrary to the present streame & sway of the tymes) but that the do∣ctrines (so intertayned by them) are warrāted with an inexpugnable Truth and Certainty? Againe, where you say, that such Worthy men (among you) take their denomination from me; and conse∣quently, and by implication you brand me with the odious Name of an Arch-Heretike; my answere to you shalbe in all candour and sobriety (for I am vn∣willing by way of retaliation to con∣uitiate you, or to bandy words of dis∣grace, especially in my owne Vniuersi∣ty, and you being but a stranger, since
this would be accounted but Corid∣nisme and Rusticity) that I am assured▪ you cannot iustly throw vpon me any such imputation. My reason is this▪ They only from whom others take the appellation for matters of fayth, are to be reputed for Arch Heretikes, who did first dogmatize, & teach Opinions in fayth neuer before heard, as belie∣ued by the Church of God: Such were Arius, Eutiches, Pelagius, Nstorius, and some others. Now if it can be made good (as I am assured it can) that the former Tenets by you mentioned, and by me belieued, be concordant to th sacred Scriptures; and were with an vnanimous consent belieued by the an∣cient Church of Christ; then I iustify, that the hatefull name of Arch-Here∣tike, cannot in any sort be appropriated vnto me. But seing you are determined to en∣ter into a serious dispute (as you say) touching the former Articles; I would willingly know, what Method you in∣tend to keep herein? That is, where yo will begin, and whether your selfe wil first oppose and obiect, or answere? th choyse whereof, for the greater satisfa∣ction
of these Gentlemen (your worthy Associates) I freely giue to you. And lastly, I would know, whether you would rather dispute priuatly or pu∣blikely. Yf Priuatly, then if it please you and these Gentlemen to accompa∣ny me to my house, you shall enioy (if nothing els, yet) better priuacy of dis∣course. Enthusiastus. O no. Our dispute shalbe open and publike, I meane in these your owne publike Schooles; This shalbe the place of our Conflict, that so in the Theater and view, not only of these English Gētlemen, comming with me, but also of this Presence (your owne daily An∣ditory) you may disauow that fayth, to the which you haue hitherto beene so pitifully enthralled. Here within these Walls the Hurt hath bene committed, and within these walles, I trust by dint of Argument, and by assistance of the Highest (who euer affoardeth his pecu∣liar Illuminations, to his Elect, of which number I am ascertayned, to be ne) to force you to disclayme from your former Positions, and thereby
partly to repayre the dmage. Yet before we come to dispute, you must giue me leaue (therby to affoard  more full passage to my griefe) to tell you, that I much feare, your defence of these interwounding▪ Controuer∣sies, proceeds in you from a thirsty de∣sire to be much spoken of by the ton∣gue of Fame; & so to become Vir The∣tralis, as placed vpon the stage of the Worlds Eye. The which I am the ra∣ther induced to thinke; since you are not content to confyne your said do∣ctrines, within the compasse of these Walles, to your owne Auditory; But withall, to diuulge them in your dis∣coursing Papers; the immateriall (wel∣lings of your Pen. I will not say, how for better, but I may well say, how lesse hurtfull (in res∣pect of others) it is, to be a secret Adia∣phorist, or Neutrall in Religion (so keeping his poyson to himselfe) then with a certaine Magistrality & assum Authority to frame & mould such do∣ctrines, which stand so aduerse to th Word of the Lord, as that I may iustly style thē to be Hyper-hereticall▪  cēding the nature of ordinary
Now then, Arminius, you being the Architect of such strāge doctrines, the beliefe whereof doth threaten an inter∣minable perdition to the belieuers; it is euident that your Sinne in Teaching is farre more reprouable, then it is in your followers in their Belieuing. The reason being, in that, wheras the igno∣rant Sectary meerly Priuatiuely belie∣ueth not that, which is True▪ the lear∣ned (such as you are) belieueth with a formed and positiue Fayth, (to speake in a restrayned sense) that, which is false. I heere passe ouer, with a gentle touch, how in defence of your former doctrines (to the dishonour of your owne Cause) you ouer neerely inter∣league with the Papists, who (as it should seeme by some of their Bookes) equally maintayne with you the said Paradoxes. But I will stay my selfe from launcing further in my Reproualls, hauing paid in these my speaches some Tribute and Duty to the Truth, and to my owne feruour: Psal . Zelus domus tu comedit me. Arminius. This your long (I will not say, te∣dious
Discourse, discouereth,  your Name well comports with your owne comportment: but you may take notice, that my Scene is not, fruitlesly to wast the tyme in vaunting Words▪ the froath of speach. Where you say, that the defence of my doctrines riseth from a certaine Vē∣tuosity, and windy desire of Prayse▪ It seemes, you tast euery thing through your owne enuenomed spitle; but I do assure you (to speake in my owne de∣fence) I do little prize this poore weake breath of Mens mouthes. Where you charge me, with inter-leaging (as you call it) with the Papists; I reply heerto. True it is, that the Papists do hold the sayd Articles with vs, but not with the same Conditions (I take it) and in the same manner. Agayne, admit there were no dis∣parity betweene them and vs, tou∣ching the belieuing; yet what doth this inforce? Can it be inferred, that be∣cause the Papists belieue them; There∣fore we ought not to belieue them? Most inconsequently inferred; since by this forme of arguing, we should not belieue that there are any Scriptures▪ that
Christ dyed for mans Redemption; that there are three. Persons, and but one God; seeing the Papists do belieue these Articles. But Syr, be not lauish of time, but without futher surpluzage of vnne∣cessary discourse (which doth but ob∣tund mens eares) hasten to dispute: And what I shall be able to produce. eyther in defence of my owne Positiōs, or in assaulting of yours (though these two points be partly coincident, & in∣terueyre the one the other) the Euent will proue. Therefore I intreat you to beginne. And Gentlemen if it please you, you may take your Seates. Enthusiastus▪ Well then: we will proceed ther∣to. And seeing you leaue it to my Ele∣ction, I will first dispute and obiect, & will produce most Vnanswerable Te∣stimonies of sacred Writ, deliuered (without the least doubt) by me in the intended sense of the Holy Ghost; Spiritus, vbi Ioan▪ 3. vult, spirat. And I will begin with the Article of Freewill; in that the Question of Freewill is a Car∣dinall, & supreme Point, being indeed the hynge, whereupon the other Que∣stions
following by necessary infe∣rence, do rest, and relye. Arminius. I like well of your Method. And you say truly, in calling the Question of Freewill a supreme Point at this pre∣sent, since it being once proued that man wanteth Freewill, it the followeth, that there is a certainty of our Reproba∣tion, Election, or Predestination. As also on the contrary part, if it can be de∣monstrated, that man hath Freewill; then of necessity from thence may be infer∣red, that there is no certainty of Pre∣destination, or Reprobation. But now to come to the subiect, of which in the first place you vndertake to dispute, I hold it expedient, that we first both agree of the definition of Freewill, and of other cautions necessa∣rily conducing to euery act, flowing from Freewill; the which being set downe afore, and circumstanced with due restrictions, and so acknowledged by vs both, my presaging thoughts foretell me, that you will but idly di∣uerberate the ayre, in alleadging the most of your Scripturall Authorities;
since the Answeres to them you shall fynde to be vertually inuolued in the said definition, cautions, and explica∣tions. And first to begin with the defini∣tion. The Deuines Aug. in Enhi∣rid. c. 0. do defyne Free∣will to be: A faculty of Reason and the Will, by the which Good is chosen, through Gods grace assisting; or Euill, through the absence of the same Grace. Now for the better explication of this Definition, we are first to vnderstand, that Freewill can choose euill of it selfe; but good, through the assistance and cooperation of Gods grace. Secondly, that Freewill belongeth only to an Intelligent and Rationall Nature; to wit, to God, Angels, and men. Thirdly, that Freewill is exercised only about Meanes conducing to an End, and not about the End it selfe. Fourthly, that Freewill consisteth in choosing one thing before another; and consequently, where there is no di∣uersity of thinges, there the Freedome of the will cannot be exercised. Fiftly, that the freedome of will requyreth a freedome, not only from Coaction and constraint, but also from all Necessity; so as the will is with no necessity caried
o choose this rather thē that, but  choose whether it selfe will. Thus much for the greater illustra∣tion of the definition of Freewill▪ an what Freewill is in its owne Nature Now where you say, that you will be∣gin with producing in the first pla your Testimonies from the Holy Scri∣ptures, (as iustly they deserue the first place, and all precedency) for the im∣pugning of Freewill; therefore as aboue I intimated, I will set downe afore, o∣ther certaine, true, and acknowledged Cautions, which I trust being truly ballanced, will obtund and blunt the edge and force of the said Authorities▪ as being alleadged through meere d∣tortion, and misapplication of them. Of these cautionary Annotations, the first is, that the liberty of the will doth not exclude the cooperation, and helpe of God; nor Gods working ex∣cludes Freewill. Seeing, though the coo∣peration of God be euer presupposed▪ yet it is in our power to choose this or that, & therefore that sentence is most true; God worketh all our workes, but yet not without vs, that is, not without our free Consent thereto.
Secondly, we are to conceaue, that God in cooperating with vs in our Actions, worketh either fficienter (as the School-Deuines do speake) yet this by the interueniency of some forme, im∣printed by God in our wills, to wit, by o wring into vs his Grace, by which e enclineth our will to good Actions; or els God worketh in our wills Obiecti∣uè, & efficaciter, yet so as this efficacy proceedeth not so much from the force of the persuasion of God in vs, as from the disposition of our will, the which disposition God foreseeth. This is meant, when God propoundeth any thing through internall persuasion, & that he seeth the will is apt to consent thereto. And Gods working in our wils, by eyther of these two former wayes, is no hinderance to the Free∣dome of our will, since (admitting ey∣ther of these kinds of Gods working within vs) the Will still remaynes free to choose this, or that; or to choose, or not to choose at all. The last Animaduersion may be, that there is great difference betweene Freedome of Election, and freedome of Execution. The first is euer necessary to
which one both  and ad ∣ction to do, and y  freedome the Will is in  fstrated, or ∣ned thereby. Now these Cautions ∣ing promisd, you may ( begin at your pleasu, to draw y Authorities out of God holy  for the impugning of . Enthusiastus. All these your Paraphr acti all obs∣uations I allow well of, they b ounded partly in Diuinity, and par in force of Nature: notwithstanding hope to produce such are and ∣uing passages of Scripture, as throu their euidency, they cannot by  meanes be deord; and through th force and strength they cannot be  wered. And first I alleadge that text,  it is said: Ioan. . No man can come to me,  the Father, that sent me, draw him. And  Apostle inclcateth the same thing : . Cor. 3 We are not sufficient of our  to thinke any thing, as of our selues;
at say you to these texts, before we leadge any other? Arminius. I reply, that all these places are il∣trate (as making nothing against ) from one of the Cautions a∣ue expressed. For we teach, that the edome of the Will is not by Nature do any good worke, but only by : therefore in that one commeth Christ, this is effected by the Will of , cooperating with the Grace of , and not otherwise. But (Enthusiastus) in my iudgement  beene more conuenient to haue  borne the alleaging of this first , seeing Chrysoston introduceth  Manichees, (who denyed Freewill) eadging this text in defence of their , and then himselfe answereth  these wordes: Chry∣ost. in Ioannem Hom. 45 versus  No man commeth , except my Father, who sent me, draw . Here the Manichees ryse vp, conten∣g by testimony of this text, that we can thing of our selues; but this taketh not
away our freewill, but sheweth that it u∣deth Gods help. Now I hold i a blemi to you, to compart with thse, ( were condemned in the Fimit Church) not only in their doctrin but also in their proofes of the said do∣ctrines, since it implyeth, that the be weapons, wherewith you impugne th truth, are borrowed from the confess Enemyes of the Truth. The second passage alleadged, by r∣tortion makes wholy against you, an in behalfe of me, for it admit th, th we haue sufficiency: Only the A post teacheth vs, that our sufficiency  thinke any good thing, is not of ou¦selues, that is, by force of Nature; b through the help and a yd of God,  is, by force of Gods Grace assisti mans will therein. And according here to M. Perkins thus writth: In his reformed Catholike pag. 7.  God commandeth men to repent, at the sam time by his grace he enableth them both  will, and to desire to repent, as also  to repent. To the third text. The answere  to is▪ grounded vpon the former Ca∣tion, or Annotation: for God worked in vs both to will, and to  plash
his Grace, but he worketh not this without our owne cooperation therin. Now Gods working, & mans working are two different thinges: neither are they in themselues incompatible, but may stand together. This is necessarily euicted out of the words immediatly aforegoing in the same place: With feare and trembling worke your saluation. And therfore the foresaid M. Perkins truly thus writeth: In his reformed Cath. pag. 14. vid. p 16. Mans freewill con∣curres with Grace, as a Co-worker; and being mooued by Grace, it acteth, and moueth it selfe: A poynt so euident, that Austin himselfe answereth this very text in these wordes: Aug. tom. 7. de gratia & libero ar∣bitrio. c.  Non quia dixit &c. Not because it is said, it is God that worketh in you both to will and to accomplish, that ther∣fore he may be thought to take away free∣will from man &c. Thus far of these pla∣ces, which receaue one and the same answere. By this now (Enthusiastus) you may see, how rouingly they are alleaged by you, against the doctrine of Freewill. But to these you may also range (if you will) these following texts of Scri∣pture, produced by diuers for the im∣pugning of Freewill, they receauing
their full satisfaction from the answer giuen to these last. The Texts are these▪ Isa. 26. Thou O Lord hast wrought all our workes in vs. And againe▪ Matt. 10. One sparrow shall not fall vpon the ground without your Fa∣ther. And yet more: Who worketh all things after the Counsell of his own will besides the like Text in Rom. c. 11, & 1. Cor. 12. And lastly, where it is said. 3. Reg. . Let our harts so encline to thee, that they may keepe thy commandements. Enthusiastus. Well (Arminius) if this my first encounter hath not beene forcible i∣nough to batter downe the walls of your innouations; yet I trust my se∣cond charge shall proue more power∣full, or rather irresistable: what then say you to these following Comments of Texts (for so in regard of their per∣spicuity, I may rather tearme them, then Texts themselues) as where it is said: Ierem. 10. I know that the way of man is not in himselfe, neither is it in man to walke, or direct his steps. And againe: Prou. 20. The steps of man are ruled by the Lord, how can a man then vnderstand his owne way? And more: Prou. 16. The hart of man purposeth his
way, but the Lord directeth his steps. La∣stiy: (to omit some others for breuity) Prou. 1. The preparations of the Hart are in man, but the answere of the tongue is in the Bord. See you not (Arminius) how these Texts (as so many murthering Pieces) do play vpon the weake fort of mans Freewill? Arminius. Good Enthusiastus, I partly pitty you, to see your iudgment thus sealed vp rather with preiudice, then cleared with force of proofe. For here againe I recurre (as to my Asylum, or Sanctuary) to the state of the question, and the Gautions aboue expressed, and by vs both acknowledged. For there we learne, that there is great disparity bet∣weene mans Freewill, and the execution of that, of which the Freewill maketh choyse to will. The Execution of the thing, which we will, is not euer in our power; and this only (though to our purpose meerely impertinent) these former sacred Scriptures do euict▪ but the freedome of the will (which is only in question betweene vs) they do not at all touch, much lesse ouerthrow.
Yea which is more, some of these ¦ry Texts by you vrged, do rather proue the freedome of the will (so often time) it happens, that a man finds a weapon, by which another wounds him:) for where it is said; The preparations of the Hart are in man; And againe: The Hart of man purposeth his way &c▪ what other construction can these receaue, then that man through the freedome of his owne will prepares his hart, and pur∣poseth his way; though the Execution & actuall performance of those points are not euer in his owne power? Ther∣fore we must remember▪ that only to will, and not to will, (and no actually to performe the thing willed, or not wil∣led) is the true Obiect of Freewill. Thus far (Enthusiastus▪) where you fynd your selfe deceaued in producing these former passages of Holy Writ, since they in no sort proue any thing a∣gainst the true Tenet of Freewill, nei∣ther immediatly, and expessedly, nei∣ther by any Inferentiall deduction▪ so certaine it is, that your murthering pieces (of which you afore aūted) are charged but with certaine Paper-bul¦lets of strayned and wrested Authori∣ties.
But if it please you, proceed fur∣ther in this your offensiue war; I meane in your assault against Freewill, & I shal vse the best meanes of defence, I may. Arminius. I do assure you, your answeres are vnexpected, and make my mynd (I will not say my iudgement) a little to fall. and let downe. But I will proceed fur∣ther: for admitting, that the former Texts do but idly diuerberate the ayre, (as aboue you said) for want of true application, yet if there be but any One Text of Scripture, which in the true construction thereof doth clearly impugne the doctrine of Freewill, then is your cause wholy become prostrate, and leuelled with the ground. These then other passages I vrge. As first: 1. Reg. 10. Part of the army went with him (viz. Saul) whose harts God had touched. In like sort: Prou.  The Kings hart is in the hand of the Lord, he turneth it whithersoe∣uer it shall please him. To these places di∣uers others might be ranged, as where it is said: Ezech. 36. I will giue vnto you a new hart, and I will make; that you shall walke in my precepts. And that other passage: Psal. 18. In¦cline
my hart to thy testimonies. The li text whereto, is in the Booke of the . Reg. 8. Kings. Now from all these it vna∣uoydably is inferred, that it is God a∣lone without any concurrence of our selues, which worketh all good in vs: so cleare are these sacred Testimonies for the taking away of all Freewill in man. Arminius. Enthusiastus; It is the true applica∣tion of Scripture, and not a gallantry of vanting wordes, which must ouer∣come me in this question: And there∣fore as to the Texts aboue by you alled∣ged, so also to these last the answere is potētially included in the former stae of the question of Frewill, and in the annexed Annotations. For it is aboue expressed, that God worketh in all our wils, either for the desiring of any thing, or for the flying from any thing; but yet he so worketh, without any im∣peachment to the liberty of our will: for though God doth worke in vs, yea sometimes infallibly▪ yet our Freewill is in no sort end angered thereby; the rea∣son hereof being (as is aboue intima∣ted)
in that the infallibility ryseth not from the vehemency of Gods motion, but from the preuision, and foresight of the readines of the will, to concurre with his inspiration. For God encly∣neth not the hart of man by forcing it but only by inuiting by his inspira∣tions: yet so, as that it is in the power of the Will to consent, or not consent to Gods inspirations. But certaine it is, that Gods preuision, and freewill are compatible, and the one is no bar to the other. Now, apply this Annotation to these last texts of Scripture, and you shall fynd how easily your supposed difficulty touching the said Authori∣ties, and mans Freewill, is loosed and dissolued. Enthusiastus. Well (Arminius) if I should grant, that for the present, I could not reply to your answeres giuen against all the former diuine Authorities, (which ad∣mitting, I am rather to ascribe it to my owne defect, then to any defect in the said Authorities, for prooffe of the point intended:) Yet what answere can you shape to these seuerall Texts of
Scripture, by which we are taught, the we are dead to sinne, and consequently that mans will is euer languide▪ an faynt (through want of power an freedome) to rayse it selfe to any spiri∣tuall actiōs? as where it is said: Ephes. 2 You▪ who were dead in trespasses and sinnes &c▪ And agayne we thus read: Ibidem. When we were dead by sinne &c. Arminius. The transparency of this obiection euen an ordinary eye can pierce; for a the Text sayth: We are dead by sinne; so also it addeth in the places alleaged▪ that we are quickned in Christ. Which ad∣dition importeth, that though of our selues we are not able to performe any▪ spirituall actions; yet Christ hath so quickned vs with his preuenting Grace, as that therby we are made able to pro∣duce the said spirituall actions: & thus▪ this quickening in Christ, implyeth only an infusion of Gods Grace, (which I willingly acknowledge) but not a ta∣king away of the freedome of man will: so wildly (as I may say) these two passages of Scripture are shot by you▪ still glancing vpon one▪ point or▪ othe
impertinent to the controuersy venti∣lated betweene vs. But I pray you (Enthusiastus) proceed further in your Scripturall proofes. Enthusiastus. I must confesse, that the most for∣cing authorities of sacred Scripture, which either I, or my partners can al∣leadge for the impugning of Freewill, are already drawne out by me. And though some other Texts might be in∣sisted vpon, yet I foresee the answere to them in your iudgment, might be ap∣propriated out of the former Animad∣uersions. But (Arminius) grant, for the tyme, that the Scripture doth not expresly and articulately condemne the doctrine of▪ Freewill for Heresy; doth it therefore follow, that the doctrine therof is Orthodoxall? Most inconse∣quently inferred. The Turkish Reli∣gion, and the many Heresies registred by Epiphanius, Austin, Ierome, and o∣ther Fathers of those early tymes, are not punctually and literally condem∣ned by Gods Holy Writ (for hardly could they be condemned particulerly by the Scripture, they rising many ages
after the Scripture was written) an yet no man will from thence conclude that those doctrines, or Religions  true. The like we may say heere touching the doctrine of Freewill. For▪ the truth of the point hereis, that a doctrine o Article of fayth is to receaue its war¦rant, not because the Scripture dot not in particuler anathematize the said doctrine; it by omission speaking no¦thing thereof at all: but the said do∣ctrine receaues its authority, in that  receaueth from the Scripture certain euident and affirmatiue proofes for th defence of the said doctrine in particu∣ler. Therfore (Arminius) except yo be able (as I presume you are not) to fortify, and establish the Doctrine of Freewill with some cleare, euident, and vnanswerable Texts of Scripture, your cause is nothing aduantaged, thoug the former diuine passages aboue pro∣duced, do not so vnauoydably (as  first perhaps expected they should) con∣fute the doctrine of Freewill. Arminius. This which you speake of the Scri∣ptures
passing ouer in silence any do∣ctrine, or confirming the contrary do∣ctrine by euident proofes, is in part true, I grant, though it be alleaged by you at this present meerly as a subter∣fugious euasion, because you are not able▪ to produce so much as One Text, to impugne our doctrine withall. Though at other times you, and yours do cry out with great exaggeration in wordes, that the doctrine of Freewill is most repugnant to the Holy Scripturs; the maintayners therof being deadly wounded with euery splinter of the se∣uerall passages thereof: so variable and seuerall is your comportment herein, at seuerall tymes. Now whereas you say, it is more pe∣culiarly incumbent vpon me, affirma∣tiuely to fortify the doctrine of Free∣will by euident Texts of Scripture, or ls the doctrine therof to be abando∣ed, as false and erroneous: I do agree with you herein, and am ready to for∣tify the sayd doctrine with choaking and Vnanswerable places of those di∣uine writings, if so your selfe hath al∣ready finished your Scene of obiecting.
Enthusiastus. I will presently surrender the fu¦ction of Opponēcy to you. For I gran that there ought to be according to  methode of Schooles certaine vicissit des & alternations of turnes betwee the parties disputant. Neither is it  reason iustifiable, that the one  should be forced to maintayne only defensiue, and neuer an offensiue But before I end, I must tell you, th the chiefe Doctor of Christs Chur since the Apostles (I meane Austin)  most strong in the deniall of Freewill For thus he writeth: Lib. 6. de Genes. ad literam. cap. 15. Conditoris  luntas, rerum necessitas est. The will and t mynd of the Creator, is the Necessity  thinges. Againe: Vbi su∣pra. c. 17. That is necessarily  come to passe, which God willeth, and they are truly hereafter to be, which God fore¦seeth. And lastly, omitting some othe passages; In En∣chirid. c. 30. Libero arbitrio malè  homo, & se perdidit, & seipsum. Man (me¦ning our first parent) by vsing Freewill badly, did both loose therby himselfe,  Freewill.
Arminius. How easily is the cloud heere dis∣elled. For the meaning of the two first laces is, that what God will haue to ome to passe, is infallibly to come to  yet speaking of mans actions, it mmeth to passe with the freedome of mans will: For God doth not destroy Nature first created by him, but will, that euery thing should be effected in ch manner, as best sorteth to the Na∣ture of the thing. To the third place, I answere, That  first Father is said to haue lost Free∣will; because by his fall the Freewill of man was made more feeble, and faynt. For that Austins meaning is not, that Freewill was absolutely lost by Adam (as though it neuer after were to be in rerum natura) appeareth from those other wordes: & se perdidit. For Adam did not loose himselfe, by any extin∣guishment of himselfe, or not after be∣ing; but because Adam thereby was ade far more worse, his Freewill being othing so vigorous, and actiue, as ore it was.
Enthusiastus. I will not much labour, in seeki to eneruate these your answeres,  they shall passe, as matters hanging  suspense. But there is one difficul drawne from force of reason, which eu arresteth my iudgment, from giui assent to your doctrine. And this is,  great repugnancy, which is between Gods foreknowledge, and Freewill: For  God do foresee such a thing will b then certainly it must be: and if ce¦tainly it must be, where then is ma Freewill in doing, or not doing the sai thing? Arminius. This doubt is partly aboue v¦foulded: but to answere more particu∣lerly thereto. The prescience and fore¦sight of God is most certaine, and  that it importeth no necessity of thing to come, is thus proued, euen from  authority of Austin, who thus disp¦teth. De li∣bero arhi∣trio l. . c. . Yf the foreknowledge  God do impose a necessity to things f¦ture, this falleth out, either as it is  sutely a foreknowledge, or els because it
in particuler the foreknowledge of God. Not the first, because it would vpon the same ground follow, that not only the oreknowledge of God, but the fore∣knowledge of man should impose the ike necessity to thinges. But this later point is most false: for example, if it were reuealed by diuine power to a man, that the next day it would rayne, yet this mans foreknowledge is not the cause of the rayne, and yet no doubt it would rayne, but no lesse contingen∣tly, then if the mā had not foreknowne the same at all. Neither the foreknowledge, or preui∣sion of God, I meane, as it is particular∣ly of God, imposeth any necessity to thinges. And the proofe hereof is this: As God foreknoweth, not only what man hereafter will do; so also, he fore∣knoweth what himselfe hereafter will doe. And yet Gods prescience doth not force God to do that, which he will do. Neither therefore vpon the same rea∣son, doth his foreknowledge force man in his actions. Againe: God did foresee the fall of Adam; and yet in the iudgmēt of the chiefest Deuines, Adam had Free∣will before his fall.
Enthusiastus. But how commeth it to passe, tha those thinges, which are certainly for  knowne, haue euer the euent, when yet they are effected contingently (as you say) and may in that respect not be a all? Arminius. The reason heerof is: Because wh foreknoweth a thing heerafter to b effected, doth in his vnderstanding pre∣curre, or preuent the effecting of the thing, and beholdeth it as done, be∣fore it be done: but that which is done cannot be vndone; although it be effe∣cted voluntarily, or contingently. But to conclude this poynt; the concor∣dancy of Gods prescience with Free∣will is so acknowledged, euen by th Deuines, as that D. Willet thus plain∣ly writeth heerof: D. VVillet in Synops. p. 809. God foreseeth, but willeth not sinne. Enthusiastus. Indeed there is no such repugnan∣cy after the true ballancing of the dif∣ficulty, betweene Gods prouision and
Freewill, as at the first it appeareth to be; whereby we may learne, that that sen∣tence is true: Secūd cogitatio∣nis, pru∣dentiores. . But I do find a farre greater labour to reconcile Gods Cooperation with mans Freewill, so, as they may both stand to∣geather, and not exile and banish one the other. For since God hath decreed from all eternity, what shalbe, or what shall not be, I see not how any place can heer be left for Freewill. Arminius. O (Enthusiastus) you must not mea∣sure the Mysteries of Christianity by the false yard of Naturall reason, or mās capacity: For though demonstratiuely we were not able to reconcile Gods coo∣peration & Freewill, yet neither of them are therefore to be denyed, if so ech of them receaue their particuler war∣rant from the word of God. Notwithstanding for your greater satisfaction (Enthusiastus) I will set downe one way (among others) by which in the iudgement of the greatest Deuines, Gods cooperation and mans freedome of Will are reconciled. For thus they teach: To wit, that the Diuine
Cooperation doth beare it selfe, with re∣ference only to the Effect, and not to the cause: whereby is vnderstood, that the concourse of God doth not determine our will, neither doth it worke vpon the will; but flowes only into the Effect produceth the Effect in the same mo∣ment, in the which it is produced by our will: And yet the same Effect could not be produced, if eyther Gods Cooperation, or Mans Will were wan∣ting. They illustrate this sentence from two, which beare a great stone, the which stone the of one them could not carry: neither of those two men giueth force to the other, nor impelleth the o∣ther, and it is in the free choyce of them both to leaue this burden. The like fal∣leth out in the Cooperation of God, and Mās-Wil in the  thing. And  this point: on∣ly before I end, I must tell you, that it seemeth strange to me, to obserue your humility (as I may terme it) in descending to the former▪ Arguments, drawne from humane Authorities and naturall reason: Seeing diuers of your iudgement in the Question of Freewill, and the inferentiall Conclusions resul∣ting
from thence, will in great vendi∣tation & brauery of speach vndertake to proue all such their assertions only from the sacred word; scorning with a supercilious looke all other kind of proofes deduced, either from the Fa∣thers, frō Naturall Reason, or from any other humane authority whatsoeuer. Enthusiastus. Well (Arminius) I see heere, what the iudgement of the chiefest Deuines are in this point. But now I will pro∣ceed no further in producing any more kinds of proofes; It then resteth vpon you, to vndergoe the like labour, by prouing from the Scriptures and other Authorities, the Doctrine of Freewill: Begin then at your pleasure. Arminius. I imbrace willingly that imposed labour; in the prosecuting whereof, I will draw my first proofes from Rea∣son; that done, I will next ryse to hu∣man Authorities; and lastly I will fir∣mely entrench, or anchour my cause vpon the infallible authority of Gods sacred Writ; thus by ascending by de∣grees
in proofes, I will consequently as¦cend in the weight of the proofes, pro∣duced from the said Authorities. And to begin. My first argument  shall be this: Let vs Au∣gust. l. 14. de vera Religio∣ne. take away by suppo∣sall Free will from man; then with all we take away all punishment due for perpetrating of Sinne; and rewards for the exercise of Ver∣tue. But this last point stands not with the practise, not only of Priuate men, but of all good Common wealths, who euer retaliate Vertue with rewards, and Vico with punishments. Enthusiastus. This your first argument is in my iudgment, but diaphorous, & transpa∣rent. For So ans∣wereth Caluin l. Instit. 2. c. 5. it followeth not, that man should not be punished, if he hath not Freewill; the reason heereof being, in that the punishment is due to the of∣fence, which offence is yet remayning in vs, and indeed taketh its whole em∣nation from our selues. Arminius. Howsoeuer (Enthusiastus) you all∣uiate and sleighten the force of this ar∣gument, yet is it insisted vpon by Chry∣sostome,
Ierome, and finally is grounded vpon force of Reason. Now more par∣ticulerly to answere here to, I say, that in your Answere you offend in the Pa∣ralogisme, or Fallacy in Logick, com∣monly called Petitio Principij, since you assume that as granted, which yet is in controuersy. For you in your dispute do presume, that the fault doth remaine and flow from vs, although we be for∣ced through necessity to the working thereof, and that it is not in our power to auoyde Sinne; so fouly you see you are mistaken in this your seeming ans∣were. But I will proceed to a second Argument. Exyle Aug. l. de Vera relig. . 14. and banish from man Free∣will,. exyle with all, all kinds of Counsels, and precepts among men, as Exhortations, and persuasions to Vertue, all prayse due to the workers thereof; as also on the contrary side all de hortations and rebukes touching the perpetrating of Vice and Impiety; since to what end tend these exhortations, persua∣sions, reprehensions, prccepts &c. if so men can not do otherwise, then they doe? Enthusiastus. I answere, So answe∣reth Cal∣uin l. a.  5. That dehortations and
reproualls, or obiurgations are very profitable, though man wanteth Free∣will; since they are deseruedly applyed to the wicked, as a scourge to their cō∣sciences in this life; and as a testimony in the next life, wherby they rest ine∣cusable at the last day in the sight of God. In the like sort, Exhortations, &c. are applyed to the Elect, to the end, that as by the inward spirit they are il∣luminated, that so externally they may be stirred vp to the hearing of the word: so by these out ward meanes they may be more prepared for the recea∣uing of the grace of God. Arminius. Heere a gayne the second time (En∣thusiastus) you fall into the former ditch (blush you not thereat?) I meane you commit the foresayd Elench of Petitie principij. For you heer agayne take as granted, that that is truly and properly Sinne, which is necessarily committed by man: but this is the mayne contro∣uersy betweene you and vs: for we e∣ternally deny, that what of necessity is committed, that can be properly Sin. Now out of this your Hypothesis & sup∣posall,
you Ideate, and frame to your selfe those ary and imaginary Ends, where unto are directed (as you say) exhortations, dehortations, prayse, dis∣prayie, precepts, and the like, towards the Elect, and the wicked. For it is most certaine▪ that reprehensions, and corre∣ptions cannot be a scourge to the con∣science of those, who want Freewill. Further more in confirmation of this Argument, I demand, why we vse not to Infants, and mad-men ohortations to Vertue, and dissuasions from vice, but only to men of rype age, and such as be in perfect state in their wits? No o∣ther reason can be giuen heereof, but that Infants and Mad-men (after the manner of beasts) are caried with a na∣turall instinct, and innate impetuosity, neyther can they otherwise worke; whereas men of rype age, and enioying their wits, do chuse through freedome of Will, what they will doe, and is in their power, if they will, not to chuse at all. This Argument aboue is so forci∣ble and pressing, as that I fynd it vsed by L▪ de vera re∣g c. 14. Austin. But I will proceede for∣ward. My third Argument. Au∣gust. vbi supra. Either
Sinne is necessary, or voluntary. If necessa∣ry, then it is no Sinne, and then by this▪ Sinne should be no Sinne, (which is im∣possible to be: If Voluntary, then may Sinne be auoyded, and consequently man hath Freewill; as being a Creature, in whose power it is to sinne, or not to sinne. Enthusiastus. I peremptorily deny the inference▪ that Sinne if it be necessary, is no Sinne▪ For the So Caluin vbi supra. Diuell doth euer necessarily▪ worke euill, and yet he sinneth; as on the contrary, side, the Angels & Saints▪ of Heauen do necessarily▪ worke well▪ and yet their workes are truly good. Arminius. This your Answere is most lan∣guid and weake, for this enfuing Rea∣son: The Angels and the Deuill, with reference to the last end, haue not free∣dome of Will▪ to wit, as it is free from Necessity; but only as it is free from coction, and constraint. Neuertheles, with reference & respect to the Meanes▪ their freedome of Will is free, eue from Necessity, seeing they doe Many
thinges, which are in their power not to doe; and for beare to doe some thin∣ges, which they may (if they will) doe. And in doing of these thinges the Di∣uels do truly sinne, and Angels worke a laudable worke; yet can neither the punishment due to the one, or essentiall reward due to the other increase ther∣by, seeing both of their states are in ter∣mino, and therein al their workes do be∣long eyther to their damnation, or e∣ternall felicity. But to leaue this point as sufficiently solued, (and the rather, seeing it was explaned aboue in the de∣finition of Freewill; to wit, that Freewill hath reference to Media, and not to finis; to wit, not to the end, but to meanes conducing to the End) I will hasten to my last Reason, which I hould as a sea∣ling argument; since the force of it is euen charactered in ech mans Soule, by the fynger of God himself. We read, euen in great and le∣gible letters, written in the booke of  our owne Consciences, that before such tyme, as our Soule (through daily custome of Sinne, obliterating wholy her fayre impressions stamped in Bap∣tisme) is become a Slaue and thrall to
Sinne, when we through frailty do fall into Sinne, in the tyme of temptation, we often shew great reluctation and re∣stance to commit it, and by our happy resistance we fynd a secret ioy in our Soules: as on the other syde, by giuing our vnfortunate assent thereto, we are thereby touched with an inward re∣morse, and prouoked to a vertuous an∣ger (as I may say) against our selues. Now, what do this secret fretting and grudging, and this worme of remorse onforce, but that it was wholy in our owne power to resist our giuing of as∣sent to such wicked temptations? This is the Lecture, which euery man liuing reades in the opened booke of his owne actions. And therefore I confi∣dently conclude, that it may be ac∣counted almost miraculous, that a man fynding this proceeding of the Soule in morall Actions, I meane touching Vice or Vertue, (his owne experience dictating the same to him) should ne∣uertheles be persuaded, that he hath not freedome of Will. And with this, I will passe towards other kinds of Proofes.
Enthusiastus. Well (Arminius) I hould this your lst Reason not to be altogeather ne∣glected, since (as you say) our owne ex∣perience is otherwise able to chek our iudgment therein. But I pray you ryse vp to other kinds of proofes. Arminius. I will▪ And the next head, from whence I will draw my proofes, shall be from the Confessions of the learned Protestants, diuers of which euen ouer∣borne with multitude of conuincing Authorities, haue in the closure of all, abandoned your doctrine herein, and entertayned our Positiue Article of mans Freewill so as here (Enthusiastus) I may say in the words of Holy Writ, Luc. 19. De ore tuo te iudico: I conuince you from the authority of such men, whom your selues do (and most deseruedly▪) highly esteeme. And first may occurre Castalio, who reprehendeth Beza himselfe for his corrupt translating of the first Chapter of S. Iohn. v. 12. To wit; As many as re∣ceaued him, he gaue power to be made the
Sonnes of God; which Beza trāslated, dig∣nity. Castalio his words are these:  is c. 1. v. . In de∣fens. Translat. pag. 183. Pulcherrimum  que momenti locum deprauat &c. Th fayre and forcing place of the first of  Beza depraeth, thus conuerting it: As m∣ny as receaued him, he gaue them dignity  be made the Sonnes of God:   est potestas, nunquam dignitas &c. But th word  (heere vsed) signifyeth powe but neuer dignity &c. Now seing Be  would not, that Christians should haue th power from Christ, what other thing is th then to enui at the benefits of Christ ∣stowed vpon Christians? Thus far C∣stalio. To this former learned man I may adioyne the authority of M. Perins herein (though at other times he may seeme partly to fluctuare, and wauer i hit iudgment touching this point.) H thus plainly writeth (a sentence  where by me alleadged:) In his reformed Catho∣like. p. 26. Because Go giues men commandement to repent and be∣lieue, therefore they haue power to repe and belieue; V bi supr. p. . God with his comman¦ment giuing grace, that the thing prescribed may be done. Molinaus (the learned Protestant)
is so full in the doctrine of Freewill, as that Peter Martyr rebuketh him there∣fore in these wordes. In his Epistles annexed to his common Places, englished in his Epist. to Caluin, pag. 99. Molinaus adiud∣eth certaine thinges amisse, touching Free∣will. In like sort Hemingius and Snecanus (Protestants of good Note) are charged by D. Willet for their maintayning of Freewill, in this manner▪ In his Synops. p. 808 & 810. They (he meaning the former two Protestants) re more erroneous concerning Freewill, then are the Papists. Brieflly, this do∣ctrine of Freewill is fully taught by Cent. 16. pag. 814. Osiander, and by certaine Protestants recorded by A▪ Mon. pag. 1533. & 1605. M. Fox: so strong and resolute (we see) are many learned Pro∣testants in this doctrine. Enthusiastus. The Authority of these former Pro∣testants doe not much sway with me, oing, that (as your selfe cannot but know) there are many other more in number, and of equal learning at least with the former, who wholy impugne the Doctrine of Freewill; and to whose iudgments therein I had rather stryke ayle, and yield.
Arminius. Be it so (Enthusiastus)▪ as you sa yet I vrge the testimonies of the Prote∣stants to this end; to wit, that wherea you rely (perhaps ouermuch) vpon th authority of other Protestants our Ad∣uersaries in this controuersy, that yo may see heerby, that other Protestan of eminency do with as strong a ben of iudgement defend the doctrine o Freewill, as yours do impugne it. An therefore though I seeke not, that th Protestāts by me alledged should oue ballance other Aduersary Protestants heerin, yet I see no reason why they should not equally ballāce with the said Protestants. And thus it followeth▪ that the matter in respect of this point is become eauen and indifferent; as be∣ing neither much aduantaged, or much preiudiced by yours or my producing of Protestants, eyther for the impu∣gning, or defending of the doctrine of Freewill. Yet heere I must aduertise you o one thing to be considered: It is this▪ That seeing the former Protestants by me alledged, do compart almost with
all other Protestants in all Articles of otestancy (this only of Freewill, and ther points therof depending, excep∣ed) it can hardly be coniectured, that he sayd Protestants would diuide thē∣elues in doctrine from all their other earned Brethren; were it not, that the weight of diuine and humane Authori∣ties did ouersway their iudgmēts there∣n; seeing otherwise they might hould it as no small scarre to them, being fe∣er in number, to dispart themselues (but vpon most weighty and forcing Reasons) in iudgment from all other Protestants. Againe, we know, that Protestāts and Papists are Aduersaries one to ano∣ther in matters of Religion: now, the former alledged Protestants by me, do conspire partly in doctrine touching Freewill with the Papists; so as the Au∣thorities of the sayd Protestants heerin are to be reputed as Confessions of the aduersary. Now how forcible this kind of Argument drawne from the Con∣fession of an Aduersary is, appeares frō he iudgement of the most learned D. Whitakers thus writing of this poynt: D. Whit. contra Bell. l▪ de Eccles. controuer. 2. q. 5. c. 14. Efficaxest Aduersariorum ipsorum te∣stimonium
&c. The testimony drawne fro the Aduersaries, is most efficacious: a I ingenuously confesse, that Truth is ab to extort testimony from its Enemies: th sayd Doctour borrowing his sentenc heerin from Irenaus (to omit other Fa∣thers) thus writing: L. 4. c. 14. It is an vnanswe∣rable proofe, which bringeth attstatiou fro the Aduersaries themselues. But inoug of this poynt: and now leauing to ins further in the Protestants iudgment herein, I will ascend vp to those tyme of the Primitiue Church (she being then Christs intemerate, and inconta∣minate Spouse,) and see of what iudg∣ment the Doctors and Fathers of those purer dayes were, touching Freewill. Enthusiastus. I pray you (Arminius) rise vp to those times, for I freely confes, that th authorities of those ancient Doctour (so long as they do not impugne God Holy Word, and Scripture) ought  haue no small soueraignty ouer man iudgment. And the rather, seeing w fynd it thus written by our owne me Kp∣nitius in exam. Concil. Trident. part. 1. pag. 74. We doubt not, but that the Primiti Church receaued from the Apostles, and ▪
postolicall men, not only the text of the Scripture, but also the right and natiue sense thereof. Therefore (Arminius) you may proceed. Arminius. Now to beginne with those Centi∣nels of Christs Church. Though all of them (I meane both of the Latin and Greeke Church) be most luxuriant and ryotous (as I may say) in their testi∣monies for the proouing of Freewill; yet because I will not cloy this presence with a fastidious aboundance of such their Authorities, some few (and those pertinent) shall serue. And first I fynd, that Austin thus writeth: Tom. 3. de Spir. & litera. c. 34. It is in our power to consent to Gods calling, or to dissent from it. Againe, he further thus enlar∣geth himselfe, euen deliuering our do∣ctrine in these expresse wordes: Au∣stin. tom. ▪ epist. 47. Va∣lentino. I haue dealt with yours, and our Brethren, what I could, that they would perseuere in the sound Catholike fayth, which neither denieth Freewill, whether to bad life, or to good; neither attributeth so much vnto it, as that without grace it auayleth any thing. And to omit other infinite lyke say∣ings, he thus plainly teacheth: Aust. l. de spirit▪ & li. c. 34. Con∣sentire
vocationi Dei, vel ab illo dissentire propriae voluntatis est. It is peculiar to th will, either to giue assent to the calling  God, or to reiect it. But to proceed to o∣thers: Ierome thus punctually writeth Hi∣ronius Dial con∣tra Pela∣gianos. Hoc est, quod tibi in principio dixer a &c. This is that, which I spake to thee in the beginning: to wit, That it is in our power t sinne, or not to sinne, that so we may keep the freedome of our will. Epiphanius accordeth to the for∣mer Fathers in these words. Epi∣phan Haeres. 1. Man festum, euidens, & indubium est, vnicui liberum arbitrium concessum esse à Deo &c. It is manifest, euident, and indubious, th God hath giuen Freewill to euery man: who hath sayd by himselfe; si volueritis, & si no∣lueritis; that so by these his wordes, it may be in mans power, eyther to worke well, or  worke badly. But to contract this poynt. Som Protestants of the greatest Note and ranke, do most fully charge the Fathers in generall with the doctrine of Freewil. For thus D. Whitgift (that learned Pro∣testant) confesseth of this point: D. Whitg. in his de∣fence of the Ans∣were to the Ad∣moni∣tion pag. 472. & 473. Al∣most all the Bishops of the Greeke Church▪ and Latin also, for the most part, were spot∣ted with the doctrine of Freewill &c. And
according to this Doctors iudgment, we fynd that our Centurists See Cent. . c. 10. col. 221. & Cent. 3. c. 10. Col. 265. & 240. Cent▪ 4 Col. 3. & 144. & 1183. Cent. 5. Col. 969. &c. do parti∣cularly charge, and reprehend these Fathers following, for their mainte∣nance of Freewill; to wit, Iustin, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Tertullian, Origen, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Cyrill Alexandrinus, Pruden∣tius, Ambrose, Hilary, Epiphanius, Grego∣ry Nissene, and Gregory Nazianzen. And that three of these ancient Fathers, to wit, Origen, Tertullian, and Cyprian de∣fended the doctrine of Freewill, appea∣reth most euidently from this one con∣sideration. It is granted by the most learned Aduersaries, that Austin, Epiphanius, and Ierome (in regard of their most cleare sentences in that behalfe) did iointly teach Freewill: Well, Austin against Origen in haeres. 414 Against Tertull. in haeres. 86.  Against Cypr. in tom 3. de Baptism. l. 2. c. 7. Ierom. l. contr. lo∣uin. & Vigil. E∣piph. in Haeresi∣bus. These Fathers did charge the former three Fathers with these three peculiar Errours fol∣lowing, and no other: to wit; Cyprian, with Rebaptization, Tertullian, with de∣nying second Mariages, and Origen, with belieuing that the Diuels should in the end be saued. But now it is more then certaine, that if Cyprian, Origen, and Trtullian had belieued, and taught otherwise tou∣ching
the doctrine of Freewill then th said later Fathers did, no doubt they had beene written against for this the disagreement from Austin, Ierome, an Epiphanius, touching Freewill, as the were charged by them for their for m acknowledged Errours. But we do not fynd, that the former three more an∣cient Fathers were contradicted by th three later, touching the doctrine of Freewill: from which point it ineuita∣bly followeth, that Cyprian, Origen, and Tertullian did vnanimously agree in de∣fence of Freewill with Austin, Ierome▪ and Epiphanius. And thus far touching the Authori∣ties of the Fathers in this question of Freewill; assuring you (Enthus.) and this worthy Presence, that I haue not discer∣ped the twentith part of those Testi∣monies, which their Writings and Vo∣lumes do affoard of this Subiect. Enthusiastus. Learned Arminius (for so I fynd you to be,) I will not be of that Ari∣starchian, and Censuring disposition, a to recall the Authorities of those An∣cient Fathers to be tryed by the touch∣stone
of my owne iudgment: I reue∣rence their Authority, both for their learning, vertues, and their proximity to our Sauiours dayes. Only, I euer say, I reuerence them with this presumed caution; to wit, whiles they write con∣cordantly to the Holy Scriptures. And therefore (Arminius) if so you can be able to produce out of Gods Holy Writ, as euident Testimonies, (which I yet thinke you cannot) for the fortifying of the doctrine of Freewill, as your haue already done out of the Fathers wri∣tings, I cōfesse, it may perhaps beget in me a certaine hesitation and doubtful∣nes of iudgment herein. But (Arminius) proceed in that kind of Methode, as shall best seeme pleasing to your selfe; and God I trust (for refractory I will not be) will second the euent. Arminius. I will, in fitting tyme arriue to my proofes borrowed from the diuine Scriptures, yet because I wil not ascend thereto (in regard of my prescribed Methode) ouer steepily, or per saltum; therefore I will take in my way the Ancient Iewes into my consideration;
and will see, whether they stand aff∣cted to the doctrine of belieuing of Free∣will, or wholy disclaime from the same▪ But this difficulty is▪ easily dissolued▪ For doe we not fynd Rabby Moyses fi¦lius Maymon, thus to instruct his Prose∣lytes? Epist. aduersus Astrolo∣gos. Ac illud quidem intelligere debe∣tis &c. But this chiefe and principall foun∣dation of our Law you ought to vnderstand; that both I, and all Philosophers do confesse▪ That what actions are committed by men▪ the same to be in their owne power &c. So  man serueth God, if so man himselfe will &c. And if he hath a desire to ioyne him∣selfe with the wicked &c. he also doth th same. See further of this point Rabby H∣darsan vpon the fourth Chapter of Ge∣nesis. And Rabby Selemo, alleadged by In lib. de Arca∣nis Ca∣tholica veritatis. Printed at Frnck∣furd. 1602▪ l. 6. c. 6. Petrus Galatinus. Philo (that learned Iew) thus initiatech his Reader in this mistery: Philo. lib. quod Deus sit immuta∣bius. Man hath Freewill: God crea∣ted him free, that being left to his proper will, he might doe whatsoeuer he pleas &c. To which sentence is extant that Ora in Deuteronomy: Behould I haue placed be∣fore thee life and death, good and  choose lyfe. Thus Philo. To conclud▪ That the Ancient Iewes were Patron
of Freewill (so euident and confessed is this point) diuers of our learned Bre∣thren do acknowledge. For D. Fulk thus fully speaketh hereof: In his defence of the English I ransla∣tion. pag. 320. The Iewish Rabbins, Patrones of Freewill, do erre. The like is acknowledged by Vpon the words of Rabbi Aiba. Paulus Fagius (the Protestant,) and by the Booke intituled: Prin∣ted Han∣nouiae. 1604. pag. 17. Synagoga Iudaica. Enthusiastus. The Iudgments of the Iewes by you alleadged, I canot very much esteeme, and this for two Reasons. First because you knowe, that vpon the comming of our Sauiour their Law and Religion was to be abrogated and disanulled, as we see by the cessation of their Sacrifi∣ces, and diuers other their Ceremonies then vsed. Secondly, some doubt, that that Galatinus, whom aboue you men∣tion (being but a late writer) forged in his alleaged Booke certayne sentences, sorting to his owne Religion, and then with subtilty obtruded them, or rather incorporated them in the former Iewes. And therefore granting this for true, D. Whitakers with more probability might answere his Aduersary produ∣cing the Testimonies of the Iewes, out
of this Galatinus in these wordes: L▪ 9. contra Duraeum. p. 818. Tuum in hac causa Petruin Galatinum mi¦nimè profectà desidero, nec Hebraeorum T¦stimonijs illis indigemus. But I pray yo leauing these Authorities hasten to th Holy Scriptures. Arminius. Before I ascend to Scripturall proo∣fes, you must giue me leaue, to ener∣uate and weaken this your Answere▪ And to the first part thereof I reply▪ That those onely points of fayth ar now abrogated, which did prefigure our Sauiours comming; such were the Iewish Sacrifices & diuers of their Ce∣remonies. But now the doctrine of Free¦will beares no reference to our Sauiour Incarnation; since once graunting, that man hath Freewill, certaine it is, that h hath it from his first Creation. Agayne, if the Iewish Law doth no∣thing belong to vs, now after the com¦ming of the Mssias; then it would fol∣low, that the Ten Cōmandements do no belong to vs Christians, & cōsequently that we Christians (as being disoblige frō them) may breake the same (by wor∣shipping many Gods, by cōmitting▪ A∣dultery,
Theft) with all Impunity and without feare. And thē withal it would follow, that our Sauiour, who first be∣came incarnated, (so humbling him∣selfe in our base nature) and after suf∣fered most opprobrious death for the expiating of Mans Sinne, should be a meanes throgh which we might with more freedome sinne; thus the Sonne should become to vs a sufficient warrāt for the breach of the Fathers Commā∣demēts; The grosse absurdity of which most necessary Inference to weigh, (Enthusiastus) I referre to your selfe & this company. Now to come to the second part of your reply touching Galatinus: I am partly persuaded, (though stiffe and peremptory therein I will not be) that the Sentences by him produced for cō∣firmation of Christian Religion from the Ancient Iewes, were not by him first forged, and after fathered vpon the Iewes. My motiue heerto is this: I fynd, that one Hieronymus de sanctafide, who was a Iew, but after conuerted to Christianity, & was Physitian to Pope Benedict the thirteenth (which Benedict was a good tyme before the dayes of
this Galatinus) did compose a booke▪ bearing the Title of Hebraeo - mastix▪ or, vindex impietatis, ac persidiae Iudaicae; in which booke he laboureth to prooue diuers poynts of Christian Religion from the there alledged Authorities & Testimonies of the sayd Iewes mentio∣ned by Galatinus. This Booke of the forsayd▪ Hierony∣mus de Sancta fide, was but lately prin∣ted at Franckford, anno 1602. But inough of this Galatinus, and of the former Iewes Authorities. And now in this last place I will arriue vp to the Holy Scriptures. Enthusiastus. Arminius, I would gladly intreate you thereto▪ And as touching all your former proofes for the maintayning of Freewill, drawne (as you say) from force of Reason and humane Authorities, I do freely grant, they partly sway with me, and haue made a deeper impression in my iudgement, then at the begin∣ning of our dispute, I euer expected they would. But if the Diuine Autho∣rities hereafter to be alleadged by you, for the fortifying of the said▪ dogmati∣call
point of Freewill, be as punctuall (without▪ any detortion, or wresting of the said Sacred passages) for the proofe of Freewill, as the former Au∣thorities haue beene; God only (who searcheth the hart of man) knoweth of what vnexpected force this our dispu∣tation may be. Therfore delay no time, but presently hasten thereto. Arminius. I am prepared thereto, and now I begin. And that these diuine Testimo∣nies may seize vpon your iudgement more strongly, and this with the lesse reluctation or repugnancy; I will there∣fore marshall, and range most of the said sacred Authorities vnder certaine Classes or Heads; that so you may per∣ceaue, how euery branch of the said passages of Scripture prooue (though by different meanes and respects) the point here intended; I meane, the truth of the Doctrine of Freewill. 1. And first, I will incampe togea∣ther diuers such chiefe texts of Holy Scriptures, which do plainly affirme, that it is in mans power, either to pra∣ctise Vertue, or vice: which point im∣mediatly
proueth Freewill. Of this kin may be alleaged, Ier. 32. Because they obeyed not thy voyce, nor walked in thy Law, ther∣fore thou hast caused this plague to come v∣pon them. Againe: Isa. 5. Iudge I pray you, betweene me and my vineyard; what could I haue done to it, that I haue not done? Why haue I looked, that it should bring foorth grapes, and it hath brought foorth thornes? And more: Math. 23. How often would I haue gathered thy children together &c. and thou wouldst not? Act. 7. You haue alwayes re∣sisted the Holy Ghost. Esa. 5. I spread out all the day my hands vnto a people, that gainsaid me. And in regard of Gods such pro∣ceeding, he is said Apoc. . to stand and knock at the doore of our Hart. These Texts af∣foard this Inference: That touching man, who sinneth, either it is in his power not to sinne, ors els he cannot but sinne: Yf it be in his power to for∣beare sinning, then hath he Freewill: Yf he cannot but of necessity must sinne▪ then God doth in vaine complayne of man for sinning; seeing it is not in his power not to sinne. Enthusiastus. To this it seemes, it may be answe∣red,
That God So answe∣reth cal∣uin Instit. l. 2. c. 5. doth not vndeserued∣ly complaine of man, although he can∣not but worke euill; seeing men are be∣come thus infirme through their owne fault, and their Hereditary malice. A∣gayne, a second Reason may be giuen, why God reprehendeth and admoni∣sheth Sinners, to wit, that thereby they may haue a greater auersion, and ab∣horring of their Sinne. Arminius. These Answeres rather fortisy our alleadging of the former Texts, then weaken it: (So the poore byrd by stru∣gling to get out of the net, doth more thereby intangle herselfe therein.) For first I say, to your first point, touching the Hereditary malice insisted vpon by you; We iustify this malice, to be a pu∣nishment, but not a fault, contrary to the iudgment of diuers of our Aduersa∣ries in this Controuersy. To the se∣cond part of your Answere I reply; That your words include the Doctrine of Freewill. For if Sinners through ob∣iurgation and fynding fault with their Sinnes, can be brought to haue a dete∣station of them, and alter therby their
course of life; then followeth it, that Sinners haue Freewill, which is the point, we vndertake to proue at this present. And if these diuine Correp∣tions cannot cause Sinners to forsake their sinfull course, to what end then doth God vse these speeches, as though it were in our power to sin, or not to sinne? But speaking no further of this  point. I will passe on forward to my se∣cond Classe of Testimonies, which shal containe, That man is commānded ther∣by to doe something, or to forbeare the doing of something: Of this nature are the Ten Commandements of God; as, Thou shalt not haue other Gods then me. Thou shalt not take the name of thy God in vayne. Honour thy Father and thy Mother. Besides infinite other precepts com∣manded and imposed vpon vs in Holy Scripture. Now I will draw from these passages this Argument. These holy passages containe a command or rule of liuing well; but God (who worketh nothing in vaine) should idly and fruit∣lesly impose this rule or command of li∣uing vertuously, if man wanted Freewill to obey or disobey such his Commaūd.
Enthusiastus. These places I must confesse, seeme very pressing; yet I answere thereto, That the So Calu. vbi supra. Law is not giuen in vayne, (and consequently that God worketh not heere to no end) though man wan∣teth Freewill, because the Law is giuen not only to be a rule of liuing well, but that by meanes of the Law Sinne may be knowne, as the Rom. 3. Apostle wryteth to the Romanes. Agayne, those former Texts do not imply, that God euer secondeth man with his grace, (without which man cannot do any thing well) & ther∣fore they force not so fully (as you may suppose) the poynt heere controuerted. Arminius. I will first take away the later part of your Answere; for I heere say, that we reade, That 1. Cor. 10. God sussereth not vs to be tempted aboue that, which we are able; but maketh with the temptation a way to e∣scape, that we may be able to sustayne. And vpon this ground it is, that God him∣selfe protesteth our possibility of kee∣ping his Commaundements in these words: Deu∣ter. 30. The Commandement, which
I haue giuen thee this day &c. is very ne to thee, euen in thy mouth, and hart, th thou maist do it. Which words (as some of our Aduersaries pretend) cannot be vn∣derstood of the knowledge of the Law, & not of mans power to keep it; since th exposition contradicteth the wordes of the Text, which speaketh expressely of doing, euen according to the iudgement of other more moderate Hipe∣rius l. 2. Methods Thcolog. & p. 479. 480. Protestāts. Now what can be more cleare for con∣uincing that man hath Freewill, & that God is not wanting to assist him with his Grace; then the former words, be∣ing the Conclusion it selfe? To the first part of your Answere I reply, that granting the Law may haue seuerall ends; certaine it is, that one end thereof (& that the principall) is to be a rule to man, for practising of Vertue and auoyding of Vice: but then in respect of this end, it must vnauoy∣dably follow, that man hath freedome of will giuen him by God, either to vio∣late the Law, or through Gods Grace (seconding his endeauour) to keep it. Againe admit, that besydes the former end, the Law be giuen, that thereby Sinne may be knowne; then I say, this
is but concident with the first end: for to what other end should Sin be known but that by knowing it, mā may auoid it? and how can it be auoyded, except man hath Freewill, eyther to sinne, or not to sinne? Euthusiastus. I pray you Arminius, proceed to other kinds of Scripturall Authorityes. And I like well your reducing them to certaine Heads: since this kind of Me∣thode doth much facilitate our appre∣hending & better conceauing of them. Arminius. My next Head then shall contayne some few passages of Gods Holy word,. by the which something is vnder con∣dition promised vnto vs by God, if so our selues will. Now, from these Au∣thorities I thus dispute. Eyther it is in our power to performe the Condition imposed, or it is not in our power: If it be in our power, then haue we Free∣will: If it be not in our power, then is not that any true Promise vnder the condition annexed, but only an euidēt deluding and deriding of the party, to
whome such an idle promise is made. Were it not ridiculous to inuite a man vnder promise of a great reward to run such a number of myles within a pre∣scribed tyme; & yet during all the time prescribed, to enchaine and shackle the legs of the party, who should run, as that he could not mooue them? The like exorbitancy of proceeding is found in our former supposall. Now (among others) the Texts of this Nature are these following: Mat▪ 10. Yf thou wilt enter into life, keep the Comman∣dements. Agayne: Amos 5. Seeke good, and not euill, and you shall liue. And further: Isa. 1. Yf you consent and obey, you shall eate the good things of the land; but if you refuse or will not, you shall be deuoured with the sword. Enthusiastus. I haue read some of Note, who haue laboured to auoyde these former places, by maintayning, that it is not absurd, So Calu. vbi supra. That God should promise to man vnder an impossible Condition: To men (say they) that are wicked, that by these kinds of Promises, it may appeare to them, how vnworthy they are of Gods benignity and goodnes; To
the Vertuous & good men, such promi∣ses may be made by God, that through the sweetnes of the Promises, the Ver∣tuous may be more allured to walke in the precepts of God. Arminius. This Answere (vnder your fauour) is wholy impertinent; since the que∣stion here is not, why God doth proffer his promises to good men, or euill men: but I auer, that from the former Text it is proued (which is the point only con∣trouerted) that nothing can be rightly promised vnder Condition, but to that Creature, which hath freedom of Will, since otherwise (let the reason of the promise be what it will) the prof∣fer of such a Condition would be ex∣pounded rather an Ironicall scoffing, then any true and reall Conditionall promise. Agayne, this Conditionall Promise to the Good & Vertuous, can∣not be vnderstood Ironically, but real∣ly and truly: And therefore it is in the power of the Vertuous, either to per∣forme, or not to performe the imposed Condition; since that is peculiar to a true Condition, to wit, that it may de∣pend
vpon the Freedome of his will, to whom it is made. But I will proceed to my next Head of Authorities, & these shall contayne, that God offereth to man a Choyce of se∣uerall  thinges, from whence we neces∣sarily gather, that it is in mans power to chuse, either of those different thin∣ges, propounded to him to be chosen. For we hould it both absurd and ridi∣culous to giue in words an election and choyce of different thinges, and yet (by forcibly restrayning him but to one thing) to take away all power of his choyce & freedome to any other thing. According to this aboue said, these few Texts (among many others) present themselues to vs; Deu∣ter. 30. I call Heauen and Earth to witnesse this day against you, that I haue set before you life, and death &c. Choose therefore life. And according to this his proposed Choyce of life, and death, God thus sweetly complayneth of Israel: Ezech. 18. Why wilt thou dye, O house of Israel? A second place may be that: Iosue 24. Choyce is giuen to you, whom you will serue. In which words Iosue implieth, that it was in the Peoples power, either to serue the true God, or the Idols.
Other passages of this Nature the Booke of Ecclesiasticus doth affoard, which though it be not accepted by vs for Canonicall Scripture, yet M. Perkins thus worthily speaketh of it, to wit, That he preferreth this Booke In his reformed Catho∣like pag. 134. before any other Bookes of men. Thus then we read in that Booke: Eccles. 15. He hath set water and fyre before thee, stretch out thy hand to which thou wilt. And agayne: Ibid. Before man is lyfe and death, good and euill; what lyketh him, shall be giuen him. And lastly: c. 31. Who might offend, and hath not offen∣ded, or do euill, and hath not done it. Then which what can be more euident for proofe of Frewill? Thus far of the chiefe Authorities; which maybe reduced to certaine ge∣nerall Heads (this next Classe follow∣ing excepted.) From whence we are instructed; First, that God plainly sayth, it is in mans power either to practise vertue or vice. Secondly, that God com∣mandeth to do something, or to for∣beare the doing of something. Thirdly, that God promiseth to vs something vpon some condition, if so we will our selues. Fourthly, that God giueth election and choyce to man to choose one thing
before another thing: All which foure points potentially include freedome of Will in man, as is aboue demonstrated. To these former we may adioine this  one other Head, contayning such pla∣ces of Scripture, in which men are tear∣med Workers, Builders, Planters, Coadiu∣tors with God in the work of their Saluation. The places are these: Math. 20. Call the worke∣men, and giue them &c. 1. Cor. . I haue planted, Apollo hath watered, but God gaue the increase. And againe, in the same place we reade: Euery one shall receaue his wa∣ges according to his labour, for we are the Coadiutors of God. Now, if men do properly worke no∣thing by their Freewill, but only are le and moued by God in these kind of actions, as meere instruments; then they ought not to be called Co-workers,  Coadiutors of God, no more then a pe can be called a Co-wryter, or a knyfe  Co-cutter, or any other dead instrume to be so accordingly called, in respect of its vse, to which it is appropriated. But now leauing these former gene∣rall Branches, I will close vp your iudg¦ment with one most choaking Testi∣mony, euery word almost thereof a
foarding an argument in proofe of Freewill: The place is this: Genes. 4. The Lord said to Cain, why art thou angry? or why is thy Countenance cast downe? Yf thou dost well, shalt thou not be rewarded? Si autem malè, statim in foribus peccatum aderit: sed sub te erit appetitus eius, & tu dominaberis illius. Yf euill, Sinne lyeth at the doore: but vnder thee the desire of it shall be, and thou shalt haue rule ouer it. Now let vs (as it were) dissect this one Testimony. And first: Why art thou angry, or why is thy Coun∣tenance cast downe? This Interrogation euidently sheweth, that it was in the power of Cain (if so himselfe would) not to become angry, or to be sorrow∣full. For why is it not said to a new borne Infant, why dost thou crye, but because we do know, it is not in the Infants power to crye, or not to crye? Or why say we not to a Dog, why dost thou barke; or to a Lyon, why dost thou roare; but because it is manifest, that it is not in the power of these beasts to barke, and not to barke, to roare and not to roare? To come to the next wordes: Yf thou dost well, shalt thou not be rewarded? Yf euill, Sinne lyeth at the doore &c. Now
this addition (if well, if euill) doe euil dently imply Freewill. For why do we not say to man, If thou wilt make the Sunne to stand still (as we vsually say to man, if thou wilt do well) thou shalt haue this, or that thing giuen to thee for making the Sunne to stand still, but because we know, that it is not in mans power, to stay the course of the Sunne, but that it is in his power to doe well, if he will, or euill, if he will not? Now to come to the last passage of this Text: Yf euill, Sinne lyeth at the doore: but vnder thee, the desire of it shall be, and thou shalt haue rule ouer it. These wordes most plumbe and perpendicularly (as I may say) fall vpon the proofe of Free∣will. For what other meaning of them can be, then that the desire of Sinne shalbe in thy power, and thou shalt haue rule ouer it, that is, it is in thy power (if thou wilt) to resist Sinne? I well know, that some of our Brethren, (See the mar∣ginall notes of the En∣glish Bi∣bles of the yeare 1576 v∣pon this place. who are aduerse to vs in the doctrine of Free∣will, rather by way of declining, then answering this difficulty, affirme, that Cain had rule, not ouer it, viz. Sinne, but ouer him, vz. Abel. And so according∣ly they doe translate this Text in some
of their Bibles. How forced (and indeed how ab∣surd) this Constructiō is, I will prooue (because this Text is most cōuincing.) First from the contexture of the words10 thēselues: Secondly, from the exposition20 of this place, giuen by the Auncient Fathers, whose exposition thereof is30 coincident with this our exposition: Thirdly from the like construction of40 the ancient Rabbins passed vpon this passage: And lastly from the like Con∣struction giuen thereof by diuers of our owne learned Brethren; vpon the Au∣thority of which place, they greatly stay themselues for the proofe of Free∣will. And first to examine the wordes themselues, I maintayne, that accor∣ding to all true Grammaticall Constru∣ction, the two Relatiues (eius, and il∣lius) must be necessarily referred to the Antecedent next going before; but the next precedent Antecedent is, Sinne, and not Abel. Secondly, I affirme for the more conuincing of this point, that Abel is not so much as once named in this passage: how then can the Relati∣ues, eius, and illius, be referred to Abel,
as to their Antecedent? Thirdly, this will prooue more e¦uident, if we doe obserue the coheren¦cy of the sense giuen by vs, with th words. For to say, Sin lyeth at the doore and thou shalt haue rule ouer it, the sens is heer most playne, and expedite: but to say, Sinne lyeth at the doore, vz. to tor∣ment thy cōscience, and thou shalt haue rule ouer him (vz. ouer Abel thy Bro∣ther) is most forced, harsh, and con∣strayned; & with an ordinary & regu∣lar reference to the words in the Text most dissolute and inconsequent. But to descend to the interpreta∣tion of the Fathers touching this place. Gregory thus writeth: Moral. l. 4. c. 2. Diuina voce Cain &c. It is sayd by the voyce of God to Cain, being of a wicked disposition; Sinne lyeth at the doore, but vnder thee shall the desire of it be, and thou shalt haue rule ouer it. Ierome in alluding to the words of the Text, thus writeth: In quaestio∣nib. He∣braicis. quialiberi ar∣bitrijes &c. Because thou hast Freewill, therefore I counsell thee (vt non tibi pecca∣tum, sedtu peccato domineris) that Sinne may not haue rule ouer thee, but that thou may rule ouer Sinne. Finally to omit the like Construction giuen by diuers o∣ther
Pros∣per. l. de Vocat. Gentium, c. ▪ Ambros. l. 2. de Cain. c. 7. Bada in hunc lo∣cum Genes. 4. Fathers: Austin thus literally expoundeth the former wordes: Au∣stin. l. 15. de Ciuitat. De c. 7. Tu¦lominaberis illius, numquid fratris? absit. uius igitur, nisi peccati? thou shalt rule ouer it, what, ouer thy brother? not so: ouer what then but Sinne? So conspiringly this Fa∣ther agrees with our Interpretation heerein. To come to the ancient Rabins. In his Hebrew Com∣menta∣ries vpon Genesis, c. 4. Aben Ersa affirment it to be a meer for∣gery, to referre the Relatiue in the former Text to any other thing, then to the word, Sinne. Rabby Moyses Hadarsan sayth: In ca. 4. Genes. quod scriptumest; Adte concupiscentia peccati, & tu dominaberis illius: Hoc est, sivolueris, praeualebis aduersus illud. That is, where it is written; the desire of Sinne shalbe to thee, and thou shalt rule ouer it▪ The meaning heerofis, that if thou wilt, thou shalt preuayle ouer it. Thus Rabby Hadarsan. To be briefe, the auncient Ie∣wes are so plaine in expoūding the for∣mer passage in proofe of Freewill, that D. Fulke taketh notice therof, and thus answereth them: In the English Translat. pa. 380. The Iewish Rabbins erre in this place. To come lastly to our owne Bre∣thren: Their iudgments are here made manifest, partly by their wrytings, and
partly by their like agreeable Transs∣tion of this very Text in their versio of their Bibles. Touching their owne Authorities herein, I will (for greater expedition) only cite the places of such their writings. See then In l. 2. Method. Theolog. p 478. Hyperius, In Syntagm. ex veteri Testam. Colum. 489. Wigandus (both no obscure Protestāts and euen Tom. . VVit∣tenberg. ann. 1580▪ fol. 62. Luther himselfe. As con∣cerning their Publike Translations of the Bible, answerable thereto, see th great English Bible of anno 1584▪ and see the Annotations annexed thereto, all shewing, that it is (Sinne) and not Abel, ouer which Cain shall haue rule. The same appareth from the Transla∣tion of the Bible by Castalio, printed at Basill, anno 1573. which Translation is much commended by Derat. Interpret. l. 1. p. 62. & 63. D. Humfrey. And thus far for the more full vn∣foulding and explicating of this most markable, cleare, and illustrious passage of Genesis, for the confirmation of our Doctrine of Freewill. And heere now I make my pause, being in good hope, that all the former Authorities both diuine and humane, (produced by me since the beginning of our dispute) will winne some ground vpon your Iudg∣ment (Enthusiastus) for your giuing as∣sent
to our most true, ancient, and A∣ostolicall doctrine herein. Enthusiastus. I do freely grant, my iudgment is ouerborne with the streame of your most forcing Authorities; and the ra∣ther, since I must confesse, I was much mistaken in the alleadging of my proofes for the impugning of Freewill: seeing through your auoiding of them, now vpon a second, and more retired view I well discerne, how they did ra∣ther but idly beate the wynd through my owne misapplyed detortiō of them, then otherwise leuell at the intended marke; So illustrious a truth (now I confesse) is the doctrine of Freewill, as that the greatest doubt, which thereof I shall hereafter perhaps make, is only, whether I can haue Freewill at any time hereafter, to deny the doctrine of Free∣will? But (learned Arminius) though I doe much incline to belieue, that man hath Freewill; yet there are certaine o∣ther dogmaticall points, in which I confesse, as yet, I do dissent from you. And among the rest, these two follow∣ing:
To wit, the first, The doctrine of  probation, by which I belieue, That Go hath decreed some men euen from their mothers wombe, without any preuision o their workes to eternall damnation. The s∣cond, The Infallible Certainty of a man owne Election, or Predestination; in bot which points many learned Deuines o our owne Country borrowing thei doctrines from you, do (I grant) hold the contrary. Now I would see (Armi∣nius) if you be as fully furnished with sufficient Answeres to what I shall ob∣iect therein, as also with good proofe for the fortifying of your contrary Te∣nets heerein, as you haue discouered your selfe to be, for the Doctrine of Freewill. Arminius. Glad I am to heare (Enthusiastus) the hopefull euēt of this our discourse, and in you I see that sentence verifyed: Math. . Iustificata est sapientia à filijs suis. And as touching the other points of do∣ctrine mentioned by you (wherein you and your party mainly differ from me) you may take notice, that our beliefe of them is necessarily, and implicitly in∣cluded▪
(so the Cause includes in it selfe the Eflect) in the doctrine of Freewil. For once granting the Doctrine of Freewill to be consonant to the Scriptures, then t vnauoydably and most consequently followeth, that euery man may be sa∣ued through the force of his Freewill, cooperating with Gods Grace & mer∣cy: as also it followeth, from the Do∣ctrine of Freewill, that man enioyeth not an Infallibility of his Election; seeing as enioying Freewill, it is in his power, of Vertuous to become wicked, & con∣sequently to loose the benefite of Ele∣ction. Neuertheles seeing the reducing the warrant of the sayd two doctrines to the doctrine of Freewill, is ouer ge∣nerall and large; therefore beginne at your pleasure (Enthusiastus) to impu∣gne the sayd doctrines, & I shall shape particuler answeres to your particuler Arguments; and that done, then will I vndertake to make good the said do∣ctrines both from diuine and humane Authorities. Enthusiastus. I will most willingly (so desirous I am to receaue satisfaction heerin from
your selfe.)  I will  the doctrine of the Cortainty of  Election, or Predestination, in the prese∣ting whereof, I will tread my for tract of Methode; to wit, in giuing  first place to diuine proofes; and  after I will descend to humane proo being of an inferiour weight. Arminius. Well Sir, proceede in your  chosen Methode at your own pleasu but before you enter into dispute;  me leaue (as in the doctrine of Free  aboue I did) to set downe the true  of this question, with its due explic∣on or restrictiō; seeing by this mean we no doubt shall find (as in the fo∣mer Controuersy we did) that souer of your proofes from Scripture wil receaue their full answere, by rec∣ring to the true state of the Question▪ Heer then we are to obserue,  whereas you, and your fellowes  maintaine, that euery one that i , is assured infallibly of his  Election, by his owne ordinary and sp fayth, which (say you) is most inf∣ble: Now I, and others
with me, do teach as follow∣th. First that so far forth, as concernes Gods promise touching our Election; we say his promise is on his part most certaine and infallible: But yet seeing Gods promise therein is only conditio∣n, implying euer some things to be performed on our part; to wit, the Con∣ditions of beliefe, of true repentance, & of finall perseuerance; now the perfor∣mance by Gods grace, or not perfor∣mance of these Conditions, being in our power, it consequently followeth, that our Election to vs is vncertaine. Since God thus pronounceth: Ezech. 18. Yf the iust man do turne away from his righteousnes &c. in his sinne he shall die. Thus through our owne frailty and indisposition, not answering at all tymes to Gods holy inspirations and grace, our Election to vs is euer vncer∣tayne (though, as aboue said, in respect of Gods promise, we fulfilling the an∣nexed Conditions thereto, most cer∣tayne) and consequently it followeth, that we cannot be assured of Saluation by fayth, seeing fayth is infallible; but only by Hope, which (through our coo∣prating with Gods grace, and assi∣stance)
is not infallibly , ne∣theles it is  with gr comfort & confidence. Now here once for all you are to conceaue, that diu sayings of God, either touching Pre∣stinatio or Reprobation, though in word they seeme absolute, yet in sense are ∣ly Conditionall; In proofe of which my assertion I will alleage a place of Ez∣chiel c. 33. which (as a Comment) well may seeme to expounde all such se∣ming absolute Texts of this natur. God Almighty words in Ezechiel  these: When I shall say unto the righteo that he shall surely liue; if yet he trust  vnto his owne righteousnes, commit  &c. he shall dye. Againe. When I  say vnto the wicked, thou st dye the death▪ Yf yet he returne from his sinnes, and d that which is right &c. he hall surely ▪ So clearely doth the Prophet instru vs, that all such seeming absolute say∣ings in Scripture, haue euer by imp∣cation some Conditions annexed  to. Now this being the true state of th Question, and illustrated with the ∣plication of Ezechiel; begin to impu it from Holy Writ, at your plasur which you shall neuer be able to
Enthusiastus. Well then, the first passage of diuine Scripture, which I will alledge, shal be that of the Apostle to the Corinthians: 2. Co∣rinth. c. 13. Try your selues, if you be in the fayth: proue you your selues: know you not your selues▪ that Christ Iesus is in you, vnles per∣aps you be Reprobates? Arminius. I answere heerto; first admitting, that this Text did prooue, that Christ was in the Corinthians, according to is grace of Iustification; yet the Text roueth that only for the time present; ut whether the Corinthians might after oose that grace or not, or want finall erseuerance (which is the point heer only questioned) this Text nothing toucheth; and therefore you may see, hat granting more touching the expo∣ition of the Text, then I need to doe; et the Answere is inuolued in the state n the Question aboue set downe. And ccordingly heer to, this knowledge of s being in the fayth (if the wordes ere to be interpreted in that sense)  to be restrained only to the tyme pre∣sent:
but for our continuance in the fayth, the Text speaketh nothing. Secondly, I reply, that this know∣ledge of the Corinthians, that Christ wa in them, hath reference only of Christ being in them, by way of 2. Cor. c. 12. Signe wonders, and mighty deeds, done among them: which if they did not acknow∣ledge, they were Reprobates. And tha this knowledge of Chst being in thē▪ cannot be referred, according to his grace of Iustification, is most cleare; in that S. Paul would neuer then haue ∣buked and reprehended the Corinthia in so full and grieuous a manner, as  find, that in the same Ibid. . 1. Epistle he di▪ Thus much heerof. Enthusiastus. I take this your answere for suffici for I see the Text (if the scope of the E∣pistle be precisely obserued) precludet me of al reply: but what say you to  other passage of Scripture, where  Apostle speaketh of himself in this  confident manner: Rom. 8. I know, Obie∣cted by M. Iewell in his A∣pology of the Church of En∣gland. pa. 78. th lyfe nor death &c shall be able to re none  from that loue, that God beareth to me  Christ▪ What greater assurednesse col the Apostle vtter of his saluation  this?
Arminius. To this I shape a double answere. First, admitting that these words should be meāt of the certainty of knowledge, yet they do not prooue the particuler knowledge, which our aduersaries do pretend, that euery one of the Elect should haue of himselfe only: My rea∣son heerof is: because these words are deliuered by the Apostle, touching his knowledge aswell of others, as himself. For the words are not, shall be able to re∣oue me, but, shallbe able to remoue vs, the Apostle speaking thus in the person of he Elect, and not of himselfe only But ouching the saluation of the Elect, there s no controuersy betweene vs and our Aduersaries. Secondly, and more punctually I reply, and affirme, that in the Greeke of he former Text, it is only, Persuasus , and not Certus sum; for the Greeke ord vsed by S. Paul, is , hich signifieth in English: I am per∣aded. And thus the certainty of nowledge, which this Text affordeth,  only of Persuasion & Hope, but not of ayth, or infallible knowledge; which
is the point only here issuable. That th Text signifyeth only, I am persuaded, & not, I am certaine, is so euident, that the English Bibles printed anno Do 1576. and 1590. do read with me in th very place, I am persuaded. Yea▪ B himselfe in his Translation of the Ne Testament, in this place translateth Prin∣ted at London, anno 1587. Mihi persuasum est: So little dot this Text proue for infallibility of Sal∣uation. Lastly I may say, that granting  Paul here spake of the certainty of  owne Saluation; yet it may be well ans∣wered, that this certainty (in regard  his high fauour with God) he had  reuelation only, and not by force of  ordinary fayth, as our Aduersaries  pretend to haue. Enthusiastus. I will proceed further: 1. Iohn 5. Th things I write vnto you, that you may kno that you haue eternall life, which belieue  the name of the Sonne of God. Arminius. To this I answere. First, that  Eternall life, may be here vnderstoo
knowledge of God, which the faithfull haue, according as we read in S. Iohns Ghospell: C. 17. This is life euerlasting, that they know thee. Secondly I say, That True Belieuers haue eternall life, not actually, (since they do not actually enioy Hea∣uen) but only in Hope, according as it i els where said; Rom. 8. We are saued by hope. For that if we will attayne eternall life actually and indeed, our perseuerance in fayth is necessarily required, of which perseuerāce this passage of Scri∣pture intimateth no certainty; since (according to the words of Ezech. 33. Eze∣hiel aboue cited) this Text (as many more) implyes in it a Condition to be performed; and consequently, it pro∣eth no certainty or infallibility of mans Election. Enthusiastus. We thus read, that the Apostle sayth: Rom. 8. We haue receaued the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry: Abba Pater. And the spirit it selfe beareth witnes to our spirit, that we are the Sonnes of God; and if is Sonnes, then also heyres, if so be that we suffer with him &c.
Arminius. You cloy me (Enthusiastus) with  fastidious saciety of Texts of this ∣ture: For this Text only proueth,  the Iust during the state of their pres Iustice, are the Sonnes of God, and con∣sequently his Heyres: But whether  Iust shal perseuere in that state till their death, (which is the chiefe point  this Controuersy) this Text prooueth not. Nay it proueth, that the Iust may▪ fall from their Iustice, and thereupon loose their Election, as is fully insinu∣ted by the Condition annexed in  very Text, vz. Yf so that we suffer  him. Certainly the damned Spirits be∣fore their fall were the Sonnes or Chil∣dren of God, & yet afterward throug their want of perseuerance in righ∣teousnes, they fell from their form state: So little doth this Authority pre∣uaile in proofe of the certainty of man Predestination or Election; the certainty▪ that is prooued from this passage, be∣ing only coniecturall, and not infal∣lible.
Enthusiastus. What reply you to that of the A∣ostle: Rom. 8. Whom he called, them also he stifyed; and whom he iustifyed, them so he glorifyed. In shew of words a most rcing Authority, since from hence it  it may be cōcluded, that whom  doth iustify, he is thereby one of  Elect, and glorifyed, and so cannot finally fell. Arminius. I reply. This your inference were rong, if all, who are called, were Elect. But contrary to this we read: Matth. 22. Many called, but few Elect; therefore this lace can take no more hold of him that is iustifyed, then of him that is called, since the words of the Text haue equall Reference to them both. There∣fore the true meaning of this place is vnderstood not of euery one, that is called or iustifyed in generall, but only of the Elect, whom God in his fore∣knowledge (according as it is said in the former alleaged Chapter) foreknew to be called, according to purpose of election. And of these it is granted, none doth fi∣nally
fall. But who these▪ Elect be,  man knoweth: Rom. 11. For who hath  the mynd of the ord, or who hath  Counsellour? Enthusiastus. S. Paul thus writeth of himself (r) . Tim. 4. I am Obie∣cted by M. Wil∣let in Sy∣nops. pa. 57. now ready to be crucifyed,  tyme of my resolution is at  &c▪  finished my Course &c. and there is laid  for me a Crowne of Iustice, which the  will render to me at that day: So certaine  is, that S. Paul was assured of his Ele∣ction. Arminius. This place toucheth not the diff∣culty: For S. Paul was assured of his Saluation through extraordinary R∣uelation. And our Aduersaries M. Perkins in his re∣formed Catho∣like. p. 8. do af∣firme with vs, that a man may be assured of his Saluation by extraordinary Reuelation▪ as Abraham, and others were. But this is not the point controuerted betweene them and vs, seeing our Aduersaries d teach, that this knowledge is by Ordi∣nary Fayth, as Vbi su∣pra. p. 9. M. Perkins maintain  Now that S. Paul had knowledge of his Saluation only by extraordinary ,
appeareth from his like fore∣nowledge of his owne death, mentio∣d in this very passage alleaged in ose wordes: The tyme of my resolution  at hand. And according to his like re∣elation he said to the Ephesians: Acts. 20.  old, I know, that you no more shall see y face. Thus we see, by true weighing of his Text, that is affordeth, no greater roofe for our Aduersaries presumed nfallibility of their Saluation, then it doth, for the certaine knowledge of the yme of their death; since the Text con∣cerneth both alike, and therefore either both these points, or neither are proo∣ued from this passage of Scripture. Enthusiastus. We are counselled by S. Peter to make our calling and election sure by good workes: His words are these: 1. Petr. 1. Wherefore brethren, Obie∣cted by Kimmo∣onis no his Re∣dempt▪ of mankind. p. . giue rather dili∣gence to make your calling and election sure by good workes; for if you doe these thinges, you shall neuer fall. Now from this it seemes, that the Faythfull are assured of their Election.
Arminius. Heere Enthusiastu, you haue affo∣ded me a weapon, where with to  your owne Cause, since the force of  your reason recoyleth vpon your self For this Text teacheth vs, that  Certainty of Gods promise touchi our Saluation depends vpon our goo workes, and therefore i but Condit∣nall; which Condition we fynd to be  down in these words: If so you doe  things. So cleare is this diuine Autho∣rity agaynst our Aduersaries pretend  certainty by fayth. Enthusiastus. We read thus of the Ephesians; That they Obie∣cted by D. Fulke against Purga. p. 35. were Eph. 1. signe it with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the pledge of our inheritance. And againe it is sayd to thē▪ Eph. 4. Greeue not the spirit, wherby you are si∣gned to the day of Redemption. Now what other thing do these Texts import, then the Certainty of the Ephesians saluatiō▪ Arminius. This place only prooueth at th most, that by the signing, and pledge, o arnest of our inheritance, is vnderstood
the conuention, or Promise made vpon Gods part to the Ephesians; the perfor∣ance whereof we willingly grant to  on his syde certayne; but the Text elleth vs not, that the Ephesians were ssured hereby to accomplish and per∣forme the Cōditions requyred on their art▪ But they rather to the contrary neere are premonished, not to grieue the pirit, and so accordingly it is in other laces of Scripture said: Act 7. They resisted the holy Spirit. And againe: Isa. . They re∣belled and vexed his holy Spirit. Enthusiastus. Well to presse a little further. We read that it is said: Iohn. 13. Whom Christ By M. Willet in Synops. p. 55. loueth, he loueth to the end. Agayne we read: Iohn. 10. That which my Father hath giuen me, is greater then all; and no man can pluck them out of my Fathers hand. Briefly (to accumulate and heape seuerall Texts togeather) the Apostle teacheth vs, that Rom. 11. the gifts and vocation of God are with∣out repentance. Now from all these places what other necessary inference can re∣sult, then that one being once in state of Grace, shall perseuere therein to the nd; & consequently, that such an one
is certaine of his Saluation? Arminius. I answere, that this inference  not so much as probable▪ (so in  it is) much lesse necessary. A  to answere in order to the Texts as  are alleaged. True it is, That God for  part, whom he loueth, loueth to  end; & accordingly we read; that Marc. c. 10.  loued the rich man, who went away  him; and yet from this loue of our  to the rich man, we cannot  that the Rich man was one of the  Againe it is most true, that God louet all men, as they are his Creatures though he hateth their Sinne; For  wiseman instructeth vs, that Sa∣pie c 11. God  all thinges, that are, and hateth none  them, whom he hath made. To the second place I answer  that another like place of our Sauiou words may well seeme to explane  as where he said: Iohn 17. Those whom thou  me, I haue kept; and none of them pe∣shed, but the Sonne of perdition. Now  parallelling these two seuerall Txts ∣geather it is euident, that the  of this place is not, that euery on
whom the Father giueth, perseueres to  end, for then the Son of perdition  wit Iudas) who (as the Text sayth)  giuen, should haue perseuered to the ▪ But rather, that the Diuell by all  temptations, cannot perforce pull a  from God, except he giues his  consent to yield to the diuels . Secondly, suppose these wordes to vnderstood of the Elect in generall, ose finall repentance is knowne to  (of whom we all acknowledge, at None do perish) for God is not  in his foreknowledge: yet this forceth nothing, seeing both the Hier. in c. 26. Hier. sayth▪ Non ex eo. quod Deus scit futurum aliquid, id∣ir futu∣rum est: Sed quia futurum est, Deus nouit. See like∣wise Au∣stin tom. 7. de prae∣dest. & gratia, c. 15. thers, and our owne learned Hipe∣rius in Method. Theol. l. 1. pa. 319. sayth: Neque quia prae∣scit Deus hominem peccatu∣rum, ideo homo pec∣cat; sed quia pec∣caturus erat, ideo Deus id praesciuit▪ The like saying hath A∣mandus Polas in partit. Theolog. l. 1 p. . Bre∣ren do teach, that things are not, be∣ause God doth foresee them; but God doth resee therin, because they are. To the third Text, I answere: That od indeed doth neuer repent him of  guifts bestowed vpon any man, yet uertheles by reason, that many do a∣use his giftes, applying them other∣ise then God intended, he is said in oly Scripture (as speaking to our Ca∣acity) Gen. . & 1. Samuel 15. to repent him.
Enthusiastus. Well. I will clostlli point  more Scipturall Authorities  I see, Arminius, you are very  in auoyding of them) with there  lowing, which for greater  I will a masse togeather. We fynd  Apostle thus to say: Christ shall  confirme you (speaking to the ∣thians) vnto the end. I like (m) 1. Cor. 1. said Apostle els where thus sayth (n) Ephes. 1. He hath thosen vs before the foundatio the world. Agayne: Rom. 8. Who shall accuse ∣gainst the Elect of God? Finally we  in the Gospell: Iohn. 10. No man shall  sheepe out of my hand. All which ∣rities may seeme well to fortify the  fallibility of Predestination. Arminius. These Texts, though many  number, yet are small in force, so  they glance from the intended  And as for the two first (to which  others of the same nature may  ranged, taking their answere, from  Answere giuen to thse two) th ∣postle only meaneth, That he hop
well of the saluation of the Corinthians▪ nd Ephesians; but that he should be as∣ured through a certainty of faith, that ll the Corinthians, and all the Ephesi∣ns (for the Apostle speaketh indefi∣itely to them all) should be saued, is ost absurd to thinke. To the two  Authorities. They only teach, that he Elect cannot finally perish; but they oe not teach, that the Elect do know  much of themselues in particular; or hat they are of the nūber of the Elect: which poynt remaynes yet vnprooued. Enthusiastus. I will desist (as I sayd afore) from rging more places of Gods word: For  willingly grant, I haue produced all uch Texts, as I thought had been most reuayling for the proofe of the doctri∣e, for which they were vrged. Onely efore I leaue the Scene of further op∣osing, I will insist in an Argument or wo, drawne from force of reason, hich Arguments preuayle strongly with diuers men of iudgment: my first en shall be drawne from the efficacy f  and Hope. And thus I dispute. The holy Scripture ascribeth to
Fayth a , or most full  in the tenth Chapter to the Hebre▪ In like sort in the eleauenth Chapter  the Hebrews, it is called in regard▪  its Infallibility, Coniunctio or Hyposta a firme ground of things to be hoped for▪  an infallible euidence of things we see▪  Agayne in the Epistle of S. Iames,  1. Hesitation and wauering is opposed  Fayth. In like sort in the sixt to the H∣brews, a steedy firmenes is attributed  Hope, or as the former greeke word  a  in which place Hope,  its stability and firmenes, is compar to an Anker. Therefore in regard  Gods promising a remission of  Sinnes, why should we rest doubtfu thereof? My second Argument shal be tak from the seeming absurdity Vrged bv Kemp∣it. in Exam. Concil. Trid. accom∣panying this your doctrine; since  doctrine seemeth to be absurd, which ∣uer teacheth a doubtfull hesitation▪  fluctuation of a mans fayth, touchi his owne saluation. Arminius. In soluing the first Argument  must recurre partly to the state of
Question aboue set downe. True it is,  Fayth is most certayne: neyther  it be called Fayth, by the which a  giueth assent with any doubtful∣ or feare to such thinges, the which ought to belieue. But our Aduersa∣ Paralogisme, or Fallacy, resteth in  that they assume, as grāted (which  can neuer prooue) that remission Sinnes, or iustification do properly  oly belong to fayth. Agayne I say ording to the state of the question,  granting a man to haue once true ; yet followeth it not that there∣e he shall finally dye in state of true , and then it followeth, that if he  not certaine of his finall perseue∣ce in fayth, he therefore is not cer∣ne of his Election, or Predestination. Touching Hope, It is most certaine, espect of God promising; but in  of mans indisposition, and his kenes and frailty in performing the nditions imposed by God, Hope is  languid, and accompanied with rtaine feare. Touching your argument from  supposed absurdity, attending on  doctrine herein, I reply, that the do∣ctrine
maintayned by vs, thou  taketh not away all feare, yet it  away all anxiety, hesitation, and  doubtfulnes, if he may be called , who dare; not giue assent to  contrary part or opinion. And as  no good inference to argue thus:  man is not doubtfull nor anxious of the ∣tainty of his Election, therefore he is elect▪ So neither are you thus to dispute▪  man hath no certainty of his fayth, or ; therefore he is euer doubting  troubled with feares touching the  There is therefore a meane to be ad∣ted betweene these two extremes , a morall certainty in respect o  Vnderstanding, and a Hope, and trus  respect of the Will. Enthusiastus. Arminius, I must confesse, you  partly satisfyed me in displaying  vnexpected weakenes and transpa∣cy of my Arguments, drawn  from the misapplication of Script as also from Reason. But seeing  accomplished my taske of  we are to change parts, therefore  may at your pleasure enter vpon
in seeking to warrant your con∣ry doctrine, with such proofes, as  shall be best armed therewith. And deed I confes, I partly begin to retire d giue back, so little preuayling I d my former Arguments to be, hich till now I accounted as many gines, able to beat downe, and leuell th the ground all contrary doctrine that, for which they were vrged. But rminius) begin. Arminius. I am prepared thereto. And for the ore exact discussing of this point, I  first ouerthrow by proofes the posed certainty of euery particular  Iustice. Now if a man be vncer∣e of his Iustice, which is a meanes  the obtaining of Heauē, then much  must he rest vncertaine of his ation. When I haue discoursed fully of the  ertainty of a Iustifying Fayth, then  I proceed to the impugning, by ofes, of the imaginary Certainty of . Now touching the first point,  ill lay downe (though it be in part  shewed) what is the true state
thereof: To wit, it is in expresse  thus: Whether a man ought or can (wit  speciall reuelation) be assured, through  of diuine fayth, that his sinnes are . In which question (Enthusiast) you, and your party hould the Aff∣tiue, I the Negatiue. Now, in disprouing this ary ∣tainty, I will keep in part my for methode of profes, and will draw  Arguments first frō Reason. My first A∣gument then shalbe this. Nothing  be certaine (crtitudin fidei) throu certainty of Fayth, except it be con∣ned eyther immediatly in the  God, or at least deduced out of  word, by euident consequence;  Fayth groundeth itselfe only vpon  Authority of Gods word. But we  not find eyther immediatly, or by▪ ∣cessary inference in the word of  that this, or that man is truly iustify except some few as May  the Paraliticall Ma, to both who was sayd by our Sauiour: Thy  remitted thee. If the Aduersary should reply▪  to, thus yllogizing: The word  teacheth, that euery one who hath
ntance of his sinnes, is iustifyed; but I  true repentance of my Synnes; there∣re I am iustifyed. I answere heerto, that he Assumption, or second Proposition of his Argument is not only false, but  impossible; except it be proued by iuine Reuelation; Since we read, Iere∣my c. 17. he hart of man is insrutable, and who oweth it? Againe, we obserue, that many are ersuaded to haue that, which indeed hey haue not. This is euident from the xample of S. Peter, who when he sayd: Luc. 22. I am prepared to be imprisoned, and to ffer death, was doubtlesly persuaded, hat he would suffer death for Christ; nd yet the euent shewed, that he was ot truly prepared thereto. Adde heer∣o, that the Anabaptist and Anti-trinita∣lan (both manifest Heretikes) do as confidently vaunt of their certainty of ustification, as any Protestant can do: nd yet it is most euident, that both f them remaine in mortall Sinne, as ng as they continue in such their Re∣ligion, and consequently that they cā∣ot be assured of their Election, but ra∣her assured (during such their state) of Reprobation.
My second Argument is this▪  by speciall benefit of God, it is reueal to some few, that their Sinnes are ∣mitted; so on the contrary syde,  Authenticall Histories record, that di∣uers most blessed, and holy men at th houre of their death, through their  certainty of iustificatiō, did greatly feare According heerto S. Ierome relateth how Hilarion a Holy man thus sayd at the poynt of death: Goe out my Soule out of this body, why art thou afrayd? Se∣uenty yeares thou hast serued Christ;  dost thou now feare? And with this  heere end, touching this kind of Argu∣ment. Enthusiastus. I cannot deny, but that your Ar∣guments drawne from reason, seeme to be very pressing; but I pray you asoe to other proofes. Arminius. My next Head of proofes shall, be take frō the pens of diuers most learne nd Ancient Fathers. And I will satisf my selfe with the sentences of som few (though chiefe) among them▪ W∣fynd▪
Austin thus to write L. de perfect. Iu∣stitiâ post▪ medium. Quatalibet titia &c. with what iustice soeuer man is dud, he ought to thinke, whether any ing be in him, which is to be blamed, hich himselfe seeth not. And againe: Serm. 23. de verb. Domini. rtasse tu nihil &c. Perhaps thou fyndest nothing in thy conscience; inuenit ill, qui elius videt; but he fyndeth in it, who seeth etter, meaning God. And finally the ayd Father▪ In Psalm. 4. Noui, quia iustitia Dei &c▪ I know, that the iustice of God remai∣eth; but whether it remaineth myne, or not, I know not. The Apostles wordes feare me, saying: who thinketh himselfe to stand, let him take heed he doth not fall. Thus Austin. Chrysostome: Homil.  ad . Multis de causis &c. for many causes our▪ iudgement is vncertaine; of which one is, because we know not what our workes are. Ierome. L. in erem ex∣ponens c. . Homo vide tin face, Deus in corde: Man seeth only the face, but God seeth the Hart: and which seemeth to vs sometymes cleane, is found to be most sor∣ide, and foule in his eyes. Finally (to omit many others) Ba∣ll thus writeth of this poynt: In constit. Mon▪ c. ▪ Mul∣a peccantes &c. we sinning in many things, many of such our sinnes, we doe not appre∣end or vnderstand: wherefore the Apostle
said: I am not guilty to my selfe of any  but neuertheles I am not iustifyed in th as much as if he should say; I sinne in many things, but I doe not obserue such my sinn Thus far of the Fathers iudgment, tou∣ching the vncertainty of our Iustifi∣cation. Enthusiastus. I should hardly haue byn persuaded▪ that the Fathers had beene so strong in this point, as now I must confesse they are; but I pray you (Arminius) ryse to your proofes of Scripture, since they are most preuayling. Arminius. Well then, to come to the Holy Scripture: I will restrayne my selfe on∣ly  first to such passages thereof, which in expresse words admonish vs, not to be ouer certayne and confident of our obtayned Iustice. Secondly, to some of  those places, which teach▪ that it is vn∣certayne, whether that man, which performeth his Penitency, do neuer∣theles obtayne remission of his sinnes, or not: and, Lastly I will conclude thi point with a demonstration (for▪ I
terme it no lesse) taken from the xample of Dauid. And to begin with the first sort, we thus read▪ 1. Pet▪ 1. Passe the tyme of your dwel∣ling here in feare. Agayne, Philip. 2. Worke your Saluation with feare and trembling. And finally: Prou. 2. Blessed is that man, who is euer fearefull. But if a man be infallibly as∣sured of his Iustification, how can he be fearefull thereof? To come to the second branch of Texts, teaching, That a man perfor∣ming sorrow, and being penitent for his Sinnes, notwithstanding is not as∣sured of the remission of his Sinnes: Now according hereto we read, Acts 8. Re pent of thy wickednes, and pray to God, si for∣te remittatur tibi; if chance it may be for∣giuen thee. In like sort it is said: . 3. Who can tell, if God will turne and pardon v.? &c. And the same words are in o, c. 2. And finally we further thus read▪ Dniel. 4. Perhaps God will pardon thine offences. Now heere (Enthusiastus) I refere euen to your iudgement, and to the iudgment of all heere present, whether this doubtfulnes of Romission of Sin∣nes, and the former Admonition, that we should not rest ouer secure of our
Iustice (both which points are prooued from the two former Classes of Scri∣pture) stand not wholy incompatible with our Aduersaries persumed infal∣liable certainty of their owne Iustifica∣tion. Enthusiastus. I freely grant, that these Texts do seeme to eneruate and weaken the do∣ctrine of the certainty of Iustification; But I pray you proceed to that exam∣ple of the Prophet Dauid, which aboue (for it is conuincing) you called a De∣monstration. Arminius. Well I come to Dauid, whose example is a sealing Argument, closing vp this point, and affordeth to vs a cer∣tainty of Truth, touching the vncer∣tainty of mans Iustification. Thus then I vrge: Yf Charity can be lost, then fayth can be lost; if Fayth can be lost, then Iu∣stification may be lost. My first propo∣sition is warranted by the doctrine of vs all, D. Fulke against the Rhem. Testa∣ment in 1. Cor. c. 3. sayth: Fayth cannot be with∣out Cha∣rity. who teach, that Charity doth as necessarily accompany a Iustifying fayth, as heate doth the fyre.
That Charity may be lost, is proued from the example of Dauid, who killed Vrias: seeing a voluntary pretended murther (and such was▪ that of Dauids) is a meere priuation of Charity. For how can we loue that man with true Charity, whom we intend to murther, and depriue of his life? Now the Euan∣gelist assureth vs, that 1. Iohn 3. Who loueth not his brother, is not of God, but abideth in death. From hence then the vnauoyda∣ble resultancy is, that Dauid in the mur∣ther of Vrias, and during all the tyme before his repentance thereof was not of God, but for the tyme abode in death, and consequently neyther had Charity nor fayth; for if he had fayth, he had not abyded in death, because it is written: 1. Iohn▪ 3. By fayth the iust man liueth. Enthusiastus. I haue read some of our learned Bre∣thren, labouring to auoyd this Argu∣ment by answering, that Dauids fayth was not lost in his murther of Vrias, but only for the tyme slept. And others doe affirme, that Dauid when he committed murther and adultery, D. Fulke in the dis∣putation in the Tower ann. 1581. the se∣cond daves Confe∣rence. was, and re∣mained the child of God; & did not fall from
his fayth. And another great man amōg vs affirmes, that Beza in respons. ad Act. Colloq. Montis∣belgar. part. alte∣ra P. 73. at one, and the sam time, Dauid sinned, and sinned not. Arminius. Tush (Enthusiastus) all this is but  froath of words, seruing only to blear the eyes of the ignorant; but it is who∣ly dissolued with the least touch of a iudicious finger. And to the first and se∣cond part of your Answere: Either Dauid had fayth at the tyme of his mur∣thering of Vrias, or he had it not (for no Medium can be giuen betweene these two Extremes:) Yf he had fayth, how then could his fayth be said to sleepe? Agayne, the Nature of true fayth re∣quireth, that  should be euer Galat. 5. Wor∣king with Charity, and that without workes it is Ia∣cob. . dead. Yf Dauid hath not fayth at that time, then is that grated, which I demanded, to wit, that Dauid in the murther of Vrias lost his fayth, and con∣sequently was not assured of his Iusti∣fication. Thus you see, that this yours euasion is nothing els, then a poore begging of the point, as granted, which is still in controuersy, to wit, that Da∣uid still kept his fayth, at the tyme h killed
Vrias. Now, to that other last kind of Ans∣were, (to wit, that at one, and the same yme Dauid sinned, and sinned not) I uch wonder, that it did euer fall from  learned mans pen; so phantasticall, explicable, and indeed absurd it is. But to proceed, this Answere implies, hat Dauid sinned (let it be in what espect soeuer the Author of this Ans∣were will haue:) Yf then Dauid sinned, hen Dauid by such his Sinne was the eruant of sinne, and of the Diuell; for we reade that, Iohn. 8. He that committeth inne, is the seruant of Sinne. And againe: He that committeth Sinne, is of the 1. Iohn. . De∣uill. And thus far touching this De∣monstration. Enthusiastus. I grant indeed, that this your Ar∣gument drawne from the example of Dauid is most strong, and I now well erceaue, how sleightly my Answere hereto was wouen, vpon seuerall reeds, but all to illaqueate & ensnare weake iudgment. But (Arminius) you auing now finished (as I take it) all our proofes for the disprouing of the
certainty of mans Iustification  Methode requireth, that you  take the like labour touching the  prouing the certainty of : though I cannot but grant,  the impugning of this later  vertually inuolued in the  of the firster. For let vs once grant,  man resteth vncertayne of his , it then ineuitably from thence  be inferred (as your selfe aboue did i∣timate) that he also resteth vncerta of his Election and Predestination;  Iustification is a necessary Medi Election and Predestination; for no  are elected or predestinated by God,  such as are finally iustifyed. Yet n∣withstanding this most necessary ∣terueniency of these two points,  would willingly heare your particul proofes, for the particular point of t vncertainty of Election o Predestinati▪ Arminius. I will satisfy your desire.  first not to lose tyme, I will keep  former Methode in producing of  proofes. And therefore for the  of Election, and Predestinati▪
gin with Arguments drawne rom Reason. Of which, my first Ar∣ument is this: The knowledge by Fayth of a mans present Iustice is more , then the knowledge by fayth of eternall Predestination; But it is aboue rooued, that no man can tell, whether e be worthy of hate or loue, in respect of his present Iustice, or state in this world; much lesse can he be certayne, whether he be worthy of hate or loue n respect of Gods decree; which decree yeth in the Abismall depth of his owne udgment. My second Argument: We can haue no certaine knowledge of such hings, as depend of the will of God, ut only by manifest reuelation of God himselfe: But Predestination doth de∣pend of the will of God: Therefore Predestination is to man vncertaine. Yf you reply, that God hath reuealed by is spirit in the Scripture, that all those, who rightly belieue, and liue well, shall haue eternall life and beatitude, I grant his is true; but I deny that God euer euealed in Scripture, that all those, who y, they belieue, do rightly belieue and liue  they ought. For if it were sufficient to
say, I do belieue, and liue▪ as I ght to  then should all Heretikes be aued,  euery of them will say, that he be∣lieueth, and liueth as he ought. Th much for some delibation, and tast  what Arguments (omitting diuers o∣thers) may be drawne from, reason  proofe of this verity. But in this next place, I will come to the Testimonies of many Protestant accomplished (in the highest degree with learning, who through the weig of diuine and humane Authority▪ ∣ged in proofe of so warrantable  Truth, haue in the end vpon their more retired and impartiall Iudgments pa∣sed thereupon, wholy comparted with vs in the doctrine heere maintained▪ And to begin with those, who are com∣monly called Caluinists, we fynd▪ that Snecanus, and Hemingius (two learn Caluinists) are so full in this doctrine o the vncertainty of Saluation, 'that D. W∣let (our Aduersary herein  thus re∣hendeth them: In his ops. p. 81. These Patrones of ∣niuersall Grace and conditionall Election  consequently hould, that men may loose  Election and Faith: Hemingius p. 30.  same is also maintayned by necanus. .
hus far D. Willet. D. Harsenet is so full  our doctrine, that he preached in proofe thereof a Sermo at Pauls Crosse. (): M. Perkins (though our Aduersary  this doctrine, yet) through racke of uth is thus forced to confesse of the  M. Perkins in his foure Treatises, necessari∣ly to be conside∣red of all Chri∣stians. Treatise foorth sect. 14. This Testimony of being persua∣ded, that we are adopted & chosen in Christ &c. is weake in most men, and can scarcely  persuaded. And of the Reprobate, who ake themselues to be in the number of he Elect, he further thus teacheth: In the epist to the Ren∣dr in the begin∣ning of therfore said Booke. They may do outwardly all things, which  Christians do; They do willingly subiect thēselues to the Ministry of the word, & are  forward as any, and as ioyfull in frequen∣ing sermons &c. They are also voyd of Hy∣pocrisy, and herein dissemble not that fayth, ich they haue not, but rather shew that ayth which they haue. Thus a man being in this state, may decaue himselfe, and the most godly in the world, which haue the greatest gift of discerning, how they and heir brethren stand be fore the Lord. Thus M. Perkins. And according to this his doctrine, he Anabaptists (who were burned in mithfyeld) euen at their death vaunted f the certainty of their Saluation, and
yet were therein deceaued,  iudgment of Calu. cont. A∣nabaptist. p. 110. & 111. Caluin. But to proce to others. Musculus (the great Pro∣stant) doth thus teach of this point: In loc. Com. loc. de Peccato. sect. . 20. Yf he, who hath beene made partaker of the Heauenly grace, do fall from that Grace,  of a iust and faythfull man, do became,  iust and vnfythfull &c. this mans con∣science (the purity of fayth being lost)  made guilty vnto damnation. And M. Ro∣bert Rollock, once Rectour of the Vni∣uersity of Edenburgh (a man mu esteemed by Beza) thus writeth In his booke of Lectures vpon the epist. of Paul to the Co∣lossian. Lect. 6. c. . p. 4.  tell thee, that notwithstanding thou art r∣deemed, and by this bloud of Christ fee from Sinne and death; yet if thou taest delight in Sinne, the greater shall be thy damnation. Now to come to others, common∣ly stiled Lutheranes. And to passeouer n Theolog. Calunist. l. . ar 14. Wo there re∣proueth Caluin, Zanhius, and the Diuines of Gnoua. Conradus Schlussenburg, In loi Theolog. pag 188.  331. Haffnref∣fensis Professour in the Vniuersity of Tubing, In dis∣put 7 ex epist. Pauli ad Cor. posteriori parte Th∣fi 5. Rungius Professour in the Vniuersity of Wittemberg, In epitom. Colloq. Montis∣belgar p. 47. & 6. Iaco Andraeas, In dis∣put 17. pro san∣ctissimo libro Con∣cord. dis∣put. 10. p. 650. Gesnerus Professour in W∣tmberg, and diuers other learned fol∣lowers of Luther, all maintayning  vncertainty of Saluation; we  Mclancthon thus expresly to  o
Me∣lanct. in Concil. Theolog. pag. 112. Excidunt homines à gratia &c. Men do fall from Grace, and do loose their iustifying grace &c. In like sort In the harmony of Con∣fssions in English. pag. 24. the Confession of Auspurg condemneth the doctrine of Certainty of Saluation for Anabaptis∣me. And accordingly In his Disputat. Theolog. p. 317. & 318. Loechius (Do∣ctor, and Professour in the Vniuersity of Restocke) defendeth our doctrine heerein, and he alleadgeth in proofe thereof the Confession of Augusta, and diuers Texts of Scripture, charging the defendours of the contrary doctrine, with Anabapticticall Errour. In like sort, Kempnitius writeth thus of this point: Kmp∣nit. in his Exm. Concil. Trident. printed ano 1578. part. 2. p. 193. & vi∣de part.  pag 19. True liuely iusti∣fying fayth may be lost, and the party made guilty of eternall damnation. Finally (not to charge your memory with a surplu∣sage of the learned Protestants iudg∣ment heerein) the Protestant Diuines of Saxony do in their publike Confession thus teach. In the Harmony o confes∣sions in English. p. 80. & p. 33. It is manifest, that who are regenerate &c. are agayne reiected by God, nd made subiect to eternall punishment. And further: Har∣mony &c. p. 195. Iustification and regene∣ration may be shaken of, and we lose eternall fe. Thus much touching the most lear¦ed Protestants in this matter of Vncer∣ty of Election, and Predestination.
Enthusiastus. Indeed I rest halfe amazed at the pregnant Testimonies of so many o our owne learned Brethren in defenc of this your doctrine, and I freely con∣fesse, I would neuer haue belieued, that so many of them, and of such eminen∣cy, had with so strong an endeauo maintayned the same, but that I fy you so punctuall and precise in allead∣ging their owne cleare wordes in  halfe thereof. But I pray you (Ar∣nius) proceed to other of your propfes. Arminius. Before I proceed to other proofes, I must subnect to this former discours one obseruation touching the iudg∣ments of our owne learned and Reue∣rend Brethren, either in this point,  in the doctrine of Freewill aboue dis∣puted of, or of any other point hereaf∣ter to be discoursed of betweene  this tyme. The obseruation is this: that whereas all these eminent Protestants already produced by me▪ or hereafter  be produced, do with an vnani consent teach, That no dogma▪
point is to be belieued, as an Article of ayth (they wholy reiecting all Tradi∣ions) but what hath its proofe out of the Scripture, either immediatly in ex∣presse wordes, or els by necessary infe∣ence deduced from the Scripture; that therefore we may truly inferre, that all these Learned men doe ground them∣selues only vpon Scripture, for their maintayning of the said doctrines; and consequently that they conspire with me in the expositions of the said passa∣ges of Scripture, already or hereafter to be alleaged by me. And further, seeing the Scripture cannot teach contrary doctrines; it followeth, that our said learned Bre∣thren by me produced, do interpret with vs (and contrary to your constru∣ction giuen of them) all such Counter∣texts of Scripture heretofore vrged, or hereafter to be vrged by you (Enthusia∣stus) for the impugning of those our said doctrines. And now this Aduerti∣sement being premised, I hasten in this next place to the Authority of the An∣cient Fathers and Doctours of Christs Church. And first, Gregory the Great thus
writeth: In primum Regum. Quia  Dei imperscrutabile est &c. Because  iudgment of God is vnsehe able, therof  man knoweth not from whence be commeth or whither he goeth: The Reason hereof be∣ing, in that it cannot be knowne, whether a man shall perseuere vnto his end in th Grace, which he receaueth. Prosper: L. . de vocatione Gentium. cap. vltim. De nullo ante ipsius  &c. We cannot pronounce before hand of  any man, that he shall be in the glory of the Elect. And this profitable feare doth pre∣serue in man a perseuering humility, that  who standeth may take heed, that he doe  fall. Austin is most full, thus writing: De Ciuit. Dei. l. 2. c. 12.  Licet Sancti de suae perseuerantiae praemin  certisunt, de ipsa tamen perseuerantia su reperiuntur incerti &c. Although Holy men be assured of the reward of their perse∣uerance; yet of their perseuerance it selfe▪ they are found to be vncertaine. For what man can know, that he shall perseuere i practise and progresse of Iustice till his end, except it be made knowne to him by some Reuelation? Againe the same Father thus fur∣ther amplifyeth vpon this point: L. de Corept. & gratia. c. 13. Quis ex multitudine fidelium &c. Which of
the multitude of the faythfull, as long as he  in this mortality can presume himselfe  in the number of the predestinate? And further, speaking of Election, he thus sayth: L. de bono per∣seuerantiae▪ c. 13. Vtrum quis hoc munus &c. It is vncertaine who hath receaued this gift, as long as he leadeth this life. Ierome subscribes to the same cen∣sure, thus writing: L. 2. aduers. Pelagium. Ne beatum dixeris uempiam antemortem &c. Thou shalt not tell any man blessed before his death: for as long as we liue, so long we are in battayle, or sight; And as long as we are in battayle, so long there is no certaine Victory. To contract this point touching the Fathers iudgements herein, I will and with Chrysostome; his wordes are these: Hom. 1. in epist. ad  hp. Si Paulus, qui tanta passus est &c. Yf S. Paul, who suffred so great matters, was not yet secure of his Resurrection, what then hall we say? Thus far concerning the Fathers in the point of Vncertainty of man Election, or Predestination. Enthusiastus. I can reply little to these so cleare and euident places of the Fathers; and indeed I cannot but confesse, that the aid Fathers did wholy teach the do∣ctrine,
which now you a this  do defend. But I am derous to  what Texts you can produce out  Gods sacred Writ, to fortify this, th Fathers, and your doctrine. Arminius. Gods Holy word affoardeth plen∣tifull store thereof; & those so illustri∣ous and euident, that both the Father & the former alledged Brothren migh securely rest themselues thereon,  teaching and belieuing of this doctrin And to beginne. I will reduce my Au∣thorities for aduantaging your memo∣ry vnto certaine Heads, as in my for∣mer proofes I haue done. Now my first Head shall contayne such Texts, as teach that our Saluation doth partly depend vpon the Cōdition of our wor∣kes: but if it be vncertaine, whether a man shall continue in the exercise of good workes; then must it follow, that our Saluation (as partly resting vpon our workes) must be most vncertaine. Of this Nature (among others) are these(r) 2. Tim. 2. few Texts following: No man shall crowned, but who shall lawfully fight. A∣gaine: Math. 1. Yf thou wilt enter into lyfe,
Commandements. And more. Rom. 8. If so  suffer with him, that we may be also ifyed with him. And lastly: Math. . Except.  Iustice do abound more, then the  of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not ter into the Kingdome of Heauen. Enthusiastus. To these Texts it may well perhaps be replyed, that good workes are re∣uired to Saluation, not as a Conditiō vpon which eternall lyfe dependeth; but only because true fayth cannot be without good workes: since bad and wicked workes (we obserue by expe∣rience) do exile, and banish away all true fayth. Arminius. I do not heere labour to search the reason, why good workes are necessa∣ry (since this to the present point is im∣pertinent) only I rest satisfyed, if you grant, that good workes are necessa∣rily required, and that without them, we canot obtaine eternal life: for once admitting this, then it most consequētly may be inferred, that no man without speciall Reuelation can assure himselfe
to be of the number of the Elect: seeing no man (euen in the iudgement of ou Aduersaries in this doctrine) can re assured, whether he performeth, & sha to his liues end performe all such good workes, as are prescribed by Christ to him to exercise. My second branch of Scripturall. Testimonies shall respect those Scrip∣tures which counsell vs to Feare, tou∣ching our spirituall state. Among o∣thers these heer alledged shall serue: Philip. 2. Worke your Saluation, with feare and trembling. Againe: the Prophet exhor∣teth, thus saying: Psalm. 2. Serue the Lord in feare, and reioyce in trembling: Apprehend discipline, least the Lord be angry, and you perish out of the iust way. And more Apec. 3. Hold fast that thou hast, least another take thy crowne. And further . Cor. 10. who standeth, let him take heed, he do not fall. And last∣ly (to omit many other such like feare∣full admonitions:) Iohn. Looke to, that you do not loose things, which you haue wrought. Now to what end are all these dreadfull Sentences, if so a man be certayne of his owne Predestination?
Enthusiastus. These sentences of the Holy Scri∣pture(*) So answere Calum vbi suprà & Kemp∣nit. in Exam. Concil. Trident. may be well deliuered only to ex∣ell that torpour, sluggishnes, and car∣all security, which otherwise maketh Christians negligent in good workes: et from hence it followeth not, that a∣y danger should be, that the Iust should. finally fall from their Saluation. Arminius. If this your Answere were solide and satisfactory, then would it follow, (a thing not once to be dreamed) that the Holy Ghost should persuade men to Infidelity, by persuading them to feare their owne saluation. For doth not he persuade a mā to Infidelity, who should persuade him to feare & rest doubtfull, whether Christ be the sonne of God, or o? Therefore when we are comman∣ded to feare, we ought not, nor can∣not rest certayne (certitudine fidei) that we are of the number of the pre∣destinated: though we may and ought to haue great hope thereof. But to pro∣ceed to a third Head The sacred Scripture teacheth,. that diuers who for a tyme, haue belie∣ued,
yet after haue mdeship wrack their fayth. And according hereto  read thus▪ . Tim. 4. In the later dayes, there sh depare certaine from the fayth. And ∣gaine: Vi supr. c. 6. Errant a side, they  from the fayth. Now the Scripture te∣cheth vs, that t is vncertaine, whe a man losing once grace and ayth sha after be restored to grace and fayt▪ For (as I obserued aboue) it is said. Iol. 2. Quis scit, si conuertatur, & Dominus i∣noscat? Who knoweth, if he will returne that God may pardon him? Now, if many belieuing truly▪  after fall from their fayth, & are  by become Reprobates, and that they  not assured, that after they shall be  stored to the Fayth and Grace of God (as these Testimanies next aboue  do proue▪) what other  can be made, then that a man in not c∣taine of his Iustification, and cons∣quently of his Predestination? seeing c∣tainty of Predestination (as is abou  cannot be had without certainty  Perseuerance in fayth and Iustice,  proper Medium of Predestination, with∣out which Predestination cannot be ob∣tained.
To all these former sacred passages Scripture, alleadged in proofe of the n certainty of mans Predestination, ay be addressed these passages fol∣owing, though not already ranged to ny Classe or Head: Hebr. 4 Yf we abide in his oodnes, otherwise we shall be cut off. A∣ayne: . Tim. . ▪ Some do repell fayth, and a good Conscience, Gal. ▪ and are fallen from Grace. And more Hebr. 6. Some, who were once illumi∣ated, haue tasted also the heauenly gift, & ere partakers of the Holy Ghost &c. are fallen, and so dangerously, that it is im∣possible (meaning therby, very hard) for hem to be renewed againe to repentance. And yet further: Rom. 11. The boughes may be oken of. Yea we read, that those, who are said Exod. 32. & Psalm. 6. to be written in Gods booke (to wit, in regard of their present Grace & ustice) are notwithstanding said vpon their replase, or fall, See Moyse word hereof in Exod. 3. and Gods Answere thereto. to be razed, or lotted foorth. Now then in regard of the vncer∣ainty of mans Iustification, Election, and Predestination (prooued from these & many other Texts of Gods Holy word aboue produced) the Apostle had reasō to burst forth into this exclamation: Rom. 11.  how incomprehensible are his iudgments?
Lord, or  Which oly Apostle out of hi  vncertainty of Predestination, in  and carefull manner  himselfe: Philip. 3. If by any meanes,  come to the Resurrection, which is  dead; 1. Cor.  . Least perhaps, when I haue  to others, my selfe become a And thus far from the Holy  touching the vncertainty of our  and Predestination; putting  in mynd, Enthusiastus, as afore I  done, that all the former proofes  alledged out of Scripture eyther for  fortifying of Freewill in man, or  impugning of the certainty of , do implicitly and conseque prooue the vncertainty of Predes∣tion. For once granting Freewill to in man, or that his present Iustice is  certaine; then followeth it, that by freedome of will, he may relinq his former Iustice, and thereupon  his Predestination. Enthusiastus. Arminius I partly yield to you  this discourse, in regard of the
ptinent Authorities by you alledged: But yet before we giue the st close to this our disputation, we are according to my intended methode, to discourse of the Questiō of Reprobation, inersly holden by you and me. Tou∣ching the which doctrine I must afore∣hand say: that in regard of these our former disputes of Freewill, Iustification and Predestination my diuining thoghts partly foretell me, that your Proofes wilbe perhaps as forcing for that, as they seeme to haue beene for these for∣mer doctrines. Notwithstanding I would most willingly haue this Question through∣ly discussed, before we breake of. And therefore what Authorities eyther out of the word of God, or otherwise I shall alleadge in proofe of the doctrine, I hould therein; I alledge them, not so much with an absolute and resolued mynd of contradicting, as with a de∣sire of receauing full Answere and sa∣tisfaction from you, touching the said Authorities. Arminius. I doubt litle, but I shall be as able
to vnty those knots of doub  yet you haue in the Question of , as already I haue done in the for∣mer. Therefore Enthusiastus you  proceed to instance in your authori∣tyes, which may seeme (though but in an impartiall eye) to fortify your do∣ctrine, yet imbraced by you therein. Enthusiastus. I will, and continuing in the  of the methode by me aboue obseru▪ I will first produce my testimonies  of the holy Scriptures. But before  come to them, I hould it very pertin to shew, what the chiefe Patron  Reprobation do hould therein. Thus  some chiefe men and their fellowers  write: Beza in his Trea∣tise en∣glished, and inti∣tuled: A display of Popish practises. p. 7. & 31. That God doth create some  to perdition, appointeth them to his  and destruction: and againe, that God  decree them to destruction. Further main∣tayning (to vse their owne wordes▪ Beza in respons. ad Acta Colloq. Montis∣belg. pag. 25. & 1. That God did not suffer death for the But some others, as remarkable as th former, more fully enlarge themselu thus endoctrinating their Schollers: Calu. instit. l. 3. c. 23 sect. . God doth ordaine by his Councell and decr that among men, some be borne
dmnation frō their mothers wombe who by their destruction may glorify God. Arminius. This doctrine is of so horrid a na∣ture, as that I can hardly be induced to belieue, that any good Christian will euer maintayne it in so full a manner, as it is by you literally deliuered; but rather they teach it with some qualifi∣cation and mitigation; as perhaps their meaning is, that God doth ordaine some to destruction, by reason of his fore∣sight of their wicked liues; And also that Christ did dye for the Reprobate, non efficaciter, but sufficienter, not effe∣ctually; whereby the Reprobate should actually partake of the benefit of his death (if so themselues will) but only sufficiently; that is, that his death was of sufficient valew in it selfe to saue the Reprobate. Enthusiastus. I would to God (Arminius) I could thus charitably (and withall truly) a∣pologize for my owne Brethren, as you (though their Aduersary herein) do now in their behalfe. But the matter
standeth so, as that their owne  do wholy preclude them of all such ∣uourable Constructions. For first, to your firster wordes, touching God▪ foresight of the wicked liues of the Re∣probate; one of them in expresse word thus writeth: D. Willet in Synops. p. 554. God hath ordayned  to be vessels of wrath, without any respect  to their workes, either good, or bad. And another as plainly teacheth, thus say∣ing: Peter Martyr in his Com∣mon Places. part. 3. pa. 12. Sinnes foreseene, are not the caus of Reprobation. And as touching the distinction (by you deliuered) of Christ suffering suf∣cienter, not efficaciter; some of our most learned Brethren (I relate it wi griefe) call this distinction, Beza in Res∣pons. ad Act. Col∣loq. Mou∣isbelg. part. alte∣ra. pag. 217. & 221. A me∣tergiuersation, and impertinent to the point in question: and therefore the same lea∣ned mā restraineth the death of Christ in these wordes, ad solos Electos; to wi that his death was only for the Ele▪ Yea they proceed so far herein, as that they peremptorily maintayne (pardo me in relating their owne words) that Beza in Res∣pons. ad Act. Montis∣belg part. altera. in Praefat. pag. 11. & 1. many Infants (meaning of belieuing Parents) though baptized, are damned  the secret decree of God.
Arminius. You haue sufficiently inough laid open your owne Brethrens blemishes and scarres; So full hould (it seemes) those words of Austin hath taken of you: Contr Donatist. post Col. . 24. Truth is more forcible to wring out Confession, then any Rack or Torment.) But now if it please you, you may come to your proofes of Scriptures, for this their doctrine: Only I must tell you by the way, that the more direfull and exe∣crable any doctrine is, the further off it is from receauing any fortifying from the word of God, being deliuered in its true and natiue sense, or Construction. Enthusiastus. I fully graunt so much with you: Neuertheles for my owne further satis∣fying (since vnresolued doubts secretly beate vpon the vnderstanding) I will relate the chiefest Texts vrged, by my Brethren in defence of this their do∣ctrine. First then they insist in those wordes: 1. Pet. . Christ Obie∣cted by Beza in Annot. in Nou. Te∣stam. in 1. Petr. c. . is the chiefe Cor∣ner stone &c. vnto you, which belieue, pre∣tious; but vnto them that belieue not &c. a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, to
them, which stumble at the word, being dis∣bedient, vnto which things they were ord∣ned. From hence now they inferr that God was the Authour of their d∣obedience, to the which disobedie they were by God ordained; and cons∣quently ordayned to damnation, the fruit of their disobedience. Arminius. The difficulty of this Text rest in those last wordes, Vnto which thing (meaning in your brethrens sense, dis∣bedience, and stumbling at the Word)  were ordayned. But heere I iustify,  Translation is not pure and sinc since the words, viz, They were ordayned haue true reference vnto those form words, vz, Which belieue; And so th true meaning of this place is, that t were ordayned to belieue. And thus y see, this place being truly vrged, ma∣keth directly against your Brethren. Now I iustify this my Answere fro the Greeke Text; the words are th . Nec credunt  quo & positi sunt. The sense thereof being, that  were ordayned to belieue, but did not.
point is so euident, that diuers learned Protestants do giue the same constru∣ction thereof with me. For Snecanus re∣citing the Text in these wordes: In Method. descript. pag. 701. N credunt▪ in quod positi fuerant, neither do they belieue, vnto which they were orday¦ned, thus answereth: Refertur propriè à doctissimis &c. This last clause is properly referred by most learned and Orthodoxall men, yea euen by Caluin himselfe, to the Iewes, who were placed to belieue. And the very same Construction thereof is gi∣uen by In de∣fens. Translat. pag. 152. 153. 154. Castalio: So little doth this Text aduantage your Brethren, but ra∣ther disaduantage them: and yet your Brethrens integrity and candour was wanting in their translating the Greeke word, . were ordayned; the word truly signifying only Positi erant. But proceed to others. Enthusiastus. The next shalbe that passage: Pro∣uerb. ape 16. The Lord Obie∣cted by D. Full against the Rhem. Testam. in Rom. 9. fol. 2, 3. made all things for himselfe, euen the wicked for the day of Euill. From whence my Brethren deduce, that God maketh, or createth wicked men to E∣ternity of damnation, which may be truly called, The day of Euill.
Arminius. Doe your Brethren rge this  to proue, that God maketh  men to be wicked? Yf so, how th,  they free God, from being the  of Sinne? A Paradox, or rather a blasph my (As D. Fulk in his de∣fence of the En¦glish Transla∣tion. pag. 500. D. Whi∣tak contra Duraeum. 1. 8. pag. 524 besides that diuers of themsel∣ues shame, at least in wordes, to be re∣puted Patrones therof) directly repu∣gnant to other Texts of Scripture,  where it is said: Psalm. 5. Non Deus volens i∣quitatemtues. Thou art a God, that wo∣dest not iniquity. Is it not their intentio to draw the foresaid Infrence  those wordes? To what end then  they alleadge it, since it is then in  respect most impertinētly vrged? Ho doe they extricate themselues out of this Labyrinth? Therefore for the better deprehen∣ding the true Construction of the fore∣said passage, we are to conceaue, that Gods making, or creating of man in the for∣mer words hath reference to mans Ma∣teriality (if I may vse that word) that  to him, as he is man, abstracting him from his Morality; but it hath no ref∣rence to his wickednes: so man (as he  man)
is created by God, but as Man is icked, he cannot be sayd to be created f him; since in this later sense God ould be the cause and Authour of his ckednes, whereas his wickednes is om himselfe. And so if he be wicked, en God ordayneth him to the day of Euill, that is, to the day of punishment; nd this he doth, for himselfe, that is, for  owne glory. The lyke saying by Ana∣gy, may be vsed of Princes, who may  a restrayned sense) be sayd to or∣aine Malefactours to punishments;  yet the Princes are neither willing, or Authours of their Subiects offēces. This our exposition of the former place  so naturall and genuine, as that it is acknowledged for true by In his Decads in English p. 404. Builinger, In Method. Theolog. pag. 438. Hiperius, and Philp n his disput Theolog. de Proui∣denia . sect. 17. Marbachius, all learned Protestants. Enthusiastus. What Answere Arminius can be gi¦uen to that (at least seeming) pregnāt Text: Rom. 9. Hath not the Potter M. Wille i Synops. 554. power o∣uer the clay, euen of the same lumpe, to make one vessell vnto honour, and another vnto dishonour? What if God witing to shew his wrath &c. suffered with long patience the
vessels of wrath, ordayned to  Now this place seemeth to ict  God euen without any prouisiō  ordaineth some men (being  the Masse, or Lumpe of mankind)  damnation. Arminius. I will be partly silent herein, & A∣stin, with some learned Brethren of  owne, & the Apostle himselfe shall  were thereto for me. And first I  Austin to paraphrase this Text in  wordes: Epist. 10. ad Paulinum. & epist. 105. ad Sixtum. Haec Massa &c. Yf this  (he meaning the Masse, or Lump whereof the Apostle speaketh) were  indifferent, that as it deserued no good,  so it deserued no Euill; not without cause i might be thought iniquity, that thereof there should be made certaine vessels to dishonour▪ But seeing, that by the Freewill of the first man, the whole Masse did become guilty of Condemnation, it is without doubt of Gods mercy, that thereof are made certain V∣sels to honour &c. and of his Iudg (meaning his Iustice) that other  are made to dishonour. Thus far Austin According to whose iudgment we  that it is not Gods absolute
without respect to mans wickednes rseene; but it is Sinne, which is the use, why some vessels are made to honour, or damnation. Now Hyperius (a learned Prote∣ant) shall further answere for me, ho sayth, That In Method. Theolog. l. 2. pag. 438. the long patience (mentioned in the Text) wherewith God suffred the Vessels of wrath, demonstrateth, that they were created good, and afterward  came euill of their proper will; They being ade vessels of wrath, because voluntarily they were to become Euill. Thus Hiperius: So certaine it is, that their Creation of being Vessels was of God; but being Ves∣sels of wrath, was from their sinnes fore∣seene. I will conclude this point euen with the Apostles explanation of this place, who expressely sayth; That 2. Tim. if a Vessel vnto dishonour, shall cleanse it selfe, it shall become a Vessel vnto Honour: So far was the Apostle from iudging, that God did absolutely ordayne any man to destruction and damnation, without respect and reference to his Sinnes and Impiety. Thus farre of this place, illu∣strated by the Apostle, Austin, and the former learned Protestant. And for the
closure of all, I will alyne to  Authorities, my owne Obseru  touching our Aduersarius, in this C∣trouersy, their trāslating out of  for their owne aduantage, these wor Ordayned to destruction; whereas it  the Greeke only,  that is, Made apt to destruction. And c∣cording hereto, it is in the Latin T Apta ad interitum. Enthusiastus. I cannot, nor will not reply again the Apostles iudgement herein: But y there remayne behind diuers  passages of Scripture (as I may tear them) that a man can hardly fall vp them without danger: As where w read: Act. 1. As many as were ordayned to ∣ternall life, belieued; implying hereby  the restraint of the former words, that some were ordained to destruction. Arminius. This Argument may be tak away seuerall wayes. First, because  speaketh only of the Predestinate;  touching (at least in words) the Rep∣bate▪
Secondly, that admitting, the ords of the Text were by sequele to oncerne the Reprobate: yet they prooue ot (which is only the issuable point in his controuersy to be proued) a reall Reprobation, or ordaining to damnation without respect of Sinne foreseene, but only a not ordayning to Mercy, or a dust dereliction of the wicked for their owne Sinnes. Thirdly and lastly I say, That wher∣as these former wordes are deliuered by S. Luke, & withall whereas our Ad∣uersaries Inference heer is, That those, who did not then belieue, were ordayned to damnation: now to dreame, that the o∣pinion of our Aduersaries should be the true meaning of S. Luke, is (I will not say improbable, but) most absurd. My reason is this: The Text there she∣weth, that, Act. 13. The whole Citty came togeather to heare, viz: that Sermon. By which words it appeareth, that this as∣sembly consisted of all sorts of persons, s yong, old, women, men &c. Now who is so stupid as to thinke, that of all that great concourse, they only were saued, who at that tyme were conuer∣ed by that Sermon? For shall we think
that all the rest of that assembly  Reprobates, and could not after be  to the fayth of Christ? So  you see (Enthusiastus) in a ∣trutination of the wordes, this  alleadged. But proceed further; For  assure myself, I shall not meet in all this discourse with any one Text, which will force my vnderstanding; much lesse necessarily euict the point que∣stioned. Enthusiastus. I take your Answere as partly ¦tisfying; but because there are some f Texts behind, which by my neere ∣tercourse among my Brethren, I  heard them produced by them, with great confidence in proofe of Rep∣bation; Therfore I am loath to  them ouer in silence, without hearing from your selfe, what Constructio you and your party doe giue of them. The next therefore shallbe  passage, which my Brethren haue  vanting wordes euer much prysed,  therfore I should be the more willing to receaue a sufficient and irrepli answere therto. The T i this: Rom. .
shall serue the yonger; I loued Iacob,  hated Esau. From which wordes  inferre, that God euen from his others wombe hated Esau, and there∣re without regard of his euill workes d reprobate him. Arminius. Indeed this is the Maister-peece in all your shopps. But I hope (Enthus.) shallbe able to giue you full satisfa∣tion herein; wherby you may partly esemble this passage to lightning and thunder, which are fearefull to the eye, nd do but seldome hurt. And first I ay, that if there were no other Ans∣were then this following, yet it were sufficient. We know, that S. Peter admo∣nisheth vs, that 2. Pet. 3. in Pauls Epistles are hings hard to be vnderstood. Now, amōg other places of this nature, this passage of Scripture touching Iacob and Esau, was euer accounted the most difficult. Heere then I demand, what equity or eason is it, that this one place (being fraught with obscurity and spinosity) should seeme in any mans iudgment, to frustrate and make void so many most leare, euident, and illustrious Texts
vrged to the cory?  said: 2. Pet. 3. He would not, that any , but all to repent. Agayne; Ezech. 8.  not the death of him that dth; but Ezech. 33.  he turne from his wayes, and liue;  many other like most expresse  monies, hereafter by  to be insis vpon. Secondly, I say, that if we admi this hatred of God to Esau; yet this  hatred is not to be taken Positiuely,  euen as the See Christ∣mannus in his dia∣graphe Electionis. pag. 78. and Se∣canus in his Me∣thod. des∣cript. pag. 517. learned Protestants  explayne, Negatiuly, that is to say,  not to loue, or not to haue mercy: And ∣cording to this my construction,  fynd diuers examples in Scripture,  fering the like interpretation, as wh it is said: Luc. 14. If any man come to me,  hate not his Father and Mother &c.  agayne (besydes diuers such oth  Iohn. 12. He that hateth his life, shalt keep &c. in all which places, the word,  hate, or Hatred, doth only signify  Not lauing of life, & Parents, accord to acertaine measure and respect,  not, a Positiue hostile hatred. Thirdly I answere, that supp that in the foresaid sentence, I loued  cob, and hated Esau, the word,
to be taken, positiuely; yet this Hatred cannot be vnderstood of Esau, as he is Gods Creature; for we reade, hat, Wis∣dom. 11. of those things, which he made,  dted none: much lesse then man, who was made Gen. 1. according to his owne image: but this Hatred is to be vnderstood on∣ly of the Sinne of Esau, as euen Beza in his display of Popish practises▪ pag 17. thus saith: We both confesse, that God condem∣neth no∣thing in men but guiltines. Beza acknowledgeth, which Sinne God did foreknow, but did neuer make. Now that Gods foresight and hatred of Esau his Sinne (which point this Text only proueth) is not repugnant to Freewill in Esau, is made cleare aboue, by my former reconciling of Freewil with Gods foreknowledge, and preuision. Lastly I reply, that euen according to the iudgements of Ges∣nerus in disput ac∣pro lib. Concord. p. 620 & 6. Christ∣mannus in his Diagra∣phe Ele∣ctionis. c. 9. p. 72. 73 7. Kimo∣donns in his Re∣demption of ma∣kind. p. 94. diuers learned Protestants: and as the contexture of the place sheweth, the first part thereof is taken out of Genis. 25. Genesis, the second part out of Ma∣lach. 1. Malachy; and that there fore, as the context of Malachy & other wordes of Genesis doe further make eui∣dent, the whole sentence aboue alled∣ged touching Iacob and Esau, is to be vn∣derstood only of the seuerall posterities of Iacob and Esau: to wit, of the felicity of the one, and the infelicity or calami∣ty
of the other: vnder which two ∣sterities the different states of the  & Gentils are adūbrated & shadowe. But because the displaying of this poi is of it selfe not conducing to our Qu∣stion in hand, and requireth a farre lon∣ger discourse, then the shortnes of th tyme will affoard: therefore I purpose∣ly forbeare to enlarge my selfe further therin. And thus mūch now aboue said, concerning your Gordians knot, which you, and other of your Brethren thin so hard to loose and dissolue. Enthusiastus. Learned Arminins. I feare, that heertofore I did much vnderualue you: & I rest fully satisfied with your great variety of Answeres to the former Au∣thority: and heerafter I shall neuer take it as a cōuincing Text for the proofe of Reprobation. But now after I haue al∣ledged all the chiefe Texts (as I take ) which seeme immediatly and expre∣ly to concerne Reprobation or damna∣tion, without preuision of workes▪ there remaine som other behind, which are vrged by diuers, but this by way o inference and deduction only, for
proofe of the sayd point of Reprobation: which I will propose to you, to receaue your solutions of them. Of which nū∣ber the first sort of Texts seemeth to prooue, that God hardeneth the hart of of man, so as he cannot exercise vertue, or obtaine his owne Saluation. As where it is sayd: Exod. c. 11. God hardened the hart of Phara. In like manner, we read: Iohn. 11. Therefore they could not belieue, because as Esay said: He hath blinded their eyes, & hardened their hart. And more fully: Esay. 63. Why hast thou made vs to erre from thy wayes, and hardened our harts? And lastly (besides many other like sayings:) Rom.  Ne deliuered them vp into a reprobate sense. Arminius. To these I answere, that God is sayd to harden mans hart, not positi∣uely (to vse the Schoole mens former Dialect) but only Negatiuely; that is, as Epist. 105. ad Sixtum. Austin teacheth, not by giuing ma∣lice, but by not affoarding him grace: Since God in respect of mans former sinnes withdraweth his Grace; and through that forbearance of his Grace, mans hart is sayd to be hardned. Thus
this Induratiō is not properly God  but only by his permission▪ but it is  owne Act. This Construction is cons∣nant to the Iudgment of the Anci Fathers▪ For euen Caluin himselfe ( elswhere is sayd) speaking of Indura∣tion, thus confesseth, of the Fathers Iustit. l. . c. 4. sect. 3. All the Ancient Fathers were afrayd  confesse the truth of this matter: And Au∣stin truly was not free sometimes from thi superstition▪ as where he sayth▪ that Indu∣ration and excecation pertayne not to  working of God, but to his fore knowledg▪ Yea which is more, diuers Me∣lancthon in loc. Com. de cus Poc∣cati & Couting. Bulling in his Decads in English pag. 49. 49.  Polanus in Parti∣tion. Theolog. l. . pag. 75. 76 Besy∣des di∣uers o∣thers. learn Protestants do expound with me  heardning of Pharao's heart, to be  the Act of God, but only his permissio. Now, that Gods Permission should be called his worke, is frequent and ob∣uious in the Scripture; a where Esay sayth: Esay 6. Make the hart of this people  and shut their eyes. Which point in Esay▪ S. Iohn deliuereth in like wordes, say∣ing: Iohn 12. He hath blinded their eyes. Yet our Math. 1. Sauiour, and Act. 28. S. Paul alleaging th same saying out of Esay, insteed of th former wordes, say only▪ They  blinded their eyes; so referring this blind∣nes, to the Act of themselues, and  to
the Act of God, but only by permis∣ion. In like sort, God is said to haue Iob. 1. & 2. fflicted Iob. And yet it is cleare by peru∣ing the History, that God only permit∣ed the Diuell to afflict him. Yea which  more, concerning▪ the very Text a∣boue alleaged touching the hardening of Pharaos heart; it is els where explay∣ed and expressly said: Exod. . That, Pharao did harden his owne heart. Therefore to conclude this point, Induration is not properly the worke of God, but only his permission, and forsa∣king the party for precedent Sinnes. Which reason of Induration is particu∣erly alleadged by the Prophet in these wordes▪ Psalm. 81. My people would not heare my voyce, and Israd would none of me, so I gaue hem vp to the darknes of their Hart. And hus farre in answere of all such Texts, which do seeme to imply, that God  Hurden the Hart of man, or deliuer him vp to a Reprobate sense. Enthusiastus. I take this your solution most sor∣ting to the Analogy of Fayth, expressed in other passages of Scripture by you lleaged, as also concordant to the iudg∣ment
both of the Ancient Fathers,  diuers learned Protestant. But to pr∣ceed further: I haue often heard all∣ged in proofe of Reprobation, that in  betraying of Christ, Iudas and the oth wicked with him, did (as the T sayth) Act. 4. What the hand and Councell of God decreed to be. And further it is said  Act. . Him &c. being deliuered by the deter∣minate Councell of God, haue you crucifyed▪ These places make ouerture, that God euen ordained Iudas, and the rest of those consorting Iewes, by the prod∣tion of Christ, to damnation. Arminius. In full Answere hereto, I must ∣cur to certaine principles in diuinity▪ acknowledged by all learned Buca∣nus in loc. Com. lib. 36. pag. 404. Amandus Polanus in Parti∣tion. Theolog. l. 1. p. 73. & 70. D. Whit. contra Duraum. l. 8. pag. 27. Prote∣stants; to wit, that in euery wick Action, we are to consider (as  where is shewed) what is therein Pos∣tiue or Materiall, and to distinguish  separate it from the malice or deformity, which is in euery said wicked Action▪ That which is Materiall (as hauing in it selfe an Entity or Being, proceed from God, in whom it is said, Act. 7. W liue and moue. But the Malignity o ¦rmity
in euery wicked Action, is in it lfe (as being a deuiation from the ue vse of Reason) a mere priuation, or fect, and hath no Entity or being; and consequently doth not proceede from God; since as L. 1. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 7. Austin truly teacheth: Priuations and defects haue no Efficient, but a deficient Cause▪ And therefore such priuations, or defects proceede only from our selues. Now to apply this doctrine to the Authority vrged; certaine it is, that the death and Passion of our Sauiour was of God, for the Redemption of mankind; But the prodition and particular Im∣piety of Iudas and his Complices, in putting our Sauiour to death, was of themselues, and not of God, nor his Councell, will, or causing, but of their owne malice against Christ: Which malice of Iudas and the rest, God did foreknow, and suffer, but neuer willed or decreed it. Therefore Sitzlinus (a learned Protestant) writeth well of these former Texts, thus saying: In dis∣putat. Theolog. de proui∣dentiâ Dei &c. sect. 44. The words (Hand and Counsell) signify the good and healthyfull End, for which God permitted that wicked fact of the Iewes, which he did neyther assist nor allow. Thus you see, that
from the former  we cannot , that God in cited or caused Iuda  commit that wicked act,  it be∣ing committed through his owne  impious mind and disposition, God  his Hand, and Counsell, did turne it  mans good. And thus much touching the Hand and Counsell of God in the  of Iudas, and his Complices. But pro∣ceed further. Enthusiastus. What say you (Arminius) to  often obiected place: Math. ead vs▪ Obie∣cted by D Fulke against the Rhem. Testam. in Math. c. o.  into temptation? Now these wordes may seeme to import, (or otherwise we should not pray for the preuenting of it) that God sometimes leadeth man in∣to temptation of Sinne, & consequētly prepareth the way to his damnation▪ and the rather seeing these form words make shew to import, not only  Permission, but euen an Actuall leading into temptation. Arminius. The answere to this place is im∣plicitly and potentially included in th Answere aboue giuen, touching In∣ration
of Pharao aboue obiected, and erefore the true sense of these words ▪ Suffer vs not to be led into temptation f Sinne, by withdrawing thy grace from vs. Which exposition is most sorting to o∣ther passages of Scripture, as where it is : 1. Cor. 10. Not suffering vs to be tempted a∣oue our power; but with the temptation maketh way to escape, that we may be able to eare it. In like sort S. Iames sayth: Iames▪ 1. Let no man, when he is tempted, say, that he is tempted of God, for God is not a tempter of euills; And he hath tempted no man, but euery one is tempted of his owne Concupis∣ence &c. But goe on (Enthusiastus.) Enthusiastus. I proceed further. I haue read some of ours to vrge these Texts following: Esay 45. I forme the light, and create darknes, I make peace, and create Euill. Agayne, it is thus written: Amo 7. Shall there be any Euill in the Citty, which the Lord hath not done? Where, by creating darknes, may be vn∣derstoode, to create man to eternall darknes. Arminius. In answere. To these Texts you may
conea, that De∣cad. pag. 40. Bullinger, and In Me∣thod. Theolog. p. 438.  perius (two eminent Protestants)  teach euen out of Austin, that they  to be vnderstood, De malo porna, non  malo culpa; That is, Of the euill of punis∣ment, not of the euill of Sinne: to whos iudgement n vo∣lum. 1. Thesium Theolog. p. 175. 176. & 20. Piscator also (no vulg Protestant) subscribeth. The exposi∣tion giuen by the former Protestan and me, of these said places is so al∣lowed by the iudgments of other of our owne Brethren, that euen the same places are so commented in the Margi∣nall Annotations of the English Tran∣slation of the Bibles of the yeare 1576. So as there shall not be any neede to answere more touching the same. But yet let vs heare of some more of your obiected Texts. Enthusiastus. I doe assure you, I am wearyed (and I thinke also I haue wearyed you  in these my allegations; and the ratr,  seeing I fynd them all so probably ( speake the least) if not fully, answered by you. Therefore I will conclude this my Scene of obiecting with alledging these
following; As how it is said;  . Sa∣muel 24. God caused Obie∣cted by Calu. in Instit. l. 2. c. 8. Dauid to number the eople. That, . Sa∣muel 16. God commanded Semei curse Dauid; And . Re∣gum. 22. appointed Sa∣in to be a false Spirit in the mouth of  Prophets: Besydes many other assages of like nature. Now these and the like Texts do seeme in diuers of our Brethrens Iudgments to prooue, that God would not cause these actions in en, which are predestinated to Salua∣tion, but only in the Reprobate. Arminius. Heere againe (as in some of the former I haue done) I will interpose the iudgements of diuers learned Pro∣testants (as a shield) betweene the for∣mer Texts and me; yet before I come to their expresse Testimonies therein, I must aduertise you (Enthusiastus) of two things: The first is, that many things, which are done only by the per∣missiō of God, himself (according to the phrase and Dtalect of the Scripture) is sayd to doe; as aboue I noted touching Pharaos induration. Secondly, you may be aduertised, that when God suffereth man to do any
thing to this or that particular  (by the like forme of speach i Scr∣ture) is sayd to cause or command  doing of it, as is as where noted.  to apply these two obseruations to  former passages of Scripture: And  touching God commanding Dauid  number the People; it is explayned  where in expresse wordes, that 1. Chro. . S∣tan prouoked Dauid to number them; So e∣uident it is, that the numbering of th People was the worke of Satan persua∣ding thereto, and not the worke of God, but only by his permission; & according to this my Answere, the Marginall no∣tes of the English Bibles of anno 157▪ vpon this place do thus comment: The Lord permitted Satan &c. And to this ou expositiō Austin accordeth touching S∣mei in these wordes: L. de gra. & li∣bero arbi∣trio. c. 0. Quomodo dixer Dominus Semci maledicere Dauid &c.  the Lord spake to Semei to curse Dauid &c▪ this is to be vnderstood, non iubendo, not by commanding Semei &c. For if Semei  obeyed the Lord commanding him, the there were reason, why he should be  praysed, then punished. In like sort, Iohn Know speaking of the Tyranny of Pharao, an  ∣sing
of Semei, thus writeth: A∣gainst the Adues∣saries of Gods predesti∣nation. p. 374. Nei∣her to Pharao, neither to Semei, nor to any ther reprobate doth God giue eyther wicked mmandement, or euill thoughts. The ruth of which Answere God himselfe making mention of the sinnefull acti∣ons of the People) may seeme to seale vp in these his words▪ Hie∣rom. ▪ I commāded it not, or spake it; neyther came it into my mynd. So much are mē deceaued in dreaming, that God should eyther command, or cause sinne. But Enthusiastus, before I end this passage I would demand of you the rea∣on, (as aboue I did) why your party o alledg these last Texts, and some o∣thers aboue obiected by you; to wit, ouching Gods leading vs into Tem∣paion, touching the Induration of Pharaos hart, touching Iudas his prodi∣ion of our Sauiour &c? Yf they be al∣ledged by your syde, to proue that God i the cause and procurer of those sin∣full Acts, tending to mans Reprobation, (as it seemes they are to that end alled∣ged;) how then can you and yours ex∣clude God (as afore I vrged, touching some Texts aboue insisted by you) from ing Authour of Sinne, a confessed
blaspheney, and  such  Contra Duraeum, l. 8, p. 524. D. Whitakers, In his defence of the English Transla∣tion pag. 500. D. Fulke, and  most learned Protestants? Yf the  sayd passages be not produced to  former end, then they in no sort  the doctrine of Reprobation. Enthusiastus. I grant Arminius, I cannot su∣ciently to my owne satisfaction reply thereto: and to speake more fully  confesse the consideration of this  so seeming necessary inference, hath oftentymes strongly assaulted my ∣gement to giue assent, that God is  Authour of Sinne. Yea which is mo I haue often insisted in this cōsequen to many learned men of my syde:  any of them would euer yield in ∣presse wordes, that God was the A∣thour of Sinne: But when vpon  their wordes I replyed, how then  God be said to obdurate Pharao's  to lead vs into temptation; to cause ∣mei to curse Dauid▪ and to cause or p∣cure infallibly these and the like  wicked Actions, specified in  the former Texts, commonly all  for proofe of Reprobation  and
notwithstanding all this, it should not llow, that God were the Authour of inne? They (I well remember) would answere this my propounded difficulty seuerall wayes, whose Answeres I will at this present relate to you, to know how far the said Answeres in your le∣uell do carry: or whether in your iudg∣ment, they are satisfactory to take a∣way your former dangerous illation. Some prime men do first answere, That, Beza in his dis∣play of Popery. pag. 11. Whatsoeuer God doth, is good: He doth all thinges; all thinges therefore re good, as they be done of him: And the difference of good or euill hath place only in he instruments. And thus they teach, that such Actions, which are in man wicked, are notwithstanding in God most iust and good. Others agayne would secondly salue the matter in this sort: Are∣tius in Loc. Com. pag. 130. & Swingl. tom. 1. do prouiden∣tia Dei. c. 6. fol. 365. We answere, God hauing no Su∣periour, can haue no law prescribed to him; And Sinne hath only place, where there is a aw: from whence it followeth, that in the Astions of God, there is no Sinne. Others agayne shape a third solution, (so irre∣olute I did fynd them in their Ans∣weres) by distinguishing, that D. Whitak. contr. Du∣raeum. vbi supra. l. 8. p. 527. Bucanu in loc. Com. loc. 36▪ pag, 44. in uery sinfull Action, what is Positiue &
Materiall is euer  aboue is touched) the , which is in euery such action not of God, but of our selues. Arminius. All this your diuersity of Answ∣res solue not the difficulty aboue ∣pounded: but they are meer ter giue  and subtill euasions of the  handled. And to beginne with  your last Answere: if your compar did meane nothing els, but that  is materiall in a sinfull action is of  and the defect, priuation, and impiety  such action doth proceed  man: then were the difficulty  and the controuersy at an end▪ but  of your friends are so full  in their sentences, of God being  sole causer of our wicked actions as that the said sentences▪ are  capable of this solution (a) Swingl. om. 1. de prouident. Dei. fol. 365. fynd some of them thus to write▪  When we commit adultery, or  the worke of God▪ being the , and inciter. Heere you see, that not only  is materiall in these actions, but also
and deformity in them, is ascri∣ to God; as the Authour thereof. And : Swin∣gl. vbi su∣pra. The Theefe, coactus est ad , is forced to sinne: And another ▪ Beza in his fore∣said dis∣play. pag. 202. God exciteth the wicked will of ▪ Thefe to kill another. Where you see againe, that the wickednes of the Will is ributed to God. And a third sayth (to mit diuers others) that, Calu. Instit. l. 1. c. 18. sect. 2▪ Our sinnes  not ony by Gods permission, but by his decree and will: He so attributing both what is Materiall, and the Deformity in euery Sinne, to the decree and will of God, and consequently maketh God the Authour thereof. Add hereto, That whereas diuers of our Aduersaries do maintayne, that (to deliuer it in their owne words) Calu. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 6. And by M. Per∣kins in his Trea∣tise of Gods free grace. pag. 148. Whatsoeuer thing God doth foresee, the same he doth will, decree, and ordayne to be done, so confounding his foreknow∣ledge and prescience with his Predesti∣nation and Decree (a point aboue re∣ted.) Now, I conclude from these mens doctrine, that God is the Authour aswell of the Deformity, and Sinne in euery wicked action, as of what is Ma∣teriall and Positiue therin, seeing he as∣well foreknoweth the one, as the other.
Now touching the other two ∣ners of reconciling the former ; if so we but truly consider, what  the touch of the point herein, the  of those Answeres will instantly (lik a clowd before the Sunne) vanis▪ ∣way: Since thoe euasions shew. That God is not Authour of Sinne, in him∣selfe (which all men freely grant) but they proue not, that God is not the A∣thour of Sinne in vs (for this they touch not at all) which is the difficulty only heere to be salued, and in which th Controuersy consisteth. But I will conclude this point, and to shew, how inexplicable (or rather contradictory) in it selfe it is, to main∣taine that God forceth & causeth Sinne in man, and yet is not the Authour thereof, Caluin shall speake for me, who is constrayned thus to acknowledg hereof. De aeterna Dei prae∣dest. contra ighium, pag. 18. How God is not to be drawne into the fellowship of fault, as being the Au∣thour or allower of Transgression, let vs not be ashamed to confesse our ignorance, seeing▪ it is playne, that it is a secret far aboue man vnderstanding. And now hauing spoken, what I hould conuenient to be said, touching
this foule aspersion, of God being the uthour of Sinne, how truly or vntruly  against some of our owne Bre∣hren the Protestants, I leaue to other  indifferency and impartiality to ensure; I would, Enthusiastus, know, whether you haue finished your dis∣course in your obiecting; or that you will draw other Arguments eyther frō the Authority of the Auncient Do∣ours of Christ his Church, or from any other Head of proofes? For I am oath to encircle and confine your li∣berty within a lesser compasse, then our self would desire. Enthusiastus. Indeed Arminius it may be, that I could produce some appearing Argu∣ments eyther from reason, or Autho∣rity of the Primitiue Doctours, which  an vndiscerning eye might at the first perhaps seeme of some force; but seeing I cannot fynd any one Text in Gods Holy word, to fortify the doctri∣ne of Reprobation (if your former An∣sweres to them be true and solid) ther∣fore I must needs conclude, that all such other Arguments, which might be
produced, would be  then those  drawne from  Writ▪ In respect whereof▪ I eer  from fr  obieing the burden  which labours passed vpon you. Arminius. I accept of the paine  most will , and in  of  will still perseued in my  tho of  by degr to the  Scripture. Therefore my  Authorities is taken,  the Pr∣stants themselues ( of great ∣nency for learning)  second and more serious reuiew,  a great auersion of iudgment do who∣ly disau and reiect th Doctrine  Reprobation, as most  to  Honour and Mercy. The Protestants in so great ,  full in this poyt,  for orders sake, I will alledg  , then the   with vs in this doctrine  as ∣ching the Caluinists, I will begin  with the Caluinists of Engla, you Country men. First I  M.  thus waiting. In A∣pocalyps. pag. 473. Seeing the
Redemption, which taketh away the Sinns the world, is an vniuersall thing; it is de∣anded, whether the grace of this Redem∣ion,  appertayne equally to all the poste∣ty of Adam, or be restrayned to a certaine umbers? I answere, that the incredulity of en, and  default of the Lambe maketh is restraint. Thus M. Fox. D. Couell thus teacheth: In his defence of M. Hooker. p. . & 63. Surely  hath a generall inclination to saue all &c. And that with a conditionall Will, he illeth all men to be saued, who therefore at they are not saued, is not his decree, t their owne fault. M. Hooker is no sse strong in this doctrine, saying: In hi Ecclesiast. Policy. p. 104. ods generall inclination is, that all men ight be saued. M. Gibbons discourseth ereof in this sort: M. Gibb. in his quest. & dispu∣tat. vpon Genes. quaest. 2. pag. 108. Surely, there was no use in God, either in his will, or in his knowledge or decree, that man should fall. That the doctrine of Vniuersality f Grace, which importeth, that God af∣ardeth to euery man sufficient Grace or his owne Saluation) is entertayned y diuers worthy men of your owne lation (Enthusiastus) is so euident, that . Willet taketh notice, & complaineth thereof in this manner: D. Willet in his Sy∣nops. pa. 784. Vniuersality  grace seemeth much to be approued by
Country men, and hath  gotten some airoes in our Church. But to come to the iudgment  the learned Coluinicts of other Coun∣tries▪ Hemingis (that learned Caluini) disoursth of Reprobation, maintayn by his Aduersaries in this▪ full man  He∣ming. lib. de Vni∣uersali gratis. pag. . Pugnat cum verbo Deivocanti &c. Th Doctrine fighteth with the Word of God, calling and inuiting all men to repentan▪ It maketh man partly sluggish, partly se∣cure, and partly desperate; For many are  to despayre, whiles by this opinion is ∣uerthrowne the doctrine of Vniuersall Grace, in which all are commanded by fayth to include themselues. For if we respect  Cause, which is the Mercy of God in Christ Grace is, truly Vniuersall: But if we respect the euent, which dependeth vpon the fault of man, it is particular. Thus largly he dis∣puteth hereof. Bullinger as fully intreateth of this point, saying: Vpon the Reue∣lat. en∣glished cap 5. fol. 79. The Lord dyed for  but that all men are not made partakers of this Redemption, is through their own  for the Lord excludeth no man. Yea Bu∣linger is so absolute in this doctrine,  that he vndertaketh to explayne  In his  in ▪ pag▪  . Induration of Pharaos heart, & diu∣lyke
Texts of Scripture, produced a∣gaynst this our doctrine. But to proceed further: Amādus Polanus thus teacheth: A∣mandus Polanus, in partition. Theolog. p. 11. 12. God by his condionall will would haue all men saued. And further: Ibid. p. 8. God doth not cause, but permit men to fall into Sinne. And yet more: Ibid. p. 7. God is not the cause of all thinges, that he foreseeth. To con∣clude, Piscator is so great a Patrone of our doctrine, as that he Volum. 1. Thes. Theolog. pag. 174. 175. alleageth di∣uers Scriptures for the fortifying of his owne Opinion therein; as also ans∣wereth diuers Texts of Scripture, obie∣cted by our Aduersaries. Now touching the Lutheranes, We fynd, that In En∣chirid. p. 158. Kempnitius, In Res∣pons. Bez. ad Colloq. Montis∣elg. part altra. pag. 25. Iacobus An∣draeas, In Theolog. Calu. l 1. Art. . Conradus Schlussenburg, In disput. pr lib. Con∣cord. pag. 60. 61. 6. Ges∣erus, the Cent. . l. 2. c. 4. Century Writers, The In the Harm. of the Con∣fess. in English. pag. 268. 269. Confession of Auspurg, In loc. Com. p. 140. Manlius, In Syntagm. x Nou▪ Testam. Col. 109. 10▪ & 111. Wi∣gandus, In disput. Theolog. disput. 1. p. 24. & disput. 1. p. 507. Lobechius, In loc▪ Com. com▪ 1. de pr∣dest. fol. 29. 3. 2. Sarcerius, In Mar∣gart. Theolog. pag. 96. A∣damus Francisci, and (to omit many o∣thers) euen the learned Melancthon, to conspire with vs herein. Which Me∣lancthon, though for a tyme he was de∣uoted to the contrary doctrine, yet in his later dayes he wholy disauowed his said doctrine, and agreeth with the for∣mer Lutheranes therein: For thus he writeth: In Con∣cil. Theo∣log part. 2. p. . Falsa & detestanda accusatio
est &c. That accusation is false, and to be  tested, which sayth: God sinneth not, tho  he helpeth the wicked to perpeirate their ∣pietyes, because (say  men) God  aboue the Law, it is lawfull for him to  what he pleaseth. And then further:  tetram vocem &c. O bad saying! For neyther God willeth at any tyme, nor causeth  workes, contradicting and repugnant to his Law. And agayne: Vbi supra. pag. . Addunt & hoc, ar∣gumentum &c. The foresaid men doe ad∣ioyne this argument: To wit: All thing are done, God seeing and determining the &c. But let vs perseuere euer in this sen∣tence or opinion, that God neither willeth nor affecteth, nor approueth Sinne. Thus fa of the Protestants iudgments in this point; omitting for the auoyding of prolixity the like Authorities of many other Protestants of Eminency: Of whom some do call this doctrine of our Aduersaries, Me∣lancth. in loc. Com. de causa peccati. Hurtfull to manners, O∣thers, Christ∣mannus in Dia∣graphe Elect. pag. 94. Wicked. Agayne, Others, (k) Blasphemous. And finally, Others (l) Horrendum dogma, & horrendum auditu. Enthusiastus. I had little thought, before this in∣stant▪
that so great a troōpe of learned otestants, had with such an vnani∣ous consent maintayned, this your ctrine. But I see, your allegations of em are so precise and punctuall, that f force I must giue way thereto. But  me intreate you to proceed to o∣her proofes. Arminius. (k) Run∣gius in disput. quindecim ex epist. Pauli ad Corinth. posteriori disput. 14.In this next place I come to the Fathers. Whose iudgment herein is a∣oue discouered, touching their iudg∣ment in the doctrine of Freewill: seeing (as is aboue often said) the doctrine of Reprobation, or Predestination is inclu∣ded,(l) Andaeas. in epitom. Colloq. Mns∣belg pag. 54. or rather impugned, in the do¦ctrine of Freewill. But to take a little tast or delibation of some Fathers par∣ticular sayings: Thus we fynde Austin to write: Au∣stin. ad Articul▪ sibi falso imposit. Art. 10. Detestan la &c. It is a hate∣full and abominable opinion to belieue, that God is the authour of any euill wil, or action. Vincentius Lyrinensis thus fully writeth hereof: . ad∣uers. Hae∣res. post medium. Who before Nouatianus taught, that God would rather the death of him that dieth, then that he should returne and liue? Which Father also further sayth: V. cnt. Ly∣ri. vbi supra. Who before Simon Magus &c. was
bold to affirme, God the Creatour, to be  Authour of our wicked deeds? Thus you see, these doctrines (to no small blemish of them) take their beginning from Si∣mon Magus, and the Hereticke Noua∣tianus. But this point of further producing particular Testimonies of the Fathers, wilbe not much needfull; seeing the learned Protestants (our Aduersaries in this doctrine) confesse fully thereof: For Beza, in his display, &c. pag. 27. one of thē taxeth & reprehen∣deth Chrysostome, Cyrill, Origen, & others for their different doctrine to them tou∣ching Reprobation. And another thus in expresse wordes confesseth heereof: (an acknowledgment aboue alledged) Calu∣lustis. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 3. Veteres omnes &c. All the Auncient Fathers were afrayd to confesse the truth in this matter; And Austin truly was not free from this superstitiō; as where he saith, that Induration and Execation pertaine not to the working of God, but to his forknowledge. Thus much for greater breuity, tou∣ching the Ancient Fathers heerein. Enthusiastus. You may then rise to your other proofes; for these your former Autho∣rities
taken from the Protestants, and the Fathers thus farre most euidently carry; that is, that both the Protestāts and the Fathers (next aboue by you al∣ledged) do agree with you in doctrine, touching Reprobation. Arminius. Well before I arriue vp to the Holy Scriptures, I will touch a litle vpon the auncient Iewes, who as afore teaching the Freedome of mans will, must there∣in (as is aboue often inculcated) neces∣sarily teach our doctrine of Vniuersality of Grace, and the impugning of Reproba∣tion; but how farre the Iewish Rabbins are engaged in this our doctrine, it will easily appeare from the acknowledge∣ments of In An∣no. in Exod.  7. Munster and In E∣pist. ad Romanos. c. 9. Peter Mar∣tyr; both which confesse, that those Rabbins did ascribe the iuduration and hardning of Pharaos heart only to Gods permission, and not as to his proper act or worke. Now, in regard of these two emi∣nent Protestants confessions in this poynt, it will be lesse needfull to insist in the particular Authorities of the said Iewes: but I will content my selfe with
the alledging only  (that  learned and graue Iew) his words. Th then Philo witth: In lib. de confu∣sione lin∣guarum. Ipsi eiim patints &c. It was not conuenient or seemingm th the powerfull God should prepare in the ∣tionall Soule the way to vice &c. Therefore it remayneth to be considered, that God is the cause only of good, but not of any Euill. And againe he thus further discourseth: Lib. de Profugis. Therefore let o wicked act, being perpetr∣ted by affected diligence of man, be reptd or said to proceede from the sentence of God▪ but from our owne proper will. And thus briefly touching the iudgment of the Iewes in this Controuersy. Enthusiastus. Well Arminius. You haue riuetted the truth of your doctrine herein by many humane Testimonies, the which I greatly presume are not capable of any sufficient Reply, admitting the said Testimonies to be sortable to the word of God▪ Therefore I much couet, that you hasten to your Scripturall proofes, since they are to preponderate all other kinds of proofes whatsoeuer.
Arminius. Now I come to them; and as I said  of humane Authorities aboue al∣ledged, in cōfirmation of Freewill, that they did consequently impugne our ad∣uersaries doctrine touching Reprobation: o with much more reason may I say, that al the former diuine passages heer∣tofore produced, to maintaine the do∣ctrine of Freewill: do by necessary infe∣rence & deduction ouerthrow the ad∣uersaries sayd doctrine of Reprobation. Therefore passing ouer all such former diuine Authorities touching Freewill: I will neer insist in such Texts of Scrip∣ture, as do immediatly and expresse∣ly impugne this your doctrine of Repro∣bation. And first, I will insist in those Texts, which teach, that God would haue all▪ men saued. That done I will descēd to such passages, which shew, that God was incarnated and suffered death for the sauing of All mankind. And to be∣ginne with the first sort of proofes. The Prophet Ezechiel in most full manner, and in seuerall places contesteth the truth heereof, thus saying: Ezech. 18. Haue I
any desire, that the wicked should die,  the Lord? Againe. Ezech. vbi supra. Cast away from  all your Transgressions &c. for I desire  the death of him, that dyeth▪ Yea  this Prophet deposeth (as it were)  intention heerein, with a mo veh∣ment ingemination in these  Ezech. 3. As I liue, sayth the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked: but that  wicked turne from his wayes & liue  you, turne you from your uill wayes  why will you die▪ O yee house of Israel? Agayne (to leaue this Proph) do we not find the Prophet I say to  in the like Dialect (Isa. 5. Text aboue  god) saying in the person of God?  Iudge I pray you betweene my Vine &  what more could I haue doe for it▪ that I haue not done? Wherefore then hath it gi∣uen thornes▪ and I looked for grapes? In lyke sort the Euangelist (to shew  nothing is wanting on Gods syde  mans saluation) thus speaketh of : Reue∣lat. 2. He gaue her a tyme, that she migh repent, and she will not repent. And  this end it is sayd (I meane, that m by leauing their sinnes, might purcha saluation) by the former Euangelist, that Reue∣lat. . God standeth at the doore (vi
our harts) and knocks; if any will open,  will enter into him, and supp with him. And therefore in respect of Gods pro∣eding herein, it is no wonder, that S. Peter speaketh thus of all men in ge∣nerall: 2. Petr. 3. and see 1. Thes∣sal. c. 5. God is not willing, that any pe∣rish, but that all returne to repentance. Now to come to the second kind of Texts, which shew, that the end of Gods Incarnation and Passion, was the saluation of All men, sorting here to we read: That, Iohn. 1. God tooke away the sin∣ of the World; Iohn. 4. That, He was a Sa∣our of the World; That, 1. Tim. 2. He gaue him∣selfe a Redemption for All; That Hebr. . He sted death for All. Finally, that . Iohn. . He  a reconciliation for our Sinnes; and not or ours only, but also for the Sinnes of the hole world. Now whither tend all these ost forcing (and indeed most comfor∣ble) passages of Scripture, but to oue, that God for his part createth ot any man to damnation, but would ue all men saued; and that for the ac∣omplishing of the same end (if so sin∣ers themselues would) he became in∣arnated, and suffred death? And that no man shall thinke, that Christ died only for the Elect (and
Christs  for     sayth▪ . Cor.  8. & Rom. 4. The  brother ▪ for whom Christ . And agayn: 1. Tim. 4. Christ is the  of All men, espetially (m) 2. Pet. . yet more, speaking of . They deny hi  bringing vpon them speedy  also: Esay. . Th Angell of  thm, and in  &c. But they  Spirit; and therefore he   the  Heb. 0. Wh hath trode  of God , and esteeme  blud of  i  don  to  of  Ye then the Wick  in the  of the  then the bloud of the  was  for the Wicked. Thus you see (Enthusiastus)  these passages of Scripture do assure that Christs passion was  not only for the Elect, but also
Wicked; if so the wicked will not through their continuance in their innes, depriue themselues of the bene∣t thereof; and consequently, that God doth not out of his absolute decree Re∣robate any man to damnation. Enthusiastus. Worthy Arminius. I will not for¦beare to relate, what I haue heard ans∣wered (or rather obiected) by some of our owne learned Brethren to most of these Texts, touching Gods will to haue all men saued. They haue shaped a double Answere hereto. First, they de∣mand, So vr∣ged by Kimme∣donius in his Re∣demption of Man∣kind. p. . how commeth it to passe, that f so God would haue all men saued, why then are not all men saued, since it s said of God: Psalm. 5. He doth, whatsoeuer he will? Secondly, my Brethren do answere to the former Testimonies by distin∣guishing of the will of God. For they teach, that God hath a double Will, So teacheth Beza in his dis∣play of Popish & c. p. 18. 190. 191. Danaeus in Isagoge Christia∣na part. 4. l. 3. c. 38. And Ki∣medonius in his Re∣demption of Man∣kind en∣glished. pag. 170  162. The one (say they) secret, fearefull, and vnsearcheable; the other, the reuealed Will of God in his Word: They vpon this di∣stinction further teaching: That, Kime∣doncius vbi supra. God willeth not the death of a Sinner in his
Will reuealed in his Word, but  his vnsearchable Will. And in proofe  this double kind of Will in God, a l∣ned man on our syde alledgeth  two seeming different sentences. (*) Esay. 45. Ego Deus, creans malum, And: Non D∣volens iniquitatem Tu es, Thus fr hence inferring: M. Willee in his Sy∣nops pag. 75. How shall these pla be reconciled to speake one truth, vnles  make a difference betweene the secret and ∣uealed Will of God? Agayne, some others in  that God hath both a reuealed. Will  the Word, and a secret Will also dif∣rent from the former, do obiect,  Gods reuealed Will by his word was,  Abraham should offer his Sonne  the Mountayne, where he had by his Secret Will disposed and determined o∣therwise. I confesse (Arminius) that doe not much rest vpon these Answere of my owne Brethren, in regard of th perspicuity of so many places of Scri∣pture already alledged by you to th contrary: Notwithstanding I haue pr∣pounded them to you, to know what replies best sort to frustrate, and ta away these their said Answeres.
Arminius. Enthusiastus belieue me, They are o Answeres, but subtile declynings f the former Texts. Therefore tou∣hing these supposed Answeres, I will tisfy you according to my best en∣eauour. And first, as touching your emand, How chancheth it, that All-men  not saued, if so God would haue all men ed? To this I answere in the wordes of the learned Protestants themselues, who thus write: A man∣dus ola∣nus in partit. Theolog. l 1. pag. 10. And Pis∣cator in Volum. 1. Thes. Theolog. p 174. Musculus in loc. Com. Loc. de volun∣tate Dei. p. 415. Hiperius in Method. Theolog. l. 1 p 16. Hemingius lib. de Vni∣uersali Gratia. pag. 16. All which Protestās do teach, that ac¦cording to the former distin∣ction, God willeth  obsolutely, and other things but Conditio∣nally. Voluntas Dei, est vel bsoluta, vel conditionalis &c. The Will of God is either absolute, or conditionall. Now what God willeth absolutely, that euer ath its infallible euent. But touching things willed by God Conditionally, thus the said men do further teach: The Con∣ditionall Will of God is that, by the which God willeth some thinges, but with an annexed Condition &c. By this his Conditionall Will, God would haue All men saued &c. Nimirum, si promissioni∣bus &c. But with this Condition, if so they belieue and obey the promises and preaching of the Gospell. And then after, the for∣mer Protestant sayth of this Conditionall Will of God: At nequaquāest simulata &c.
But this Conditionall Will is not  feyte in God, s if God commanded  things, which indeed he would not. Th far the former learned Protestant▪ To these former Protestants D. ∣uel thus subscribes in these wordes: In his defence of M. Hooker pag. 62▪ 63  With a Conditionall Will, God willeth  men to he saued, therefore that they are  is not his decree, but their fault▪ he ther meaning, because the Wicked will  answere to Gods Inspirations,  keepe his Commandements, and  like. Thus you haue your first▪ Answe refuted from the learned Protestan owne pens: Whose doctrine herein  warranted from many passages of Scri∣pture, signifying Gods Condition Will, as where it is said: (as aboue  touched.) Reuel 3 Yf any man will heare  voyce, and open the gate, he will supp  him. And in likesort: Ezech. . The wicked  liue, if he will turne from his wayes, besid many other such sentences in Holy Scripture: in which God doth not com∣pell or inforce our Wils, but affoarde to vs Condition of Deut. 30. Choyce, and 1. Cor. 10.  not suffer vs to be tempted abouc that, whi we are able to beare. Thus though thi∣ges haue not euer their euent, accor∣ding
to Gods Conditionall Will, the cause reof is not God, but our selues not nswering to his Conditionall Will. Of which slackes in man, God himselfe omplayneth, saying: Ezech. 14. I would haue ansed thee, and thou art not cleane. And gayne; Isa. 65. I called, but you would not ans∣ere, but did chase the things, which I ould not. And finally (to omit diuers thers▪) Math. 2. How often would I gather &c.  thou wouldst not? Thus far in dis∣ouall of your first Answere to my ormer Authorities. Enthusiastus. I well see the weakenes of that first asion; therefore I pray deliuer your udgement touching the second Ans∣ere, consisting of the Secret Will of , and of his Reuealed Will in the Word. Arminius. Touching this distinction of Gods ill, I hould it to be a meere Phantas∣e, or Platonicall Idaea, forged only in spaire of better satisfaction. There∣re I first answere, that if we doe ad∣t God to haue two meere contrary
wills, and this truly and really; by  One of which Wills (to wit, his Reu¦led Will) he seriously willeth, the Con∣uersion of a Sinner; by his other Secre Will, He would not haue him to con∣uert from Sinne, that therby he may b damned; then it followeth that God  one and the same time willeth meer cō∣trary things; which to imagine God  doe, is both impossible and absurd. And if our Aduersaries (to disintagle them¦selues out of this net) do say, that Go by his Reūealed Will, willeth not indeed▪ and seriously the conuersion of a Sin∣ner; but only maketh an outward shew thereof, by exhortation and promise set downe in his word, whereas indeed  willeth and determineth the contra by his Secret Will; doth it not from hence then follow, that God is to  charged rather with a reuealed dissim∣lation, then with a reūealed Will? Secondly I answere, That this dis∣tinction of Gods reuealed and concealed will, fighteth mainly with this,  Principle of Protestancy; to wit, tha we are to belieue nothing, as matter of fait but what draweth its proofe from Script How then can we belieue, that
a Secret will, different from his uealed will in Scripture? Or if they , that they picke his Secret will out of e Scripture, then how can they  it his Secret Will, seeing it is expres∣d in Scripture? And thus thē it would llow, that God should haue Two eer contrary and repugnant Wills, th being expressed in Scripture: the hich to ascribe to his diuine Maiesty,  most iniurious and dishonourable;  most absurd, and implying in it self  manifest contradiction, and conse∣uently thereby weakening the Autho∣ty of the sayd diuine Scripture. But to proceed further, obserue thusiastus the exorbitancy of our ad∣ersaries proceeding heerin: for if God would not the death of a Sinner by his uealed will in the Scripture, why then do they vrge from his sayd word, that He willeth the death of a Sinner, as of sau, Pharao &c. Now to come to those ormer places of Scripture, which our duersaries make their Basis, vpon which they build this Intentionall and ry distinction of Gods Secret will, and  Reuealed will: to wit: (e) Ego Deus ans malum, and agayne: Non Deus vo∣lens
iniquitatem tues: I here  That this irster Text is wholy  construed, and wrested from its  sense: seeing, by Euill, in that place,  Esay, is vnderstood not Iniquity or the Euill of Sinne, but only the Euill of pu∣nishment, (as is aboue expressed) as na∣mely Warr and Aduersity; as appeareth more euidently by the opposition of the word Peace, next precedent. For the words in Esay are: I make peace, and create euill; And therefore Hyperius (the learned Protestant) thus commenteth vpon this place: In me∣thod. Theolog. lib. 2. pg. . Malum pro bello ac∣cipitur, vtpote quod paci sit oppositum: A point so euident, that the English i∣bles themselues of the yeare 1576. (as aboue I declared) in their Marginall notes of this place doe thus paraphrase the foresaid place in Esay: I sendpeace and warre, prosperity and aduersity. Now, touching the Example of Abraham; First I answere, That the Text it selfe she weth, that Gods euen Reuealed Will to Abraham, signified by the Angell (and not his Secret Will) wa that Abraham should not offer (or, a the Text sayth) Genes. 22. Lay his hand vpon the child. Againe, God only comman∣ded
Abraham to offer his sonne (as the Text sayth) to Genes. vbi supra. proue Abraham. Ther∣fore Gods Reuealed will was not to haue it done, but only to haue it commaded for the triall of Abraham. Secondly, admitting that it had beene Gods Reuealed Will, that Abraham should offer his Child, and that this his Will should not haue beene counter∣manded by his said Reuealed Will to Abraham; yet (according to the iudg∣ment of some learned Aman∣dus Pola∣nus in Partition. Theolog. . 1. pag. . Protestants) it may be well interpreted, that when God willed by this act to try Abraham, the true meaning and intent both of Gods Will and wordes were truly to be performed in Abraham, by the only of∣fering his sonne vp in deuotion and fayth. And accordingly the Apostle sayth. Heb. 11. By fayth Abraham offered Isaac, when he was tempted. Lastly I say, admit, that God had a Reuealed Will, and a Con∣cealed Will, touching the offering vp of Isaac; Yet this is meerely impertinent to conuince, or proue, that God by his Secret Will determineth the Reprobation of any man, ordayning him euen from his Mothers wombe to damnation. And thus much concerning this Sub∣iect
of Reprobation, defended with  a strong bent and vehemency, by di∣uers of our Aduersaries. But now Enthusiastus, heer I giue a full stop to this our discourse: what my small talent in defence of these my former doctrines, and in impugning of yours, could affoard▪ I haue not beene (you see) sparing or nigard in making vse thereof, and this for the altering (and indeed bettering) of your iudgement, Now if I could discerne, that they haue wrought with you so forcibly, as I do couet, O how bounti∣fully were my labour recompensed, & how larg a retaliation should I account it to be for any paines taken therein? Your former wordes (and I hope, they doe not stand Neutrall to your mind, since such men were worthily rebuked, Rom. . Qui linguis suis dolos age∣bant) do partly encourage me, that my discourse hath not fallen vpon the stones, or on the barren ground, but that it hath somewhat wonne vpon your iudgment. And for your greater strengthening in the beliefe of these points, which I haue prooued in our former disputation for most true, Here
I do witnes before the whole Court of Heauen, that if your contrary doctri∣ne be true, God doth seeme to cease to be God, and himselfe to renounce Himselfe: Since he should then (by depriuing man of Freewill, and reprobating him to damnation, without any preuision of his workes) seeme partly to relin∣quish and abndon his owne Essentiall & Incommunicable Attributes of Good∣▪ and Mercy. Enthusiastus. Learned Arminius. This your se∣rious and zealous Protestation is not much needfull (so strong a battery & assault your Arguments haue already madevpon my Iudgment.) Therefore though I haue aboue giuen sufficient o∣uerure, how highly I prized your proofs, and how working they seemed with me to be: Neuerthelesse to with∣draw the veyle, which you (perhaps) may feare to be betwene my former words, and my most retired and secret thoughts, Know you (Arminius, and this learned Assembly) that at this pre∣sent I do freely vnbreast my selfe vnto you all, and do confesse in all candour
and sincerity, that I am conuinced  this our Conflict. I grant, that I  lost the day (notwithstanding my for∣mer windy, ventitation, and presumed confidence) & that you come off, with honour. But what? Is this in a true iudg∣ment any disreputation to me? Noe. Since in being ouercome, I do ouer∣come, and in my Ouerthrow, I am Vi∣ctorious, as now by this meanes trium∣phing ouer those Errours, to which my Iudgment was afore enthralled. Let Truth euer preuaile: Veritas Psal. 116. Domini manet in . Till the time of this our disputa∣tion, I grant, I euer was most strong (I will not say pertinacious) in defence of my former doctrines, & euen my Con∣trall cogitations were euer that way fixed. But since my Cause lyes thus wholy prostrate by force of your for∣mer Authorities, I will for euer after repudiate (to which I was afore, as I may say, so much espoused) my former Errours, strongly senting of Innouation. Neuer therfore more will I entertayne the least thought of them. And no more Enthusiastus will I be called, as tasting of aēry Illuminations, self- Pln∣cy,
and belieuing in a mans owne Iudg∣ment, Orthodoxus shall heereafter be my Name. I will decline (for the tyme to come) the obliquity of the paths of such men, who tread asyde to all ancient times, and wil be content to follow the Tract of Reuerend and gray-hayred Antiquity, especially seeing she doth an∣chour herselfe so firmely & immouea∣bly vpon Gods sacred Word. I haue hi∣therto vnknowingly bene sick (though Iohn. 11. My sicknes hath not bene to death:) Now I am healed: Giue me then leaue to congratulate my owne recouery, & suffer me with patience to launch forth a litle in words. My selfe am now cured by this learned Mans discourse, accounting it my honour to become his Proselite, or Cannertite: & I thirst to cure others, labouring with my former disease. O then, you Worthy men of my owne Na∣tion, who did accompany me to this Mans presence, and I you out of En∣gland; I haue (I speake with griefe) of∣ten in my publike Sermons to you, and in my priuate discourses, inuenomed your Iudgments with these former dā∣gerous Theories and Speculations: now
Charity 1. Cor. 13 quae adificat, omnia  omnia sperat; commands me to  (what I can) the hurt already done Sufer then for your owne good, that these my wordes may be an Antidote to your former poyson, by me distilled I Thinke, what it is to dismantle (as it were) and to disarme Man of Freewill: It is to resemble man (made according to the (Gen. 1. Image of the Highest) or rather to transforme him vnto a Beast: who wor∣keth nothing of himselfe, but only by the push of another (so the knife cut∣teth not of itselfe, but as a dead instru∣ment moued by the hand.) In like sort, those other most pernicious Theorems, depending of the want of Freewill, (I meane the Positions of Certainty of Sal∣uation and Reprobation) what most dan∣gerous effects doe they worke in mans Soule? Do we not see by daily expe∣rience, that they open the sluce to all turpitude of manners and Sensuality? That man who is persuaded that he wanteth Freewill, and that he is alrea∣dy, and vnalterably from all Eternity eyther Predestinated or Reprobated, what should stay him for ingulfyng himself in all enormous Crimes? May he not
vpon the grounds of his owne fayth thus iustly apologize for himselfe: I want Freewill; The ten M. Fox Act. Mon. pag. 135 and D. Willes in Sy∣nops. Pap. pag. 564. Commande∣ments of God do not belong to me: I am alrea∣dy either Predestinated to Heauen, or Re∣probated to Hell: A vertuous life, if I be of the number of the Reprobate, cannot aduan∣tage me; nor the most facinorous course can preiudice me, being Predestinated: Why then should I be so vnkynd, as deny my selfe the fruition of Pleasures, though neuer so much prohibited in Gods word? So thrall & mancipated must such a man be to all Sinne and flagitious Impiety. This (no doubt) is the Dialect or language, in the which most men (be∣lieuing the former doctrines) do expo∣stulate with themselues in the secret of their owne Soules: And daily experiēce doth depose and sweare the certainty hereof. And you, the Learned Auditory here gathered together. Happy you are in en∣ioying the dayly Conference of this worthy man, who hath indoctrinated you in the Truth of these former dog∣maticall Points. You see, how affluent∣ly, and abundantly he hath fortified these his doctrines from so many vn∣answer∣
word, and (besyd  o Reason, and of the most  Protestants) from all   grounded  from the  word; which   hand o Time, hath  truth thereof to Posterity. Keepe  this Depositum with an vnalterable ∣solution; and thinke that man to be  a mertricious and frontlesse bold  who dae oppose himselfe against  foresaid, both diuine and Humane ∣thorities. And England (my most noble  deare Country) O that it were in  power, to dis-inchant their iudgmen liuing in thee, of these pernicious ∣ctrines, with which they stand yet ∣witched! Is it not a point deseruing  commiseration and pitty, to obseru how many men in our owne Country of most eleuated Wits, and furnish with all variety of literature, do  their full consent, for their belieuing  such exitiall and despet doctrin Desperate I call them, in regard of  most desperate attempts and  which diuers of the Belieuers of
vnnaturally perpetrated against . O how many, through persuasion  themselue are wholy Reprobated ,  that it is not in their owne freedome of Will to concurre with  Grace, for the changing of their  liues, haue become their owne ? Thy selfe, My deare Country ( it with vnutterable griefe)  become the sable and mournfull  Theater, vpon which diuers  lamentable Tragedies haue beene cted. But (alas) why should man seeke to conine Gods Mercy, which is like himselfe, Infinit, Endles, and Intermina∣ble:  Psalm. 102. aters & vsque in aternum, mi∣sericordia eius super mentes se? And what can discourage man from making his attonement with God, with whom, by truly and penitently confessing our  be Sinners, we cease to be Sin∣ners? Are any Persons, here exempted? No. For we reade, Whosoeuer Ezech. . shall de∣part from his wicked wayes, and turne to  him. Is any tyme limited or prefixed for receauing his Mercy?
grant and ndulgence of  lesse: Yf  Esay.   were , they shall be  Sing   nor  nor Sinne is excluded  of  large and ; why  n  (euen  thing  despayring doctrine of  much  the boundles Mercy of God)  and  to him,  (k) 2. Cor. .  But I re,  your ares (  worthy▪ ) with a tedious ∣course; and therefore ing the day  far , we must  and   (eruing  for the  of your ) and  back to the ▪ Arminius. Good Enthusiastus,  much  that my speaches haue
▪ I pray God that  company heere,  yet  aduerse in doctrine to  the lyke benefit by this our discourse▪ That you are to depart so soone, I much grieue; and rest much oubtfull, whether we shall euer see  another agayne, during this tyme  pregination. But if so you be lling thereto, after your returne into England, we will in part supply the want of corporall familiarity by intercourse of mutuall and friendly let∣rs by meanes whereof we may en∣ioy (as absently present) the one the o∣ther: Virg.  absentem & video▪ & au∣dio. Enthusiastus. Most willingly I accord thereto: and with this, these Gentlemen and I, take of you, and of this your Auditory, our last Farewell.
Nay,    you,   of Worthy▪ I will take my  you to your Enthusstus. Once more the▪  Company and I giue you  well. FINIS▪ God saue the King
