19180 99855927 21435
A hundred and foureteene Experiments and Cures of the fa∣mous Physitian Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Paracelsus; Transla∣ted out of the Germane tongue into the Latin. Whereunto is added certaine excel∣lent and profitable Workes by B. G. a Portu Aquitano. Also certaine Secrets of Isacke Hollan∣dus concerning the Vegetall and Animall worke. Also the Spagericke Antidotarie for Gunne-shot of Iosephus Quirsitanus. Collected by Iohn Hecter. LONDON Printed by Vallentine Sims dwelling on Adling hill at the signe of the white Swanne. 1596
that the inquisition of some one part is the occasion of searching out of an other, so finitely, that the bluniest wit cannot  of  to traine him on,  the deepest head of want of varietie to entertai him still, so large occasion of subiect, or circumstance is  offred to nder of. Of these writers I haue made choice of two or three such as in their countrie (by their deserts) are helde verie dere: these, not for their methode, which I middle not with, but for their medicines, which I sually make, I haue translated, for the benefite (I hope) of my , and as heretofore in some of the translations Printed, I haue  held to couer my rdenesse with the authoriti of other mens countences, so here I presume (right Worshipfull) vnder the comfortable shield of your fauour, to shadow the slendernesse of this my simple worke, beseeching you of your bountifull tesie, for the which you are commended of the most, to pardon my rashnesse, and to accept of this enterprise, proceeding from him that amongst your boun∣d well willers is not the least. Your Worships in all dutifull seruice. Iohn Hecter.
An Apologeticall Preface of Maister Barnard G. Londrada A Portu Aquitanus vnto the Booke of Experiments of Paracelsus, wherein is pro∣ued, that sicke bodies stuffed and filled with the seedes of diseases, can hardly be cured without metalline medicines: contrarie to the writings of some which deny that Mettals (after what sort or maner soeuer they be prepared) may profit or help the nature of man. IN sacred Scripture (gentle Reader) among others we finde this lawe full of Christian Loue and Charitie: Thou shalt restore againe the wandering or straying▪ Oxe or Deuteron. 22. . Asse of thy neighbours vnto him: By which law the eter∣nal God would as by an euident argument confirme and establish amongest vs mutuall loue and amitie. For if in this sorte Gods lawes doe commaund vs to take care of the straieng cattle of our enimies: how much more then do they will vs to helpe the miserable ease and great dangers of the bodies of our friends, and to restore their health? Wherefore when as I (toge∣ther with Theophrastus Paracelsus and other excellent men) vnderstoode the errours of manie Phisitions of our time, I beganne to deuise with my selfe by what meanes I might attaine to the knowledge of true phisicke, which is deriued out of the light of nature, not out of the darke writings of the heathen. And I iudged it to be necessarie to trauell, and to go vnto far places, to seek out learning and knowledge, and not to hope or looke for it, sitting at home idlelie. I prepared my selfe therefore to my , and with long trauell and labour haue searched out and learned those things, which for christian loue sake I can no longer keepe silent, that I might call backe the wandering children into the path of true doctrine, and hauing declared my iournie and labours, they also being excused and defended, which are laid open vnto al maner of slaunders, by those which so greatly commend the heathenish phisicke, whose deceits in som part I wil indeuor to disclose; I wil afterward declare what those that are desirous of true and naturall phisicke, are to looke for at my hands, and what Bookes of true phisicke I haue gathered together in sundrie places, being mooued with compassion towards those that go astraie, I wil com∣municate and set forth for their publike profit and commoditie. But first the matter so requireth, that to auoide the hatred of the common sort, as well from my selfe, as from al other fauourers of the Arte of Separa∣tion, I should dulie answer vnto the aduersaries, whose frowardnesse and malice is such, that they wil with proude wordes annihilate, reiect, and condemne others inuentions, which they themselues see and perceiue they may vse with great successe and profite. And yet they in the meane season arrogate vnto themselues the commendations due vnto the Au∣thors, and with a lying kinde of stalth robbe the inuenters of Artes of their due honour; which is a subtil kind of craft, springing out of the de∣ceits
of the olde serpent. For when as reports are spread of the straunge cures of sundrie grieuous diseases, which are wrought by the benefite of tinctures and vegetall and minerall spirites, by the cunning and labour of those whom the common sort at this day cal Chymists or Alchimists: by and by on the contrarie part they crie out that those colliar phisitions can do no good but kil al men that put themselues into their hands with their venemous medicines, so that they ought to bee driuen out of the commonwealth, and that they are deceiuers, and that their extractions and preparations, their subtile and thinne spirit wil profit nothing, and that the spirit of Vitriol is poison, the essence of Antimonie and Mercu∣rie is nothing, the extraction of Sulphur is nothing worth, neither the li∣quor of gold: and to be briefe, that al things are contrarie to the nature of man, and more to be auoided then the eies of a basiliske. And yet they in the meane time like cunning and crastie theeues priuily, and with fair promises picke out from the poore Chymists the secrets of Phisicke, and secretly learne those things that they forbid the common people as poi∣sons, afterwardes challenging them for their owne practises. And by this wicked iniury they deriue vnto themselues the fauour, friendship, praise, gifts and rewardes of men, which by good right are altogether due vnto those that by their labour, sweat, watching, and diligent search in natural things by Vulcans arte haue found out such things, and published them for the common commoditie of man. And yet not contented therewith, they also publish great volumes filled with toyes, lies, & sophistications; going about as much as in them is, to suppresse, ouerthrowe, and vtterly to extinguish the light with darkenesse, and the trueth with lies, & prac∣tise (the most plaine and manifest workemistresse established euen by trueth it selfe) with a vaine fained theoricke, deuised by their owne sub∣tile braine. I say to thee (thou notable Doctor, that so backebitest Para∣celsus) how canst thou by any meanes with thy trifling wordes deface the worke it selfe, or with thy theoricke refell the practise? Art thou so great a doctour and knowest not, that thou hast profited so much, as by thy worke thou canst bring aught to effect? Paracelsus teacheth that the fal∣ling sickenesse is to be cured with the spirit of Vitrioll, and performed it, and the worke it selfe declares it daily: prooue thou the contrarie, and cure the same disease with thy pilles, sirropes, and electuaries, then shalt thou haue the victorie. It is not sufficient for thee by bringing thy rea∣sons, to proue that metalline medicines are not agreeing for mans na∣ture, neither that metals may be so prepared that they may heale. Why? Thou deniest that which indeede is performed, and openly seene with eies. It is a foule thing to be ignorant in that that euery man knoweth. For out of all doubt you haue all heard, that most daungerous diseases haue bin cured with metaline tinctures, yea, with such as haue not been rightly prepared by counterfeit Paracelsians, as with Vitrum Antimonij, which doth plucke vp sodainely at once by the rootes the impurities of the feuer, although not without great weakening of the powers, yet it healeth: And yet we alow not such perillous cures. And so likewise of others. N Mineralles worke this, not being rightly prepared,
what thinke you will they doe being rightly prepared and purged from their venome and poison? And how can you with a safe conscience reiect those things whereof you haue no knowledge? It is not sufficient to affirme ane thing except it be confirmed by probable and grounded reasons. Euerie man will play the Censor of Paracelsus, whom it is more easie to reprehend, then to follow. And whilest euerie man desireth to seeme, or to be thought more learned then other, no man wil learne of another. I say euery Pa∣racelsian which doth but onely carry coales vnto the worke, can shewe you by eie three principles of Theophrastus physicke. Haue you tasted the most sharp salt? or the most sweete ole? or the balme that most delicate liuor? All those being hidden in euerie thing that is created, you haue not once perceiued. The metalline spirites, in whome physike doeth consist, by no meanes can be found out, neither what force they haue or fellowship with mans nature, but only by fire, for as fire did first shew that the smoake of Mercurie was poison to mans nature without ane subtile speculation, but thou didst neuer handle coales, neither canst draw any so smal a baulme out of the Vegetals therfore being ignorant in metalline physicke, thou canst not so much as once ghesse what it is▪ and therefore doest iudge of things vnknowen, as the blinde man doeth of colours. Is it not a great folli to write against a thing, and not to vn∣derstand it wel before? Such as are addicted to Paracelsus doctrine, when they perceiue you haue no stronger weapons then those you haue hi∣therto gathered, they will conclude that you rather confirme and esta∣blish Paracelsus physicke, then confute it. It is not enough to say a thing is false, except there be morè probable and better shewed. Hereby it appeareth that ye nourish a secret ignorance of naturall things in your selues. What,  you those great physitions and excellent philosophers? How commeth it then to passe that the force of drugs are hidden and vnknowen vnto you? Do you not in this point come eere vnto the em∣pericks, whom you with great pride and brag of knowledge riect, when as you say; the Chymist, be he neuer so excellent, is no phisitian, but he that with iudgement and reason hath learned to make and ve all r∣dies for diseases: For in those points consisteth the chiefest glorie and commendation of a Phisitian, and the onelie safetie of the sicke. Hovve vaine is this reasonable phisitian, which prepareth his medicines with reason and not with the hand? He is the very phisitian that with his own hand purgeth his medicines from their venome, and being so prepa∣red, with sharpe iudgement doth applie them to their proper diseases, that the seede of the disease may be pulled vp by the rootes, and so must the speculation and practise, reason and the worke concurre and ioyne together, because iudgement without practise is barren. Tell me, hovve commeth it to passe that mercurie healeth the French pox and the fil∣thie scabbe? Why doe you command the miserable sicke persons to an∣noint themselues with quickesiluer as shepheardes grease their sheepe? How happeneth it (I say) that mercurie is the speciall best remedie a∣gainst
these diseases▪ Do you d that metals o an , y and the greatest pe cures? Why doe you co such as  infected with leprosie to swallow gold▪ hi do you boile it in bro with cap? Why do you mingle  gold in your  and ∣ries? You know that the force of the epro is of delaied that it break∣ not out into the vpper part of the skinne by taking of crude gold into the stomacke: Then if golde that is compact and not resolued do worke this effect, wat will not the spirite of golde worke being oosed from his grose substance? If you will not beleeue Paracelsus, that the cure of mst dangerous dis∣cases eth hidden in mettalles, at the least,  those that liued long before him, amongst whome Arnoldus de villa  is chiefe, who in his booke of the preseation of youth saith th: Pearles  into li∣quor, comfort the naturall heate, help the embling of the heart, and those that are feareful, and properly they clarifie the blood of the heart▪ and manie diseases are cured by them. For i is a salt of the  which the wise call their Animall stone, and some the Minerall C, and all the maisterie in the preparation of it, is, that it may be resolued into a most pure and potable water with such things as doe not destroy his nature. This saith Ar, who speaketh  of stamping, but of solu∣tion: but to what purpose dl alldge thi Verily, that you may see how with your owne swords you cut your owne throats, you vse pearles, corals, and pr  in your electaries and broathes, and those you beae into pouder. You  as it were a certaine medicinall ver∣tue in pretious stones, but you deale as naughtie cooks and rude coun∣trie wo do, that when pages o has come to their hands, they  the  the potage pot, or else eethe them in water: euen so stampe and breake your pearles which should rather be dissolued. Al∣bit you should make powder as subtil as the aire, you should nothing profite: for as you put it into the stomacke, so shall you see it passe away againe, and hereupon of very necessitie were the rules of Chy preparations brought into physicke, which you doe hate worse   serpentr a dog, with the practisers of their. What ll neede many wordes? If you will not yet grant that  speciall  of diseases consisteth in minerals, hearken what  Mathlu saieth in the fourth booke of his Epistles: the bodies of  sicke being  of seedes of diseases, will hardly be healed without m alline medicines. And in his treatise of Antymonie he saith: Atymo∣nie doth no lesse purge the diseass of the bodies, then metals, from su∣peruities. This did that learned an vnderstand when as yet he  not the true prepration of Antymony. Likewise hee greately esteemeth the potable olde, the preparation whereof, as the sae M vsed it, I will deae vnto you. because you shall not be ignorant. Take gold twise or thrise purged with Antymony, make it into thinne plates and in a it vessell, hang the plates that they touch not one another, and let i be burned and calcied in a rnace duly  by the space of halfe
out and laide open in the aire, they do dissolue, and there flowe from it a certaine oilie humour red of colour, and of taste swish. He drew out two ounces of oile of golde, but out of that which was not so well bunt, the liquor did not so readily runne out. Sometimes he vsed to poure on the spirit of wine rectified, & that so long, and so much, vntil the whole red colour was drawen out. You shall rectifie those spirites or essence of wine very subtilly, if you put it into a glasse cucurbite vnder a limbecke with a receiuer, and set it in most cold or snowie water, and couer the head round about with a linnen cloth stieped in warme water, for then the subtiler partes will rise vp, leauing the waterie substance in the bot∣tome. Gold calcined and often infused with the spirit of wine with ma∣ny imbibitions, and againe distilled by a Limbecke, leaueth in the bot∣tome behinde a reddish liquor. That Physition vsed first to purge the body, and then to shaue and heate the crowne of the head, and them to poure on a dramme of that oile, and to giue so much also to be drunke  maluesey. The like is to be wrought with fine siluer for the diseases of the head, and so likewise of other mettalles, for being duely prepared, they do dissolue, because they are saltes. This man hath many other mynerall medicines, which were neuer knowen, either to Galene, or to Hypocrates, but brought to light by our Theophratus Paracelsus, of whome you great Philosophers and Phyiti∣ons onely in name do vndisreetely write. Do you thinke all things vt∣terly vnpossible vnto other men which you your selfe knowe not, or can not do, or that you cannot compasse with your diuine knowlege? What will you say to this? I know a man that within three, or at the most sixe daies, can heale the French pox with his Turptum minerale, not with that which is made with oile of vitrioll, but with another farre more ex∣cellent which shall not come to your handes or knowledge except you lay aside your frowardnes, and cease to bring the Paracelsians in suspi∣tion with the common people and noble men, and to defraud them of the fruit of their iust labors. You say, What haue you brought to passe? what haue you found out whereby you should looke for praise or profit? Then do we demaund of you, What haue you found out whereby phy∣icke is the better furnished? We haue brought into physicke, essences, oiles, balmes, and saltes, all which the Alchymists schooles haue founde out. And how great light is come vnto physicke onely by true distillati∣on, it is knowen vnto all men, and daily experience teacheth, how great commodity hath redounded thereby vnto the sicke. In the meane time, if you so much detest the labour, yet at the least spare our good name. But it is no maruell, doth it not so alwayes happen, that the best labour is worst accepted and recompenced? Euery good man clined to ver∣tue, wisedome, and fidelitie can witnes the same, what reward they haue often receiued for their fidelity and opening of the trueth. So soe men when they can say no more, they obiect vnto the searchers of nature, their pouerty, filling the eares of the common people with glorious lies, alwaies chanting vpon thse things which followe vpon the abuse and ungerous cues of the couterfeit Paracelsians, iudging all things by
their contempt pouertie, vile estate, and basenesse, but they will quick∣ly auoyd that dspised pouertie, which willingly they sustaine, that the nature of things might daily more & more be knowen vnto men, wher∣by the vnaccustomed cures of most grieuous diseases, might at length be found out, with the which such as are diseased, might through your sluggishnes all die, if God hauing compassion vpon them nowe at the end of the world had not prouided wholesome medicines, euen by most contemned men. The lepers and gowty, the infected with the physicke, falling sickenes, and French poxes, deuoured with the canker, fistula, & gteedy woolfe, with the dropsie, and palsey, and that with the plague & other diseases, are thrust into their graues. These (I say) and many o∣ther more, whome you through ignorance with your naughtie and cor∣rupt potions and purgations, like butchers haue buried aliue, will rise vp against you. These (I say) wil call you to answer, and accuse you, euen the poore, whome you haue robbed of their goodes, will require your blood for the losse of their bodies, and consuming of their mony. Then what a madnes and cruel foolishnes is this, that in the time of any great plague, such as are infected, you shut vp in houses, set markes ppon them, keepe them in prison, strangle them with cares and solitarines, and kill them for hunger: Is the plague so to be cured? Or whether doe you not thinke that all men may be infected from whence the first man was infected? why do you not preserue the whole with your antidotes or de∣fensiues being so famous physitions as you are? but you haue tried al∣most all your medicines to be of no force in this disease. Do you in this sort loue your neighbour as your selfe? or thus spend your life for your fellow, when as at no time (if help be required) there is greater neede of fellowship, companie, comfort and helpe than in the time of plague? O what great punishment haue you deserued that refuse those that are forsaken of their friends, farre from their kindred, and as it were thrust into exile, whose solitarinesse hath beene more violent vnto them then the disease, and griefe of minde hath killed rather then the sickenesse? what I pray you is true and christian friendship? doth not this complaint of the sicke stirre vppe vnto pitie? When I was in health thou wer my friend, thou diddest visit me, and help me, but now that I am sicke, thou doest abhore , and liest from me, when fortune laughed vpon mee, thou diddest also laugh: but nowe that with griefe and teares I raue comfort, thou doest deny it. What doe you call visiting and helping? You will not only not help your selues, but wil perswade princes to stop the passages, that no trauellers shall passe vnto those places, when as you ought with courage to relieue them of their griefe, and willingly to go thither to trie your cunning. But when any plague beginneth, you are the first that tremble, are afraide and despaire. The sicke are com∣mitted vnto you as children and infants which lacke diligent cure, you ought to helpe them as the father doth his children, and not to robbe them of their money. Then would the sicke man smile vpon you, if you would refresh his languishing life with some gentle balme: then woulde he reioyce in the sight of you, and call you his father. Euery naturall
physition of necessitie ought to make his medicines with his own hands, and not to commit them vnto an vnskilfull Cooke, not to fill great vo∣lumes with receits, with the which I see those that are studious in phy∣sicke are in a manner ouerwhelmed, that they bee ready almost to fall downe and die vnder so heauie a burthen of receits, physicke is not so learned but with the labour of the hands, practise being workemistree where Vulcan day by day doth shew new and pleasant remedies which nature teacheth the good steward her workeman, daily to purge better and better from their superfluities. Do you looke for a rich haruest, and do not first plow nor sowe? Looke for knowledge of the secret naturall powers, and do not first seeke it out by labour with the fire? for the most part of you all are daintie and slouthfull, and hee that is slacke in his workes, goeth like a blind man vnto his practise. If you did not so much abhorre the Chymicall Art you would learne to separate the pure from the vnpure (which is the cause of the corruption of things) by long di∣gestions, distillations, and imbibitions, whereby you should make your medicines pure and cleane before you minister it to the sicke, so vppon the sodaine receiuing, the sicke nature should be refreshed, whereas the weake stomacke cannot concoct, digest, and separate grose matters. But these great doctors wil not be schollers, or yong souldiers, no more then an old dog wil be brought to hunting with whips, and gaw his line and shew his grinning teeth to him that leadeth him, rather then he will bee ruled: euen so you will rather openly gainesay the trueth, and like dogs barke and bite at it, then you will confesse your errours. What, ought this to be a reproch vnto the Chymists, that for the true preparations of medicines whereof you are ignoraunt, and for their great labour and paine which you do eschew, they should be accounted beggars, poore, and ragged? do you not thinke that the common people will at length finde out your deceits? You haue beene sufficiently warned of many doctours of physicke, who truly haue not alowed your childish cures. A∣mongst whom Conrde Gesner is one, and many other o, which if they were liuing most certainely would deny your fained Art. Likewise Iohn Woz of Cullen which flourished 1510. doth sharply reprooue the Physi∣tions of his time, who in his writings vpon the plague and labyrinth of Physitions most plainely and excellently intreateth of metaline medi∣cines and quintessences, and sheweth their vse. What will you answer to those things which that doctor Gorreus hath written in the fift booke of the extraction of the Quintessence out of herbes, where in his com∣ments hee so excellently extolleth metalline medicines, and did vse them, little esteeming your medicines: for hee saieth the distillations of waters out of hearbes and other such like things, wherein the A∣pothecaries doe boast, are almost of no force, for it is nothing else but the sleame of the thing, whose principall liquor consisteth in the oyle of salt. But that I may stirre vp in you an earnest desire to know the marue∣lous propertie of things, I will repeate vnto you the iudgement of Ferne∣lius Ambian in his second booke and eighteenth chapter De Abdi
causis. When first (saith he) I gaue my selfe vnto the studie of that sensible and metalline philosophie called Chymia, through long trauell (as many other had,) I getting a most perfect maister or teacher, did draw out of euerie plant and other liuing things verie diuerse and sun∣drie substances: First water, and that very plentifull if the plant were green, more scarce if it were drie: then oyle, but not that fatte and fil∣thy substance, which by presse is drawen of our men, but the worke∣manshippe of a more excellent Arte, which neither easilie corrupteth nor owreth by age, and that of two sortes, one thinne and white, an other drier and redde, &c. Then it followeth I will tell you by your leaue, not vttering this whole secret, but teaching you vpon what true groundes it doeth consist. But lest the straunge obscuritie of the name might offend you, which the fathers haue couered vnder a shaddowe or darke kinde of speech, I will most plainely and openly shewe it i his place. And yet you can not away with them that giue you good counsell, as also you will not suffer learned and excellent men, ney∣ther Gerard Dorne Doctour of Physicke, whome, no doubt, God hath raised vp vnto vs. This most excellent man is woorthie of eternall me∣morie, because that he by no iniurie, neither perilles could be teified, but that by his last writings he hath made aracelsus more famous, who doeth excell with a most auncient granitie and authoritie, that at the least he might helpe the children or learning, fo whose defence as a valiant souldier hee contendeth by word and deede euen to the death, the fellow and companio of that learned physition Isehus Quirstan famous in physicke, who hath excellently deserued for physicke: and in his bookes hath vttered manie excellent philosophical secrets vnto the posteritie, and opened manie hidden spagyricall medicines, and woulde haue brought to light greater things, if the ingratitude of some had not stopped his willing minde, and specially of a perfumer, which goeth about to reprooue manie things, and to alow but few in his writing, and yet not able to shew better. Whereby it comes to passe, that through one mans ingratitude, al feele losse and lacke. Proceede therefore with courage, driue away those drones and sluggish beasts from the acke, so shall your head be crowned with perpetual praise. In the meane time, whatsoeuer we haue gotten by many trauels, and found out and lear∣ned with labour, we wil heere annex, praying out aduersaries, that if they neede them not, they wil not contemne or launder them, or ter∣rifie others, which with willing minde would embrace these our labors: or else, to teach them some better things; considering yet that some∣thing in the meane time ought to be giuen and granted vnto him, which for physickes sake hath put himselfe in so many dangers. After the great murder and furie of our countrieen the French men, when I went with D. Charles of Chambray, D. of Pansay into Italie, trauelling through ria, Ragusium, Sclauonia. Macedonia and Bizantium, icessantly applied my whole studie to vnderstand and knowe some certaintie touching the philosophers stone or chyical matters. But I could finde no true philosophers, onely false Physitions and Chymists
euerie where, which had either altogether none, or else very litle know∣ledge of naturall Artes and preparations. At the length (by Gods good will) I happened vpon a very learned man Daniel Bishop of Dalmatia. Vnto this most excellent man I directed my letters, the which togither with his answer, alittle after sent to me, I will hereafter publish, where∣in you shall see many philosophicall points delectable to be read and vnderstoode. At the length, when I had sufficiently searched ouer the East coun∣tries, and could gather no certaine point in naturall sciences, I deter∣mined to take my iourney towardes Germanie with the most curteous prince Cabaneus Vydam of Chrtres, still imploying my minde to the ear∣nest study of Chymicall physicke. And there I vnderstoode that Kinges and Princes were deceiued by vnskilfull practisers, which did vtter and sell their sophisticate Chymicall artes, which they had begged and scratched together out of all corners, with a pompous shew deceiuing the princes of their money, whereby it commeth to passe, that dailie a great number of sophisters, and sophisticators doe daily rise and spring vp, through which, not onely the most commendable art of Alchymie receiueth great detriment, is oppressed, and adulterate, and the Chy∣mistes themselues made hatefull vnto all men, consuming their life, time, and goodes vpon vaine workes and practises: but also there re∣doundeth most great hurt and domage vnto the common wealth. For there are many deceiuers so craftie, that with a dissembled experience in the Chymicall arte, and with fained friendship and great promises they doe craftily learne of others their cunning, which they challenge for their owne, esteeme of great value, and carry them about to bee solde. As vpon a time certaine knaues by craft gote from mee certaine written bookes, and solde them for a great summe of money. Common wealths and the Chymicall art should be very well prouided for, if that such knaues might bee punished and restrained by the magistrate, so should the studious of the Arte be lesse deceiued, and in short space the true and pure Arte would appeare from those shadowes and sophistica∣tions. Wherefore to the ende that such as be desirous of the Arte may haue some pledge from mee, wherewith they may make this science more plaine, I will shortly (God willing) set foorth three bookes of the philosophers stone, written by diuers Authours, whereof the first was drawen out of certaine characters by a noble Brytaine, wherein all the darke speeches of the philosophers are most plainly expounded, where∣vnto I will annex two hundred certaine infallible and true philosophi∣call rules, whereby those that doe erre and doubt touching the matter of the stone, shall be confirmed. The second booke is, Ihannes de ouil∣lsco Pedomonta, which treateth of the philosophers mercurie, and how it is drawen, together with an Epistle of Iohn Panus of the same argument. But there is a more certaine excellent Treatie of an vncer∣taine Authour, which doeth explane many doubts in that sacred Phy∣icke. And because that all nations, specially the Germanes, haue written
bookes in their owne language, I will also write two bookes in the french tongue for the helpe of such as are studious of Philosophie, wherein I will intrete of many preparations and speciall medicines tried by me, and others, also of diuerse elyxirs of the philosophers, extractions of mercuries and mercuriall waters, of many and diuerse dissolutions, I will also adde the interpretations of sundry Characters wherewith the bookes both of the olde and newe writers are written to couer and hide the Art. Also the exposition of a certaine Alphabet, without the which the worke can hardely be vnderstoode. And two treatises, the one of the vertues of the vegetall and minerall oiles, the other of the saltes and properties of many vegetals and minerals: whereunto I will also ioyne two treatises of philosophicall mines, and of making of vine∣gers, the which my labour and studie, if I see it acceptable vnto those that are studious of that Art, I wil shortly set forth greater things, which many with their whole heartes doe wish and desire. In the meane time, take in good part this little worke. That which wee haue hitherto spo∣ken, is spoken onely vnto those that doe so deadly hate the Chymicall physicke, which thinke nothing can be well or profitably taught in Phy∣sicke that the olde harpe oundeth not. As though that nature were not more then Galen, or that all the learning of Physicke were to be drawne from the heathen, or that they alone had published the art, and establi∣shed it with such sound arguments. Why do you not out of those authors confute those excellent men which are folowers of Paracelsus, amongst whom that great Doctor Petrus Seuerius a Dane is chiefe, who in his Idea hath opened the inuincible foundation of Paracelsus Phisicke. Why do you not aunswere to the monarchie of the Trinitie of that learned doctor and Phisition Gerard Dorne? Why doe you not confute the vo∣lumes of that famous Phisition Turnesser, beeing confirmed with the truth of practise. But for your sakes which daily cal Galens doctrine vnto examination, and with exact iudgement do consider of it, giuing place vnto Paracelsus, acknowledging and exercising his preparations and practise, I doe reioyce, and shortly more shall come out against the ad∣uersaries, which shall bite them better. In the meane time with your worde, deede, and witing, defend the trueth from iniurie. Farewell.
B. G. Londrada A Portu Aquita∣nus vnto the gentle Reader, health. THis treatise of Paracelsus (friendly rea∣der) came vnto my hands by the gift of a certain nobls Prince of Germanie, and be∣cause it is sufficiently euident to be Para∣celsus worke, I thought it not good to reserue it to my selfe, but to publish it abroad, seeing there commeth no commoditie or profit of hidden treasure. This therefore such as it is (louing Reader) imbrace: and shortly, God willing, looke for more and greater matters. But this one thing I would haue you vnderstand, that when you do minister those exalted essences of Paracelsus and his precious oyles, thinke not that they are to be ministred by themselues, but with some other mixture to cary or leade them: and they must be vsed, the stomack first being pur∣ged with some speciall medicine of Paracelsus: as for ex∣ample, if you will minister oyle of Vitrioll, mingle fiue or sixe droppes with an ounce of conscrue of Roses, so shall you safely giue it; the like you must iudge of other things; vse these happilie. Farewell.
An hundred and foureteene Experi∣ments and Cures of Phillip Theophrastus Paracelsus a great Philosopher, and a most excellent doctor of the one and the other Physicke, Written With his owne hand in the Ger∣mane tongue, which Conrad Steinberge his seruant found among other loose papers and scrolles of Paracelsus. A Certaine Baron being diseased with a wonted griefe, By drinking our Quinta essentia Mercuriale, cast out a stone downeward, and became whole. 2 A certaine woman was long sicke of the Passion of the heart which she called Cardiaca, who was cured by taking twice our Mercurial vomit, which caused hir to cast out a worme commonly called Theniam, that was foure cubites long. 3 One Bartholmew, had for two yeeres space a paine in his side, whome I cured by giuing him the oyle of Vitrial, in a drinke comforting the stomacke. 4 A man that had his Nauill standing out like to a mans yard, was healed with a thrid dipped in the oyle of Uitriol, by tying the threed hard about it euery day. After the same sort I healed a great swelling or ouergrowing of the flesh called Parotis, which grew out of a womans thigh waying fiue pound. 5 A souldier was shotte through in the breast to the left shoulder with a two forked arrow, so that the head stucke fast in the bone, the which I drewe forth with my two fingers, and powred Kist into the wound and so hee was healed. 6 A Phisitian being astonied with a clap of thunder and Lightning, so that hee seemed to bee sicke of the (Apo∣plexia)
or of the disease which they call Syderacio, and of vs, blastings or taking, was restored to his former health with Oleum auri in aqua Melissae. 7 A young man which for three yeere hadde on his chinne a great outwarde swelling or apostume, with the often chawing of the herbe called Persicarie, was cu∣red. 8 I cured hard apostumes, swellings, and crustie vlcers, and stinking in the nostrels, with our Medicamentum mu∣dificatiuum, and with our Emplastrum Stipticum. 9 A woman who was in manner consumed with the French Pox, was cured with a drinke or potion of Essenti Melissae, and shee liued eight yeares after. 10 One had his stomacke swollen and standing out bigger then a Pomegranad, and that without any paine, whome I cured with a drinke or potion of the oyle of Vi∣triol. 11 A boy of fifteene yeares olde falling downe a stone staires had his arme and leg benummed and void of moo∣uing, whose necke with the hinder parte of the head, and all the backe bone I annointed with this Unguent, R. of the fatte of a Fox, ℥ ij. oyle of the earth womes, ℥ j. Oleum Phi∣losophorum ℥ ss. I mixt them together and anointed there∣with, and in short space no wound nor swelling appeared in him so hurt. 12 One after an agew fell into such a dead sleepe that he felt not himselfe being pricked, nor could open his eies, nor speake any thing; hee was sicke of the Lethrgi, whome I cured with the oyle of Salt. 13 a woman that gaue a child sucke, hauing her tearmes stayed long before, at the length the menstruous bloud ran a pace out of her breasts, wherupon when she felt no griefe or paine, I healed her by extracting bloud out of the vaine of the foote called Sphen. 14 A boy hauing his finger eaten to the bone with a dis∣ease called Impetigo or Lichen, I cured in short time with the oyle of Lead. 15 In a place where the bones wrere cankred and con∣sumed,
with good successe I vsed Quinta essetia serpen∣tum. 16 A young man had his thigh made filthie with red Pushes of the bignesse of Grommell seede, which I cured with the water of Tartar and Theriacle. 17 The growing out of the flesh in the Fundement, as also Ani Rhagades, which are certaine cleftes or chaps in the flesh, I cured by the taking away of those fleshlie parts by incision with Filum Arcenicale, and by the vnction of Oleum Saturni. 18 One that spit bloud I cured by giuing him one scru∣ple of Laudanum Precipitatum in the water of Plantaine, and outwardly I applied a linnen cloth to his breast, dipped in the decoction of the barke of the rootes of Hen∣bane. 19 One had two Pushes as it were wartes vppon the yard, which he got by dealing with an vncleane woman, so that for sixe moneths he was forsaken of all Phisitions, as vncurable, the which I cured by giuing him Essentia Mercu∣riale, and then mixed the oyle of vitriol, with Aqua sophiae, and laied it on warme with a supositorie or tene foure dayes. 20 One fiftie yeeres olde after hee was healed of the French pox, had euery moneth the flux of the Hemeroides breaking and flowing out as fast as the termes doe in a wo∣man, whom I cured by purging him first with Pillule Pe∣stilentiales Ruffi mixed with our Essentia Mercurials, after∣ward he drunke oftentimes, Aurum Diaphoreticum, but last of all, by giuing him Crocus martis in drinke hee was perfectly cured. 21 A Goldsmith of Stuburg had his skull perished vntil the innermost skin, or pellicle, which they call, Meniux te∣nuis: which also swelled vppe, whome I cured by ope∣ning the skull, and by purging the skinne or pelliele, as it commonly falleth out in the wounds of the head with Unguentum Fuscum, and afterward with Blsamum Hiperici, and with the flowers of herbes a propriate for the head applied to the place painted informe of a plaster. But in
the meane time he dranke thrise euerie day of the oyle of Vitrioll with the water of Basell and Lauerder: Note that this disease is called Talparia, or Talpa. 22 A girle of the age of fifteene yeares before she had her flowers, was verie sore sicke, whome I cured with the Oyle of Camomell, in the water of Melissa and Uale∣nian. 23 I cured a woman that for thirtie yeares had a canker in her breast, by giuing her Essentia Mercurialis, with the water of Plantaine. 24 A boy had his face and stones swolen whom I cured with the extraction of Rhabarb. 25 One Ionas falling in loue with one Sabian, fell be∣sides himselfe, whom I holpe by giuing him in drinke La∣pidem siue calculum microcosmi. 26 The daughter of one Oliuer being very pale did greedilie eate smal stones, chauke, lime, dust, and such like, (as they commonly doe which haue the longing sick∣nesse called Pica or Malchia) thorowe the lothing of the stomacke, whome I cured by purging her with Essentia Mercurialis for the first vomite, afterwarde for certaine daies I gaue her oyle of Uitrioll to drinke with the water of minte. 27 One was sicke of the Lousie euill called (Pthiriasis) whom I cured with these pilles. R. Essentia mercurialis, ʒ ss. Aloes Hepatice and Mirha ana. ℥ ss. Saffrana halfe a scruple, make thereof pilles with the oyle of Staphisaegriae, afterward he dranke a draught of wine of Centuarie or Per∣ficaria. 28 A boy of eighteene, yeares old had a tooth drawen, and three months after a certaine blacke blather appeared in the place of the tooth. The which I daily annointed with oyle of Vitrioll, and so the blather was taken awaie, and the new tooth remained. 29 A young Gentlewoman, called Ascania had great paine in her head, and was cleane ouer all her bodie, be∣cause shee had not the due course of her tearms, who after shee had often vomited, the paine abated: but when shee
could not abide any longer to vomit, I cured her by draw∣ing bloud out of the vaine which is vnder the ball of the foote, and afterward the tearmes had their naturall course, and she was holpen. 30 I oftentimes cured the falling sicknesse with Essentia Ueratri Nigri prepared after our order. 31 One that had the Flux of bloud by meanes of an Arter that was cut, I holpe with Kist Stipticum. 32 A Knight being in an assemblie was sodenlie asto∣ned and diseased ouer all his bodie, as if hee had hadde the Apoplexie, whome I cured by anointing the hinder parte of his head with Balsamum Helenij, and Essentia Mer∣curialis. 33 A man of the countrie being stung with a Viper or adder, fel presently into a colde sweate, to the great danger of his life, who was restored to his health presently by drin∣king Theriaca Nostra with strong wine. 34 A woman who had not her naturall courses, was troubled with a verie sore cough: the which I cured by o∣pening the vaine beneath the ball of the foote. 35 A fat drunken Tauerner was in danger of his life by a surfet, who was restored to his health by letting of bloud. 36 A woman called Sabina had a long time the flixe of the belly, by reason of the loosenesse of the stomacke, the which I cured by giuing her oyle of Uitrioll, with con∣serue of Anthos. 37 A man that was wounded in the pellicle or tunicle of the heart, was cured with Essentia Solis. 38 A yong man being vexed with a continuall and vio∣lent cough, I cured by giuing him oftentimes the iuice of Horehound with our Oximell, and after that he voy∣ded a worme vpward and was holpen. 39 A young childe had after a sicknesse a swelling in his breast by reason of the aboundance of humours, the which I cured onely with Theriaca Nostra. 40 A certaine man had a disease called Carcinomate, or angrena, the which was cured with Oleum Ueneris.
41 A certaine woman was so troubled with a disease in her secret partes, that what moist or liquid meate shee did eate, presently shee vomited againe, the which was cured with Oleum Margaritarum. 42 One Eligus had a great paine in his stomacke, the which was holpe with Essentia Mercurialis Uomitoria, the vvhich shortly after vomited a peece of flesh wherein was hd a worme. 43 One Vermundus, vvas so troubled in his head and braine, that hee stagered hither and thither, as though hee had beene drunke, whome holpe by giuing him Pillu∣las Pestilentiales, with the which I mixed Essentiam Mercu∣rialem, that caused him to vomite a hundred and fiftie wormes. 44 A certaine man was sicke of the splene, whom I cu∣red with Crocus martis, in the water of Tamaris and Enul Campane, and by outwardly applying Balsamum gummi ∣moniaci. 45 One was troubled vvith a corosion or gnavving of the intralles, whome I cured by ministring vnto him Flores Veneris in wormevvood wine. 46 One was troubled with paines in the stomacke thorow weakenesse, who tooke Oleum salis in his drinke, and caused him to haue manie seges or stooles, and so was restored to his health, as wee haue written in our booke called Parastenasticon. 47 A man that vvas troubled with the head-ach I pur∣ged by the nostrels, casting in the iuice of Ciclaminus with a siring. 48 Against the falling sicknes I gaue often to drinke the iuice of the herbe called Lanceola, the which is called Her∣ba Uernalis, or the lesse plantaine with an emptie stomacke for the space of thirtie dayes, mixing it with the extraction of the shauings of iuorie, and the bloud of a pigion, for the man, the male, and for the woman, the female, in the Essence or oyle of Craneum Humanum. 49 In diseases of the eies termed Catharacta or stiliidium and (called in the Greeke Epiphora) and in swellings and
paines of the eyes, I haue vsed Medicamentum siue Collirium nostrum made of Tutia Magistralis, wherevvith wee did not onely cure watering eies, but also the great paine of the eie liddes, and also where there vvas flesh grovving ouer the sight of the eie, that it seemed to bee past the cure of those common Phisitions that professe to bee skilfull in theeies. 50 A certaine disease called Palipus the which is a stin∣kng in the nose, I cured with oyle of Uitrioll and the water of wax. 51 One falling from a hie place pissed bloud, the which is short space I cured, giuing him to drinke ʒ j of a pouder of our inuention with ℥ iij. of the flovvers of Tiliae. 52 In the great scab I haue often vsed ths Vnguent, made of Mercurie mortified ʒ ij. Ceruse ʒ i. Euphorbium ʒ j Staphisagre, Litage, Sanders, ana ʒ ss. mixe them all together with as much grease of a red hogge as will suf∣fice. 53 A certaine man being long sicke of the pox had two rumous and an vlcer in his nose, at the which euerie day there came footth great quantitie of stinking and filchie matter, in whose nose I cast this decoction with a siring. R. Honie ℥ iiij. the iuice ef Calendine, Common salt prepared ʒ ij. Aloes washed ℥ ss. mixe them together. In∣wardly he vvas purged vvith Oleum Mercurij. 54 In hard and knottie impostumes of the govvte, I vsed Amoniacum dissolued in vineger mixed vvith ehe oyle of Turpentine, also oyle of Cristall, onely disperceth and consumeth those knottes, as I haue oftentimes proued, or Cristall calcined vvith the oyle of Turpentine, also the oile of salt doth the same. 55 In curing of paines in the mouth of the stomacke, entralles, and belly, I vsed the water of the floures of Ca∣momel ℥ iii. hony of Roses ℥ i. 56 One Ioannes Babtista a faire yong man was infected with the pox two yeres throgh the filthy sin of Sodomites, so that there grew a peece of flesh in the invvard parte of
the necke of the great gut with such extreme paine that he was almost dead, whome I cured by sweating manie dayes, with a Malgamie made of Mercurie and Iupiter, and opening his fundament with an instrument called Spe∣cillum Ossicularium, and laying on oyle of Uitrioll, vppon the said superfluous flesh, and afterward I cured that flesh eaten away, with a suppositorie Incarnatiue. 57 One called Gallenus had lost his speech by meanes of a hole that hee had in the pallate of his mouth comming of the pox, the which I cured with Mercurius Dulcis dia∣phoreticus cast in by a siring, and so the flesh grewe againe and was made whole. 58 One was troubled with great burning of the vrine the which I holpe in this order R. dry Roses, Pug, semis, Linseede, the seede of Coucumbers, Gourdes, Melons, Mallowes, Purcelane, Populeon, ana ʒ two of the fruit of Alkekengi, numero x. faire water l. i. fs. make thereof a de∣coction according to Art: then straine it, and put thereto Troshiscorum Alkekengi ℥ ss. white sugar ℥ ij. Camphire ʒ j. mixe them and cast it into the yard with a siring or other instrument. 59 One being sicke of a thisicke, which is an vlcerati∣on of the lunges, with a consumtion of all the whole body, the which hee tooke by the infection of his owne wife. I cured with the oyle of Perrelles. 60 A certaine woman had the course of her termes so long, that many times shee was readie to giue vppe the ghost, whome I cured with the oyle of Vitrioll, in Plan∣tane water, and ʒ j. of Carniola. 61 Pustules or Wheles in all partes of the bodie, and especially in the head comming of the Poxe, I cured onely with the potion of Lignum Vitae or Guicum, and his purgatiue Salt, without anie other outwarde medi∣cine. 62 A Fistula being betweene the testicules and funda∣ment of a certaine man troubled with the pox, I healed by applying Oleum Arsenicale fixum. 63 A Hernia or Rupter which some call Ramex, in the
with the bowelles fall into the coddes, I cured by the extraction of white sanicle, digested in bread, and af∣terward taken in drinke, keeping vppe the gut or entralles with a trusse made fitte for the purpose, and laying vp∣pon the place offended, the Fesses that remained of the extraction. 64 Intollerable paines in the legges, Ex morbo Venere, I cured with the oyle of Lignum Vitae, mixt with old The∣riacle. 65 A certaine maiden through want of her monethly sicknesse was so vexed, that sometime thrise a day shee seemed to be haunted with an euill spirit, whome I pre∣sently cured with the extraction of Rhabarbe, with the spirite of Tartar in drinke, with the water of Melissa ar∣themisiae and pulegi, in Oleo Uitrioli. 66 Paines in the teeth I cured by the iuice of the night∣shade and Persicariae made warme in a Gargarisme bu∣rying the herbes afterward in a dunghill. 67 I prepared a pouder of the ashes of Rosemarie, the which maketh the yellow teeth white, and hea∣leth tumours in the Gummes verie quicklie without bloud. 68 In tumors of the vuule Gummes and iawes, I haue vsed Oleum Uitriolli in water of Persicariae. 69 In tumors of Scrophules, or hard impostumes of the breastes, I haue vsed the oyle of Terpentine mixed with Misselto of the Oke in forme of a vnguent. 70 At Ingoistad a cittie of Germanie, a certaine man had the consumption of the lungs, whome I cured with the extractiou of Consolida maior in bread. 71 A certaine woman the which after childbirth was not well purged of her tearmes, presently fell beside her selfe, with other greeuous paines in her breast and reines of the backe, whome I holpe onely with the Essence of An-timoni. 72 A maiden of ten yeares olde after bathing her selfe fell into an Apoplexia, which proceeded of the Flux of grosse humours into the vessels and into the partes of the
head wherein consisteth the feeling and moouing of the whole body yet she snorted much in her sleepe and trem∣bled ouer all her bodie whome I cured with Oleum cranij Humani, giuing it with the spirit of Vitrioll in water of Lauender. 73 A young sucking childe had his palate and lippes full of Pustules or wheles called Aphtas, whome I cured by bathing them with a linnen cloth wet in this wa∣ter. R. Consolidae maioris & minoris, ana one handfull, white wine j ss. boyle them together and put thereto Sal Gemae,  ij. clarified honie l ij. and make thereof a mixture. 74 A certaine woman who wanted her naturall cour∣ses, was thereby so tormented that shee abhorred all men, yea her verie companions, whome I cured by o∣pening the inward vaine of the arme, bicause I coulde not finde the vaine of the legge called Saphena. 75 A man of three score yeeres being full of Me∣lancholie humours, hadde crustie scabbes ouer all his bodie, the which I cured with the medicine, R. the iuice of Plantane, Semperuiui, and nyteshad ana Oleum Lithar∣girij, as much as will suffice, make thereof an vnguent wherewith thou shalt annoint all the partes of the bo∣die. 76 One was troubled with a distillation or Cataract of the eies, whome I cured in this order. R. Tuti prepared and put into a fine linnen cloth, and dip or wet it well in Vino cretico, wherewith wash the eies oftentimes and they shall be holpe. 77 A certaine woman after childbirth was troubled with great paine and chops in her breast, which I cured washing them often with wine mixt with Oleum saturn and afterward the child did sucke. 78 A yong maiden being troubled with a grreuous vo∣miting that shee coulde neither retaine meate nor drinke that shee tooke, the entrals moreouer swelled exceeding∣ly, whome I cured by applying a plaister of the leuen of bread with the iuice of mint.
79 A certaine woman that three moneths after shee was conceiued, feared abortion or birth of her childe a∣fore the time, whome I cured with the Extraction of Rhabarbe with the spirite of Tartar, and afterwarde shee drunke oftentimes Essentia Melissae with Oleum Solis. 80 One Gotius, had a bone out of ioynt for three daies, which afterward swelled maruellously, the which swel∣ling I holpe with Oleo Uerbasci and Prunella, otherwise Primule with the iuice of Camomilla, and Agrimonie, and Oleum Petroleum, these being mixed together warme, I anointed the place being greeued, and so the bone was re∣stored to his place againe: then afterwarde to strengthen and comfort the ioynts, I vsed the saide vnguent mixed with Msselto of the Oke, and Consolida Maior, vntill the cure was perfectly done. 81 A woman being almost dead of the Chollicke, I cu∣red with the red oyle of Vitrioll, drunke in Aniscede wa∣ter, and a while after that potion, she voided a worme and was cured. 82 A certaine man called Barthelmew, hauing carnall companie with his wife, could voide no sperme at his yard but onely winde, the which by often vsing of Oleum Vitri∣oli with the spirite of Tartar in distilled wine, and af∣terward the Extraction of Satirion hee performed the act verie well. 83 A child of ten yeares old was troubled with a stone in the bottome of his yarde, the which I cured by giuing him Oleum Vitrioli to drinke in Aqua Aqualiae, and then I applied outwardly oleo cancrorum with the oyle of Tur∣pentine, and so within one houres space the stone came foorth and hee was holpe. 84 A woman of twenty yeares old being married could haue no children, who by the vse of taking the extraction of Satirion she conceiued, and within nine moneths shee had a strong childe, but lest that after her childbirth shee shoulde become barren againe and dried away with a leanenesse, I gaue her to drinke Oleum Margaritarum
with Romaine coleworts. 85 A certaine woman being troubled with great abun∣dance of her naturall sicknesse had great swelling and paines in her hands and feete, and fell manie times into a sound, whome I cured by taking often the Extraction of Rhabarbe. 86 To cause nurses to haue abundance of milke, I haue taken the fresh branches or tops of fenell and boyled in water or wine, and giuen it to drinke at dinner, or supper, and at all times, for it greatly augmenteth the milke. 87 One had in the amepit a sanguine impostume, vp∣on the which impostume I aplied a linnen cloth wet in mans bloud, being warme, and so in short time he recoue∣red his health, not without great admiration. 88 One called Ambrose, while he yawned, sodainly the lower law remained with great griefe and paine, whome I cured with the decoction of Camomel, Uerbascum Per∣forata, and such like, as before in Number. 80. 89 One was troubled three yeares with a disinesse in the head, whome I cured within a moneth by drinking Oleum Uitrioli, in Betoni water. 90 A man being vehemently troubled a yeeres space with paines in the head, I cured onely by opening of the skull, and in the same manner I cured the trembling of the braine, taking therewithall, Oleum saltis in water of Basell. 91 A certaine maide for want of her monethly sicknes, was svvollen all the bodie ouer, and had red Pustules, which alwaies at certaine houres of the day appeared se∣uen times, and vanished away with great paine of the sto∣macke, and sounding, whom I ured giuing her in drinke Essentia Splenis, extracted out of the Splene of an oxe in the water of Melisse and Artemisiae. 92 I holpe one of the plurifie by drawing away bloud of the inward vaine of the arme on that side, giuing him also in drinke Spiritus Tartari, in A Melissae and anoin∣ing the outward par the mouse of th mountaine.
93 A certaine woman hauing a coroding vlcer in the left brest with great paines, by meanes that she had not her naturall sicknesse, she had also in the right breast, necke, and armpit, certaine kernels, and hard tumors, and chief∣ly the left arme was astonied or taken, to whome I gaue fundrie times a purgation of the extraction of Rhabarbe, and the oyle of Golde by the space of a moneth, out∣wardly I washed the breast with the decoction of the rootes of Celandine in wine: also I laied thereon plegetes wet with Oleum Veneris, mixt with honie and rooled it, and afterward I layd it on our common Opodeltoche, and so she was perfectly cured. 94 One Rosina, was troubled with a quartane Agevv the space of tvvelue months, with induration and swelling of the Splene, whereof shee fell into a kinde of dropsie which is called Ascitem, the which I purged first with Es∣sentiae, and Trochiscis Alhandali & Serapionis. The second day I commaunded her that shee shoulde licke in Diacu∣bebe for the space of a moneth. 95 One had a hard svvelling in the flesh of his legge caused of (Morbus Hispanicus) whome I cured with Oleum Antimoni, . Mercurie mortified according to our or∣der ʒ i. mixt into an vngent. 96 A noble woman was troubled vvith Empiema the vvhich is a spitting foorth of filthie matter, vvhome I cu∣red vvith Oleum Sulfuris drunke in vvater of Ciclaminus Mlissa and Betonie. 97 in grieuous paines of the ioyntes I haue vsed, Oleum Uitriolli in vvater of turpentine, or water of vvormvvood. 98 A priest vvas troubled vvith the running govvte and vvith great paines in his Kidneis, vvhom I cured only vvith oyle of turpentine according to our order. 99 A certaine Queene through the Retention of her menstrues, had her tongue so inflamed and svvollen that shee could not speake, and had a lamenesse throughout the vvhole bodie, and also fel besides her selfe, vvhome I cured by dravving bloud from the vrine called Saphena. 100 A child of twelue yeares olde had sodenly a great
swelling in his head the which was soft, whome I cured in foure dayes with this medicine, R. oyle of Camomil, Tap∣si Barbati, Hipericon, and mixe them, and therevvith an∣noint the tumor. 101 A young man that was troubled with Spasmus Ca∣ninus, so that his mouth was drawne awry, I cured by annointing the reines of the backe with Balsamum Helenij & Hederae, and by little and little drawing the place being avvrie to his forme vvith the gentle rubbing of my hand: Moreouer, I gaue him in his drinke Oleum salis. 102 One had an impostume behinde his eare, the which I cured in purging him vvith our Essentia Mercuri∣alis, and applying our Apodeliae. 103 I cured the inflation and hardnesse of the splene, with my plaister made of gummes, and oleum Philosopho∣rum, with the iuice of Ciclaminus. 104 A certaine woman being avvake vvas vexed with Litargia, so that her eies vvere alvvay shut, and if any had called her, shee coulde scarce open her eies, and no man could vnderstand vvhat she said, not yet ansvver anie man, the vvhich woman vvas brought to her perfect health on∣ly by the vse of oleum vitrioli. 105 A noble man in Carinthia vvas sick of the plague vvhom I cured by giuing him euery morning electuariu iniperorum, wherevvith I mixed one scuple of oile of vi∣trioll. 106 A Prince in Germanie that was troubled with the frensie, by reason of a sharpe feuer, vvhom I cured vvith giuing him fiue graines of Laudanum nostrum vvhich ex∣pelled the feuer, and caused him to sleepe sixe houres af∣tervvard. 107 A Gentlevvoman of name vvas troubled with the suffocation of the matrix, whom I cured vvith specifico no∣stro corticis ficus, being laide vpon hote coles, and taking the sume thereof at the lovver partes, and presently shee was holpe. 108 A Lawyer of Augusta was long sicke of the col∣licke, and was forsaker of other Physitions, whome I cu∣red
by giuing him Laudanum nostrum. 109 A Barber of Argentine was greatly troubled with the head-ach, to whom I gaue the oyle of sweete marge∣rome to smell, and put a drop thereof into both eares, and as soone as it was done he was holpe. 110 A certaine woman at Colmaria, was troubled with the falling sicknesse, in whose nose I put the oyle of Gar∣gates, and within a little while after she recouered againe; then I purged her with Elleoro nostro, and the next day I gaue her certaine drops of the oyle of Cranei humanae, who afterward was troubled no more. 111 A certaine Baron was sore infected with Mor∣bus Hispanicus and miserably annointed with Vigoes vn∣guent, and left off the schoole doctors, vvhome I first pur∣ged with our Specificum Torpetum, and then I gaue him ole∣um solis & Margaritarum, in aqua guaici rectificate, and so he was perfectly cured. 112 Many that were troubled with the quartane feuer I haue cured with our Turpeto, and also those that had the pestilence and plurisie. 113 A certaine man of fiftie yeres olde was vexed with a cramp that his head and necke was drawen downe to his breast, and could not lift nor stirre it, vnto whome I appli∣ed Arcanum magnetis & oleum salis, and so he was cured. 114 One was troubled with a palsie, whome I cured onely with the essence of Cheri drawen with the spirite of wine. The end of the Experiments of Philip Theophrastus Para∣selsus a most excellent Doctor of the one and the other Physicke: enioyne thereto the praise of Iesus Christ, and farewell.
B. G. L P. Penotus Londrada a portu san∣tae Mariae Aquitanus, greeting. I Thought good (gentle Reader) to publish and make thee partaker of these foure particular things, which, if at the first fight they shall not seeme to a∣gree with thy worke and practise, thou must re∣member to impute that vnto thine errour and ignorance; for, a light errour doth marre a whole worke, which thou must a∣mend by reading of Philosophers bookes. For which cause the sayings of Philosophers are much and long to bee searched, examined, and thought vppon before thou canst get out the hidden meanings of them. If then in reading Philosophers Bookes thou play the sluggard, thou canst neuer bee perfect in preparing thy matters, and therefore I might not by the autho∣ritie of the lawes of Philosophie, interprete all things openly, word for word to thee. Something are to be left for industri∣ous wittes, wherein to excercise themselues by studying and sear∣ching. Notwithstanding if thou be not vnthankefull, all these things shall be opened and declared vnto thee in my Galliae portu; where verie many workings hitherto knowne of fewe, shall faithfully bee set foorth. In the meane season knowe thou, that I am not the deuiser of these particular things; for some of them I had of gift, and some other for money and re∣wards came to my hands. To thee I giue them freely, which vse well. Farewell.
¶ A Treatise of certaine particulars, whereof the first intrea∣teth of the preparation of the Markasite of lead, as well for the transmutation of mettals, as for the altera∣tion of mans bodie, &c. THe philosophers Saturne, is properly the markasite of leade, and in deede doth excell Sol and Luna, in so much that Raymond saith, that in this inferior world, there is no greater secret, then that which consisteth in the Markasite of Lead, insomuch that they which haue throughly sought out the force and nature of it, haue bound themselues together by othe neuer to vtter those secrets of nature vnto the ende of heir liues. For so much as his operation is of such kinde, as truely it hath manie and sundrie vses, which being duely prepared, doth not on∣ly alter and change the filthie and corrupt humours of our bodies, but also can change and transmute by sundrie ex∣periments, Luna into Sol. Take of the Minerall markasite of leade xii. pound and grinde it into sine pouder vppon a Marbell stone, as they grinde colours vvith vineger: being well ground and tem∣pered, put it into a strong glasse, and put thereon a good quantitie of distilled vineger, and stir it well with a sticke. and so let it stand in Balneo Mariae: then set thereon a blind head, and there let it stand eight daies togither, stirring and mouing it euerie day sixe or seauen times: then let it coole: and the vineger wilbe of a yellow colour, the which ye shal powre forth into another glasse, taking heed that ye stirre not the pheces: then put thereon more vineger, & stirre it wel with a sticke, and st on the blind head and set it in Bal∣neo Mariae other viii. daies, as ye did afore, then powre forth that vineger being coloured into the other glasse. And this order ye shal vse so long vntil you see the vinegar no more coloured, for at the last the pheces wil remaine in a white masse, like white earth. Distillation of the coloured Uenigar. THen take all that vinigar being coloured, and distill it in Balneo vntill it will drop no more, and there let thy
cucurbit stand three dayes with the pheces that it may drie well, then take it fourth, and thou shalt finde in the bottome of the glasse a white matter, the which take out, for in that whitenesse, the rednes of the Markasite is hid∣den, which being prepared, auaileth much to make aquam philosophorum that they call ardentem. The preparation of the Pheces. Take the white pheces or matter, and put it into a di∣stilling vessell with a great recipient very well luted, that the spirites goe not foorth, and set it in the hot ashes, and giue it a gentle fire, and then increase it according to arte a day or two, and there will come foorth first a white wa∣ter, and then a red or golden yellow oyle, the which is to be kept close with great care. The pheces to be taken againe. Then take those pheses and set them in a calcining fur∣nace eight dayes, then take them foorth and grinde them finely, and put them in a glasse with a good quantitie of distilled vineger, and stirre them well together; that be∣ing doone, set it againe in Balneo for eight daies together, and stirre it euery day seuen or eight times, the more the better, then let it waxe colde and settle, and powre away the cleare part from the pheces, but take heed that ye stir not the dregges or bottome. Then powre on fresh vine∣ger, and set it in Balneo againe, and doe as ye did afore, and then powre away the vineger againe, and cast away the pheses, for they are nothing worth. The distillation of the vineger. Then take the vineger which you reserued, and distill it with a gentle fire, and in the bottome thou shalt finde a salt, in the which remaineth all the force and strength. Then calcine the said salt againe in a reuerberatorie loure and twentie houres with a great fire, then take it forth and put it in the glasse wherein it was afore, and put thereon fresh viueger and set it in Balneo. And this thou shalt do so often vntill the salt leaue no pheces in the bottome: that
being done, distil thy vineger as at the first, and thou shalt find thy selfe prepared liquid and cleare as Cristall. Coniunctio spiritus corporis, scilicet olei & salis. Take the aforesaid salt, and grinde it vpon a stone drop∣ping thereon his red oyle by little and little: that being do one, put it into a cucurbit luted with Hermes seale, and so set it vpon a treuet in an Athanor twenty dayes, and it will be fixed into a red stone, so that ye haue the true go∣uernment of the fire. Then take it forth and grinde it vp∣on a stone, and according to the waight put thereunto as many Letones of the Calex offine gold, and vppon all these put on asmuch of the white water which ye distilled afore the red oile as all the whole doth weigh, and close it vppe with Hermes seale, and set it in ashes in an Athanor with a soft fire vntill it be fixed, but after it be fixed there wil ap∣peere many colours, the which wil turne into perfect oile and true Elixer. Reioyce in this, but before yee beginne the worke, consider of it and pray. The second particular that is called Torpetum siue diaphore∣ticum minerale, purgiug without loathsomnesse or diffi∣cultie, helping the plurisie, the plague, and especially the French pox. Take Leonis à dracone repurgatissimi one part, aquilae mi∣neralis repurgatissimae twelue partes, mixe them together according to Arte, then put them into a cucurbit of glasse, and put thereon twise so much of the liquor of red Colc∣thor without fleme, as the matter weyeth, and then nou∣rish it in warme sand with a gentle fire three dayes taking heede that the matter ascend not into the head. That be∣ing done, distill it that the pheces may remaine drie, then increase thy fire that the sand and glasse may be red hote the space of three hours: then let it wax cold, and take out the matter and beate i finely, and wash it with faire distilled water, vntill it haue lost his sharpenesse, and that thou shalt do diuers times till it be well purged: then drie it and put it into a glasse, and put thereunto the spirite of wine that it may be couered three fingers hie, and set it on
fire, and thus thou shalt do three times, and th t thou without any doubt a greater secret to heale his proper dis∣ease, so that within six daes he shall be quite whole. The dose is about fiue graines in conserue of roses drunke with wine or Saccro Rosto as well in the morning as at night when hee goeth to bed, and let the patient sweate thereon two houres at each time. It is a most soueraigne medicine against all contractions, and you vse it (as afore) accor∣ding to the nature of the disease. But the patient must vse it six daies. If there appeare any pustules ye shal cure them by touching them with oyle of Sulphure. Moreouer those that haue the dropsie or such like moist diseases in the body are cured by giuing them six graines in water of Car∣dus Benedictus, letting them sweate thereon as is aforesaid and keeping the order afore set downe. Against the Plu∣isie, yee shall giue foure graines in the said water. And a∣gainst the plague in rose vinegar. Against the falling sick∣nes with water of blacke cheies or Pionie. Furthermore, if anie haue had the same disease by nature, yee shall giue them euerie day a little pill in Aqua Pionia, putting ther∣on six droppes of the spirit of Vitrioll. If I would shew or expresse all the vertues, I should write a booke there of, but that which remaineth I will shewe more at large in my booke called Portus Gsconicus with the order to draw the spirit of wine. The third particular called Laudanum. Anodinum, the which is most excellent of all other secrets in asging griefes and paines in diuerse disease. TAke Liquor is aquae inexpert & inspissati ℥ij & put ther∣to the spirit of wine, and set it in Balneo to digest, vntil it haue drawen awaie the Tincture: then powre it forth into a cleae vessell, and put on more, and so set it to digest againe so long as it will giue any Tincture or co∣lour. Then take the gumme of Henbane dried in the unn ℥ j. and draw away his Tincture with the spirit of wine, as thou didst out of the liquor aforesaide, then take
Dimber ℥ij. and likewise draw away his Tincture with the spirit of wine, and keepe it verie close vntill such time as I shall shew thee: then take momia ℥ ss. and drawe a∣way his Tincture with the spirit of wine, and when thou hast done mixe it with the other, then take Crocus Ori∣entalis ʒ iij. and drawe foorth his tincture and mixe it with the rest, and euerie day stire it, and keepe it in a warme place close stopped fifteene daies; that being done, distil it in Balneo, and there will remaine a little matter in the bottome, then put thereto a little of the Tincture of Di∣mbrae, the which ye reserued afore, and so let it stand in digestion vntill it be thicke, stirring it 3. or 4. times a day vntill the smell of the licour be in a manner consumed, the which will be in sixe weekes. Then take these that follow, the licour of Currall, cleare Ambre o Succinum of each ʒj. Unicornes horne 6. graines, Magisterium Perlarum one scr∣ple▪ Ossis de Corde Crui halfe a scrupple, Aurum Potabile, or his Tincture ʒ ss. All these being finely beaten and mixed in a stone or glasse morter, with the spirit of Diamber, put in with the residue being thicke, and so stirring it sundrie dayes afterward distill al the spirit of wine away, then put thereon the residue of the spirit of Diambrae, and when it is almost dry, put therto Olei succini, olei masi & Cinamoni of each about one scruple. Then take one part and reserue it for women without muske, for it hurteth them. But to the other parte for men, put in halfe a scruple of the ex∣traction of muske made with the spirit of wine, and set it in a warme place that it may drie, and so keepe it to thy vse. Ye may giue it in forme of pilles or dissolue it in some con∣uenient licour, inconuenient Dose, as iij. graines or fixe graines, for those that are of strong nature. It comforteth much against the chollicke, the frensie hote Feuers, Ar∣thritide Pdagra, the weakenesse of the stomacke, the yex, and comforteth against vomiting, prouoketh sleepe. A∣gainst the falling ficknes yee shall giue iij. graines with the spirit of Vitrioll and Essentia Camphora that is drawen with oyle of sweete Almondes, the which is made in this order.
The order to draw the Essence of Campher. Take Campher  oyle of sweete Almondes ℥ss. mace∣rate them in the sunne or in Balneo, or in a drie warme fur∣nace foure and twentie houres, then draw foorth his Tin∣cture or essence with the spirit of wine, and put thereto ʒ j of Laudanum, and ʒ ii of the spirit of vitrioll, and ℥ sixe of the water of pionie floures, and stirre them together, and giue therof one spoonful at the time of the fit. It is a most excellent remedie against all vncurable diseases. The fourth specificum called Panchimagogon, the which doth purge in small dose all noisome spirits that are min∣gled with the humours. Take Specierum Dirhodon abbatis ℥ ii. and drawe forth the tincture with the spirit of wine, and keep it by it selfe. Afterward take the Pulpe of Colocinthides ʒ vii. Turbit ʒ v. Agariei ℥ i ss. Heleborinigri ʒ vii. Dyagredi ʒ vi. Foliorum sene ℥ iiii. Rhabarbari ℥ ii. Elteri ℥ ss. beate them and mixe them together, and put thereon Sinamon water, the which is made in this order. The Sinamond i. and stamp it grosly, then infuse it in white wine foure and twentie houres close stopped, then distil it with a gentle fire being close luted, for with this sinamond water or spirit of wine, thou maist drawe foorth the tincture of all the aforesaide drugges. Alwayes prouided, that ye keepe them a month in a warme place to macerate, stirring them three or foure times in a day, and at the end of the moneth powre foorth the licour, and put the pheses into a Retort, and distill foorth the oile and water, the oile ye shal rectifie, and re∣serue. The pheses that remaine ye shall calcine, and make thereof a salt, the which ye shall put to the oile that ye re∣ctified. Then take that licour which ye reserued first, and distill it in Balneo, and in the bottome there will remaine a matter thicke like honie. Then take the tincture of Di∣trodiou Abbatis, and powre it vppon that thicke matter, and stop well thy glasse, and set it in a warme place eight days, stirring it euery day. That being done, draw it away
the spirit in Balne, vntil it remaine thicke like honie, vnto the which ye shal put his oile that ye distilled, mixe them and let them digest-vntil it be so thicke that ye may make thereof pilles, the which ye may do so soone as it feeleth the cold: for in the colde it will waxe hard, and in heate it will waxe liquid: the dose is from one scruple to twoo scruples where there shalbe need of purging in the pou∣der of Licores, for so it worketh without paine. Foure principall diseases whereunto almost all other disea∣ses may be referred. THe Leprosie is the first, whose badges all manner of vlcers do beare, as itch, seabs, Alopecia, scurffes, scabs, choppes in the skinne, foulenesse, the dead euill, and such like diseases. To the gowt doth belong the chollicke, paine in the reines, Orexes paine in the teeth, running gowtes, painfull flixes▪ paine of the head Cephalea and Himecrania. To the dropsie are referred all manner of feuers, appo∣stumes, the iaunders, and euill digestion. To the falling sicknesse belongeth Cathares, beating of the heart, cramps, giddines of the head, Apoplexis and suf∣focation of the matrix. If any of the principal of those diseases be healed, al the other inferior be also cured. For the cure of the gowt three things are required, that is, resoluing, mitigating and strengthening. Wherfore, if thou be of any quicke iudgement, the four particulars before set downe are sufficient for thee. The chiefest point of health consisteth in this, not to fil thy selfe with meate, nor to be slow in labour. Barnardus G. Penotus Landrad a Portu S. Mariae Aquita∣nu nto the singular learned man Iohn Aquill the hammer of the Ethnickes, wisheth much health. NOt onely in these our dayes (friend Iohn) but also in the olde time amongest the learned, this prouerbe
hath taken place, that ignorance is the mother of maruel∣ling. Who in these daies would not maruel to see men vt∣terly void of al maner of learning to bee preferred before learned men and such as are most skilfull in the Latine and Greek tongues, and those are to be embraced of kings and princes, and revvarded with most liberall gifts, & most famous and learned men expert in all the tongues to be re∣iected and contemned? You which excell in iudgement and learning wil ansvver that euery perfect gift commeth dovvne from the Father of light. Therefore God doeth in these latter daies stirre vp these Ideots and Empericks, to stirre vp euery phisition that he should rightly prepare his ovvne medicines with his ovvne handes, and being so prepared, with sharp iudgement applie them to their pro∣per diseases, that the seede of the disease may be pulled vp by the rootes, and not to commit it to an vnskilful cooke. And therefore of necessity from hence must both the the∣orike and the practise, the reason and the worke concurre and ioyne togither, because iudgement without practise is barren. The greatest number of them will ansvver, we knovve not your workes and preparations which require so great and hard labour, we are nowe olde and doctours, we wil not be made yonglings and schollers againe. If this ansvver might take place, the Iew, the Pope & the Tu would not change their superstitions. which notwithan∣ding we knovv to be most contrary to the sacred scripture. But we sufficiently and daily prooue by calcining, subli∣ming, dissoluing, putrifying, distilling, congealing and fi∣xing by this most laudable art of Alhimie, how the pure may be separated from the vnpure, and the corruptible from the incorruptible, and that vvhich is venemous and deadly be changed and made wholesome and good, and as Paracelsus saith concerning this art, we shall first consider that al things are created of god, for he created of nothing something, and that something is the seede of all things, and that seede worketh that effect hereunto ordained and appointed. Al things notvvithstanding are so created that they shall come vnto our hands, and beginne to bee in our
povver, but so, as things not perfect, but to be made per∣fect: as things not finished, but to be finished. The matter in them truely is perfect, but the middle and last matters remaine to be made perfect. As for example, God created iron, earth, and clay, but not such as they should bee, for the clay groweth, yet not like a pot or other earthen ves∣sell: so he created iron lying in a rude masse, and hath gi∣uen it so rude vnto vs: therefore we with our labour must make thereof shooes for horses, sithes, and speares. Euen so is it in Physicke, for that is also created of God, but not so that it should be vtterly perfect, but as yet hidden vnder the earth, not purged from his vncleane matter, but that which remaineth to be made perfect in it, is committed to the Chimist, that is, to the physition to be purged and cleansed. For herbes, trees, stones, and yron, and whatsoe∣uer is seene with the eies, is not true medicine, but is rude and impure, wherein as yet the pure part lieth hid. And therefore Alchimie teacheth to purge the medicine to dissolue it, and to separate things of contrarie kinde from things of the same kinde, otherwise rotten things woulde be mingled with rotten, and the corrupt with the corrupt, and so conspire to one effect, so that of one disease manie other should spring or arise. Briefly, euery man loueth not that wherof he hath no vnderstanding or knowledge, but flieth from it, contemneth it, and thinketh it not meete to be learned. The body onely careth for that which is out∣ward, but the minde worshippeth his God. By how much more the knowledge or vnderstanding of any thing doth encrease or growe, so much the more is the loue of the fame augmented. For all things consist in the true knovv∣ledge of them, and out of that springs all the good fruites that redound to knowledge. Knowledge also brings faith, for he that knoweth God, beginneth straitway to put his trust in him. For such as euery mans faith is, such is also his knowledge. And contrariwise he that doth otherwise worke about nature, worketh like a Painter that painteth an image, in the which is neither life nor strength: wherefore those
which you call Emperickes shall rise euen before your fa∣ces, and take in hand and help grieuous diseases, the cures whereof are vnpossible vnto you: and you togither with your consolations and reasonings shall be made laughing stockes. As lately B. in Germanie it happened of a cer∣tain noble and famous woman which was vexed with the paine of the matrix. Some physitions saide it was the gra∣uell and the stone; but an Empericke passing by affirmed that it was neither the grauel nor the stone, wherefore he commanded a remedy to be prepared for the matrix, the which being done, she was straitwayes healed. Oh what a rumour was raised by and by of him! stirring vp others also to rumours and tales, saying, that her husband doeth contemne vs that wil rather vse the aduise and counsel of an Empericke, then ours. Yea and others that seemed wi∣ser did finally regard him that would euery houre vse the help of an Empericke man most vnlearned. Marke I pray you (my friend Aquilla) how the enemies inflamed with enuy go about to oppresse the trueth: but at the last, will they, nill they, they shal be inforced to confesse that that cannot be denied. But you may obiect vnto me; He that speaketh all, excludeth nothing. For there be many wor∣thy learned men maisters and professors of Physicke, that do not deny or refuse this arte. In the which number are those most excellent and singular masters and doctors Pe∣trus Seuerynus Danus which hath written maruelous thin∣ges of this Chimicall Arte, that woorthy and godly man Michael Neander professor of humanitie, Theodorus Zuin∣gerus of Basill a man practised in this Arte, and also Theo∣dorus Brickmannus a physition of Cullein, which both by word & deed daily excelleth with most deepe iudgement in these matters, whom I wilneuer ouerpasse with silence. Hereafter foloweth three particular treatises, the first of the sulpher of gold and other mettals, then of stones, and the extraction of Corall. R. Purged and fine gold made in plates ℥ j. the powder of pomise stone ℥ iiij. lay them Stratum Superstratum,
and reuerberate it with drie wood fiue dayes and nights together, then take the powder and keepe it in a glasse. Then melt the golde againe, and make it in plates and lay it Stratum Superstratum as ye did afore, and that ye must do vntill the gold haue lost his yellow colour, after take al thy powders together, and put it in a glasse with distilled vi∣neger, and there let it remaine vntil the vineger be colou∣red yellow, then powre it forth and put in more, and that thou shalt do so often, vntill the vineger be no more co∣loured, then vapour away the vineger, and thou shalt find an inpalpable pouder in the bottome. If thou beest wise, looke where thou madest an end, there beginne; the like is of other mettalles. But they are not to be reuerberated so long; you shall haue of siluer a blewish colour, ofyron a reddish colour, of copper a darkish colour. There is dra∣wen out of Corall a red tincture. All which things are to be corrected with the spirite of wine being often powred thereon, there cannot be a shorter or profitabler way foūd out for this. Iron plates for one time are of force, but after the first Cimentacion they serue no more. His tincture be∣ing rightly prepared is vsed in stead of gold. If it be dra∣wen out of the best steele, it will fixe the mercurie of Sa∣turne. The second particular is of the maruellous preparation of the markasite of Lead, tincting water or other licour in∣to his red colour. R. Salt common prepared vitrioll Romane of each i vi. set them in a fire of calcination ten houres, then take it foorth and beate it to powder, then put it into a stone pot vnglased, and giue it fire 15 houres according to Art, then will distil forth both the oile and the spirit togither, the which ye shal rectifie in a pelican, then being rectified put thereunto the markasite of lead in powder, being in a strong cucurbit vvell luted, and then set it in ashes in a fornace, vnder the which yee shall set a burning lampe for the space of a moneth, and then the Markasite will
dissolue into a red matter: afterward take common foun∣aine water and powre thereon, then set it to dissolue in a moist place or cellar, and the floure of the Markasite will turne like to a red christall: the which take to thy worke. It purgeth the leprouse blood in plurisies, the plague, Contractures, the lungs and liuer the quantity of one peece in greatnes, doth serue to dissolue the same. The third particular, and the summe of the whole worke. R. Album. Albius, Albo as much as ye wil, Aqua Soluens vi. times as much, and set them in Balneo three dayes, then take it forth, filter it, and drie it: then againe dissolue it, and that do three times: being drie, dissolue it by it self, of the which solution, take three partes olei permanentis & incombustibile one part, Aeris foure parts, shut thy vessell, and in that heate nourish it, and in few dayes thou shalt haue a vniuersall medicine to expell all diseases. Reioyce, and giue praise vnto Iesus Christ. A Fragment out of the Theorickes of . Iscaacus Hollandus. AMongest all things that were created of God, water was the first, whereunto God ioined his proper earth, and of earth, whatsoeuer hath essence or life hath his originall. Therefore there are two manifest elements, that is, water and earth; in which the two other lie hidde, the fire in the earth, and the aire in the water: and they are so knit together, that they cannot be seperated. Two of them are fixed, as the earth and fire. two are flying, as water and aire. Therefore euery element doth participate within other elements. Moreouer, in euery element are two other elements, one decaying, putrifying and combu∣stible, the other eternall and incorruptible as the heauen: besides iu these natures lieth hid an other nature which is called by the name of stinking Pheces, which hinder and
take away the strēgth of the rest, so as they haue very litle force or none, and thereby make the other elements stinc∣king and subiect to putrifaction. There is also two kindes of waters, the one elementall, the other of raine and riuer waters; as there is also two kindes of earths, one elemen∣tall, cleare, shining, and white, the other blacke, stincking, and combustible. Like as also there be two fires, one ele∣mentall and naturall, the other stinking and combustible: the like is also to be saide of the aire. The base things are so mingled with the rest, that by and by they corrupt al things, so that nothing can continue long, for they bring death and weaken all nature be it neuer so noble. This is to be vnderstoode of all things both vegetall, animall, and minerall. Therefore it is necessary by Art to seperate the elementall nature from the corruptible, that the matter may be brought to a medicinall qualitie. There bee three most subtill spirites in all things, that is, colour, taste, and smell, these fly away inuisibly, the Philosophers call them wilde spirits, because they are not fixible, yet the industrie of the artificer may fixe them. They alwaies growe in the bodily substance vntill they come to perfection and end. The herb therfore is to be taken when it is fully growen, and take heed that you loose none of those three spirits, as the ignorant vse to do, with their putrifactions and sepa∣rations of elements. For none of those spirites consisteth of the three elementall elements: but God hath adorned elements with those three spirits, and of them the fire is a∣nimall, the water aire elementall, and no man but God can seperate them asunder. But the water of the cloudes may be seperated from them. Also all the pheces may be separated from them which are mingled with them, which are the stinking and corruptible elements, and the foure elementall elements may be brought to a christalline shi∣ning: but these three elements, fire, aire, and earth are vn∣seperable. My sonne, knowe this, that Mercurie is the first of all things, for before time there was water, and the spirit of the Lord rested vpon the water, but what vvas that water, the water of the cloudes, or a moisture which
might be powred out? No: but it was a drie dusty water, & God had ioyned his earth vnto it which is his sulphur, and so the earth congealeth the water, and thereof sprung the foure elements included in these two by the will of God. Therefore Mercurie congealeth sulphure, and sulphure Mercurie; neither can one of these be without the other, as also they cannot be without their salt, which is the chief∣est meane by whose help nature ingendreth and bringeth forth all vegetals, minerals, and animals. Wherefore these three, mercurie, salt, and sulphur can not be one without another, for where the one is found, there the other are found also, neither is there any thing in nature wherein these three are not found▪ and of these three whatsoeuer is in nature hath his originall, and are so mingled with the foure elements, that they make one body, and the salt is drowned in the bottome of the elements, for it is necessa∣rie that the salt should keepe them vnited by his sharpe∣nesse and dinesse, notwithstanding it is a flying spirit, but because it sticketh in the botome of the mixture, and is o∣uercome of the fatnes and combustible oile, in which it is found, as the yolke within the white of the egge, and the combustible oile liueth of the earth with the alt and phe∣ces, and the salt is buried in the bottome of the pheces of the combustible oile and earth, therefore it cannot flie a∣way from the earth, but by great force of fire. These three spirites whereof we haue spoken, are said first to be sepe∣rated from the mixture of the elements which is the soul of all things, or their quintaessence, which holdeth toge∣ther the whole mixture of the elements, for when the spi∣rites are gone cut, then the mixture is dissolued by it selfe and diuided, neither is there neede of fire to expel the salt from the earth, when the elements are separated from the pheces, then is the salt also separated with it. This salt is vnknowne to the ignoraunt. Therefore salt is the meane betweene the grosse earthly partes, and the three flying spirites resting in the naturall heat, that is, the taste, moist smell, and colour: which three are the life, soule, and quin∣taessence of euery thing, neither can these three spirits be
one without the other, as the Father, the Sonne, and the Holie-ghost are one, yet three persons, and one is not without the other. The ignorant laugh, neither vnder∣stand they these three spirits, when as they are tied to the grosse earthly fixed partes, and are made subtill, and their salt is ioyned and mingled with them, it must transforme them all together, and fixe them into a cristalline bodie Diaphanes and red of colour, whereof we wil speak here∣after; he that knoweth not this salt, shall neuer bring anie to passe in Art. The philosophers call this salt a drie wa∣ter and a liuely salt, but the ignorant thought they meant mercurie, but the Philosophers called the three spirites Mercurie, and the earth Sulphur, which the ignorant vn∣derstand not. Either of them can not be without the o∣ther, neither is there any thing in nature, in which these three are not, and they are so mixed with the foure ele∣ments that they make one body and mixture. Whatsoe∣uer God hath created is in these three stones, wherfore all may be reduced into a cristalline cleernesse by Art, giuen by God vnto the Philosophers, for in the latter days God wil seperate all the vncleane pheces and corruption that is in the elements, and bring them to a cristalline cleere∣nesse and rednesse of a carbuncle. Afterward there shall be no more corruption, but they shall endure for euer. Do you thinke that all thinges which God hath created in these lower partes, should vtterly perish in the latter day? No, not the least haire of those things which God hath created no more then the incorruptible heauen, but God by his will wil change all things, and make them christal∣line, and the foure elements shall be perfect, simple, and fixed in themselues, and they shall be all a quintaessence. Demonstration of these things may be made here on earth by Arte, for whatsoeuer God hath created may be broght to a cristalline cleerenesse, and the elements gathered to∣gether into a simple fixed substance, which being doone, no man can alter them, neither the fire it selfe burne or change them, but they shal continue perpetually as those things which haue attained eternitie.
The order to draw forth the Quintessence of Sugar, collec∣ted out of the vegitable and animall workes of Isacke Ho∣lander. HEere will I shewe thee a great secret, howe thou shalt drawe foorth the quintaessence of Sugar, the which truely excelleth all vegitable workes, by meane of his temperature like vnto the incorruptible heuen, the which is neither hot, colde, nor dry, but most temperate, neuer∣theles compounded of the foure elements, but they striue not one with another, for if they are so ioyned together, that they can neuer be separated one from an other, but for euer remaine simple and fixt in vnitie. But this heauen doth distribute and giue vnto the earth whatsoeuer is ne∣cessarie for it, although that it selfe be neither hote nor colde, moist nor dry, the which like effects hath the quin∣taessence of sugar, the which in it selfe hath the foure ele∣ments, as gold hath: as gold is pure, so sugar is impure, gold outwardly is hote and moist, inwardly colde, and drie, and white: sugar is the contrarie, for it is outwardly colde and drie; and inwardly hote and moist and red, and fixed both outward and inward. Neither is there any thing wanting, but that the inward qualitie may be brought, that his red∣nesse may appeere outwardly, and that his pheses be sepe∣rated, then is it prepared, and shall not neede to be fixed, for it is fixed alreadie, and doth retaine with it selfe al out∣ward and inward spirits, and whatsoeuer is volatill, it doth retaine. Now what his kinde is I will tell thee, and from whence he hath his originall, that is, euen out of the red, but if thou wilt be further satisfied, reade the three and thirty chapter of the generation of those things that grow in the seas, and other waters, where we write largely of the nature thereof. Heere it shall be sufficient for vs to shewe the order how to prepare it, and in what order it shoulde be vsed in medicine, and also to other things where it may be applied. His nature is to retaine or hold all flying spi∣rites, and to fixe them into a stone, as shalbe shewed here∣after. First ye shal vnderstand that ye cannot seperate the pheces, except ye bring the inward parts outward, that is
to say, that his inward darke golden colour do appeere, the which when it is so did, his rednesse is seene, and this fire passing the yellownesse of his aire, or his inōbustible oile, then mayest thou first seperate the pheces from the Quintaessence. Take therefore hard and white Sugar, for it is not needefull that yee trauell much in dissoluing and congealing of it, although there be much impuritie ther∣in, that hindereth not, but that the inward part may bee brought foorth, for it must be purged when as the rednes doth shew it selfe outward. Take therefore ten or twentie pounds of sugar more or lesse, as ye shall thinke good, that being beaten, put it into a cucurbit of hard stone, and put thereon Aqu vitae, that it may stand couered viii. fingers, then distil it in Balueo with a strong fire vntill it wil distil no more, then let it waxe colde, and powre on the saide Aqua vitae againe and distill it againe, and this shalt thou do sixe or seuen times: at the last open the head and take foorth the sugar, which thou shalt put in a strong glasse, and set it in fine ifted ashes, and put thereon the Aqua vitae, and distill it vntill the halfe be come foorth, then powre on againe the Aqua vitae which thou distilledst a∣way, first being made warm lest the glasse should breake: ye shal note that the head would haue a hole in the top, by the which ye may powre in the Aqua vitae with a funnel; this thou shalt repeate often with a strong fire, that the wine and the sugar may boyle in, and because the halfe part of the wine will come away quickely, ye shal present∣ly put on the other part, for if yee should distill foorth all the wine, the sugar would burne through too much heate, because it must continually be boyling in the glasse, and it would smell of the burning, for it hath alwayes his combu∣stible sulfure, wherefore yee must alwayes haue halfe the wine in the vessell, and when thou seest the halfe is distil∣led forth, make the same warme and put it in againe with a funnell, and that thou shalt so often repeate, vntill the su∣gar remaine as red as blood, the which thou shalt perceiue through the glasse. Thou mayst bring that to passe in viii or ten dayes according as thou rulest thy fire. Note, that
when thou perceiuest the matter to be red let it coole, and take away the vessell with ashes, and set the vessell in Bal∣neo, and with a strong fire distill away the Aqua vite vntil the Sugar remaine drie, and when it will distill no more, yet shalt thou let it stand 4. or 5. daies very hot in the said Balneo that the sugar may be perfitly congealed, then let it coole and take out the matter or stone, the which will be blacke like pich, that is to be vnderstoode when it is con∣gealed, then take the saide stone and put it into a great quantity of common water twise distilled and set it in Bal∣neo fiue or sixe dayes, with a great heate slightly couered, stirring it euerie day fiue  six times with a woodden la∣dle, then let it coole▪ and ake it forth and let it settle three or foure dayes, then powre of that which is cleare into an∣other vessel, and keepe it close, then powre on those phe∣ces the sublimed water as a fore, and set it in Balneo to digest three dayes, stirring it with a ladle as ye did afore, then let it coole and settle, and powre of the clearest part, as ye did afore and put it to the rost, then powre on more water vp∣on the Pheces and digest it in Balneo as afore, and this ye must so often repeate vntill the water bee no more colou∣red, then thou mayest cast away the pheces for they are nothing woorth, for the Element of the earth is with the Element of fire and water, neither can they bee sepera∣ted any more but are fixed together. Make thereof a tri∣all, for there will remaine nothing but a light ashes. It will burne like oyle or fat, neither doth there any thing re∣maine more then of oyle or fat. Take the glasse wherein is all the red of the solution and distill it in Balneo, or let it vapour away if ye haue store of distilled water vntil it be dry, then let it coole & take off the head, and powre ther∣on more sublimed water, and set it in Balneo againe, and stirre it about with a woodden ladell as yee did afore, then let it settle as afore & powre out of the clearest part, and that thou shalt doe so long vntill there remaine no more pheces, at the length put it in a glasse that may abide the fire and boyle or vapour it away so long vntill there appeare a certaine scum thereon, then take it foorth and
set it in a colde and drie, or hot and drie place, and it wil grow into a great red masse or lump and transpirant like a ruby or other philosophers stone, the which if thou wile bring to pouder, set it in a warme dunghil in a large wide glasse open and let it vapour away, vntill it be come into a yellow pouder like vnto golde, and so thou shalt haue the Quintaessence of Sugar fixt, the which will retaine al fly∣ing spirites. Neither is it sweete but a heauenly taste, the which if yee put it in your mouth it will melt without any feeling. If it bee winter or cold thou shalt seeme to feele a certaine naturall heate throughout the whole bodie and shalt seeme so temperate and light as though thou couldst flie. If thou be ouerhot, swallow a little, & presently thou shalt cole easilie as though thou wentest into a cold bath, and thus it worketh in heate, moist, cold, and dry, by an in∣credible myracle, when ye will vse it, drinke it with recti∣fied aqua vitae, or rose water, Endiue or Scabiowes, or by it selfe if yee will▪ and thou shalt see maruels: if any be dis∣eased outwardly with scabbes or vlcers, let him drinke of this, and wash the ores with wine wherein this Quin∣taesse is dissolued, and hee shall presently waxe whole, most miraculously. If any be wounded or thrust in with any weapon so that it be not deadly, let him drinke ʒ j of this Essence with warmed wine, and wash the wound with wine wherein the Quintaessence is dissolued hee shall be presently cured, so that those which shall heare or see it shall be amased thereat. It helpeth also the falling sicke∣nesse, pestilence, and all such diseases as may happen, vnto man: if ye haue Aurum Potabile ye shal mixe lij, with lj of this Quintaessence in a glasse, and set it on a treuet or in a dry Balneo 30. daies in an Athanor and they wil be s together, and then it will worke miracles in mans bo∣d ye may also when ye haue drawen the Quintaessence of any herbe, Coagulate and fix it with the same as I saide before with Aurum Potabile, and thou shalt see thereof les. Furthermore if ye wil haue it to passe the helme yee must put thereon as much vinegar or aqua vitae and distil it, and againe powre on fresh vineger or aqua vitae &
draw it away againe vntil the Quintaessence doth ascend in a red golden colour, as we haue shewed in many places how to distil those matters that are fixed by vineger or a∣qua vit, for when it is distilled by the Limbecke, his ver∣tues are angmented a thousand times, & wil work strange cures: keep this as a secret, for it is a gret mystery in nature. Here beginneth a manuel or handy worke, how the Quinta∣essence may be drawen out of honie. NOw wil I open vnto you a great secret in the vegetall worke of honie, to wit, a maruellous nature, for it is drawen out of the most noble & pure part of the floures. The nature of Bees is such, that they draw out the best of euery thing, as in the Animall worke is more at large des∣cribed, wherein there is taught how to extract the nature of al beasts, and specially in the 84. Chapter. Wherefore (my sonne) know this, that al that God hath created good in the vpper part of the world, are perfect and vncorrup∣tible, as the heauen: but whatsoeuer in these lower partes, whether it be in beasts, fishes, and all manner of sensible creatures, hearbs, or plants, it is indued with a double na∣ture, that is to say, perfect, and vnperfect: the perfect na∣ture is called the Quintaessence, the vnperfect the Pheces or dregges, or the veneous or combustible oile. There∣fore you shall seperate the dregges and combustible oyle, and then that which remaineth is perfect, and is called the Quintaessence, which will endure continually euen as the heauen, neyther can it bee dissolued with fire or anie other thing. For when God had created all things, and looked vpon them, they were all perfect good, there was nothing lacking to any, and therefore for loues sake, I say vnto thee, that God hath put a secret nature or influence in eue∣ry creature, and that to euery nature of one sort or kind he hath giuen one common influence, and to euery one of se∣uerall kindes their seuerall influence, and vertue, whether it be on Physicke, or other secret workes, which partly are found out by natural work manship. And yet more things
are vnknowen then are apparant to our senses: what, doe you not thinke that an herb that is appointed for one dis∣ease which it will cure, doth not containe in it many more vertues then are knowen vnto vs? Yes truely many more. This also Iadde, that if the pheces and combustible oile be taken away from this thing or herb, which in all things is the poyson, that should be taken away that brings death vnto vs, and the elements should be purified, and so burned together by Art, that they shall passe together by a Lim∣becke, and be ioyned together, as it were coupled in mar∣riage, that it may roote out al manner of disease from eue∣ry thing, be it herb or liuing thing, or be drawen from his venome, as in the 14. chapter of the Prologue of this book is declared, and also in the Prologue of the Animall work, whereas the manner of drawing the Quintaessence out of all venemous beasts, birds, wormes, and flies, is plainely de∣clared, that it may help all the griefes of man, but that spe∣cially is drawen out of the blood of man, and there is like∣wise declared, that there is no neede of things without man or beast to help such as are infected. For euerie crea∣ture containes in himselfe the remedy of his disease, which remedy may be drawne without the hurt of man or beast, that the disease may bee miraculously cured, as is there most excellently taught in the thericke and in the prac∣tise. Therefore I would write this, that thou soone migh∣test vnderstand what maruellous force is in honie, which is taken out of all floures, and gathered into one masse, which truely is indued with sundry vertues. For if GOD hath giuen vnto other things the gift of healing, what then is there not in honnie, which is gathered out of so many floures, and euery herb indued with his owne proper ver∣tue? Truely if it be brought to his height and excellencie, it will worke maruellously. Now consider what lieth hid∣den in this Quintaessence, and esteeme it not lightly, but keepe it secret as the most excellent thing of al the animal worke, the which being obtained, you shall neede no o∣ther medicines to put away al the accidents of the bodie.
The second Chapter. NOw I will set in hand with the practise. Take twelue quartes of the best virgin Hony, and put it in a great earthen vessell with a Limbecke well luted, and set it in Ealneo, & lute a recipient to the necke of it, and distil that which will distil of it in your Balneo boyling. My sonne knowe this, that there is no common water in honie but onely Philosophicall and Elementall, for the Element of aire doth first passe with the Element of fire, in the which the aire is contained, and the aire when it riseth resem∣bleth the sauour of aqua vitae distilled, and at the first can not be knowen from aqua vitae, neither by sight, neither sauour: distill it vntill there wil no more arise. Then leaue the vessell in Balneo fiue daies with a Limbecke and recei∣uer, let it boyle night and day that the matter may be dri∣ed, then let it coole and take it out and take away the re∣ceiuer and Limbecke, and that which is in the receiuer powre into the vessell againe vpon the die matter and set it in Balneo and couer the mouth of the vessel with a cleane dish well luted, and let your Balneum be only luke warme. My sonne vnderstand that it may thus bee done, for it is good that the fire be drawen with his proper aire, so as a mā would stay so long, for it wold be of the greater force. The auntient Philosophers wrought in this sort, but the daunger is when the vessels shall bee opened lest the wa∣ter flie away, for it is as sutill as wine. For euerie time the aire is to be drawn away and againe to be powred on, making putrifaction in a warme Balneo, but first it must be wel luted, and a Limbecke being set on with a receiuer, you must reiterate the worke vntill the fire rise like vnto red bloud. There is another methode or rule of working found out in these our daies which is in this sort. The third Chapter. THey are thus drawne out and the matter dried, as is a∣foresaide, then take common water twise distilled in Balneo and powre on as much as is sufficient, and set it in
Balneo, couer the mouth of the vessel: but let not the Bal∣ne boile, and so let it stand three daies and three nights, moouing it day and night▪ with a spattle of wood: let it coole & be poured out and strained. Then take a cleane vessell and poure out that which is cleere, and powre vp∣on the pheces fresh distilled water as you did before, & set the vessell in Balneo, and doe as you did before: let it bee cleared and put aside with the first water, and put on again fresh water distilled and set it in Balneo as aforesaid, and do this so often vntill the water be no more colored, for then haue you the fire seperated from the earth, but reserue the earth or Pheces vntill I tell you further what you shall do with it, for there is yet a combustible oyle in it. The fourth Chapter. TAke the vessel wherin is the colored water, and set it in Balneo with a Limbecke and receiuer well luted, and distill al the water with a boyling Balneo & let the matter be well dried and coole, then take away the Alimbicke & let the vessell remaine in Balneo and powre on the water againe vpon the matter and make a fire and set a dish vp∣on the mouth of the vessell and let it stande so in Balneo three daies, euery day moouing it with a spattell of wood 3. or 4. times, then let it coole and be taken out and strai∣ned. Then take a cleane vessell and softly powre out that which is cleere into it, and vpon the pheces straightwaies poure on fresh distilled water stirring it about with a wo∣den ladle, and let it stand to cleere one day, & the Pheces which remaine put vnto the first Pheces. Then take a vessell and set it in a boyling Balneo vntil it be drie and re∣iterate this worke vntill there remaine no Pheces in the bottome of the vessell, so shall you haue the pure Element of fire: and the Element of the aire also must bee so often distilled vntill there remaine nothing in the bottome: and in this sort you shall haue the pure Element. Seperate then the water from the fire, and let it drie, so shall you haue a cleere shining matter like to Camphere: keepe the
fire well in a glasse, and the aire with the water in another glass well closed vntill you haue your earth prepared. The fift Chapter. TAke all the earth with the Pheces, and drawe out the combustible oile by a discensorie that is with two ves∣sels ioyned and luted together vntill the combustible oile do passe, which is profitable for all colde diseases and other passions which were too long to rehearse: if you desire not the combustible oile, suffer it to flie away. Then tak your earth, and calcine it in a furnace of reuerberation gently, vntill it be al white as snow, then take a great ear∣then or stone vessel, and put your white calcined earth in∣to it, and powre out a good quantitie of common water di∣stilled, and stirre it with a woodden ladle, and set it three dayes in a boyling bath, and couer it with a dish, and stirre it euerie day ten or twelue times. Let it coole, and the vessel take out, and let it cleere one whole day: then take an o∣ther cleane vessel, and softly poure out that which is cleer, and vpon the pheces powre againe fresh distilled water, and set it in Bal, and doe as you did before. Take it out againe, and let it cleere one day and night, and that which is vppermost cleere powre out to the first water: Then put to fresh distilled water the third time vnto the pheces, and set it in Balneo, and doe as you did before, and powre out the cleere the third time vnto the first water, then cast away the pheces of the third water, for they are of no va∣lew. Then take the vessell into which the water was put, & set it in Balneo with a lembecke, and a receiuer: and with a boyling Balneo drawe out the water vntill the matter bee made drie. Let it coole, take away the Limbecke and poure in the water againe vpon the earth, or salt. and set it one day in boyling Balneo. Let it dissolue and cleere, and take out that which is cleere. And put in a little distilled water vpon the pheces, and let it stand two or three houres in a warme bath: take it out, let it cleere by the space of one houre or two, and powre out the vpper part to the first
water, and cast away the Pheces, for there is nothing in them. Let the vessel be set again in Balneo with the earth or salt, and distill away the water vntill all be drie, and do as afore reiterating the worke, vntill that no pheces re∣maine in the bottome, then draine away the water from the earth, and you shal find a faire earthlike Cristall: and so you shall haue pure elements. The sixth Chapter. TAke a great glasse that will beare the fire, and put into it your earth and your fire, and powre your aire vp∣pon it, and set it to distill in a furnace, in potte or with sande or ashes, with a Limbecke well luted, hauing a hole in the vppermost knottie parte, that a funnell may bee put in when there shall bee neede of infusion: when as the humiditie that it hath receiued be halfe con∣sumed, then fortifie your fire by little and little increasing it vntil you see the water boyle, and keepe the fire in that state still, vntil it be consumed euen to a pinte. Take a∣way the fire, let it coole, take away your receauer and open the hole of the Limbeck and put in your glasse fun∣nell, and poure in all the distilled water in the recipient vppon the earth, and stoppe the hole of the Limbeck, and set the receauer vnto the necke thereof well luted and distill againe, & obserue the maner aforesaid of drawing and making infusion, and doe thus tenne times. The tenth distillation finished, let all passe together: for then the earth is made flying. So the aire, the water, the fire, and the earth will ascend together by the Limbeck, and be brought into one substance which were in foure. One together in nature and now simple as the incorrupti∣ble heauen, yet are they not fixed: but notwithstanding they are so coupled together betweene themselues, that by no meanes they can bee seperated, but will continue one simple bodie for euer: euen as the christalline and vncorruptible heauen which notwithstanding is com∣pounded of the foure elements. What thinke you of
this my sonne? Can not this quintaessence helpe euerie disease that doth infect man through his most excellent temperature whether it be in heate, cold, moyst, or drie, for all are in it that he may distribute vnto euerie one that which is necessarie, euen as the heauen, when neede re∣quireth, giueth vnto the earth all things, as coldnesse, heate, or moysture: And yet is neither hote, colde, moist, nor drie, but of one simple essence, and that indued with such a nature that is giueth vnto euerie thing that which is necessarie? In like manner doth this quintaes∣sence. Therefore my sonne reioyce, and giue the almigh∣tie God thankes which hath opened these things vnto the Philosophers. The vii. Chapter. NOw my sonne, if thou wilt bring this quintaessence yet to a greater perfection. Take a great circulatory, or Pellican, that is a glasse that hath a great head like to a Limbeck, and in the top of the head a hole by the which the matter may be powred in by a funnell. Let the hole be stopped, out of the head cōmeth forth ij. arms bending round vnto the bellie, by the which that which doth as∣cend vp may fall downe againe, by those armes of glasse into the bellie of the Pelcane. This is the forme of the vessels that distill one into an other, or Pellican. Take then your quintaessence and put it in a Pellican in ashes, but better in salt prepared and dried, and make your fire like vnto the extreme heate in Sommer, and the quintaessence wil rise lyke vnto a red oyle, and fal downe againe by the armes of the Pellican: and by often ascen∣tion, the quintaessence wil waxe thicke that it wil tarie in the bottome and rise no more, then fortifie the fire that it may ascend and descend againe. Then keepe the fire in that heate vntill it ascend no more, but rest in the bot∣tom. Then make your fire stronger that it may ascend & descend againe, and keepe the heate in the same degree vntill it rise no more. Obserue this manner in augmen∣ting
your fire vntill the water be fixed, and the glasse be red hotte foure and twentie houres together: if the quintaessence doe not then ascend, it is fixed and brought vnto his highest vertue, & take it out of the glasse being yet hotte, for if it be cold it will waxe hard that you must breake the glasse. For at the fire it doth waxe liquide, and being set open in the ayre, it doth congeale and pearceth euerie hard thing, as oyle doth any drie leather, and in colour is like vnto a rubine, and through shining lyke a christal, it giueth light in the darke sufficient to reade by. What doest thou thinke of this my sonne? are there not many strange bodies created of God? Truely hee hath endued the Philosophers with no lesse giftes: For they that can looke into the secrets of nature, shall see it to be of an incredible operation, for this is gathered by the Bees of the subtilest part of all plantes, trees, flowers, and fruites, and at that time when flowers breake out and trees budde. It is worthily called the Philosophers stone. for it is fixed and lyquable as waxe, and as the minerall stone transmuteth the impure mettall, so doth this al∣ter diseases. Heereby it doth appeare that this doth beare the bell amongst all vegetals. Whereas it being yet in his grosenesse and vnpure, it is but of smal value for any vse in Physick by what meane soeuer it be boyled or scummed, but doeth alwayes retaine his nature. For it consisteth of all the fruites of the earth, plantes and trees. Whereof one herbe is hotte, another cold, another drie, another moist, one astringent, another laxatiue, some corrosiue, others venemous: and so diuers herbes haue their diuers qualities. Thirdly it commeth to passe if it helpe one disease, by and by it hindreth an other. For euerie thing worketh according to his propertie when as there is separation made in the body. And of this separa∣tion it ingendreth bloud and other humors. And they are lykened vnto gunnepouder, which so long as it lyeth stil there commeth no hurt of it, but if it be brought vnto the fire, it straight vttereth his secret nature, and is kind∣led with a venemous fire which cannot be quenched with
water. For the colde and drie, hote and moist, do striue amongst themselues, a wind is stirred vp that breaketh al things that is neere vnto it. The like happeneth vnto ho∣nie, that when it commeth to the region of the liuer that it should be there seperated, then it sheweth his nature to passe vp and swell with winde, that it is no maruel if that through contention the veines of the liuer be broken, as oftetimes it happeneth, whereupon Apostomes are cau∣sed in diuers places, and bringeth foorth such inflamma∣tions, that the veines are easily broken. Although manie do greatly commend hony: but they are not the children of philosophie, neither do they vnderstand the nature of it. But when it is brought to a simple fixed as wine, then is it the chiefest medicine amongst al the vegetables, nei∣ther is the like vnto this found in al the world. Giue God thankes, and be liberall vnto the poore. The dose of this is one graine, and it must be taken euery morning with an empty stomacke, likewise in the euening, vntil the ende of the disease. For euery disease will bee cured in shorte time, euen after the same manner, as the Minerall stone maketh his proiection vpon mettals, Praise God and la∣bour diligently. The manner and order how to drawe the Quintaessence out of the hearbe called Rose solis. NOw my sonne, I will teach thee the greatest mystery or secret amongst all vegetable things, whose force and strength hath beene kept secret amongst all the aun∣tient workemen, and they haue bound themselues one to another by oth, that they should not vtter in their bookes or writings the strength of this herb, which is caled Rose solis, and in the Germane tongue Sindawe. Whosoeuer therefore hath not the whole vegetable worke, he cannot attaine to the strength of this hearb. For in that worke is comprehended al the force of medicinall things, And this worke of vegetables is not come to the handes, but onely
of the antient sworne artificers which were skilfull in the liberall artes. But now my sonne, I will open it vnto thee with adration, that thou shalt keepe this hidden know∣ledge secret. First, my sonne, you must vnderstand, that this hearb is the hearb of the sunne, vppon the which the sunne spreades his beames and influences as he doth vp∣on gold in the veines of the mines. And he powreth out his influences more vpon this hearb then vpon any other which is created of God, as it is euidently knowen of the antient philosophers, and this hearb doth so far surmount al other herbs which spring out of the earth, as the sunne doeth all other planets in the heauen, and hath greater force and power of influence then any other thing crea∣ted of God in the firmament. So this hearb doth excell al others in vertue, and therefore this hearb is decked with another colour, other leaues, and stranger shape then all other hearbs. And his nature is such, that the hotter and dier the countrie is in the time of the yeare, and the heat of the sunne, and the more that the sunne doth heate and burne him, this hearb is the more moist and filled with deaw, insomuch that vpon one branch will hang aboue a thousand drops. Make a triall and strike this herb with a slender twig, that the drops which fal from it may fall in∣to a large glasse vessell, and you shall see the vessell filled with a maruelous dew, and if the sunne be vehement hot, those branches in short space, that is, within the space of halfe an houre will be more full of dew then before, and if you strike the dew twentie times with a rod, yet will it a∣gaine be laden with drops; it were enough if we did see no other myracle then from whence this dewie humour should rise, which in so short space doth so aboundantly flowe from it, and how much the more the burning sunne doth scorch vp the other herbes so much the more is this moist and filled with drops euen as though it had beene sprinkled ouer with water, hereupon may we gather his maruelous qualities, and iudge that there is some secret o∣peration hidden in it; if thou do keepe this water thus ga∣thered in a glasse, therewith thou shalt cure all the disea∣ses
of the eies, whether they come of rues or of inflama∣tion, it helpeth moreouer all the paines and diseases of the heart, it cooleth the liuer and stomacke that is inflamed & doth mittigate all the paine of the head that commeth of heart and driueth away all dreames and fantasies, it is good also to kil the canker & the woolfe, against the bi∣ting of venemous beastes, against poyson dronke, if it be taken by the mouth, it helpeth also the pestilence, it is good for many other diseases which were too long here to rehearse. This herb hath the colour of the sunne for his colour is red darke diuided with yellowe lines, and his shape is like a star and his proportion like a heauenly pla∣net and consisteth of seauen branches, in the vtter parte brode, neare the ground narrow, & it is as though it were heauie, of a tender substance, outwardly hot and moist, in∣wardly cold and drie. The left side of it is cold and moist, the right side hotte and drie, and it is most temperate as gold. Wherefore his elements cannot be seperated one from another as in other herbes, but it may be purged from his pheces, for his fixing letteth that the Elementes cannot be separated, for the fire will ascend with the aire by the Balneum as wee will heereafter teach. The earth may bee separated from his Pheces and the Pheces like∣wise from the fire and ayre, although it hath not manie dregs. Some latine writers call it Lingua auis or Birdes tongue, some call it Solaria of the sunne, of Lunaria is cal∣led the moone; the Flemming cals it Sindow. But the old Philosophers haue kept secret the qualities as yet for the maruelous effect it worketh. And it is maruell saith Ar∣nold de Villa nou that a man should die that eateth euery day some of it in his grose substance, what will it then worke when it is brought vnto his finenesse and clensed from his pheces? It hath this great vertue in it, that if it be put into a glasse wherin there is poisō mingled with wine or any other cup that is poisoned, straightwaies the glasse wil flie in peeces, but if it be a stone pot of aleblaster or such like, the wine wil so boile as though there were a vi∣olent fire vnder it & al the wine wil run out vntil there be
nothing left in the vessell: also if any man carrie this herb about him & happen on his enemies, they shal haue no power to hurt, but contrariwise, to shew him all kinde of dutie. Also if any man bee bewitched either in bodie or in his art, that is, in Cookerie, Bruing, or Baking, or by any other meanes, this herb caried about him makes him free from the witchcraft. If it bee also tyed vppon the bellie of a woman with childe, she shall straightwayes be deliuered although the childe were dead and rotten with∣in as it hath beene oftentimes prooued by experience. This herbe caryed about one or a little thereof euerie day eaten as long as it is vsed, preserueth man from the fal∣ling sicknesse. Moreouer, if a man bee taken with the Apoplexie, that his mouth bee drawen aside, and his speech and senses taken from him, they shall be all resto∣red againe if the sicke drinke the iuice of this herbe strai∣ned, as hath beene oftentimes prooued. Moreouer if it be hanged about the neck of one that is possessed of a spi∣rit, so long as he carieth that about him, hee shall be quiet as a Lambe, and the power of the spirit shall be taken a∣way. Make a proofe, and you shall finde it true. The bleeding at the nose is by and by stayed, if you hold that herbe in your mouth. They that are wearied with trauell, if they drinke the iuice thereof in wine, they are by and by so refreshed, as if they had not laboured or gone no iourney, it doth comfort the synowes, muscles, tendons, and all the whole nature. Woundes are also cured there∣with, if it bee dronke tenne daies together in wine or ale, if the wound be washed with the same drinke, and bound vp with a cloth wette in the same. The paine of the teeth is by and by apeased if that herbe bee laid vnto it. All these things haue beene often prooued and found true. If it will doe such things whilest it is yet hindered with his grosse matter, what will it worke when it is brought to his perfection? My son, knowe this for a truth, that there is no herbe that growes vppon the earth to be compared vnto this in strength and goodnes, therefore take heede that you doe not neglect it, but diligently re∣member
and keepe the secret close from them that are not of the nature of our children, and from the ignorant. For if this herbe did not grow so plentifully and the pro∣perties thereof were knowne, it woulde bee more estee∣med then golde or pretious stones, for the effects of the quintaessence are maruelous, as heereafter shal appeare. Nowe there remaineth that wee must teach howe to bring this hearbe to his highest degree, and to his quin∣taessence. First it is to be gathered the same hauing his course in his owne house, that is, in the lion, and the moone behold him with a sinister quadrate aspect. It is to be gathered whole with rootes, leaues and flowers, so that there be neither earth, dirt, nor other hearbes mingled withall. Neither must it by any meane touch any water or be made moyst. Therefore you must take heede that you gather it not in rainie wether, or moyst wether: but rather when the sunne doth shine hottest vpon it, gather great store of it, and stampe it well in a mortar of Marble, and put it in a Cucurbite of stone with a head and receauer luted, and set it in balneo, and distill away al the water vn∣till it be so drie like pouder, and there will rise together with the water of the color of most fine gold, which one∣ly happeneth in this herbe, and in none other: and when there remaineth no more liquor, yet leaue the cucurbite for three or foure dayes in Balneo, and boyle it night and day that all the moysture may be perfectly seperated and drawne away, then let it coole and take away the recea∣uer and stoppe it diligently, then take off the head and take out the matter and beate it in a Marble morter into most fine pouder that it may passe through a thicke siue, put this pouder againe into an earthen cucurbite, and poure on your water and aire, and stirre it with a wodden ladle, and couer the mouth of the cucurbite close with a tyle, and set it in a warme bath by the space of nine dayes to putrifie, euerie day stirring it with a wooden ladle foure or fiue times, and couer the cucurbite againe with a tyle, setting a weight of lead vpon it; at the nine dayes ende take your vessell out of the Balneo, and that which is
in it straine it into an earthen vessell glased, and straine it hard vntill the matter drie. Then take this drie pouder and put into his cucurbite and couer it with a tyle, and keepe it in a warme place vntil I teach you what you shal do with it. The moist liquor which is drawen from it wil be red, for the element of fire is there present with the aire & the water, put that liquor into a cucurbite of stone and put on a head and lute it wel, and set it in Balneo with a receauer well luted, and distill away all the water with the aire seuerally from the fire in a boyling bath, vntill there will no more distill, and the fire will passe away in the bottome, then take away the vessell out of the bath & stop it well vntill I teach thee what is further to be done. Then take againe the stone cucurbite wherein your pou∣der is conteined, which I bad you before to keepe, and poure on the fire and the aire, and stirre it wel with a wo∣den ladle, and set it in a warme bath nine dayes more, and couer it with a tyle, and stirre it foure or fiue times euerie day with a adle as you did afore. And when the nine dayes are past, straine our that which is in the vessell, and poure the liquor in a glased vessel, the residue of the pou∣der put into another vessell as you did before, and keepe it so long vntill I teach thee how to draw out the combu∣stible oyle. Then take againe the vessell wherein your fire is, and mingle your liquor with it which you keepe in your glased vessell, where your fire and aire is, and set a head vpon the vessell wherein your matter is, and lute it, and set it in Balneo, and set a receauer to the bill of the head, then distill out the water and aire with a boyling bath vntill no more will distill, and you shall haue in the receauer water and aire, take them away, and take the ves∣sell out of Balneo, and you shall find remaining in the bot∣tome like thicke Turpentine, and that is the element of fire mingled with many Pheces. Now the fire is to be separa∣ted from the Pheces on this manner, poure on your water and aire vpon that from whence you draw it, and stirre it with a spoone, and couer it with a tyle, and let it settle foure dayes, and the Pheces will fall into the bottome,
and poure out softly that that is cleare into a clean cucu∣it, that no pheses passe with all stop the vessel wherin the pheces are, and set it by. But that vessell that contemet the water, fire and aire, set it in balneo with a head and re∣auer fitted and well luted, and distill the water and aire in that same degree. And when it will distil no more take away the receauer. Let the vessel coole, and you shall find in the bottom your fire, which keepe in his vessell well stopped and pure in your water and aire againe vppon the pheces from whence you did draw them and stirre them with a spoone, and let it settle foure dayes, then poure it out softly from his pheces into the vessell that holdeth your fire so that no pheces bee mingled withall, couer your vessell wherin your pheces remaine and set it vp. But your vessell wherein your water aire and fire is, set againe in Blneo as I shewed you, and distill away the water and aire, for they two doe alwaies passe away toge∣ther and the ire remaineth in the bottome. Poure on the water and aire againe vpon the Pheces, and stirre it with a spoone, then let it settle foure dayes, (this is nowe the third repetition, whereby you haue seperated the water and aire from the pheces,) and that which is cleare poure out into the vessell that holdeth you fire. Then put your Pheces vnto the first which I bad you keepe, in the which your combustible oyle is. For nowe yo haue drawen your fire out of your Pheces: therfore distil your water with the aire, and when it will distill no more take away your vessell, and you shall finde in the bottome the element of fire not yet pure, but foule and full of dregges, poure on therefore the water and aire againe, and stire it well with a spoone or ladle, couer it, and let it stand and settle soure dayes, then poure out that which is cleare into another cleane vessell, and set aside the ves∣sell wherein your pheces are. But the vessell where in your fire water and oyle are, set in Balneo to distill as long as it will dill then take it out, and poure the liquor distil∣led into the vessell where your Pheces are, and dooe as  taught you to worke with the pheces, vntill you haue
your element of fire without any feculent or grosse sub∣stance. When you haue distilled away the water and are from the fire, and suffered it to settle foure dayes, and that all bee cleare without any Pheces, then shall you haue your pure fire. Therefore put all your Pheces toge∣ther vnto your first pheces where your combustible oyle is. Afterward take a great cucurbite of glasse and put all your three elements into it, and set it in ashes with a Lim∣becke and a receauer fitted and luted, and kindle a gentle fire, first in your furnace, and increase it more and more, vntill the fire and aire be passed, and that your Limbeck begin to waxe red within. Then make the heate of your fire moderate, vntill all your element of fire be passed, & the head red like bloud, and the water and aire shal swim vpon like oyle. By this meanes these three elements shall be brought to their highest essence, and be perfectly rec∣tified. Take away the receauer and stoppe it diligently, vntill your earth be prepared, and know that in the dust and pheces there remaineth yet a combustible oile which you may extract by a discensory if you will. It is good against the colde gout, for members benommed, and si∣owes too much mollified. If thou be weary of this labor, put this pouder or pheces into a reuerberatory that they may be mingled with a gentle fire vntill it be as white as snow: which being done, put it into a large cucurbite of stone o pour on a great quantity of water twise distilled, it is not material how much water you poure on, and sti it well with a wodden ladle or spoone siue or sixe times, alwaies couer it diligently with a tyle, & after foure daies suffer it to coole and let it stand foure daies & settle, then poure out the cleere from the pheces warily into another leane vessell, and poure on fresh distilled water as afore, stirre it with your spoone, and keep it two daies in Balneo as before, then suffer it to coole and settle, and poure out the cleare from the Pheces, and put it to the first water: Doe this the third time, and then cast away the Pheces for they are good for nothing. All your waters that you haue drawen, distill by Balueum, or for the more speede,
by ashes that al the water may rise, and that there remaine in the bottome a dustie matter, poure on distilled water againe, stirre it, and keep it in balneo, by the space of foure and twentie houres, then let it coole and settle, and poure out that which is cleare gentlie from the Pheces. Poure on againe more common water vpon them, and stirre it, set it in balueo ten or twelue houres, take it out, let it settle, & poure the cleere vnto the first water, and cast away the Pheces, they are nothing worth. Repeate this worke so often vntill there remaine no pheces after it hath set ed. Then shal you haue your earth rectified from all his phe∣ces which you shall congele and drie, that it may be like pouder or dust. Then ioyne that with your other ele∣ments in the glasse, and it wil straight resolue into his ele∣ment, for the element of water is there present. Set them all together in a furnace vpon ashes, put on a head with a receauer well luted, the head must haue a hole in the top, that with a funnel the liquor may be poured in & alwaies stopped safely. Make your fire in your furnas, first gentle, afterward greater, vntil that that is fermented doe passe. But all is not to be drawen out, but about halfe a sextary of the liquor with the water, that the matter may remain moist. For if you should driue out all, it would congele into an hard masse and breake the glasse in the furnace. Then open the hole which is in the top of the head, and with a funnell poure in that which is in the receauer. But first it must be made warme, lest by pouring in the colde liquor the glasse do breake, but if you suffer the glasse to coole, you may poure it in without any danger. Repeate this inbibition ten or twenue times, afterward distil out whatsoeuer wil be distilled so long as any thing wil passe by the necke of the Limbecke. For after this tenth distil∣lation, the earth wil be no more congeled but will rest in the bottome like a red golden oyle. Inbibe it againe, pou∣ring on the liquor, and distilling it vntil al the elements passe together by the Limbecke, and that nothing at all doe remaine in the bottome of the vessell. Then giue thankes to God for his maruelons giftes which hee hath
distributed vnto his Philosophers, & hath giuen them so great knowledge of things as they vttered in this worke which is altogether heauenly, & rather diuine then hu∣mane. For it is a great maruel in this life that mans vnder∣standing can bring these inferior things to so great perfe∣ction, that they haue atained euen to the highest degree of vertue. Truely it is the worke of the holy ghost which hath put it into the mindes of men. For I do affirme, that whoso hath this hear so prepared, that he may helpe all the iufirmities of mans body, whether they be curable or vncurable, except natural death which is ordained afore vnto euerie man of God. Yea this dare I be bolde to say, that if a man do vse daily the waight of one scruple of this quintaessence, or the quintaessence of sugar and potable gold wherin pearls are dissolued, or the quintaessence of Selandine. That mā by Gods help shal not die before the day of the great judgement. For the humors in mans bo∣dy can by no meanes predominate one ouer another, as in the thirtie six chapter of Uegetales is taught, where is in∣treated of the quintaessence of al medicinall things, and there it is shewed, that by Gods help the life of man may be prolonged euen vntill that day, void and free from all diseases & sicknes. And further, that man may be prefer∣ued in the state he was in at thirtie yeeres of age, and in the same strength and force of wit. And vpon that do all the Philosophers agree, that a man may continue in the same state as long as in an earthly paradise. This is so plainely and at large shewed in that chapter, that wil you, nill you, you shall bee enforced to conceiue it in your mind, to beleeue it, and to confesse it to be true. There∣fore it is not needefull to reason much of the force and qualities of this quintaessence: but whatsoeuer disease mā be infected withal, giue him to drinke with wine so much of this quintaessence as a nutte shell will hold, & in short space hee shal bee healed as it were miraculously, accor∣ding as the disease is violent or gentle. But if you giue this quintaessence to drinke mixed with the quintaessence of gar with potable golde wherein pearles are dissolued
and with the Quintaessence of Selandine, within one day you shall cure all the diseases whatsoeuer they be. Here∣by it doth appeare, that it is rather a diuine work then hu∣mane. Therefore giue god the praise, and take heed that you doe not vtter this secret. For tyrants woulde by that mean; prolong their liues that they might bring to passe their wicked purposes, whereof both you and I shoulde be the occasion. Therefore keepe it secret, for it is one of the greatest secrets amongst all the vegetals, whereunto no treasure may be compared. Worke therefore and di∣stribute liberally vnto the poore, and God shall giue thee eternall felicitie. Oft times great force lieth hid in bodies low, Of booke in few lines, not much, but apt doth show. Vertue increaseth by exercise. The Spagericke Antidotarie of the preparation and ma∣king of medicines against Gunneshot, taken out of the Chirgerie of Iosephus Quirsitanus. IT is an olde and true saying of the poer; that there is nothing more imperious than an ig∣norant man, which thinketh nothing well done, but that he doth himself, which thing as it may be seene in many other artes, yet most specially in this, which is called the Spagericke art. For we see eue∣ry where certaine men, I know not what they bee, puffed vp with a certain barbarous and foolish pride, which with great scorne inuey against those medicines which are dra∣wen out of the metalline mines. Which notwithstanding it is apparant were in vse and had in great estimatiō with the chiefe antient Physitions, as we haue declared in that booke which we haue set forth of the Spagericke prepa∣ration of medicines. And what, I pray you, is the cause of
this anger, or rather madnes, but that (as they themselues confesse) they know not the preparation of them? O hap∣py artes, if onely artificers might iudge of them, as Fabius is reported sometime to haue said. Then are they vnhap∣pie of whom the ignorant and vnlearned fear not so rash∣ly to giue iudgement, which neuer yet vnderstood from whence or why, this is called the Spagericke art, which learned men of two greeke words haue so named, bicause by that arte a certaine subtill and spirituall nature is dra∣wen, gathered, and pressed out, wherein the force and ef∣fect of the medicine doth chiefly consist. The great and incomparable commodity wherof, as it appeareth in ma∣ny other diseases, so shall it chiefly be knowen in curing wounds by gunshot. As I trust (God willing) it shal much more happily be tried and found out by the preparations of medicines animall: vegetable, and minerall, & by other essences drawn out of , sulphur, vitriol, arsenicke, yron, copper, lead and , and also out of antimonie, and such other minalles, as also out of the grose and fatt bodies of simple mettals, of whome it is farre off, that the force should be so great (although the antient Physitions haue vsed the  cure wounds and vleers, as their writings do testifi)  the force of their spirits, which may be cal∣led, as it were their soules. But peraduenture some of those backebiters wil say, why are not we content with those medicines o remedies which the learned antiquitie hath deliuered vnto vs, and that Hypocrates and Gallen the anti∣ent pillers of our art & others haue set forth in their mo∣numents? why seeke we new waies neuer heard of before, specially vnknowne to the Apotheearie But some of vs will answere that the onely remedie of Mercurie precipi∣tate, is the onely remedie (to passe ouer other) which ve∣ry lately they haue begun to vse, in curing of wounds by gunshot, and other malige vulcers, were sufficient to an∣swer this their question, yea and to reprooue their follie ioyned with intollerable pride. But if authoritie be asked for. I thinke Gesner, Guinter, Andernacke, Seuerine (to passe ouer a great many other) will be for vs great authoritie
with the learned: as these standerers. Specially because the learning of these famous men is confirmed by their learned writings & monuments, that those tongues might count it a great honour vnto them to confesse themselues their schollers. It were easie for me to bring forth manie other arguments, if I did not see the follie of these ckbi∣ters to be so great, whereof truely I am ashmed, speci∣ally when I behold some of their hookes lately set forth, wherein contrarie to the purpose of the treatise, strange thinges are inforced, that (as the olde prouerb saith) the ointment seemeth to consist in nothing, as though they pertaine to the purposed entreating of curing the gowte, certaine inuectiue digressions I know not what, of the be∣ginning of things, of the original of mettals and Philoso∣phers stone (which of them is called Morosophocus) or did in any point seeme to agree with it. Therefore againe & againe I am inforced to crie out, O happy ars, if onely artificers might iudge of them. How farre vnlike was the purpose of many olde men, the which if they were igno∣rant of any thing which they vnderstoode, was knowen of other, euen in farre distant countries they spared no la∣bour to go see them. Plto inflamed with desire to learne those things which he knew not, went into Egypt, and after to Tarentum to Architas, and ouer al Italie to heare the other Pythagoricall philosophers, Apollonius Tyanius traueled through the kingdome of Persia, and passed ouer the mountaine Caucasus, and visited the Albanes, Scythi∣thians Massagetes, and all the rich kingdomes of India. Afterwards was carried vnto the Brachmanes, and heard Iarehas in his chaire of gold disputing of the hidden cau∣ses of things, and of the hidden mysteries of nature. From thence by the Elamites, Babylonians, Chaldees, Meedes, Assyrians, Arabians, and Palestines, he returned to Alex∣andria, and from thence went into Ethiopia to heare the Gymnosophists, and to learne their secret and hidden artes. This vertue is truely to be followed, and not the sluggishnes of those slouthfull followers, which hauing searce once mooued their foote from their countrie fires,
yet will dsallow this Spagericke arte, and thinke no ∣ther labor to be taken in searching of the truth, when not∣withstanding that art doeth make open vnto vs the mar∣uelous and hidden secrets of nature: neither in my iudge∣ment are they vnworthily cō  of those which with their mamfold perilles and trauel haue  out those secrets of nature. But I pray you, what foolishnes is this, to forbid vs to vse any other medicines then those which were knowne in olde time? As though , then which  more in vse this day, thē were kno∣wen to the olde physitions. Further, to what purpose is it that they obiect vnto vs the sulphurie , vene moustinckes (a they  them) by whose  & drawn breath (for these are their contume hous wordes) they be almost  cophants, that the olde Physitions made very many medi∣cins of most filthy things, as of the filth of the eares, sweat of the body, of womens menstrues (and that which is hor∣rible to be spoken) of the dung of man and other beasts, spitle, vrine, fles, mice: the ashes of an owles head, the hous of goats and asses, the wonnes of a ioten tree, and the scurfe of mules, as may bee gathered out of the wri∣tings of Galen, Aetij, Aeginet, Dioscor. Marcel. Plin. Se∣rap. Gal. simpl. 10. cap. 18. 9, 10, 12, 13. Act. Tetr. 1. ser. 2. cap. 110. Aegin. libr. 7. Dioscorid. libr. 2. cap. 90. Marcel. cap. 4. & 26. Plin. libr. 28. 4. 15. Serap. simpl. . 453. & 466. to passe the metallines which it is euident they did also vse. Truely, when I consider with my selfe the pride of these fooles which disdaine this metalline part of Ph∣sicke (which after their manner contumeliously they call , and therefore can neither helpe their owne nor many other diseases. I call to mine a storle, perad∣uenture knowne vnto them, of Herachto Ephesio, which being sicke of a drop,  the help of Phyons, annoynting himselfe ouer with cow-dung, set  in the sunne to drie, and falling asleepe was torne in peeces of dogges: but these are more then sufficiently answered . Nowe I will declare what is my purpose and scope in the : vely to prescribe plainely hereafer, not those things which are
alreadie common, or (as it is commonly saide) kno∣wen to blinde men and barbes. lest I might seeme to immitate those that vse to write hapsodias and heapes, but the methode and way of preparing medicines by Spagericke ae, that pertaine vnto Gunneshot, which I knowe are yet vnknowne vnto many Phisitions and Surgeons. And this I can truely confesse, that I am indu∣ced for two causes to doe it: first to prouoke those that are better learned, if they haue any better medicines to vtter them, as also that I might specially helpe my coun∣trie and mankinde: vnto the which (the more is the greefe) thee is too much neede of those kinde of medi∣cines in these most lamble and cruell times wherein it hath so long beene bloodied with domesticall and ci∣uill warres▪ but to encounter with their aunders which crie out, that these kinde of medicines doe not onely re∣quire long & difficl preparation, but also that they are so deare that euerie one cannot easily vse them. I haue thought good therfore first to set downe common medi∣cines, and then to come to those which I doe farre more esteeme, as indeede they are farre more excellent then the other, as by their preparation you may know. Albe∣it also I haue, determined to haue consideration of the poore and common souldiour and to set downe them a∣part that shall helpe the rich. THerefore the Surgeons are to bee admonished that when they goe into the warres, that they take with them these things readie prepared which are to bee had at most Pothecaries. Supprantia. silium▪ of oth srt▪ . Tetraphramacm Galen. Resumptiuum. The emplaster of Mucilages which may bee dissolued with oyle Oliue if neede be. Detergnti▪
Uguentum diapmpholygs Nicolal. Unguen iride Andr: Empla disolued with oyle of Roses, Vgueum Apoolicum A. Ugutum Egypiacum of the same. Sarcotica. Unguentum Aureum. Ung crseos Mes vtrun{que}. Empla Grati De & de Ia. Ccatricem inducentia. U de Minio. Desiccatiuum rubrum. Emplastrum de cerusa. & res extran. ntum  Nicolai. Vnguenta Magistralia of the Phisitions of Florence de∣scribed by . Vnguentum de calce viua. Repllentia & aringentia. Vuguentum de bolo coe. Vuguentum osatum Mesu. OR for the saide intentions medicines may bee made which neede no other then common preparations. Suppurantia. Take of new Butter and oyle Oliue, anna, ii. ounces, wheare meale clensed from his bran, halfe an ounce, faire water iiii. ounces, boyle all together. Or take the leaues of Tussilage & Mallowes, ana. M. ii. ost them vnder ashes and mingle them with butter. Or take of the iuice of the rootes of Lillies first rosted vnder aes, iiii. ounces, of the grease of a hen goose or swine, ii. ounces, with oyle of Linseed or oliues, the yolke of an egge and a little wax, make an ointment. Detergentia. Take of hony iii. ounces, of beane meale▪ and barley meale ana, ii. drams, boyle them with wine to the height of an ointment.
Or take of Plantaine leaues and Smalege ana, M. i. red Roses p. ii red wine ces, boyle it to halfe: straine solue  ii. ounces, Turpen∣tine, i. ounce. Meale of  and Oobus, ana, i. dram, Alloes and Mirre, ana, halfe a dram, boyle it againe, put∣ting to so much waxe as shall suffice to bring it into the forme of an ointment. Or take of the iuice of plantaine and Agrimonie ana, ii. ounces, Rose ho▪ iiii. ounces, of the roote of os and Beane meale, ana, halfe an ounce, mingle them towarde the ende with Turpentine i. ounce, make thereof▪ an ointment. Sarcotica. Take of Manna; of Frankinsens ana, ij. drammes of Meale of Fenegreke and Orobus ana, j. dram let them be wrought with honie and the yolke of an egge. Or take of Sarcocollae dissolued in milke, iii dramm, Mastick, Olibanum, ana, i dram, Liquid pitch, and Tur∣pentine ana, i. ouncele them and make an ointment. Epo Take of white chalke ij. ounces, of ashes of burned lea∣ther iij. drammes, worke them with oyle of Roses. Or take of quicke Lime so often washed in water vntill it haue lost, all his nesse ij. ounces, of Terae Arme∣niae i. ounce, boyle them with oyle of Mirtilles. Of  Lead, burnt Stibium  Pompholyge may also be made medicines most fit for that purpose. Ad vennata vulnera. Take of the iuice of Aagallidis prpure, of Cyclaminis, ana, i. ,  Vie mingled with mans spitle, halfe a ounce, em. Or take of ge, ii. ounces▪ Gaum halfe a ounce, Gh and Turpentine, ana i. ounces, oyle as much as shall suice. Or take of oyle iiii. ounces▪ of Sagapenum, Mumiae and Amber, ana, i. dras, Frankinsens, Mastick▪ ana, ii. drams of th best Terrae Sigillatae and red Corall, ana, i. dram, pitch. ii. ounces, wax as much as shall suffice to make an ment.
Or take ii. onions, of the leaues of Unicae peruince scabio∣sae Risini of each a handful, rost them vnder the ashes, and put thereto of Treacle halfe an ounce, and with Turpen∣tine make an ointment. Ad ambusta. Take of the iuice of Onions rosted vnder ashes, ii, oun∣ces, oyle of Nuttes i. ounce mingle them together. Or take of the leaues of black iuice stamped with plan∣ine water M. ii. of oile i. pound, boile them together with iiii. ounces of white wine vntil the wine be consumed, thē put to wax as much as shall suffice to make it a salue: Or take of Larde molten in the flame ii, ounces, and poure it into the iuice of Beetes and Rue, the creame of milke i. ounce, Mucilege of the seede of condonioru and Tragacanthae ana, halfe a ounce, mingle them. Repellentia, & sanguinem cohibentia. Take of the iuice of the leaues of Woodbine and of O∣ken leaues, ana, i. ounce, red Roses i. dram, Boli Armenae & Sanguis Draconis, ana, ii. drams, oyle of Roses iii. ounces, waxe as much as shall suffice▪ Or take of the Pulpe of Apples boyled in milke iii. ounces, of Mucilage, of the seedes of Psillij and Cydones, ana, halfe a ounce, of the iuice of Bursae Pastoris and Poli∣gonum ana, i. ounce, of Acaciae and Sanguinis Drconis, ana, iii. drams, of Terra Sigillate halfe an ounce▪ oyle of Mirtils, iiii. ounces, white wax as much as shall suffice to make an ointment. BVt these medicines following are not so much vsed a∣mong the Apothecaries neither knowne vnto the Sur∣ons, yet most profitable for wounds by shot and all other whose fit preparation the Spagericke arte doth partlie declare. Suppurantia: Take of the roote of holy Oke, and Lillies, ana, iiii. ounces, Beetes with the rootes. M i. fresh Butter halfe a pound, wormes prepared in wine, iii. ounces, yolkes of egges 12. the marie of a Calfe, of Turpentine, ana, v. ounces, oyle Oliue clensed from the Phes i. pounde
stampe those that are to be stamped, mingle al well toge∣ther and digest them in warme doung, one moneth after presse it out, and with a fire on ashes boile it to the sub∣stance of a salue. Or take of the iuice of the hearb Tusilage and Oxalidis ana, iij. ounces, fat drie figges, 20. Frankasence, ii. ounces Rosen of the Laixtre, i. ounce and a halfe, grease of a Goose and a henne, ana, ii. ounces, fresh Butter halfe a pound▪ Olei visci pomrum compos. i. pound al mingled toge ther, let them boyle in a double vessel luted with Luto Sa∣pientiae for the space of sixe houres and straine it warme & set againe in the sunne or boyle it to a fit substance, these medicines doe quickly mooue matter and are anodina verie commodious for wounds by shot. Detrgentia. Take of the Iuice of Centari and Selandine, ana, iiii. ounces, of honie iii. ounces, of flowers of Uerbascum p. ii. of Frankensence, Myrre and Masticke, ana halfe an ounce, oyle of Turpentine vi. ounces, good white wine i. pound, putrifie them al in warme dongue and boyle them as be∣fore with a fire of ashes vntill the wine and iuice be con∣sumed and it bee brought to the forme of an ointment, then put to i. ounce of this ointment, i. dram of mercurie precipitate dulcified. If there be need of greater clensing. Or take Visci herbarum sniculae Pirolae, Aristoloch, and Vincae peruincae, ana, ii. ounces, of turpentine washed iiii. ounces, Crocus Veneris halfe a ounce, Balsami Taertari, ii. drams. Sulphuris Antimoni, i. dram and a halfe, set them vpon a fire of ashes vntill it haue the substance of a salue. Saercotica. Take of the Mucilage of the seed of Frnigreeke ii, oun∣ces, of the iuice of hounds tongue Perscicaria and the great Comferie ana, i. ounce and a halfe, oyle of Frankin∣sence and mirre, ana, iii. drams▪ oyle of Hipericon simple ii. ounces, Turpentine washed with white wine, ii. ounces, let them stand in the sunne or at a soft fire vntil they wax thicke. Unguentum depaet.
Take of the iuice of Pum, i▪ pound. Turpentine v. oun∣ces, of common oyle of Hipericon viii. ounces, good white wine halfe  pound, digest all viii. dayes, after seeth them vntill the wine be consumed, then put to Colophoiae and waxe, ana, iii. cnces: Muni and Amber ana, ii. drammes, melt them againe at the fire and make an ointment accor∣ding to art. Take of the iuice of the Petum and Comferie, ana, iiii. Another of  discription. ounces, oyle of Turpentine i. pounde, flowers of Hiperi∣con and Verbascus, ana▪ M. ii. apples of an elme tree iii. ounces, the buds of the Poplatrec, iiii. ounces, the spirit of wine i. pound & a halfe, digest al these in horse dongue or in a warme bath in a glasse vessell well stopped one whole moneth, then wring it out and straine it and put to it of Frankensence, Masticke, and Mirre ana, i▪ ounces, Sanguis Draconis, halfe a ounce, Muniae, vi. drams, Turpen∣tine halfe a pound, Benioini j. ounce, circulate them to∣gether in a Pellicane viii. daies, after with a moderate heat distill away the spirit of wine and there wil remaine in the bottome a most pretious balme. Cicatricem inducentia. Take of burnt Allum i. ounce, Crete Vitrioli iii. drams, Crocus martis, Crocus Uncris, ana▪ ii. drams, mingle them and make a pouder which you may vse by it self, or ming∣led with hony. Or take of Bole Amenae prepared after our maner, ii. drams, clex of egshels halfe an ounce, the iuice of vnripe. Damascens, iii. ounces. boile them with a soft fire to a per∣fect substance. Ad Ven. Take of oyle of Amber and Turpentine▪ ana, i. ounc oile of Iuniper, ii. drams, ettle seed and the root of Gen∣tian, ana, ii. drams, oyle of Sulphur Vitriolat, i. dram and a halfe, red. Corall, i. dram, mingle them togither. Or take of the iuice of Pentaphillon, Scabious and Ru ana, ii. ounces. Olei sulphuris Rubei i. ounce, oyle of mire,  drams, Colophoni and gum of iuice, ana, vi. drammes, mingle them,
Adambusta. Take of lard molten and washed in water of nightshad ii. ounces, Olei Saturni halfe an ounce, mingle th▪ Or take the iuice of the rootes of Henbane and flowers of red popie, ana, i. ounce, Salt Peter. i. dram, Mucilage of Seminis Cidoniorum, iii. drams, and with oyle of Cham∣phire make an ointment. Repellenti & sanguinem cohibenti. Take of Bole Armenae prepared after the Spag manner ii. ounces, Crocus Martis and Crocus Veneris, ana, i. ounce, mixe them with oyle of Roses. Or take of Colcotharis Dulsifieati, ashes of frogges bur∣ned, ana, halfe a ounce, mingle them with the white of an egge. There bee made other remedies for the fore saide in∣tents, the making whereof wee haue described in their proper places which I commit to the iudgement of the skilful Surgeons to vse wisely as the disease and partie af∣fected dotis require. Now there remaineth to speake of drinks for wounds before wee teach the preparations of medicines. De potionibus vulnerarijs. THese potions for wounds, although they driue not out the humors downwards, yet preuaile they very much to clense woundes, because they clense superfluous hu∣mors and the blood from all filth, and by a certaine mar∣eious qualitie where with they excel, they knit the bro∣ken bones and help the sinowes that are hurt by wounds, & helping nature, they at the last fil the wound with flesh and close them vp without vsing any other remedie: when as I sawe in Germanie the maruelous and almost incredi∣ble effect which came by the vse of these potiōs euen in curing desperate Vlcers, I thought it not meete to passe ouer the mention of them, and that so much the rather, because I knew the vse of them in time past was alowed, but nowe through the necligence of Phisitions to be al∣most growne out of vse. Also I haue experiēced those po∣tions to be taken, not only as medicins, but also as norrish∣ments,
and to helpe all the passions and incommodities whereunto wounds are subiect. The simples whereof the medicines are made, are these: Cyclaminus. Consolida maior. Consolida mediae, quam Sophiam nonnulli vocant. Sabinae. Galangae. Vinca peruinc. Centaurum. Ophioglosson. Betonica. Aristolochia. Ueronica. Agrimoniae. Uerbenae. Serpnariae. Persicariae. Arthemisiae. Lilium conuallium, Zedoariae. Pyrola. Sperma ceti. Cancri fluniatiles. Nux vomica, Astaci. Mumiae. Macis. Bolus Armena. You shall much better drawe out the strength of those simples then the common sort, if you put them into a tun of white must, and digest them there ii. moneths, or if you cut the greene bearbes verie small and wring out the iuice of them into a Pelicane or blinde Limbeck, or circulate them three or foure daies in Balne Mariae. This last way is most conuenient for them that are for∣bidden the vse of wine, specially if they be wounded in the head. The distilled waters of thē be also good if they be taken driely by themselues morning and euening with dose and manner conuenient: Or if white wine be delai∣ed with them (if it bee graunted to the wounded) heere foloweth the composition of the vulnerarie potions. A Vulnerarie potion to be giuen the first seauen dais. Take of both Conferies Veronica, Swbread, ana, M. i. Astacos purged num, iiii. white wine two measures, circu∣late them in Balneo, three daies, straine it, and giue euery morning one spoonefull. Or take of the eies of Crabs in pouder halfe a ounce, Mumia, ii. drams Bole Armenae, i. dram and a halfe, the herbs of Agrimoni Ophioglosson. Ueronica, & Sowbread ana,
M.  Sperma Ceti, i. dram, infuse them in white wine  a night in Balneo, take of this ii. spoonefulles morning and euening if neede be, it putteth away the inflamations ve∣rie much, and helpeth the burning. Take of Macis, the eyes of Crabbes, Zedoarie ana, iii Potions to be giuen other timer of the griefe. drams, Mumia, Ga'ingale the lesse, ana ii. drammes, Nucis vomicae, i. dram and a halfe, beate them groselie, and put them in a glasse vessell powring thereto of white wine i. measure and a half, macerate them in a soft heate ii. daies. The dose is one spoonefull in the morning and as much at night. The force of this potion is so great that it cannot be sufficiently commended. Take of the flowres of Uinca Peruinca Lilium Coali∣um, A potion apt for poisoned wounds by Gunshot. ana, p. i. Galanga Zedoariae ana ii. dams. Mumia and Bo∣le Armenia ana, i. dram, Sperma Ce, halfe a dram, white wine i. measures, digest and circulate them in Balneo 4. daies the dose is one spoonefull morning and euening. A potion vulnerary where the bone is broken with gunshot. Take of Aristolochi, Sowbread, Adders grasse, both conferies, Geranii ana, M. i Sauin▪ M. ss. maces, Zedoariae, the eyes of Crabbes ana, halfe a ounce, Mumia Galingale the lesse, ana, i. dram and a halfe, being cut smal and bru∣sed and the other things brought into a grose pouder boyle all in a double vessell foure houres with one mea∣sure of wine vse it morning and euening. This medicine is much better then so manie splents wherewith many are tormented. R. of flowres of Lilium Conualium, Betonie ana, p. i.  potion fr the wounds of the hed. Galingale Macis, ana, iii. drams, Persicaia, Selandine, Vinca Peruinca, Veronica & Centauri, ana, M. s. mace∣rate themas before, and referue them to your vse. A potion for wounds of the breast. Take of the ice of Veruen, Betonie Veronica, ana, ii. ounces, cinamon water i. pound macerate them. Take of Bole armeniae half an ounce of both the Com∣feries For wounds of the macke. ana, M. i. Galingale ii. drams, temper them with wine as aforesaid reserue them to vse. Diuers discriptions of otions may be made of the foresaid simples which I haue
to the iudgement of the expert phisition notwithstāding this one thing I wil adde, that the vse of them hath many oportunities to cure wounds by gunshot as also the Can∣ker and al maligne desperate and eating vlcers, of al which the Phisition shal take very great profit if he prepare the potions with the essence of the vulnerarie simples spage∣tically extract as wee haue taught in another. A briefe declaration of Spagericall medicines. FOr as much as nowe remaineth to declare the Spage∣rick preparation of those simples which pertaine to the cure of wounds by gunne shot, wee will vse the same me∣thod we haue before vsed whereby this our treatise may be the plainer. Superantia sunt igitur & Anodyna Oleum ouorum. Oleum butyri. Oleum refinae. Ol. visci pomorum compos. Oleum hyperisi simpl. Olea omnium axung. Detergentia Oleum myrrhae. Oleum mastiches. Oleum terebinthinae. Oleum mellis. Viscus centaurij. Viscus vincoe petuincoe. Viscus aristolochioe. Sal foecum aceti. Balsamus martis. Crocus veneris. Mercur. praecipitat. vulgaris Mercur praecipit. dulcific. Oleum guaiaci. Balsamus veneris. Balsamus Saturni. Balsamus tartari. Sarcotica Balsamus hyperici. Oleum thuris. Oleum sarcocollae. Ol mannae. Viscus consolidae vtriusque Viscus cynoglossi. Epultica Calx testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacum. Bolus armena praeparata. Alumē adustum & praepar. Crocus Martis. Creta vitrioli flaua. Ol. salis tartari. Ol. talci. quae etiā cicatri∣ces deco∣rant. Repellentia & sangui∣ cohi∣bentia. Ol. visci pomorum simplex. Oleum Martis. Crocus Veneris. Colcothar simplex. Colcothar dulcisicarum.
Bolus armena praeparata. Calx testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacum. Ad venena Butyrum arsenici fixum. Praecipitatus dulcificatus. Balsamus tartari. Ol. Mercur. corporale. Oleum antimonij. Oleum sulphuris vitriolatū. Ad ambu∣sta Oleum ouorum. Oleum lardi. Oleum butyri. Aqua gammarorum. Aqua spermatis ranarum. Aqua florum papauer. rubri Viscus rad. hyoscyami. Oleum Saturni, eius{que} Sal. Oleum Lithargyri. Attrahen∣tia Viscus aristolochiae. Viscus corticis med. tiliae Succinum praeparatum. Magnes praeparatus. Sunt rursus illo∣rum simplicium singula, quae sin∣gulis partibus vulneratis con∣ducunt, vt Ossibus corrup∣tis. Oleum myrrhae. Oleum caryophyllorum. Oleum tartari foetens. Oleum vitrioli. Oleum sulphuris simplex. Oleum sulph. vitriolatum. Oleum antimonij. Sulphur rubjcūdum antim. Oleum salis. Oleum Mercur sublimati. Neruis vulne∣ratis. Oleum cerae. Oleum iuneperi. Oleum euphorbij. Oleum ouorum. Oleum terebinthinae. Oleum sulphuris terebinth. Carni putridae ac corrupta. Sal fuliginis. Sal vrinae. Sal tartari. Sal mellis. Oleum frumenti. Oleum mellis. Oleum sulph. acidunt. Phlegma vitrioli acidum. Phlegma aluminis acidum. Balsamus Martis. Balsamus Veneris. Balsamus Mercurij▪ Balsamus tartari.
But because regarde is alwaies to be had of the noble part in whose action the life doth consist, there bee cer∣taine medicines, which being giuen can defend them. Roborant enim. Crebrum. Oleum succini. Oleum saluiae. Oleum caryophyllorum. Spiritus vitrioli. Cor. Aurum vitae. Tinctura auri. Essentia margaritarum. Hepar. Tinctura Bals. natural. Tinctura corallorum. Oleum Martis. The Spagericall preparation of medicines before rehearsed. THe dregges of wine or crude Tartar brought into Oleum Tartar . pouder, put into a Retort of glasse or earth with his re∣cipient, make fire by degrees as is doone to the making of strong water, there will rise great plentie of white spirits which wil turne into water and thicke stinking oile, sepa∣rate the oyle by a funnel and keepe it to your vse. But the salt of Tartar you shall draw out of the Pheces The Salto Tartar. (which they call the dead head) which are left in the Re∣tort. Those you shall dissolue in warme water, and after filter that which is dissolued twise or thrise, coagulate it at the fire by vaporing away the water, and the salt wil re∣maine in the bottome of the vessell, which if you againe dissolue and coagulate diuerse times, you shall purge it cleare like Cristall. This Cristaline salt if you put it into a glasse and set it Oyle of Tartar. in a wine seller or other moist place, within few dayes it wil resolue into a cleare oyle verie excellent to clense the spots and vlcers of the face. Take crude Tartar ii. pounde, salt Peter. Salt of Soote, The balme of Tartar. of the Pheces of vineger, ana, iiii. ounces, Calcis Vuae, vi. ounces, all broken verie small put into a vessel, not glased,
but wel stopped. Calcine it xii. houres, dissolue that is cal∣cined in warme water, & distil it by filter, after coagulate it, and clene it againe, repeating three times your calcina∣tions, dissolutions, and coagulations: then put all into a Limbecke and put on distilled vinegar, that it be uered iiii. fingers. Distil the vinegar in balneo M. and there wil come forth a sweete liquor, then poure on the vinegar a∣gaine to distill, this do so long vntil it be no more sweete but sower, as when you poured it on first and so rise in the Limbecke. Then distill all in a strong fire by a Re∣tort, and there will come forth a hot oyle, the commodi∣ties whereof can scarcely be declared. After the same maner if you will you may distil al the salt of Tartar by a Limbecke: whereof you shall make a most excellent and wholesome oyle. Vinegar being distilled by a Limbecke, the pheces re∣maine Oyle of Vint∣g. in the bottome of the vessell which first dried, af∣terward with a violent fire if they be driuen out by a Re∣tort, there come foorth a very red and sharpe oile. Then if you dooe againe dissolue the dead head or Pheces in Salt of Vinegar warme water, filter, and coagulate it, the salt of Vinegar will rest in the bottome, the which is verie profitable for all eating vlcers. Soote brought into fine pouder, dissolue it in distilled Sal and oyle of S. Vinegar in Balneo, and separating all the mensture, that which remaineth in the bottome dissolue and coagulate againe so long till it come to white salt which in a moyst place wil dissolue into oyle, verie apt to cure the Gangrae∣nam and all maligne vlcers. Bole Armonack made into fine pouder, dissolue it in the The preparation of Bls Arm. sower fleame of Alum, then separate the fleame by Bal∣neum and poure on other. Doe this three times, and then the Bole will be turned into a very fat oyle which with a verie soft fire is dryed and brought into pouder most apt to staunch bloud wheresoeuer it breake out. Take of Cloues beaten in pouder one pound, simple Oyles of spices ,  and . water, or Aqua Vitae which is better, vi. pounde, infuse them to digest in Balneo or dung foure dayes, then put
them in Limbecke with his refrigatorie, distill it accor∣ding to arte, and seperate the oyle from the water by a funnel, and keepe it for your vse. After the same manner shall you draw the oyles of Sage, Iuniper, Amber, Turpen∣tine, Mirre, Frankinsens, Sarcocolla, Masticke and Euphor∣bium. We haue written another better way to draw oyles out of the foresaide things in the Spagericke preparati∣on of medicines. Wheate being put into a retort with the spirit of wine, digest it viii. daies, then distill it with a violent fire, that Oyle of wheat▪ which is distilled powre againe vpon the dead head, di∣gest it againe and distill it againe, if you reiterate this iii. times there will come forth a most excellent oyle of the Gangraena and Carcinomat. Take of the flowers of Hipericon small utij. pounde The sple Bale of Hipe∣ricon. oyle of Turpentine i. pound, yolkes of egges, 20. Aqua Vitae halfe a pound, mingle them all together and let it putrifie in hot dung one whole moneth, then wring it out and set it in the sunne two moneths. After the same maner is the Balme of Visci pomorum Bals vised pomorum. The compound ble of hyp∣icon. made or with oile Oliue, first purified in Balneo. Take of the flowres of Hipericon, i. pound of the Mus∣lage of the roote of the great Conferie, iiii. ounces, floures of Camomil, Verbascum, ana▪ pug ii▪ oile of egges and tur∣pentine, ana, half a pound, Aqua Vitae one pound, Mirre, Frankensence, Mastick, Muiae, ana, ii ounces, red sugar vi. ounces, putrife all in dung one moneth in a vessel di∣ligently stopped, then wring it out and circulate it in Bal∣neo three dayes, afterward with a soft fire boyle it to the substance of a Balme. Take of the leaues of the Mysselto of the Apple tree The  balme of  pomorum. cut smal, ii. pound, put them into a vessel of glale, putting thereto buds of the Popler tree halfe a pound, oyle of the grease of a Badger and of Butter, ana, iiii. ounces, turpen∣tine vi. ounces, oyle of wormes ii. pound and a halfe, good white wine, ii. pound, digest all well stopped in verie hot dung, ii. moneths, then presse it and circulate it, and with a soft fire boile it vntil the liquors be consumed, there can
not be found a more excellent medicine to asswage ache and paines. The iuice of the leaues and rootes of hearbes you shall How the flime or uslege is drawen out of hearbs. purifie vntill it bee cleare: powring to it so much Aqua Vitae and digest it in Balneo in a glasse xv, daies, then se∣parate that water by distillation, and there remaineth in the bottome the slyme or muslage of the hearbes. Steepe the leaues and rootes of hearbes in common Another me∣thode. water filtred or that which is better, in white wine eight daies, then let them boyle iii. daies with a soft fire vnder them. Then wing them out and purifie it, then boyle them with a softfire, vntill they come to the thicknes of honie which we cal the slime of muslage. By this rule you shal draw out of both Comferies Cynoglosso, Centaurie, Vinca peiuinca, Aristolochie, the roote of henbane & the middle barke of Tillia their muslage verie profitable for the foresaid medicines. Out of the flowres of red Poppie or their iuice you shal draw a water by a Limbeck very profitable to coole, The salt of mans vrine hath an excellent qualitie to Salt of ine. clense. It is made thus. First the vrine is to be filtred, then, coagulated, after with distilled vinegar dissolued, & againe coagulated, these must be reiterated 3. or 4. times. Melt waxe at the fire and boyle it with wine till it bee consumed: doe it so long vntill it cracke no more. Take i. Oyle of Wax. pound of wax thus prepared, Alum calcined half a pound, Sage leaues M. i. put al into a Limbeck, with his receauer and distill it with a meane fire. First there will come forth a grose oyle, thick, hard, & white, which must be distilled againe as afore, and iii. times reiterated, and so you shall make an excellent oyle of waxe for all griefes of the sy∣nowes. In like maner is the oyle of Rosen and pitch made. Out of honie you shall first drawe an excellent water The water and oyle of honie. by Balneum, afterward you shall put vnto the dead head or pheces that are left, sand or flint stones calcined that the matter boyle not vp, which you shall driue out by a  of glasse giuing fire by degrees, and so you shal di∣stil a yellowish cleare oile, togither with a grosse impure
oyle. Let all digest againe 4. or 5. dayes, after distill it a∣gaine by a Limbecke in sande, and there will come out a pure red oyle swimming vpon the water. This water is sower almost like vinegar distilled, and is very good a∣gainst the Gangrena: but the oyle which burneth like A∣qua Vitae hath maruaious qualities, specially if it be circu∣lated certaine daies with the spirit of wine: for the spirit being after separated there remaineth a sweete oyle of pleasant sauour, good for wounds by gunshot and eating vlcers. Out of the pheces which remaines is drawen a salt, first The salt of hony being calcined with a fire of reuerberation, dissoluing it with his proper menstrua or common water distilled, fil∣tering and coagulating it three times. It is good for al▪ rot∣ten vlcers. This salt you shal mingle with his proper bur∣ning oyle according to arte, and you shall reape greater commoditie thereof, then is lawfull to be spoken. Take of honie not separated from his waxe ii pounde, Tartar made into pouder i▪ pound, let them putrifie toge∣ther Another oyle of hony more precious. in dung xv. dayes and distill it by a retort, and there will first come a cleare water, then a yellowish. Put these againe vpon the dead head, and putrifie it againe other xv. dayes, after distill it againe, and this doe three times, and you shall haue an excellent oyle of honie. Take butter first molten in white wine, and then distil Oyle of butter  larde. it with a meane fire, and there wil distil out a oyle greatly swaging paines and supplying. So shall you make oyle of Larde and all greases. Take 100 yolkes of egges first sodden hard, put them into a Cucurbite and make fire by degrees, first there wil yle of ylks of Egges. come out a water, after a yellowish oyle swimming vpon the water▪ last a thicke oile. The water is good for al spots in the face, the oyle to appease all griefes and aches. Boyle Ceuees in water of Orphine in a double vessell Water of▪ eses. wel stopped one whole day. After distil it, powring the water 3. times vpon the pheces, then let it be kept, it is ve∣ie good for inflamations, burnings, & the Carcynomata Water of the sperme of frog The sperme of eede of frogges is gathered in the
moneth of March, and i distilled by a glasse Limbecke, and therof is drawen a water very commodious for infla∣mations and burnings. Eggeshels or the shels of snailes are reuerberated in a al of gsel nd siles. sharpe fire three daies vntill they be brought into a veie white Calce. But if they be sprinckled with vineger whi∣lest they are calcined, the Calce wil be the lighter and ap∣ter to worke his force. Mercurie first washed and prepared, according to Ge∣bers The common Mercurie pre∣cipitate. prescription dissolue with the duble weight of com∣mon strong water, then distill it  times and poure it so often againe vpon the pheces; and so it is brought into a verie red pouder, cut of the which being eueberate at the fire and drawne away, the spirits of the strong water which otherwise woulde mooue geeat paine. But it were better if it were washed with the sleame of Allum and vi∣negar distilled, and the water of Egges, for by that meane the sharpnesse is taken away. But it is better to prepare Mercurie with often subli∣mations, Mercurie preci∣piat fixi & dl∣ciied most pro∣fitable for the re of ds. and to fixe it being quickened againe and pur∣ged from his filthy earth and superfluous humiditie with the water which wee haue described in the booke by me published of the Spgerick preparation. But if al men do not vnderstand that discption for the darke wordes of Art, it shall not be incommodious to fixe the Mercurie with common strong water three times powred on and drawne away, and to bring it into a red pouder, and that with a sufficient violent fire that al the sharpnes and ve∣nome of the menstrew may be drawne away, which shal much the better be done of this water following be min∣led with it, and by often distillation sepated. Take of distilled vinegar  pound & a half, the fleam  Allum, i. pound and a halfe, calce of eggeshels vi. oun∣es, distill al til it be drie. Take of this water  pound, of Mercurie precipitate as fore i. pound, mingle all wel ac∣cording to art, distil it by a Limbeck, powring the water againe vnto the peces three times. Last of al driue al out vntill it bee d and there will remaine a pouder in the
bottome, which grinde vppon a marble and put it into a Limbeck, pouring on the water aforesaid, which you shal three times distill from the pheces as afore, Lastly the Mercurie precipitate must be circulated with a alcool of wine 24. houres. Then distill away the spirit of wine that the matter may drie, then poure on new againe and circu∣late it and distill, as afore and that do 4. or 5. times, and then you haue attained the perfect preparation of Mer∣curie, whose qualities cannot be sufficiently commended in curing of sundrie diseases, specially of the Pox, whe∣ther it be takē by mouth, or applied to the place grieued. Make Amalgama with iiii. ounces of Mercurie, cude, oile of Mer∣curie corpo and i. ounce of the best tinne. Spread this vpon a plate of Iron, and set it in a moyst place, and all will dissolue into oyle, it is also made with Mercurie alone, and a plate of Tynne. Mercurie, as the maner is, three times sublimed with Oile of mercu∣rie subblimed Salt of Vitrioll, at the last is mingled with the like porti∣on of sal▪ Armoniack, & againe subblimed three or foure times, al that subblimat is dissolued into oile, out of which the spirit of the salt Armoniack is to be drawen away, cir∣culate all with the essence of wine and distil it so long vn∣til the oyle haue lost his heate and sharpnesse and the Armoniacke be separated. It is also reduced by it selfe into an oyle with a very soft heate of an Athanor by long distance of time. Sublime Mercurie so often with the simple Calce of The balme of Mercurie. egges well prepared vntill it be vtterly extinct. To this mixture powre vinegar distilled alcoole sated that it may couer it 4 fingers, distil the liquor from the pheces 4. or 5 times vntil the Mercurie be come into a very red pouder which you shall circulate with a alcoole of wine in a pel∣lican 8. days, separate the alcool by a limbeck & there wil remaine in the bottome the most pretious & sweet balme of Mercury. It healeth al desperate vlcers & also ruculā i sica, & greatly helpeth these wounds by gunshot. Al other preparations of Mercurie and the maner of vsing it you shal gather out of the book which we lately set forth.
Vpon the filings of Iron often washed with salt water,  martis poure sharpe vinegar that it may couer it foure fingers, set it vpon warme ashes 8. daies, euerie day moouing the matter and separating the vinegar which wil be colored, & pouring on againe new, and that so long till the vinegar be no more coloured, which being vapoured away take the pouder that remaineth in the bottome, and subblime it with like portion of Armoniacke: the same sublimate you shall returne againe so often vppon his pheces, and subblime again vntil there appeare the color of a Rubin: then cast al into scalding water, that the salt may dissolue them, by & by put to cold water, & the balme of Mars wil rest in the bottome like the calx of gold. Poure away the water and put to fresh again that the balme may be made sweete. Of this with the spirit a wine alcolizat by circulations, Oyle of Mars. you shall make a red oyle most excellent for all inwarde Hemerodes or issues of bloud, and to strengthen the bow∣els, if one drop be mixed with conserue of Roses or Con∣ferie or giuen with wine. The filings of Iron first well washed, you shall calci rous marti. with the flowre of Sulphur or dissolue with strong water, then poure on very sharpe vinegar, and set it in a warme place certaine days, then reuerberate it with an open fire, as Arte commandeth one whole day, gathering alwayes the flowres which remaine aboue, vntill all be conuerted into a vere red and light pouder. After the same maner you shal make the balme, oile & The balme oile, Crocus & Vi∣rioium Ven∣is. Crocus of copper, out of the which with the sowre flame of Vitrioll, circulating all artificially, you shall drawe a bleweshing Vitriol whose qualities we haue discribed in another place. Out of Saturne calcined is drawne a sweetish salt in balneo with distilled vinegar, pouring it so often vpon the alt of saturn. Pheces vntil it draw no more. The menstrew euaporated, the salt remaineth in the botome, which by often dissolu∣tions and coagulations is made Cristaline: and afterward easily dissolued into oyle being set in a moist place. But if  .
you circulate this cristaline salt in a Pelicane with the al∣cool of wine 15. daies, and after take away the menstrew by distillation, & put to new wine & circulate it, putting to a fit dose of cristaline salt of Tartar, you shall make a Balme sweeter then sugar which will maruellously pre∣uaile Balsamu Sa∣turni. against all maligne vlcers and diseases of the eyes. Decoct Antimonie made in pouder with a capital lie Sulphur of antimoni. prepared of Tartar calcined, and Sope ashes and quicke∣lime the space of one houre, then let it coole, pouring vpō it a litle Vinegar, and there wil appeare a certaine rednes swimming vpon, which you shal gather: then againe let it boile for one houre or two, againe let it coole and gather that which swimmeth vp. Do this so often vntil there ap∣peare no more rednes. For it is the sulphure of antimonie which dried at a soft fire, you shal keepe it to good vses. Mingle Antimonie with Sugar and Alum, and put all Oyle of antimo∣nie. into a Retort of glasse, make a soft fire for 4. or 5. houres, afterward increase it, and there will come out an oyle red like bloud: It is also done with mercurie sublimate, but great eede is to be taken lest any errour be committed in the degree of fire. Boyle Sulphur prepared with oyle of Linseede with a verie soft fire, and it will be like blood congealed. Let the oile of Sul∣phur matter coole, put it into a retort and giue it fire, and there will distill out a verie red oyle of Sulphur. It is also done, if you mingle bran with your Sulphur and distill it. Take of Sulphur Vinae P. i. with which mingle with a oile of Sulph vitriolate. soft fire so much pure vtrioll molten that it may be one body. Distill this by a discentorie and there will descend a red oyle into the receauer. If i. pound of the flowre of sulphur be mixed with ii. or iii. pound of oile of turpentine in a drie heate, the flowres oile of Sulphur terebinthina. wil dissolue into a red oile. Then the menstrew rightly & artificially separate, circulate the rubin of Sulphur, with the Alcoll of wine eight dayes, and you shal haue oyle of Sulphur that hath the qualities of the naturall Balme. The sower oile of Sulphur is made by Sulphur, by set∣ting it on fire, and hanging ouer it a bell or a large glasse Sowre oile of Sulphur.
head to  the  which   into that . Put▪ Viioll beaen into pouder into a Cucurbite, gi∣uing The  of Violl. it a fire of the second degree, and there wil issue a sower water which is called the leame of Vitrioll. Take the Pheces which remaineth in the bottome of  of Vitrioll. the vessell which is called Colcothar, stamp that, and if you mingle flyntes withall with a violent fire, there will come out a red oyle. It is also made with the simple Colcothar driuen out Another . with a violent fire three daies space, and there will come forth a verie hot oyle, which is made sweete by circula∣tion with spirit of wine Tartarizated. But if the Colcothar bee dissolued in warme water and  dulci∣fi   of . the rednesse in it separated and the water euaporated, the Colcothar will remaine sweetish, that which remaineth the rednesse being taken away is called Creta Uitrioli. But if Vitrioll be drawne by the ninth, a limbeck pou∣ring on alwaies the liquor vpon the dead head, and after Spirit of Vii∣ll. circulating all by the space of eight dayes, you shall haue the spirit of Vitrioll verie profitable for many things. The leame of Allum is made like the fleame of Vi∣trioll. But Allum is prepared if the leame be 5. times pow∣red Tled of al∣ and the preparation. vpon the pheces out of which it was drawne and di∣stilled, last of all drie out all the fleame vntill it be drie. Make brine of salt, into which cast hot burning stones that they may be imbybed, those stones so imbybed put  of salt. into a retort, giuing fire by degrees, there wil come forth a very hot oyle of salt. I said before that there was great force in Butyro Arse∣ici fixo, to cure al vnmon and maligne vlces, it is made  in this maner. Mingle cristaline Arsenick first subblimed with onely colcothar (which doth keepe backe his poy∣son) with like waight of salt of Tartar and salt Peter, put al into two glasses & fixe it, giuing fire the space of xxiiii. hour▪ first very gentle, then of the highest degree. You shall finde the matter verie white fixed, resembling the
color of pearles▪ which dissolue in war water,  may draw the Aly from it. And the pouder which e∣maineth imbybe with oile of Tartar or of Talcum which is better, and drie it at the fire, and do this thrise. Againe dissolue the matter in warme water that you may take a∣way his salt and there will remaine a very white pouder and fixed, which will dissolue in a moyst place into a fat oyle which is  like Butter. Out of Talcum rightly and artificially calcined is oile of  drawne the spirit with distilled vinegar. This is dissolued into a pretious oyle being set in a moist place. Take of the iuice of Aristolochia Rotundae, and Sa∣uin, The   of Mag ana, iii. ounces, Serpe, ii. ounces, spirit of  i. pound▪ circulate them first the space of xxiiii. hou then distil them, of this water take i. pounde of elect Magnes made into pouder iiii. ounces▪ circulate them together, & distil away the water from the Phces,  this three times, and by this meanes you shall obtaine the preparati∣on of Mag. But because (s wee haue saide) the noblest  are to Cordiall be strengthened, and the heart the principal gan of life, must alwaie be defended, these preparatio following are to be vsed. Take of Theincae of Alex  ounces and a halfe, The  on of  cll   the best Mrre i. ounce and a halfe, Saffron ii. drams, the spirit of wine vi. ounces, mingle al these, and in ashes with a very soft fire distill it, circulate that which is distilled in Bao eight daies, and then distill it againe. The water hath a most excellent qualitie against the plague and all venemous things, and doth maruellously strengthen the heart. We haue sheed the  ncture of gold Corals, naturall Balme, and the esence, of Prle in the book which I wrote of preparation now resteth for  to speake of the gold of life, which  hall knowe to be the most excellent and extreme  in curing  do but consider  excellencie
