23095 99846643 11627
¶ THREE PROPER, and wittie, familiar Letters: lately passed betvvene tvvo V∣niuersitie men: touching the Earth∣quake in Aprill last, and our English refourmed Versifying. With the Preface of a wellwiller to them both. IMPRINTED AT LON∣don, by H. Bynneman, dvvelling in Thames streate, neere vnto Baynardes Castell. Anno Domini. 1580. Cum gratia & priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
¶ TO THE CVRTEOVS Buyer, by a VVelwiller of the tvvo Authours. CVrteous Buyer, (for I write not to the enui∣ous Carper) it was my good happe, as I in∣terpreate it, nowe lately at the fourthe or fifte he, to bee made acquainted wyth the three ters following, by meanes of a faithfull friende, who with much entreaty had procured the copying of them oute, at Immeritos handes. And I praye you, inter∣prete it for your good happe, so soone after to come so easilye by them, throughe my meanes, who am onely to craue these twoo things at your handes, to thinke friendely of my friendly meaning, and to take them of me wyth this Presumption, In exiguo quandoque cespite latet lepus: and many pretious stones, thoughe in quantitie small yet in qualitie and valewe are esteemed for great. The first, for a good familiar and sensible Letter, sure liketh me verye well, and gy∣ueth some hope of good mettall in the Author, in whome I knowe myselfe to be very good partes otherwise. But shewe me, or Immerito, two Englyshe Letters in Printe, in all pointes equall to the other twoo, both for the mat∣ter it selfe, and also for the manner of handling, and saye, wee neuer sawe good Englishe Letter in our liues. And yet I am credibly certified by the foresaide faithfull and honest friende, that himselfe hathe written manye of the same stampe bothe to Courtiers and others, and some of them dis∣coursing vppon matter of great waight and importance, wherein he is said, to be fully as sufficient and hable, as in these scholerly pointes of Learning. The whiche Letters and Discourses I would very gladly see in Writing, but more gladly in Printe, if it might be obtayned. And at this time to speake my conscience in a worde of these two following, I esteeme them for twoo of the rarest, and finest Treaties, as wel for ingenious deuising, as also for sig∣nificant vttering, & cleanly conueying of his matter, that euer I read in this Tongue: and I hartily thanke God for bestowing vppon vs some such pro∣per and hable men with their penne, as I hartily thanke the Author him∣selfe, for vsing his pleasaunte, and witty Talente, with so muche discretion,
and with so little harme, contrarye to the veine of moste, whych haue thys singular conceyted grace in writing. If they had bene of their owne set∣ting forth, I graunt you they might haue beene more curious, but beeyng so well, and so sufficiently done, as they are, in my simple iudgement, and hauing so many notable things in them, togither with so greate varietie of Learning, worth the reading, to pleasure you, and to helpe to garnish our Tongue, I feare their displeasre the lesse. And yet, if they thinke I haue made them a faulte, in not making them priuy to the Publication: I shall be alwayes readye to make them the beste amende  can, any other friendly waye. Surely, I wishe them bothe hartilye wel in the Lord, and betake you and them to his mer∣cifull gouernemente, hoping, that he will at his pleasure conuerte suche good and diuine gifts as these, to the setting out of his own glory, and the benefite of his Churche. This XIX. of Iune. 1580. Your, and their vnfayned friend, in the Lorde.
Three proper wittie fami∣liar Letters, lately passed be∣tvvene tvvo Vniuersitie men, tou∣ching the Earthquake in April last, and our English reformed Versifying. To my long approoued and singular good frende, Master G. H. GOod Master H. I doubt not but you haue some great important matter in hande, which al this while restraineth youre Penne, and wonted readinesse in prouoking me vnto that, wherein your selfe nowe faulte. If there bée a∣ny such thing in hatching, I pray you hartily, lette vs knowe, before al the worlde sée it. But if happly you dwell altogither in Iustini∣ans Courte, and giue your selfe to be deuoured of secreate Studies, as of all likelyhood you doe: yet at least imparte some your olde, or newe, Latine, or Englishe, Eloquent and Gallant Poesies to vs, from whose eyes, you saye, you kéepe in a manner nothing hidden. Little newes is here stirred but that olde greate matter still depending. His Honoure neuer better. I thinke the Earthquake was also there wyth you (which I would gladly learne) as it was here with vs: ouerthrowing diuers old buildings, and péeces of Churches. Sure verye straunge to be hearde of in these Countries, and yet I heare some saye (I knowe not howe truely) that they
haue knowne the like before in their dayes. Sed quid vobis vi∣detur magnis Philosophis? I like your late Englishe Hexame∣ters so excéedingly well, that I also nure my Penne some∣time in that kinde: whyche I fynd indéede, as I haue heard you often defende in worde, neither so harde, nor so harshe, that it will easily and fairely, yéelde it selfe to oure Moother tongue. For the onely, or chiefest hardnesse, whych seemeth, is in the Accente: whyche sometime gapeth, and as it were yawneth ilfauouredly, comming shorte of that it should, and sometime excéeding the measure of the Number, as in Car∣penter, the middle sillable being vsed shorte in speache, when it shall be read long in Uerse, séemeth like a lame Gosling, that draweth one legge after hir: and Heauen, béeing vsed shorte as one sillable, when it is in Uerse, stretched out with a Diastole, is like a lame Dogge that holdes vp one legge. But it is to be wonne with Custome, and rough words must be subdued with Use. For, why a Gods name may not we, as else the Gróekes, haue the kingdome of oure owne Lan∣guage, and measure our Accentes, by the sounde, reseruing the Quantitie to the Uerse? Loe here I let you sée my olde vse of toying in Rymes, turned into your artificial straight∣nesse of Uerse, by this Tetrasticon. I beséech you tell me your fancie, without parcialitie. See yee the blindefoulded pretie God, that feathered Archer, Of Louers Miseries which maketh his bloodie Game? Wote ye why, his Moother with a Veale hath coouered his Face? Trust me, least he my Looue happely chaunce to beholde. Séeme they comparable to those two, which I translated you ex tempore in bed, the last time we lay togither in West∣minster? That which I eate, did I ioy, and that which I greedily gorged, As for those many goodly matters leaft I for others. I would hartily wish, you would either send me the Rules and Pecepts of Arte, which you obserue in Quantities, or else followe mine, that M. Philip Sidney gaue me, being the very same which M. Drant deuised, but enlarged with M.
Sidneys own iudgement, and augmented with my Obserua∣tions, that we might both accorde and agrée in one: leaste we ouerthrowe one an other, and be ouerthrown of the rest. Truste me, you will hardly beléeue what greate good liking and estimation Maister Dyer had of youre Satyricall Verses, and I, since the viewe thereof, hauing before of my selfe had speciall liking of Englishe Versifying, am euen nowe aboute to giue you some token, what, and howe well therein I am able to doe: or, to tell you trueth, I minde shortely at con∣uenient leysure, to sette forth a Booke in this kinde, whyche I entitle, Epithalamion Thamesis, whyche Booke I dare vndertake wil be very profitable for the knowledge, and rare for the Inuention, and manner of handling. For in setting forth the marriage of the Thames: I shewe his first begin∣ning, and offspring, and all the Countrey, that he passeh thorough, and also describe all the Riuers throughout En∣glande, whyche came to this Wedding, and their righte na∣mes, and right passage, &c. A worke beléeue me, of much labour, wherein notwithstanding Master Holinshed hath muche furthered and aduantaged me, who therein hath be∣stowed singular paines, in searching oute their firste heades, and sourses: and also in tracing, and dogging oute all their Course, til they fall into the Sea, O Tite, siquid, ego, Ecquid erit pretij? But of that more hereafter. Nowe, my Dreames, and dying Pellicane, being fully finished (as I partelye signi∣fied in my laste Letters) and presentlye to bée imprinted, I wil in haude forthwith with my Fary Queene, whyche I praye you hartily send me with al expedition: and your frend∣ly Letters, and long expected Iudgement wythal, whyche let not be shorte, but in all pointes suche, as you ordinarilye vse, and I extraordinarily desire. Multum vale. Westminster. Quarto Nona Aprilis 1580. Sed, amabò te, Meum Corculum ti∣bi se ex animo commendat plurimùm: iamdiu mirata, te nihil ad li∣teras suas responsi dedisse. Vide queso, ne id tibi Capitale sit: Mihi
certè quidem erit, neq tibi hercle impunè, vt opinor, Ierum vale, & qum voles saepè. Yours alwayes to commaunde IMMERITO. Postscripte. I take best my Dreames shoulde come forth alone, being growen by meanes of the Glsse, (rūning continually in ma∣ner of a Paraphrase) full as great as my Calendar. Therin be some things excellently, and many things wittily discour∣sed of E. K. and the Pictures so singularly set forth, and pur∣trayed, as if Michael Angelo were there, he could (I think) nor amende the best, nor reprehende the worst. I know you woulde lyke them passing wel. Of my Stemmata Dudleiana, and especially of the sundry Apostrophes therein, addressed you knowe to whome, muste more aduisement be had, than so lightly to sende them abroade: howbeit, trust me (though I doe neuer very well,) yet in my owne fancie, I neuer dyd better: Veruntamen te sequor solùm: nunquam verò assequar.
A Pleasant and pitthy fami∣liar discourse, of the Earthquake in Aprill last. To my loouing frende, M. Immerito. SIgnor Immerito, after as many gentle Godmorrowes, as your self, and your swéete Harte listeth: May it please your Maistershippe to dispense with a poore Oratour of yours, for breaking one principall graund Rule of our olde inuiolable Rules of Rhetorick, in she∣wing himselfe somewhat too pleasura∣bly disposed in a sad matter: (of purpose, to méete with A coople of shrewde wittie new marryed Gentlewomen, which were more Inquisitiue, than Capable of Natures works) I will report you a prettie conceited discourse, that I had with them no longer agoe, than yesternight, in a Gentlemans house, here in Essex. Where being in the company of cer∣taine curteous Gentlemen, and those two Gentlewomen, it was my chaunce to be well occupyed, I warrant you, at Cardes, (which I dare saye I scarcely handled a whole twelue moonth before) at that very instant, that the Earth vnder vs quaked, and the house shaked aboue: besides the moouing, and ratling of the Table, and fourmes, where wée sat. Where vpon, the two Gentlewomen hauing continual∣ly béene wrangling with all the rest, and especially with my selfe, and euen at that same very moment, making a great
loude noyse, and much a doo: Good Lorde, quoth I, is it not woonderful straunge that the delicate voyces of two so prop∣per fine Gentlewoomen, shoulde make such a suddayne ter∣rible Earthquake? Imagining in good fayth, nothing in the worlde lesse, than that it shoulde be any Earthquake in déede, and imputing that shaking to the suddayne sturring, and remoouing of some cumberous thing or other, in the vp∣per Chamber ouer our Heades: which onely in effect most of vs noted, scarcely perceyuing the rest, béeing so closely and eagerly set at our game, and some of vs taking on, as they did. But beholde, all on the suddayne thre commeth stumbling into the Parlour, the Gentleman of the house, somewhat straungely affrighted, and in a manner all agast, and telleth vs, as well as his Head and Tongue woulde giue him leaue, what a woonderous violent motion, and shaking there was of all things in his Hall: sensibly and visibly séene, as well of his owne selfe, as of many of his Seruauntes, and Neighbours there. I straite wayes be∣ginnyng to thinke somewhat more sriously of the matter: Then I pray you, good Syr, quoth I, send presently one of your seruauntes farther into the Towne, to enquire, if the like hth happened there, as most likely is, and then must it néedes be some Earthquake. Whereat the good fearefull Gentleman being a little recomforted, (as misdoubting, and dreading before, I knowe not what in his owne House, as many others did) and immediately dispatching his man into the Towne, wée had by and by certayne woord, that it was geerall ouer all the Towne, and within lesse than a quarter of an howre after, that the very like be happened the next Towne too, being a farre greater and goodlyer Towne. The Gentlewoomens hartes nothing acquaynted with any such Accidentes, were maruellously daunted: and they, that immediately before were so eagerly, and gréedily praying on vs, began nowe forsooth, very demurely, and deuoutely to pray vnto God, and the one especially, that was euen nowe in the House toppe, I beséeche yu hartily quoth shée,
let vs leaue off playing, and fall a praying. By my truely, I was neuer so scared in my lyfe, Me thinkes it maruellous straunge. What good Parteer? Cannot you pray to your selfe, quoth one of the Gentlemen, but all the House must heare you, and ring Allin to our Ladyes Mattins? I sée woo∣men are euery way vhement, and affectionate. Your selfe was liker euen nowe, to make a fraye, than to pray: and will you nowe néedes in all hast bée on both your knées? Let vs, and you say it, first dispute the matter, what daunger, and terror it carryeth with it. God be praysed, it is already cea∣sed, and héere be some present, that are able cunningly, and clearkly to argue the case. I beséeche you master, or my∣stresse, your zealous and duoute Passion a while. And with that turning to me, and smiling a little at the first: Nowe I pray you, Master H. what say you Philosophers, quoth he, to this suddayne Earthquake? May there not be some sensible Naturall cause therof, in the concauities of the Earth it self, as some forcible and violent Eruption of wynde, or the like? Yes no doubt, sir, may there, quoth I, as well, as an Intel∣ligible Supernaturall: and peraduenture the great aboun∣daunce and superfluitie of waters, that fell shortly after Michaelmas last, béeyng not as yet dryed, or drawen vp with the heate of the Sunne, which hath not yet recouered his full attractiue strength and power, might minister some occasion threof, as might easily be discoursed by Naturall Philosophie, in what sorte the poores, and ventes, and crannies of the Earth being so stopped, and fylled vp euery where with moysture, that the windie Exhaltations, and Uapors, pent vp as it were in the bowels thereof, could not otherwise get out, and ascende to their Naturall Originall place. But the Termes of Arte, and verye Natures of things themselues so vtterly vnknowen, as they are to most héere, it were a péece of woorke to laye open the Reason to euery ons Capacitie. I know well, it is we that you meane, quoth one of ye Gen∣tlewomen (whom for distinction sake, and bicause I imagine
they would be loath to be named, I will hereafter call, My∣stresse Inquisitiua, and the other, Madame Incredula:) now I beséeche you, learned Syr, try our wittes a little, and let vs heare a péece of your déepe Uniuersitie Cunning. Séeing you Gentlewomen will allgates haue it so, with a good will, quoth I: and then forsooth, very solemnly pawsing a whyle, most grauely, and doctorally procéeded, as followeth. The Earth you knowe, is a mightie great huge body, and consisteth of many diuers, and contrarie members, & vaines, and arteries, and concauiies, whrein to auoide the absur∣ditie of Vacuum, most necessarily be very great store of sub∣stantiall matter, and sundry Accidentall humours, & fumes, and spirites, either good, or bad, or mixte. Good they cannot possibly all be, whereout is ingendred so much bad, as name∣ly so many poysonfull, and venemous Hearbes, and Beastes, besides a thousand infectiue, and contagious thinges else. If they be bad, bad you must néedes graunt is subiect to bad, and then can there not, I warant you, want an Obiect, for bad to worke vpon. If mixt, which séemeth most probable, yet is it impossible, that there should be such an equall, and proportionable Temperature, in all, and singular repecte, but sometime the Euill (in the diuels name,) will as it were interchaungeably haue his naturall Predominaunt Course, and issue one way, or other. Which euill working vehement∣ly in the partes, and malitiously encountering the good, for∣cibly tosseh, and cruelly disturbeth the whole: Which con∣flict indureth so long, and is fostred with aboundaunce of cor∣rupt putrified Humors, and ylfauoured grosse infected mat∣ter, that it must néedes (as well, or rather as ill, as in mens and womens bodyes) brust out in the ende into one perillous disease or other, and sometime, for want of Naturall voyding such feerous, and flatuous Spirites, as lurke within, into such a violent chill shiuering shaking Ague, as euen nowe you sée the Earth haue. Which Ague, or rather euery fitte thereof, we schollers call grossely, and homely, Terrae motus, a moouing, or sturring of the Earth, you Gentlewmen, that
be learned, somewhat more finely, and daintily, Terr metus, a feare, and agony of the Earth: we being onely mooued, and not terrified, you being onely in a manner terrified, & scarce∣ly mooued therewith. Nowe here, (and it please you) lyeth the poynt, and quidditie of the controursie, whether our Motus, or your Metus, be the better, & more consonant to the Princi∣ples and Maximes of Philosophy? the one being manly, and deuoyde of dreade, the other woomannish, and most woully quiuering, and shiuering for very feare. In sooth, I vse not to dissemble with Gentlewoomen: I am slatly of Opinion, the Earth whereof man was immediately made, and not wooman, is in all proportions and similitudes liker vs than you, and when it fortuneth to be distempred, and disseasd, either in part, or in whole, I am prsuadd, and I beléue Reason, and Philosophy will beare me out in it, it only moo∣ueth with the very impulsiue force of the malady, and not trembleth, or quakth for dastardly feare. Nowe, I beséeche you, what thinke ye, Gentlewomen, by this Reason? Reason, quoth Madame Incredula: By my truly, I can neither picke out Rime, nor Reason, out of any thing I haue hearde yet. And yet me thinks all should be Gospell, that commeth from you Doctors of Cambridge. But I sée well, all is not Gould, that glistreth. In déede, quoth Mistresse Inquisitiua, héere is much adooe, I trowe, and little helpe. But it pleaseh Master H. (to delight himselfe, and these Gentlemen) to tell vs a trim goodly Tale of Ro∣binhood, I knowe not what. Or suer if this be Gospell, I dowte, I am not in a good beléefe. Trust me truly, Syr your Eloquence farre passth my Itelligence. Did I not tell you aforehand, quoh I, as muche? And yet would you néedes presume of your Capacities in such profound mysteries of Philosophie, and Priuitis of Nature, as these be? The very thinking whereof, (vnlesse happily it be per fidem implicitam, in beléeuing, as the learned beléeue, And saying, It is so, by∣cause it is so) is nighe enough, to caste you both into a fitte, or two, of a daungerous shaking feauer, vnlesse you presently
séeke some remedie to preuent it. And in earnest, if ye wyll giue me leaue, vpon that small skill I haue in Extrinsecall, and Intrinsecall Physiognomie, & so foorth, I will wager all the money in my poore purse to a pottle of Hyppocrase, you shall both this night, within somwhat lesse than two howers and a halfe, after ye be layed, Dreame of terrible straunge Agues, and Agonyes as well in your owne prettie bodyes, as i the mightie great body of the Earth. You are very me∣rily disposed, God be praysed, quoth Mistresse Inquisitiua, I am glad to sée you so pleasurable. No doubt, but you are mar∣uellous priuie to our dreames. But I pray you now in a lit∣tle good earnest, doo you Schollers thinke, that it is the very reason in déede, which you spake of euen now? There be ma∣ny of vs, good Mistresse, quoth I, of that opiniō: wherin I am content to appeale to ye knowledge of these learned Gentle∣men here. And some a ne, of our finest conceited heades defend this Positiō, (a very straūge Paradox in my fancie:) yt the Earth hauing taken in too much drinke, & as it were o∣uer lauish Cups, (as it hath sensibly done in a maner all this Winter past) now staggereth & réeleth, & tottereth, this way and that way, vp & downe, like a drunken man, or wooman (when their Alebench Rhetorick cōmes vpon them, & speci∣ally the moouing Patheticall figure Pottypôsis,) & therefore in this forcible sort, you lately sawe, payneth it selfe to vomit vp againe, that so disordereth, and disquieteth the whole body within. And, forsoothe, a fewe new Contradictorie fellowes make no more of it, but a certaine vehement, and passionate néesing, or sobbing, or coffing, wherewithall they say, and as they say, say with great Physicall, and Naturall Reason, The Earth in some place, or other, euer lightly after any great, and suddayne alteration of weather, or diet, is excée∣dingly troubled, and payned, as namely this very Time of the yeare, after the extréeme pynching colde of Winter, and agayne in Autumne, after the extréeme parching heate of Sommer. But shall I tell you, Mistresse Inquisitiua? The soundest Philosophers in déede, and very déepest Secretaries
of Nature, holde, if it please you, an other Assertion, and maintayne this for truth: (which at the leastwise, of all o∣ther séemeth maruellous reasonable, and is questionlsse far∣thst off from Heresie:) That as the Earth, vppon it, hath many stately, and boysterous & fierce Creatures, as name∣ly, Men and Women, and diurs Beastes, wherof some one is in maner continually at variaunce and fewde with an o∣ther, euermore séeking to be reuenged vpō his enimie, which eft soones breaketh forth into professd and open Hostilitie: and then consequently followe set battels, & mortall warres: wherin the one partie bendeth all the force of his Ordinance and other Martiall furniture against the other: o likewise within it too, it hath also some, as vengibly and frowardly bent, as for Example, Woormes, and Moules, and Cunnyes, and such other valiauntly highminded Creatures, ye Sonnes and daughters of Mars, & Bellona that nurrish ciuill debate, and contrarie factions amongst them selues: which are sel∣dome, or neuer ended too, without miserable bloudshed, and deadly warre: and then go me their Gunnes lustly off; and the one dischargeth his Péece cotagiousy at the other: and there is suche a Generall dub a dubbe amongst them, and such horrible Thundering on euery syde, and suche a mon∣strous cruell shaking of one an others Fores and Castels, that the whole Earth agayne,  at the least, so muche of the Earth, as is ouer or néere them, is terribly hoysed, and — No more Ans, or Ifs, for Gods sake, quoth the Madame, and this be your great Doctorly lear∣ning. Wée haue euen Enoughe alreadie for our Money: and if you shoulde goe a little farther, I feare mée, you woulde make vs nyghe as unning as your selfe: and that woulde bée a great disgrace o the Uniuersii. Not a white, gentle Madame, quoth I, there be of vs, that haue greater store in our bowgets, than we can well occupie our selues, and therefore we are glad as you sée, when by the fa∣uourable, & gratious aspect of sone blssed Planet, and spe∣cially our Mercury, or your Venus, it is our good Fortune,
to lighte on such good friendes, as you, and some other good Gentle woomen be, that take pleasure, & comfort in such good things. Wherat Mistresse Inquisitiua, laughing right out, and beginning to demaunde I know not what, (me thought, shée made, as if it shoulde haue béen some goodly plausible Iest, wherat shée is, and takes her selfe prettily good:) Well, well, Master H. quoth the Gentleman of the house, now you haue playde your part so cunningly with the Gentlewoomen, (as I warrant you shall be remembred of Inquisitiua when you are gone, and may happely forget her: which I hope, Mistresse Incredula will do sometyme too, by hir leaue:) I pray you in earnest, let vs men learne some thing of you too: and especially I would gladly heare your Iudgement, and resolution, whether you counte of Earthquakes, as Natu∣rall, or Supernaturall motions. But the shorter, all the better. To whom I made answere, in effect, as followeth: Master Hs. short, but sharpe, and learned Iudgement of Earthquakes. TRuely Syr, vnder correction, and in my fancie: The Earthquakes themselues I would saye are Naturall as I veryly beléeue the Internall Causes there of, are: I meane those two Causes, which the Logicians call, the Materiall, and the Formall Marr, the Exterll auses, which are the Efficient and Finall, I take rather of the two, to be suprnaturall. I must rae a little leae to lye open the matter. The teriall Cause of Earthquakes, (as was superfi∣cially ouche in the begining of our speache, and is suffici∣ently prooed by Aristotle in ye seconde Booke of his Meteor,) is no doubt great aboundance of wynde, or stoare of gros and y s, and spirites, fast shut vp, & as a man would saye, emprysoned in the Caues, and Dangens of the Earth
which winde, or vapors, séeking to be set at libertie, and to get them home to their Naturall lodgings, in a great fume, violently rush out, and as it were, breake prison, which for∣cible Eruption, and strong breath, causeth an Earthquake. As is excellently, and very liuely expressed of Ouid, as I re∣member, thus: Vis fera ventorum caecis inclusa cauernis, Exspirare aliquò cupiens, luctata{que} frustra Liberiore fru coelo, cùm carcere Rima Nulla foret, toto nec peruia flatibus esset, Extentam tumefecit humum, ceu spiritus oris, Tendere vesicam solet, and so foorth. The formall Cause, is nothing but the very manner of this same Motion, and shaking of the Earth without: and the violent kinde of striuing, and wrastling of the windes, and Exhalations within: which is, and must néedes be done in this, or that sort, after one fashion, or other. Nowe, syr, touching the other two Causes, which I named Externall: The first immediate Efficient, out of all Question, is God himselfe, the Creatour, and Continuer, and Corrector of Na∣ture, and therefore Supernaturall: whose onely voyce car∣rieth such a reuerend and terrible Maiestie with it, that the very Earth againe, and highest Mountaines quake & trem∣ble at the sounde and noyse thereof: the text is rife in euery mans mouth: Locutus est Dominus & contremuit Terra: how∣beit, it is not to be gainesayd, that is holden of all the aunci∣ent Naturall Philosophers, and Astronomers, for the princi∣pall, or rather sole Efficient, that the Influence, and heate of the Sunne, and Starres, and specially of the thrée superior Planets, Saturne, Iupiter, and Mars, is a secondarie Instru∣mentall Efficient of such motions. The finall, not onely that the wynde shoulde recouer his Naturall place, than which a naturall reasonable man goeth no farther, no not our excellentest profoundest Philosophers themselues: but sometime also, I graunt, to testifie and de∣nounce the secrete wrathe, and indignation of God, or his
sensible punishmen vppon notorious malefactours, or, a threatning Caueat, and forewarning for the inhabitantes, or the like, depending vppon a supernaturall Efficient Cause, and tending to a supernaturall Morall End. Which End, (for that I knowe is the very poynt, where∣on you stande) albeit it be acknowledged Supernaturall and purposed, as I sayd, of a supernaturall Cause, to whom nothing at all is impossible, and that can worke supernatu∣rally, and myraculously without ordinarie meanes, and in∣feriour causes: yet neuerthelesse is, we sée, commonly perfor∣med, by the qualifying, and conforming of Nature, and Na∣turall things, to the accomplishment of his Diuine and in∣comprehensible determination. For being, as the olde Phi∣losophers call him, very Nature selfe, or as it hath pleased our later schoolemen to terme him, by way of distinction, Na∣tura Naturans, he hath all these secondarie inferiour thinges, the foure Elementes, all sensible, and vnsensible, reasonable, and vnreasonable Creatures, the whole worlde, and what soeuer is contayned in the Compas of the worlde, being the workmanship of his owne hands, and, as they call them, Na∣tura naturata, euer pliable and flexible Instrumentes at his Commaundement: to put in execution such Effectes, either ordinarie or extraordinarie, as shall séeme most requisite to his eternall Prouidence: and now in these latter dayes, very seldome, or in manner neuer worketh any thing so myracu∣lously, and extraordinarily, but it may sensibly appeare, he vseth the seruice and Ministerie of his Creatures, in the at∣chóeuing thereof. I denie not, but Earthquakes (as well as many other fearefull Accidentes in the same Number,) are terrible signes, and, as it were certaine manacing forerun∣ners, and forewarners of the great latter day; and therefore out of controuersie the more reuerendly to be considered vp∣pon: and I acknowledge considering the Euentes, and se∣queles, according to the collectiō and discourse of mans Rea∣son, they haue séemed to Prognosticate, and threaten to this, and that Citie, vtter ruyne and destruction: to such a Coun∣try,
a generall plague and pestilence: to an other place, the death of some mightie Potentate or great Prince: to some other Realme or Kingdome, some cruell imminent warres: and sundry the like dreadfull and particular Incidentes, as is notoriously euident by many olde and newe, very famous and notable Histories to that effect. Which of all other the auncient Romaines, long before the Natiuitie of Christ, did most religiously or rather superstitiously obserue, not without a number of solemne Ceremonies, and Holly∣dayes for the nonce, euer after any Earthquake, making full account of some such great rufull casualtie or other, as otherwhyles fell out in very déede: and namely, as I re∣member, the yeare Ante bellum Sociale, which was one of the lamentablest, and myserablest warres, that Italy e∣uer sawe: and Plinie, or I knowe not well who, hath such a saying: Roma nunquam tremuit, vt non futurus aliquis porten∣deretur insignis Euentus. But yet, notwithstanding, dare not I aforehand presume thus farre, or arrogate so much vnto my selfe, as to deter∣mine precisely and peremptorily of this, or euery the like sin∣gular Earthquake, to be necessarily, and vndoubtedly a su∣prnaturall, and immediate fatall Action of God, for this, or that singular intent, when as I am sure, there may be a sufficient Naturall, eyther necessarie or contingent Cause in the very Earth it selfe: and there is no question, but the selfe same Operation in Genere, or in specie, may at one tyme, procéeding of one Cause, and referred to one End, be preternaturall, or supernaturall: at another tyme, pro∣céeding of an other, or the same Cause, and referred to an other End, but Ordinarie, and Naturall. To make shorte, I cannot sée, and would gladly learne, howe a man on Earth, should be of so great authoritie, and so familiar acquaintance with God in Heauen, (vnlesse haply for the nonce he hath lately intertained some few choice singular ones of his priuie Counsell) as to be able in such specialties, without any iusti∣fyable certificate, or warrant) to reueale hys incompre∣hensible
mysteries, and definitiuely to giue entence of his Maiesties secret and inscrutable purposes. As if they had a key for all the lockes in Heauen, or as if it were as cleare and resolute a case, as the Eclipse of the Sunne, that darke∣ned all the Earth, or at the least all the Earth in those Coun∣tries, at Christes Passion, happening altogether prodigious∣ly and Metaphysically in Plenilunio, not according to the per∣petuall course of Nature, in Nouilunio: in so much that Dio∣nisius Areopagita, or some other graunde Philosopher, vpon the suddayne contemplation thereof, is reported in a certaine Patheticall Ecstasie to haue cryed out, Aut rerum Natura pa∣titur, aut Mundi machina destruetur: as my minde giueth me, some of the simpler, and vnskilfuller sort, will goe nye to doe vpon the present sight, and agony of this Earthquake. Mar∣ry the Errour I graunt, is the more tollerable, though per∣happes it be otherwhiles, (and why not euen nowe,) a very presumptuous Errour in déede, standing only vpon these two weake and deceitfull groundes, Credulitie and Ignoraunce: if so be inwardly (not onely in Externall shewe, after an Hy∣pocriticall, and Pharisaicall manner) it certainly doo vs good for our reformation, and amendment, and séeme to preach vnto vs, Paenitentiam agite, (as in some respect euery suche straunge and rare Accident may séeme:) how Ordinarie, and Naturall so euer the Cause shall appeare otherwise to the best learned: especially, as the Earthquake shall be knowne to endure a longer, or a shorter Tyme, or to be more or lesse generall, in more, or fewer places. Which two differences, touching the quantitie of Tyme, and Place, after I had a lit∣tle more fully prosecuted, alledging certaine particuler Ex∣amples thereof, howe in some places huge Castels, in some Townes, in some great and mightie Cities, in some Shires and Seigniories, and Prouinces, in some whole Countryes, and Regions haue béen perillously mooued and shaken there∣with: in one place, a long time together: in an other place, not so long, or at seuerall and parted times: in another, very short, as God be thanked here euen nowe: and finally by the
way, shewing a thirde and most notable difference of all, (as well for the present or imminent terrour and daunger, as o∣therwise) by the sundry species, and formes which Aristotle, Plinie, and other Meteorologicians haue set downe of Expe∣rience, as they haue heard, or read, or séen the earth to quake, to sturre, and hoyse vp Houses, Walles, Towers, Castelles, Churches, Minsters, whole Townes, whole Cities, whole Prouinces, without farther harme: to ruinate and ouer∣throwe, and destroy some: to yawne and gape, and open lyke a graue, and consquently to swallow vp and deuour other: and sometime also to drinke vp whole riuers, and mightie bigge running waters withall, or to chaunge and alter their common woonted course some other way: to sinke and fall downewardes: to cast out and vomitte vp either huge vaste heapes, as it were Mountaines of Earth, or large Ilandes in the mayne Sea, neuer remembred, or séen before: or great ouer flowing waters, and fountaynes: or hotte scalding sul∣phurous lakes: or burning sparkles and flames of fire: to make a horrible hissing, gnashing, ratling, or some like woon∣derfull straunge noyse, (which all Effectes are credibly re∣ported, and constantly auouched, of our most famous & best allowed Philosophers) a fewe such particularities, and di∣stinctions, compendiously and familiarly coursed ouer. The good Gentleman gaue me hartily, as appeared, very great thankes, and tolde me plainly, he neuer either read, or heard halfe so much of Earthquakes before: confessing withall, that he yéelded resolutely to my opinion: that an Earth∣quake might as well be supposed a Naturall Motion of the Earth, as a preternaturall, or supernaturall ominous worke of God: and that he thought it hard, and almost impossible, for any man, either by Philosophie, or Diuinitie, euermore to determine flatly the very certaintie either way. Which also in conclusion was the verdit, and finall resolution of the greater and sager part of the Gentlemen present: & namely of an auncient learned common Lawyer, that had béen Gra∣duate, and fellow of a Colledge in Cambridge, in Quéene
Maris dayes. Who tooke vpon him, to knit vp the matter, & as he said, determine the controuersie, with the authoritie of all the naturall Philosophers, old or newe, Heathen or Chri∣stian, Catholique or Protestant, that euer he read, or heard tell of. Thre Physickes quoth he, are in euery mans hands: they are olde enoug to speake for them selues, and wée are young enough to turne our Bookes. They that haue Eyes and Tongues, let them sée, and reade. But what say you nowe, quoth I, to the staying and quieting of the Earthe, béeing once a moouing? May it not séeme a more myracu∣lous woorke, and greater woonderment, that it shoulde so suddainely staye againe, being mooued, than that it shoulde so suddainely mooue, beyng quiet and still? Mooue or turne, or shake me a thing in lyke order, be it neuer so small, and lesse than a pynnes Head, in comparison of the great migh∣tie circuite of the Earth, and sée if you shall not haue much more a doo to staye it presently, béeing once sturred, than to sture it at the very first. Whereat the Gentleman smyling, and looking merrily on the Gentlewoomen, héere is a schoole poynt, quoth he, that by your leaues, I beléeue will poase the better scholler of you both. But is it not more than tyme, thynke ye, wée were at Supper? And if you be a hungered, Maister H. you shall thanke no body but your selfe, that haue holden vs so long with your pro∣founde and clerkly discourses, whereas our manner is to suppe at the least a long howre before this tyme. Beyng set, and newe occasion of spéeche ministered, our Supper put the Earthquake in manner out of our myndes, or at the least wise, out of our Tongues: sauing that the Gen∣tlewoomen, nowe and then pleasauntly tyhyhing betweene them selues, especially Mystresse Inquisitiua, (whose minde did still runne of the drinking, and Néesing of the Earth,) repeated here, and there, a broken péece of that, which had béen already sayde before Supper. With déepe iudgement no doubt, and to maruellous great purpose, I warrant you ater the manner of woomen Philosophers, and Diuines.
And this summarily in Effect was our yesternyghtes graue Meteorologicall Conference, touching our Earth∣quake here in the Country: which being in so many neigh∣bour Townes, and Uillages about vs, as I heare say of this morning, maketh me presuppose, the like was wyth you also at London, and elsewhere farther f. And then forsoothe, must I desire Maister Immerito, to send me with∣in a wéeke or two, some odde fresh paulting thréehalfepen∣nie Pamphlet for newes: or some Balductum Tragicall Ballet in Ryme, and without Reason, setting out the right myserable, and most woull estate of the wicked, and dam∣nable worlde at these perillous dayes, after the deuisers best manner: or whatsoeuer else shall first take some of your braue London Eldertons in the Head. In earnest, I could wishe some learned, and well aduized Uniuersitie man, woulde vndertake the matter, and bestow some paynes in déede vppon so famous and materiall an argument. The generall Nature of Earthquakes by definition, and the speciall diuersitie of them by diuision, beyng perfectly knowen: (a thing soone done) and a complete Induction of many credible and autenticall, both olde and newe, diuine and prophane, Gréeke, Lattine, and other Examples, (with discretion, and iudgement, compyled and compared togi∣ther) being considerately and exactly made, (a thing not so easily done) much no doubt myght be alledged too or fro, to terrifie or pacifie vs, more or lesse. If it appeare by generall Experience, and the foresayde Historicall In∣duction of particulars, that Earthquakes, sine omni ex∣ceptione, are ominous, and significatiue Effectes, as they saye of Comets, and carrie euer some Tragicall and horrible matter with or after them: as eyther destructi∣on of Townes and Cities, or decay of some mightie Prince, or some particular, or generall plague, warre, or the lyke, (vt supra) whatsoeuer the Materiall, or For∣mall cause be, Natural, or supernaturall, (howbeit for myne owne part I am resolued, as wel for the one, as for the other,
that these two I speake of, both Matter and Fourme, are ra∣ther Naturall in both, than otherwise) it concerneth vs, vpon the vewe of so Effectuall and substaunciall euidence, to con∣ceiue seriously, and reuerently of the other two Causes: the first, supreme Efficient, whose Omnipotent Maiestie hath nature self, and all naturall Creatures at commaundement: and the last finall, which we are to iudge of as aduisedly, and prouidently, as possibly we can, by the consideration, & com∣parison of Circumstances, the tyme when: the place where? the qualities, and dispositions of the persons, amongst whom such, and such an Ominous token is giuen. Least happily through ouer great credulitie, and rashnesse, we mistake Non causam pro causa, and sophistically be entrapped Elencho Finiū. Truely, I suppose, he had néede be an excellent Philosopher, a reasonable good Historian, a learned Diuine, a wise discrete man, and generally, such a one as our Doctor Still, & Doctor Byng are in Cambridge, that shoulde shew himselfe accor∣dingly in this argument, and to the iudgement and conten∣tation of the wisest, perfourme it exactly. My selfe remem∣ber nothing to the contrarie, either in Philosophie, or in Hi∣stories, or in Diuinitie either, why I may not safely & law∣fully subscribe to the iudgement of the noble Italian Philoso∣pher, and most famous learned Gentleman, whilest he liued, Lord of Mirandola, and Erle of Concordia, Counte Ioannes Franciscus Picus, in my opinion, very considerately, and part∣ly Philosophically, partly Theologically set downe, in the sixt Chapter of his sixt Booke, against Cogging deceitfull A∣strologers, and Southsayers, De rerum Praenotione, pro verita∣te Relligionis, contra Superstitiosas vanitates. In which Chap∣ter, (if happely you haue not read it already,) you shall finde mny, but specially these thrée notable places, most effectuall and directly pertinent to the very purpose. The first more vniuersal. Naturae opere fieri non potest, vt Ostentis, vt Monstris magni illi, seu dextri, seu sinistri euentus portendantur, & ab aliqua pendeant proxima causa, quae & futura etiam proferat. Impostura Daemonum, vt id fiat, videri potest. Sed & plaera{que} non monstrosa,
non prodigiosa per see, pro monstri tamen, & portentis, haberi pos∣sunt, & solent à quibusdam, quibus Rerum Natura non satis com∣perta est, causarum enim ignoratio, noua in re Admirationem parit. Propter quam, philosophari homines capisse, in exordys primae philo∣sophiae scribit Aristoteles. Wherein those two seuerall points, Impostura Daemonum, and Ignoratio causaerum, are no doubt mar∣uellous probable, and moste worthy bothe presentlye to bée noted nowe, and more fully to be discussed hereafter: appea∣ring vnto me the verie right principall Causes of so manye erroneous opinions, and fantasticall superstitious dreames in this, and the like behalfe. The seconde more speciall, as it were hitting the white in déede, and cleauing the Pinne in sunder. Idem in Terraemotibus etiam, quod in fulguribus, fulminibus{que} interpretandis, obseruauit Antiquitas. Cuius Reiliber, Graeco elo∣quio, nuper ad manus peruenit, in Orpheum relatus Autorem: sed perabsurdum nimis, vt quod frequentissimè fit, pro vario terrae anhe∣litu, pro ventorum vlentia, vaporum{que} conductione, (marke you that?) ex e rerum futurarum significationem petere, quorum nec effectus esse possunt, nec causa, praeterq forte mortis inferendae illis, qui fulmen exceperit, aut qui terrarum hiatu perierit. Sed nec ab eadem proxima deduci causa possunt, à qua & futurae pendeant res, vt supra deductum est. And then shortly after, the thirde, moste agréeable to the seconde, as flatlye determining on my side, and as directlye concluding the same position as may be. Nec sanè Orpheus ille, si tamen Orpheus fuit, vllam affert om∣ninò causam, cur quispiam ex terrae motibus, vrbium, hominum, re∣gionum euenta praesagire possit. Solùm va narrat arbitrio: si ter∣rae contigerit motus, nocti, si aestate, si hyeme, si urora, si interdus, quid portendatur: Quae certè, & saniore possunt abitrio refelli, & Expe∣rientiae testimonio, vt arbitror, non secus irrideri, ac supra Tagis por∣tenta irrisimus, Haruspicinae Autoris. A moste excellent sounde Iudgement in my conceit: and ful wel beséeming so Honorable and admirabl a Witte, as out of Question, Picus Mirandula had: who bing yet scarce∣ly
thirty yeres of age, for his singularitie in al kind of know∣leege, as wel diuine as prophane, was in Italy and France as Paulus Iouius reporteth, surnamed Phoenix, as the odde, and in effecte the onely singular learned man of Europe: and to make shorte: suche a one, in moste respectes, as I woulde wise nowe to be tempering with this newe notorious inci∣dent: staying my selfe in the meane while vpon this probable and reasonable Interim of his: and preferring it before al the friuolous coniecturall Allegations, and srmises, that oce counterfaite, and reasonlesse Orphes oppose to the contrarye. But, Iesu, what is all this to Master Immerito? For soothe I knowe not by what mischaunce, these miserable balde odious thrée halfe penny ellowes, alas, a company of silly béetlehea∣ded Asses, came into my minde, that wil néedes be sturring, and taking on in euerye suche rare and vnaccustomed euent, as if they sawe farther in a Milstone, than all the worlde be∣sides, whereas euerie man, that hathe but halfe an eye in his ead séeth them to be more blinde, than anye Buzzarde, or Bayarde, Scribimus indocti, docti{que} Poemata passim, and surely, as the worlde goeth nowe in Englande, rather the firste, for aught I sée, than the laste. O interim miseras Musas, & misera∣biles: Where the faulte shoulde rest, viderint Oculi, at{que} capitae Reip. Mihi quidem ist hic, ne{que} seritur admodùm, ne{que} metitur. Non valdè me nous Bibliotheca libros desiderat, sipsa, id est, quos ha∣et, veteribus contenta est. Quid plura? T vale, mi Immerito, at{que} ita tibi persuade, Aliquid esse eum, qui istorum longè est dissimilimus, quos Typographi nostri habent venales maximè. Commende mée. to thine owne good selfe, and tell thy dying Pellicane, and thy Dreames from me, I wil nowe leaue dreaming any longer of them, til with these eyes I sée them forth indéede: And then againe, I imagine your Magnificenza, will holde vs in sus∣pense as long for your nine Englishe Commoedies, and your Latine Stemmata Dudleiana: whiche two shal go for my mo∣ney, when all is done: especiallye if you woulde but bestow one seuennights pollishing and trimming vppon eyther. Whiche I praye the hartily de, for my pleasure, if not for
ther sake, nor thine owne profite. My Schollers Loue, or Reconcilement of contraries, is shrunke in the wetting: I hadde purposed to haue dispatched you a Coppie thereof, long ere this: but, no remedie, hitherto it hath alwayes gone thus with me: Some newe occasion, or other, euer carrieth me from one matter to another, & will neuer suffer me to finishe eyther one or other. And truly, Experto crede, it is as true a Uerse as euer was made, since the first Uerse, that euer was made: Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus: whiche my Anticosmopolita, thoughe it gréeue him, can beste testifye, re∣mayning still as we saye, in statu, quo, and neither an inche more forward, nor backewarde, than he was fully a twelue-month since in the Courte, at his laste attendaunce vpon my Lorde there. But the Birde that will not sing in Aprill, nor in May, maye peraduenture sing in September: and yet me thinkes, Sat cit, si sat bene, if I coulde steale but one poore fortnight, to peruse him ouer afreshe, and coppy him out a∣newe. Whiche I hope in God to compasse shortly. But I beséch you, what Newes al this while at Cambridge? That was wont to be euer one great Question. What? Det mihi Mater ipsa bonam veniam, eius vt aliqua mihi liceat Secreta, vni cuidam de eodem gremio obsequentissimo filio, reuelare: & sic pau∣ci habto. Nam aliàs fortasse pluribus: nunc non placet, non va∣cat, molestum asset. Tully, and Demosthenes nothing so much studyed, as they were wonte: Liuie, and Salust possiblye ra∣ther more than lesse: Lucian neuer so much: Aristotle muche named, but little read: Xenophon and Plato, recked amon∣gest Discoursers, and conceited Superficiall fellowes: much verball and sophisticall iangling: little ubtile and effectuall disputing: noble and royll Eloquence, the best an persuasi∣blest Eloquence: no such Orators againe, as reheadded A∣gelles: An excéeding greate difference, betwéene the coun∣tenaunces, and portes of those, that are braue and gallaunt, and of those, that are basely, or meanly apparelled: betwene the learned, and vnlearned, Tully, and Tom Tooly, in effect none at all.
Matchiauell a great man: Castilio of no small reputati∣on: Ptrach, and Boccace in euery mans mouth: Galateo and Guazz neuer so happy: ouer many acquainted with V∣nico Areno: The French and Italian when so highlye re∣garded of Scholiers? The Latine and Greeke, when so light∣ly? The Queene mother at the beginning, or ende of euery conference: many bargaines of Mounsieur: Shymeirs a no∣ble gallant fellowe: all inquisitiue after Newes, newe Boo∣kes, newe Fashions, newe Lawes, newe Officers, and some after newe Elementes, and some after newe Heauens, and Helles to. Turkishe affaires familiarly knowen: Castels builded in the Ayre: muche adoe, and little helpe: Iacke would faine be a Gentlemanne: in no age so little so muche made of, euery one highly in his owne fauour, thinking no mans penny, so good siluer as his own: Something made of Nothing, in spite of Nature: Numbers made of Ciphars, in spite of Arte: Geometricall Proportion seldome, or neuer vsed, Arithmeticall ouermuch abused: Oxen and Asses (not∣withstandiug the absurditie it séemed to Plautus) draw both togither in one, and the same Yoke: Conclusio ferè sequitur de∣teriorem partem. The Gospell taughte, not learned: Chari∣tie key colde: nothing good, but by Imputation: the Cere∣moniall Lawe, in worde abrogated: the Iudiciall in effecte disanulled: the Morall indéede abandoned: the Lighte, the Lighte in euery mans Lippes, but marke me their eyes, and tell me, if they looke not liker Howlets, or Battes, than E∣gles: as of olde Bookes, so of auntient Uertue, Honestie, Fidelitie, Equitie, newe Abridgementes: euery day freshe span newe Opinions: Heresie in Diuinitie, in Philosophie, in Humanitie, in Manners, grounded muche vpon heresay: Doctors contemned: the Text knowen of moste, vnderstood of fewe, magnified of all, practised of none: the Diuell not so hated, as the Pope: many Inuectiues, small amendment: Skill they say controlled of Will: and Goodnesse mastered of Goods: but Agent, and Patient muche alike, neither Bar∣rell greatly better Herring: No more adoe aboute Cappes
and Surplesses: Maister Cartwright nighe forgotten: The man you wot of, conformable, with his square Cappe on his rounde heade: and Non resident at pleasure: and yet Non-residents neuer better bayted, but not one the fewer, either I beléeue in Acte, or I beléeue, in Purpose. A nūber of our prea¦chers sibbe to French Souldiors, at the first, more than Men, in the end, lesse than Women. Some of our pregnantest and soonest ripe Wits, of Hermogenes mettall for al the world: Olde men and Counsailours amongst Children: Children a∣mongst Counsailours, and olde men: Not a fwe ubble fa∣ced Iani, and chaungeable Camelions: ouer-manye Claw∣backes, and Pickethanks: Réedes shaken of euerie Wind: Iackes of bothe sides: Aspen leaues: painted Sheathes, and Sepulchres: Asses in Lions skins: Dunglecockes: slipperye Eles: Dormise: I blush to thinke of some, that wéene them∣selues as fledge as the reste, being, God wot, as kallowe as the rest: euery yonker to speake of as politique, and as great a Commonwealths man as Bishoppe Gardner, or Doctor Wutton at the least: as if euerie man nowe adayes hauing the raming of his own Horoscope, were borne in decimo coeli domicilio, and had al the Wit, Wisedome, and Worshippe in the world at commaundement. Sed heus in aurem: Meministin' quod ait Varro? Omnes videmur nobis esse belli, festiui, saperdae, cùm sumus Canopi: Dauid, Vlisses, and Solon, fayned them∣selues fooles and madmen: our fooles and madmen faine thē∣selues Dauids, Vlisses, and Solons: and would goe nigh to de∣ceiue the cunningest, and best experienced Metaposcopus in a country: It is pity faire weather should euer do hurt, but I know what peace and quitnes hath done with some melan∣choly pickstrawes in the world: as good vnspoken as vnamē∣ded. And wil you néedes haue my Testimoniall of youre ole Controllers new behauior? A busy and dizy heade, a brazen forehead: a ldden braine: a woodden wit: a copper face: a sto∣ny breast: a factious and eluish hearte: a founder of nouelties: a confounder of his owne, and his friends good gifts: a mor∣ning bookeworm, an afternoone maltworm: a right Iuggler,
as ful of his sleights, wyles, fetches, casts of Legerdemaine, toyes to mocke Apes withal, odde shiftes, and knauish practi∣zes, as his skin can holde. He often telleth me, he looueth me as himselfe, but out lyar out, thou lyest abhominably in thy throate. Iesu, I had nigh hand forgotten one thing, that ywis somtime I think often ynough vpon: Many Pupils, Iacke∣mates, and Hayle fellowes wel met, with their Tutors, and by your leaue, some too, because forsooth they be Gentlemen, or great heires, or a little neater and gayer than their fello∣wes, (shall I say it for shame? beléeue me, tis too true) their very own Tutors. Ah mala Licentia, ab initio nō fuit sic. Stulta est omnis iuuenilis Doctrina, sine virili quadam Disciplina. Quasi verò pauperioribus duntaxat pueris, ac non multò magis generosa, at{que} nobili Iuuentuti conueniat, pristinae illius Institutionis, atque E∣ducationis seueritas, & ingenuae, & prudentis, & cruditae, & cum Tutoris personae, tum pupillo, etiam ipsi perquam accomodatae. Vsque∣quaque sapere oportet: id erit telum acerrimum. Caetera faerè, vt lim: Bellum inter Capita, & membra continuatum:  publicis defensa scholis, priuatis confirmata parietibus, omnibus locs ostentata, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire, hoc sciat alter. Plimi passim fit Pecunia, Pudor parui penditur: Nihili habentur Literae: Mihi crede, credendum nulli: O amice, amicus nemo. Quid tu interim? Quomodo te inquies geris? Quomodo? Optimum est ali∣ena frui insania. Video: taceo, rideo: Dixi. Et tame addam, quod ait Satyricus ille: Viendum est rectè, tum propter plurima, tum his Praecipè causis, vt linguas Mancipiorum Contemnas. E meo municipio, Postridie quàm superiores de Terraemotu ser∣mones haberentur, id est, ni fallor, Aprilis septimo, Vesperi. With as manye gentle Goodnightes, as be letters in this tedious Letter. Nosti manum tanquam tuam. POSTSCRIPTE. This Letter may only be shewed to the two odde Gentlemen you wot of. Mrry I would haue those two to see it, as sone as you may conueniently. Non multis drmio: no multis scrbo: non cupio placere multis: Alij alios numeros ladant, praeferunt, venerantur: Ego ferè apud nos, ferè apud vos Trinitatem. Verbum sapientisat: nosti caetera: & tres Charites habes ad vnguem.
A Gallant familiar Letter, containing an Ansvvere to that M. Immerito, vvith sundry proper examples, and some Precepts of our Englishe reformed Versifying. To my very friend M. Immerito. SIgnor Immerito, to passe ouer youre néedelesse complaint, wyth the sidue of your preamble (for of ye Earthquake I presuppose you haue ere this recey∣ued my goodly discourse) and withall to let my la nglishe Hexametres goe as lightye as they came: I cannot choose, but thanke and honour the good Aungell, (whether it were Gabriell or some other) that put so good a motion into the heads of those two excellent Gentlemen M. Sidney, and M. Dyer, the two very Diamondes of hir Maiesties Courte for many speciall and rare qualities: as to helpe forwarde our new famous en∣terprise for the Exchanging of Barbarous and Balductum Rymes with Artificial Uerses: the one being in manner of pure and fine Goulde, the other but counterfet, and base yl∣fauoured Copper. I doubt not but their liuelie example, and Practise, wil preuaile a thousand times more in short space, than the dead Aduertizement, and persuasion of M. Ascham to the same Effecte: whose Scholemaister notwithstanding I reuerence in respct of so learned a Motiue. I would glad∣ly be acquainted with M. Drants Prosodye, and I beséeche you, commende me to good M. Sidneys iudgement, and gentle
M. Immeritos Obseruations. I hope your nexte Ltters, which I daily exspect, wil bring me in farthr familiaritie & acquaintance with al thrée. Mine owne Rules and Precepts of Arte, I beléeue wil fal out not greatly repugnant, though peraduenture somewhat different: and yet am I not so reso∣lute, but I can be content to resrue the Coppying out and publishing therof, vntil I haue a little better consulted with my pillowe, and taken some farther aduize of Madame Spe∣rienza. In the meane, take this for a general Caueat, and say I haue reuealed one great mysterie vnto you: I am of Opi∣nion, there is no one more regular and iustifiable dirction, eyther for the assured, and infallible Certaintie of our En∣glish Artificiall Prosodye particularly, or generally to bring our Language into Arte, and to frame a Grammer or Rhe∣torike thereof: than first of all vniuersally to agrée vpon one and the same Ortographie, in all pointes conformable and proportionate to our Common Natural Prosodye: whether Sir Thomas Smithes in that respect be the most perfit, as sure¦ly it must néedes be very good: or else some other of profoun∣der Learning, & longer Experience, than Sir Thomas was, shewing by necessarie demonstration, wherin he is defectiue, wil vndertake shortely to supplie his wantes, and make him more absolute. My selfe dare not hope to hoppe after him, til I sée something or other, too, or fro, publickely and auten∣tically established, as it were by a generall Counsel, or acte of Parliament: and then peraduenture, standing vppon fir∣mer grounde, for Companie sake, I may aduenture to do as other do. Interim, credit me, I dare geue no Preceptes, nor set downe any Certaine General Arte: and yet sée my bolde∣nesse, I am not greatly squaimishe of my Particular Exam∣ples, whereas he that can but reasonably skil of the one, wil giue easily a shreude gesse at the other: considering that the one fetcheth his original and offspring from the other. In which respecte, to say troth, we Beginners haue the start, and aduauntage of our Followers, who are to frame and con∣forme both their Examples, and Precepts, according to that
President which they haue of vs: as no doubt Homer or some other in Greeke, and Ennius, or I know not who else in Latine, did preiudice, and ouerrule those, that followed them, as well for the quantities of syllables, as number of féete, and the like: their onely Examples going for current pay∣ment, and standing in steade of Lawes, and Rules with the posteritie. In so much that it séemd a sufficient warrant (as still it doth in our Common Grammer schooles) to make  in , and , in Vnus long, because the one hath , and the other, Vnus homo nobis, and so consequent∣ly in the rest. But to let this by-disputation passe, which is already so throughly discoursed and canassed of the best Philosophers, and namely Aristotle, that poynt vs, as it were with the forefinger, to the very fountaines and head springes of Artes, and Artificiall preceptes, in the Analiti∣ques, and Metaphysikes: most excellently set downe in these foure Golden Termes, the famoussest Termes to speake of in all Logique and Philosophie, : shall I nowe by the way sende you a Ianuarie git in Aprill: and as it wre shewe you a Christmas Gam∣bowlde after Easter? Were the manner so very fine, as the matter is very good, I durst presume of an other kinde of Plaudite and Gramercie, than now I will: but being as it is, I beséeche you, set parcialitie aside, and tell me your mai∣sterships fancie. A Nevv yeeres Gift to my old friend Maister George Bilchaunger: In commendation of three most precious Accidentes, Vertue, Fame, and Wealth: and finally of the fourth, A good Tongue. Vrue sendeth a man to Renowne, Fame lendeth Aboundaunce, Fame with Aboundaunce maketh a man thrise blessed and happie. So the Rewarde of Famous Vertue makes many wealthy, And the Regard of Welthie Vertue makes many blessed: O' blessed Vertue blessed Fame, blssed Aboundaunce, O t I had you hee, wih th losse of thirtie Comementes.
Nowe farewell Mistresse, whom lately I loued aboue all, These be my three bonny lasses, these be my three bonny Ladye, Not the like Trinitie againe, saue onely the Trinitie aboue all: Worship and Honour, first to the one, and then to the other. A thousaud good leaues be for euer graunted Agrippa. For squibbing and declayming against many fruitlesse Artes, and Craftes, deuisde by the Diuls and Sprites, for a torment, And for a plague to the world: as both Pandora, Prometheus, And that cursed good bad Tree, can testifie at all times. Meere Gewegawes and Bables, in comparison of these. Toyes to mock Apes, and Woodcockes, in comparison of these. Iugling castes, and knicknackes, in comparison of these. Yet behinde there is one thing, worth a prayer at all tymes, A good Tongue, in a mans Head, A good Tongue in a woomans. And what so precious matter, and foode for a good Tongue, As blessed Vertue, blessed Fame, blessed Aboundaunce. L' Enuoy. Maruell not, what I meane to send these Verses at Euensong: On Neweyeeres Euen, and Oldyeeres End, as a Memento: Trust me, I know not a ritcher Iewell, newish or oldish, Than blessed Vertue, blessed Fame blessed Abundaunce, O blessed Vertue, blessed Fame, blessed Aboundaunce, O that you had these three, with the losse of Fortie Valtes He that wisheth, you may liue to see a hundreth Good Newe yeares, euery one happier, and merrier, than other. Now to requite your Blindfolded pretie God, (wherin by the way I woulde gladly learne, why, Th, in the first, Y in the first, and thirde, H, and My, in the last, being shorte, M, alone should be made longer in the very same) Imagin me to come into a goodly Kentishe Garden of your old Lords, or some other Noble man, and spying a florishing Bay Trée there, to demaunde ex tempore, as followeth: Thinke vppon Petrarches Arbor vittoriosa, tiromfale, Onor d' Imperadori, e di Poete: and perhappes it will aduaunce the wynges of your Imagi∣nation a degrée higher: at the least if any thing can be ad∣ded
to the loftinesse of his conceite, whō gentle Mistresse Ro∣salinde, once reported to haue all the Intelligences at com∣maundement, and an other time Christened her,Segnior Pegaso. Encomium Lauri. WAat might I call this Tree? A Laurell? O bonny Laurell: Needes to thy bowes will I bow this knee, and vayle my bonetto: Who, but thou, the renowne of Prince, and Princely Poeta: Th'one for Crowne, for Garland th'other thanketh Apollo. Thrice happy Daphne: that turned was to the Bay Tree, Whom such seruaunes serue, as challenge seruice of all men. Who chiefe Lorde, and King of Kings, but th'Emperour only? And Poet of right stampe, ouerawith th'Emperour himselfe. Who, but knowes Aretyne, was he not halfe Prince to the Princes. And many a one there liues, as nobly minded at all poyntes. Now Farewell Bay Tree, very Queene, and Goddesse of all trees, Ritchest perle to the Crowne, and fayrest Floure to the Garland. Faine wod I craue, might I so presume, some farther aquaintaunce, O that I might? but I may not: woe to my destinie therefore. Trust me, not one more loyall seruaunt longes to thy Personage, But what sayes Daphne? Non omni dormio, worse lucke: Yet Farewell, Farewell, the Reward of those, that I honour: Glory to Garden: Glory to Muses: Glory to Vertue. Partim Ioui, & Palladi, Partim Apollini & Musis. But séeing I must néedes bewray my store, and set open my shoppe wyndowes, nowe I pray thée, and coniure thée by all thy amorous Regardes, and Exorcismes of Loue, call a Parliament of thy Sensible, & Intelligible powers together, & tell me, in Tom Trothes earnest, what Il fecondo, & famoso Poeta, Messer Immerito, sayth to this bolde Satyriall Libell lately deuised at the instaunce of a certayne worshipfull Hartefordshyre Gentleman, of myne olde acquayntaunce: in Gratiam quorundam Illustrium Anglofrancitalorum, hic & vbique apud nos volitantium. Agedùm verò, nosti homines, tan∣quam tuam ipsius cutem.
Speculum Tuscanismi. Since Galateo came in, and Tuscisme gan vsurpe, Vanitie aboue all: Villanie next her, Statelynes Empresse. No man, but Minion, Stowte, Lowte, Plaine, swayne, quoth a Lording: No wordes but valorous, no workes but woomanish onely. For life Magnificoes, not a beck but glorious in shew, In deede most friuolous, not a looke but Tuscanish alwayes. His criging side necke, Eyes glauncing, Fisnamie smirking With forefinger kisse, and braue embrace to the footewarde. Largebelled Kodpeasd Dublet, vnkodpeased halfe hose, Straite to the dock, like a shirte, and close to the britch, like a diueling. A little Apish Hatte, cowched fast to the pate, like an Oyster, French Camarick Ruffes, deepe with a witnesse, starched to the purpose. Euery one A per se A, his termes, and braueries in Print Delicate in speach, queynte in araye: conceited in all poyntes: In Courtly guyles, a passing singular odde man, For Gallantes a braue Myrrour, a Primerose of Honour, A Diamond for nonce, a fellowe perelesse in England. Not the like Discourser for Tongue, and head to be found out: Not the like resolute Man, for great and serious affayres, Not the like Lynx, to spie out secretes, and priuities of States. Eyed, like to Argus, Earde, like to Midas, Nosd, like to Naso, Wingd, like to Mercury, fittst of a Thousand for to be employde, This, nay more than this doth practise of Italy in one yeare. None doe I name, but some doe I know, that a peece of a tweluemonth Hath so perfited outly, and inly, both body, both soule, That none for sense, and senses, halfe matchable with them. A Vulturs smelling, Apes isting, sight of an Eagle, A spiders touching, Har haring, might o a Lyon. Compoundes of wisedome, witte, prowes, bountie, behauiour, All gallat Vertues, all qualities of body and soule: O thrice tenne hundreth thousand times blessed and happy, Blessed and happy Trauaile, Trauailer most blessed and happy. Penatibus Heruscis laribusqe nostris Inquilii: Tell me in good sooth, doth if not too euidently appeare, that this English Poet wanted but a good patterne before his yes, as it might be some delicate, and choyce elegant Poee of good M. Sidneys, or M. Dvers, (ouer very Castor, & Pollux for ach and many greater matters) when this trimme géere was in hatching: Much like some Gentlewooman, I coulde name in England, who by all Phisick and Phystognomie too, might as well haue brought forth all goodly faire children, as
they haue now some ylfauored and deformed, had they at the tyme of their Conception, had in sight, the amiable and gal∣lant beautifull Pictures of Adonis, Cupido, Ganymedes, or the like, which no doubt would haue wrought such éepe im∣pression in their fantasies, and imaginations, as their chil∣dren, and perhappes their Childrens children too, myght haue thanked them for, as long as they shall haue Tongues in their beades. But myne owne leysure fayleth me: and to say troth, I am lately become a maruellous great straunger at myne olde Mistresse Poetries, being newly entertayned, and dayly employed in our Emperour Iustinians seruice (sauing that I haue alreadie addressed a certaine pleasurable, and Morall Politique Naturall mixte deuise, to his most Honourable Lordshippe, in the same kynde, wherevnto my next Letter, if you please mée well, may perchaunce make you priuie:) marrie nowe, if it lyke you in the meane while, for varie∣tie sake, to sée howe I taske a young Brother of myne, (whom of playne Iohn, our Italian Maister hath Cristened his Picciolo Giouannibattista,) Lo here (and God will) a péece of hollydayes exercise. In the morning I gaue him this Theame out of Ouid, to translate, and varie after his best fashion. Dum fueris foelix multos numerabis Amicos, Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris. Aspicis, vt veniant d canda tecta columbae? Accipiat nullas fordid Turris Aes? His translation, or rather Paraphrase before dinner, was first this: 1. Whilst your Bearnes are fatte whilst Cosers stuffd with aboundaunce, Freendes will abound: If bearne ware bare, then adie ir a Goddes name See ye the Dooes they breede, and feede in gorgeous Houses: Scarce one Dooue doth loue to remaine in ruinous Houses, And then forsoth th  t make proofe of his facultie In Pmeters too  a  withall.
2. Whilst your Ritches abound, your friends will play the Placeoe, If your wealth doe decay, friend, like a feend, will away, Dooues light, and delight in goodly fairetyled houses: If your House be but olde. Dooue to remoue be ye bolde. And the last and largest of all, this: 3. If so be goods encrease, then dayly encreaseth a goods friend. If so be goods decrease, then straite decreaseth a goods friend. Then God night goods friend, who seldome prooueth a good friend, Giue me the goods, and giue me the good friend, take ye the goods friend. Douehouse, and Louehouse, in writing differ a letter: In deede scarcely so much, so resembleth an other an other. Tyle me the Doouehouse trimly, and gallant, where the like storehouse Fyle me the Doouehouse: leaue it vnhansome, where the like poorehouse? Looke to the Louehouse: where the resort is, there is a gaye showe: Gynne port, and mony fayle: straight sports and Companie faileth. Beléeue me, I am not to be charged with aboue one, or two of the Uerses: and a foure or fiue wordes in the rest. His afternoones Theame was borrowed out of him, whō one in your Coate, they say, is as much beholding vnto, as any Pla∣net, or Starre in Heauen is vnto the Sunne: and is quoted as your self best remember, in the Glose of your October. Giunto Alessandro ala famosa tomba Del fero Achille, suspirando disse, O fortunato, che sichiara tromba Trouasti. Within an houre, or there aboutes, he brought me these foure lust. e Hexameters, altered since not past in a worde, or two. Noble Alexander, when he came to the tombe of Achille, Sighing spake with a bigge voyce: O thrice blessed Achilles. That such a Trump, so great, so loude, so glorious hast found, As the renowned, and surprizing Archpoet Homer. Uppon the viewe whereof, Ah my Syrrha, quoth I here is a gallant exercise for you in déede: we haue had a little prettie triall of you Latin, and Italian Translation: Let me sée now I pray, what you can  your owne Tongue: And with that, reaching a certaine famous Booke, called the
newe Shephardes Calender: I turned to Willyes, and Tho∣malins Emblemes, in Marche: and bad him make them ey∣ther better, or worse in English verse. I gaue him an other howrs respite: but before I looked for him, he suddainely rushed vpon me, and gaue me his deuise, thus formally set downe in a faire péece of Paper. 1. Thomalins Embleme. Of Honny, and of Gaule in Loue there is store, The Honny is much, but the Gaule is more. 2. Willyes Embleme. To be wize, and eke to Loue, Is graunted scarce to God aboue. 3. Both combined in one. Loue is a thing more fell, than full of Gaule, than of Honny, And to be wize, and Loue, is a worke for a God, or a Goddes peere. With a small voluntarie Supplement of his owne, on the other side, in commendation of hir most gratious, and thrice excellent Maiestie: Not the like Virgin againe, in Asia, or Afric, or Europe, For Royall Vertues, for Maiestie, Bountie, Behauiour. Raptim, vti vides. In both not passing a worde, or two, corrected by mée. Something more I haue of his; partly that very day begun, and partly continued since: but yet not so perftly finished, that I dare committe the viewe, and examination thereof, to Messer Immeritoes Censure, whom after those same two incomparable and myraculous Gemini, Omni exceptione ma∣iores, I recount, and chaulk vppe in the Catalogue of our very principall Englishe Aristarchi. Howbeit, I am nigh halfe perswaded, that in tyme (siquidem vltima primis re∣spondeant) for length, bredth, and depth, it will not come far behinde your Epithalamion Thamesis: the rather, hauing so fayre a president, and patterne before his Eyes, as I war∣rant him, and he presumeth to haue of that: both Master Collinshead, and M. Hollishead too, being togither therein.
But euer, & euer, me thinkes your great Catoes, Ecquid erit pretij, and our little Catoes, Res age quae prosunt, make suche a buzzing, & ringing in my head, that I haue little ioy to ani∣mate, & encourage either you, or him to goe forward, vnlesse ye might make account of some certaine ordinarie wages, at at the leastwise haue your meate, and drinke for your dayes workes. As for my selfe, howsoeuer I haue toyed, and triled heretofore, I am nowe taught, and I trust I shall shortly learne, (no remedie, I must of méere necessi∣tie giue you ouer in the playne fielde) to employ my tra∣uayle, and tyme wholly, or chiefely on those studies and practizes, that carrie as they saye, meate in their mouth, hauing euermore their eye vppon the Title De pane lucrando, and their hand vpon their halfpenny. For, I pray now, what saith M. Cuddie, alias you know who, in the tenth AEglogue of the foresaid famous new Calender? Piers, I haue piped erst so long with payne, That all myne Oten reedes been rent, and wore, And my poore Muse hath spent hir spared store, Yet little good hath got, and much lesse gayne. Such pleasaunce makes the Grashopper so poore, And ligge so layde, when winter doth her strayne. The Dapper Dities, that I woont denize, To feede youthes fancie, and the flocking fry, Delighten much: what I the bet for thy? They han the pleasure, I a slender prize. I beae the hushe, the birdes to them doe flye, What good thereof to Cuddy can arise? But Mster Clli Cloute is not euery body, and albeit his olde Companions, Master Cuddy, & Master Hobbmoll e as little beholding to their Mistresse Poetrie, as euer you wst: yet he peraduenture, by the meanes of hir speciall fa∣uour, and some personall priuiledge, may happely liue by dy∣ing Pellicanes and purchase great landes, and Lordshippes,
with the money, which his Calendar and Dreames haue, and will affourde him. Extra iocum, I like your Dreames pas∣singly well: and the rather, bicause they sauour of that singu∣lar extraordinarie veine and inuention, whiche I euer fan∣cied moste, and in a manner admired onelye in Lucian, Pe∣trarche, Aretine, Pasquill, and all the most delicate, and fine conceited Grecians & Italians: (for the Romanes to speake of, are but verye Ciphars in this kinde:) whose chiefest en∣deuour, and drifte was, to haue nothing vulgare, but in some respecte or other, and especially in liuely Hyperbolicall Am∣plifications, rare, queint, and odde in euery pointe, and as a man woulde saye, a degrée or two at the leaste, aboue the reache, and compasse of a common Schollers capacitie. In whiche respecte notwithstanding, as well for the singulari∣tie of the manner, as the Diuinitie of the matter, I hearde once a Diuine, preferre Saint Iohns Reuelation before al the veriest Maetaphysicall Visions, & iollyest conceited Dreames or Extasies, that euer were deuised by one or other, howe ad∣mirable, or superexcellēt soeuer they séemed otherwise to the worlde. And truely I am so cofirmed in this opinion, that when I bethinke me of the verie notablest, and moste won∣derful Propheticall, or Poeticall Uision, that euer I read, or hearde, me séemeth the proportion is so vnequall, that there hardly appeareth anye semblaunce of Comparison: no more in a manner (specially for Poets) than doth betwéene the in∣comprehensible Wisedome of God, and the sensible Wit of Man. But what néedeth this digression betwéene you and me? I dare saye you wyll holde your selfe reasonably wel sa∣tisfied, if youre Dreames be but as well estéemed of in Eng∣lande, as Petrarches Visions be in Italy: whiche I assure you, is the very worst I wish you. But, sée, how I haue the Arte Memoratiue at commaundement. In good faith I had once againe nigh forgotten your Faerie Queene: howbeit by good chaunce, I haue nowe sent hir home at the laste, neither in better nor worse case, than I founde hir. And must you of necessitie haue my Iudgement of hir in déede? To be plaine,
I am voyde of al iudgement, if your Nine Comoedies, wher∣vnto in imitation of Herodotus, you giue the names of the Nine Muses, (and in one mans fansie not vnworthily) come not néerer Ariostoes Comoedies, eyther for the finenesse of plausible Elocution, or the rarenesse of Poetical Inuention, than that Eluish Queene doth to his Orlando Furioso, which notwithstanding, you wil néedes séeme to emulate, and hope to ouergo, as you flatly professed your self in one of your last Letters. Besides that you know, it hath bene the vsual pra∣ctise of the most exquisite and odde wittes in all nations, and specially in Italie, rather to shewe, and aduaunce themselues that way, than any other: as namely, those thrée notorious dyscoursing heads, Bibiena, Machiauel, and Aretine did, (to let Bembo and Ariosto pae) with the great admiration, and wonderment of the whole countrey: being in déede reputed matchable in all points, both for conceyt of Witte, and elo∣quent decyphering of matters, either with Aristophanes and Menander in Gréek, or with Plautus and Terence in Latin, or with any other, in any other tong. But I wil not stand greatly with you in your owne matters. If so be the Faerye Queene be fairer in your eie thā the Nine Muses, and Hob∣goblin runne away with the Garland rom Apollo: Marke what I saye, and yet I will not say that I thought, but there an End for this once, and fare you well, till God or some good Aungell putte you in a better minde. And yet, bicause you charge me somewhat suspitiously with an olde promise, to deliuer you of that iealousie, I am so farre from hyding mine owne matters from you, that loe, I muste a néedes be reuealing my friendes secreates, now an ho∣nest Countrey Gentleman, sometimes a Scholler: At whose request, I bestowed this pawlting ungrely Rime vpon him, to present his Maistresse withall. The parties shall bée namelesse; sauing, that the Gntlewomans true, or counter∣faite Christen name, must necessarily be bewrayed.
of one, but wolde as well in Writing, as in Speaking, haue them vsed, as Monosyllaba, thus: heavn, seaevn, a leavn, as Maister Ascham in his Toxophilus doth Yrne, common∣ly written Yron: Vp to the pap his string did he pull, his shafte to the harde yrne. Especially the difference so manifestly appearing by the Pronunciation, betwéene these twoo, a leavn a clocke and a leaven of Dowe, whyche lea—ven admitteth the Diastole, you speake of. But sée, what absurdities thys yl fa∣uoured Orthographye, or rather Pseudography, hathe ingendred: and howe one errour still bréedeth and beget∣teth an other. Haue wée not, Mooneth, for Moonthe: sithence, for since: whilest, for whilste: phantasie, for phansie: euen, for evn: Diuel, for Divl: God hys wrath, for Goddes wrath: and a thousande of the same stampe: where∣in the corrupte Orthography in the moste, hathe béene the sole, or principall cause of corrupte Prosodye in ouer many? Marry, I confesse some wordes we haue indéede, as for example, fayer, either for beautifull, or for a Marte: ayer, bothe pro acre, and pro haeredè, for we say not Heire, but plaine Aire for him to (or else Scoggins Aier were a poore iest) whi∣che are commonly, and maye indifferently be vsed eyther ways. For you shal as well, and as ordinarily heare fayer, as faire, and Aier, as Aire, and bothe alike: not onely of diuers and sundrye persons, but often of the very same: o∣therwhiles vsing the one, otherwhiles the other: and so di∣ed, or dyde: spied, or spide: tryed, or tride: fyer, or fyre: myer, or myre: wyth an infinyte companye of the same sorte: some∣time Monosyllaba, sometime Polysyllaba. To conclude both pointes in one, I dare sweare priuately to your selfe, and will defende publiquely againste any, it is neither Hersie, nor Paradox, to sette downe, and stande vppon this assertion, (notwithstanding all the Preiudices and Presumptions to the contrarie, if they were tenne times as manye mo) that it is not, either Position, or Dipthong,
or Diastole, or anye like Grammer Schoole Deuice, that doeth, or can indéede, either make long or short, or encrease, or diminish the number of Sillables, but onely the common allowed, and receiued Prosodye: taken vp by an vniuersall consent of all, and continued by a generall vse, and Custome of all. Wherein neuerthelesse I grant, after long aduise, & diligent obseruation of particulars, a certain Uniform Ana∣logie, and Concordance, being in processe of time espyed out. Sometime this, sometime that, hath béen noted by good wits in their Analyses, to fall out generally alyke? and as a man woulde saye, regularly in all, or moste wordes: as Positi∣on, Dipthong, and the like: not as firste, and essentiall cau∣ses of this, or that effecte, (here lyeth the point) but as Se∣cundarie and Accidentall Signes, of this, or that Qualitie. It is the vulgare, and naturall Mother Prosodye, that a∣lone worketh the feate, as the onely supreame Foundresse, and Reformer of Position, Dipthong, Orthographie, or whatsoeuer else: whose Affirmatiues are nothing worth, if she once conclude the Negatiue: and whose secundae intentiones muste haue their whole allowance and warrante from hir primae. And therefore in shorte, this is the verie shorte, and the long: Position neither maketh shorte, nor long in oure Tongue, but so farre as we can get hir good leaue. Perad∣uenture, vppon the diligent suruewe, and examination of Particulars, some the like Analogie and Uniformity, might be founde oute in some other respecte, that shoulde as vniuer∣sally and Canonically holde amongst vs, as Position doeth with the Latines and Gréekes. I saye, (peraduenture,) bycause, hauing not yet made anye speciall Obseruation, I dare not precisely affirme any generall certaintie: albeit I presume, so good and sensible a Tongue, as ours is, béeyng wythall so like itselfe, as it is, cannot but haue something equipollent, and counteruaileable to the beste Tongues, in some one such kinde of conformitie, or other. And this for∣sooth is all the Artificial Rules and Precepts, you are like to borrowe of one man at this time.
Sed amabo te, ad Corculi tui delicatissimas Literas, propediem, quā potero, accuratissimè: tot interim illam exquisitissimis salutibus, at{que} salutationibus impertiens, quot habet in Capitulo, capills semiaure∣os, semiargenteos, semig emmeos. Quid quaeris? Per tuam Venerem altera Rosalindula est: eam{que} non alter, sed idem ille, (tua, vt ante, bona cum gratia) copiosè amat Hobbinolus. O mea Domina Im∣merito, mea bellissima Collina Clouta, multo plus plurimùm salue, at{que} vale. You knowe my ordinarie Postscripte: you may commu∣nicate as much, or as little, as you list, of these Patcheries, and fragments, with the two Gentlemen: but there a straw, and you loue me: not with any else, friend or foe, one, or o∣ther: vnlesse haply you haue a special desire to imparte some parte hereof, to my good friend M. Daniel Rogers: whose cur∣tesies are also registred in my Marble bke. You know my meaning. Nosti manum & stylum. G.
¶ TVVO OTHER, very commendable Let∣ters, of the same mens vvri∣ting: both touching the foresaid Artificiall Versifying, and cer∣tain other Particulars: More lately deliuered vnto the Printer. IMPRINTED AT LON∣don, by H. Bynneman, dvvelling in Thames streate, neere vnto Baynardes Castell. Anno Domini. 1580. Cum gratia & priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
¶ To the VVorshipfull his very sin∣gular good friend, Maister G. H. Fellovv of Trinitie Hall in Cambridge. GOod Master G. I perceiue by your most curteous and frendly Letters your good will to be no lesse in déed, than I alwayes estéemed. In recō∣pence wherof, think I beséech you, that I wil spare neither spéech, nor wryting, nor aught else, whensoe∣uer, and wheresoeuer occasion shal be offred me: yea, I will not stay, till it be offred, but will séeke it, in al that possibly I may. And that you may perceiue how much your Counsel in al things preuaileth with me, and how alto∣gither I am ruled and ouer-ruled thereby: I am now deter∣mined to alter mine owne former purpose, and to subscribe to your aduizemēt: being notwithstāding resolued stil, to abide your farther resolution. My principal doubts are these. First, I was minded for a while to haue intermitted the vttering of my writings: leaste by ouer-much cloying their noble ea∣res, I should gather a contempt of my self, or else séme ra∣ther for gaine and commoditie to doe it, for some swéetnesse that I haue already tasted. Then also me séemeth the work too base for his excellent Lordship, being made in Honour of a priuate Personage vnknowne, which of some yl-willers might be vpbraded, not to be so worthie, as you knowe she is: or the matter not so weightie, that it should be offred to so weightie a Personage: or the like. The selfe former Title
stil liketh me well ynough, and your fine Addition  lesse. If these, and the like doubtes, maye be of importaunce in your séeming, to frustrate any parte of your aduice, I bée∣séeche you, without the leaste selfe loue of your own purpose, councell me or the beste: and the rather doe it faithullye, and carefully, for that, in all things I attribute so muche to your iudgement, that I am euermore content to adhilte mine owne determinations, in respecte thereof. And indéede for your selfe to, it sitteth with you now, to call your wits, & senses togither, (which are alwaies at call) when occasion is so fairely offered of Estimation and Preferment. For, whiles the yron is hote, it is good striking, and minds of Nobles va∣rie, as their Estates. Verùm ne quid durius. I pray you bethinke you well ereof, good Maister G. and forthwith write me those two or thrée special points and ca∣ueats for the nonce, De quibus in superioribus illis mellitissimis, longissimis{que} Litteris tuis. Your desire to heare of my late bée∣ing with hir Maiestie, muste dye in it selfe. As for the twoo worthy Gentlemen, Master Sydney, and Master Dyer, they haue me, I thanke them, in some vse of familiarity: of whom, and to whome, what speache passeth for youre credite and e∣stimation, I leaue your selfe to conceiue, hauing alwayes so well conceiued of my vnfained affection, and zeale towardes you. And nowe they haue proclaimed in their , a generall surceasing and silence of balde Rymers, and also of the verie beste to: in steade whereof, they haue by autho∣tie of their whole Senate, prescribed certaine Lawes and rules of Quantities of English sillables, for English Verse: hauing had thereof already greate practie, and drawen mée to their faction. Newe Bookes I heare of none, but only of one, that writing a certaine Booke, called The Schoole of Abuse and dedicating it to Maister Sidney, was for hys labor scorned: if at leaste it be in the goodnesse of that nature to scorne. Suche follie is it, not to regarde aforehande the inclination and qualitie of him, to whome wée dedicate oure Bookes. Suche mighte I happily incurre, entituling My
Slomber, and the other Pamphlets, vnto his honor. I meant them rather to Maister Dyer. But I am, of late, more in loue wyth my Englishe Uersifying, than with Ryming: whyche I should haue done long since, if I would thē haue followed your councell. Sed te solum iam tum suspicabar cum Aschanio sapere: nunc Aulam video egregios alere Poëtas Anglicos. Mai∣ster E. K. hartily desireth to be commended vnto your Wor∣shippe: of whome, what accompte he maketh, youre selfe shall hereafter perceiue, by hys paynefull and dutifull Uer∣ses of your selfe. Thus muche was written at Westminster yesternight: but comming this morning, béeyng the sixtéenth of October, to Mystresse Kerkes, to haue it deliuered to the Carrier, I receyued youre letter, sente me the lste wéeke: whereby I prciue you otherwhiles continue your old exercise of Uer∣sifying in English: whych glorie I had now thought shoulde haue bene onely ours héere at London, and the Court. Truste me, your Uerses I like passingly well, and enuye your hidden paines in this kinde, or rather maligne, and grudge at your selfe, that woulde not once imparte so muche to me. But once, or twice, you make a breache in Maister Drants Rules: quod tamen condonabimus tanto Poetae, tuae{que} ipsius maximae in his rebus autoritati. You shall sée when we méete in London, (whiche, when it shall be, certifye vs) howe fast I haue followed after you, in that Course: beware, leaste in time I ouertake you. Veruntamen te solùm sequar, (vt saepenu∣merò sum professus,) nunquam sanè assequar, dum viuam. And nowe requite I you with the like, not with the verye beste, but with the verye shortest, namely with a fewe Iambickes: I dare warrant, they be precisely perfect for the féete (as you can easily iudge) and varie not one inch from the Rule. I will imparte yours to Maister Sidney, and Maister Dyer, at my nexte going to the Courte. I praye you, kéepe mine close to your selfe, or your verie entire friendes, Maister Preston, Maister Still, and the reste.
Iambicum Trimetrum. VNhappie Verse, the witnesse of my vnhappi state, Make thy selfe fluttring wings of thy fast flying Thought, and fly forth vnto my Loue, whersoeuer she be: Whether lying reastlesse in heauy bedde, or else Sitting so cheerelesse at the cheerfull boorde, or else Playing alone carelesse on hir heauenlie Virginals. If in Bed, tell hir, that my eyes can take no reste: If at Boorde, tell hir, that my mouth can eate no meate: If at hir Virginals, tel hir, I can heare no mirth. Asked why? say: Waking Loue suffereth no sleepe: Say, that raging Loue dothe appall the weake stomacke: Say, that lamenting Loue marreth the Musicall. Tell hir, that hir pleasures were wonte to lull me asleepe: Tell hir, that hir beautie was wonte to feede mine eyes: Tell hir, that hir sweete Tongue was wonte to make me mirth Nowe doe I nightly waste, wanting my kindely reste: Nowe doe I dayly starue, wanting my liuely foode: Nowe doe I alwayes dye, wanting thy timely mirth. And if I waste, who will bewaile my heauy chaunce? And if I starue, who will record my cursed end? And If I dye, who will saye: this was, Immerito? I thought once agayne here to haue made an ende, with  heartie Vale, of the best fashion: but loe, an ylfauoured mys∣chaunce. My last farewell, whereof I made great accompt, and muche maruelled you shoulde make no mention thereof, I am nowe tolde, (in the Diuels name) was thorough one mans negligence quite forgotten, but shoulde nowe vndoub∣tedly haue béene sent, whether I hadde come, or no. Seing it can now be no otherwise, I pray you take all togither, wyth all their faultes: and nowe I hope, you will vouchsafe mée an answeare of the largest size, or else I tell you true, you shall bée verye déepe in my debte: notwythstandyng, thys other swéete, but shorte letter, and fine, but fewe Uerses. But I woulde rather I might yet sée youre owne good selfe, and receiue a Reciprocall farewell from your owne swet mouth.
Ad Ornatissimum virum, multis iamdiu nominibus clarissimum, G. H. Immerito sui, mox in Gallias nauigaturi, . SIc malus egregium, sic non inimicus Amicum: Sic{que} nouus veterem iubet ipse Poëta Poëtam, Saluere, ac calo post secula multa secundo Iam reducem, calo mage, quàm nunc ipse, secundo Vtier. Ecce Deus, (modò sit Deus ille, renixum Qui vocet in scelus, & iuratos perdat amores) Ecce Deus mihi clara dedit modò signa Marius, Et sua veliger lenis parat AEquora Ligno, Mox sulcanda, suas etiam pater AElus Ira Ponit, & ingentes animos Aquilnis— Cuncta vijs sic apta meis: ego solus ineptus. Nam mihi nescio quo mens saucia vulere, dudum Fluctuat ancipiti Pelago, dum Naita prram Inualidam validu rapit huc Amor, & rapit illuc. Consilijs Ratio melioribus vsa, decus{que} Immortale leui diffessa Cupidinis Arcu. Angimur hoc dubio, & portu vexamur in ipso. Magne pharetrati nunc t contemptor Amoris, (Id tibi Dij nomen precor haud impue remittant) Hos nodos exsolue, & eris mihi magnus Apollo. Spiritus ad summos, scio, te generosus Honores Exstimulat, maius{que} docet spirare Poëtam, Quàm leuis est Amor, & tamen haud leuis est Amor omnis. Ergo nihil lauds reputa aequale pernni, Prae{que} sacrosancta splendoris imagine tanti, Caetera, quae vecors, vti Numina, vulg aorat, Praedia, Amicitias, vrbana peculia, Nummos, Quae{que} placent oculis, form, spectacula, Amores Conculcare soles, vt humum, & ludibria sensus. Digna meo certè Haruejo sententia, digna
Oratore amplo, & generoso pectore, quam non Stoica formidet veterum Sapientia vinclis Sancire ternis: sapor haud amen omnibus idem. Dicitur effaeti proles facunda Laërtae, Quamlibet ignoti iactata per aequora Caeli, In{que} procelloso longùm exsul gurgite ponto, Prae tamen amplexu lachrymosae Coniugis, Ortus Caelestes Diuûm{que} thoros sprenisse beatos. Tantùm Amor, & Mulier, vel Amore potentior. Illum Tu tamen illudis: ua Magnificentia tanta est: Prae{que} subumbrata Splendoris Imagie tanti, Prae{que} illo Meritis famsis nomine parto, Caetera, quae Vecors, vti Nmina, vnlgus adorat, Praedia, Amicitias, armenta, peculia, nummos. Quae{que} placent oculis, frmas, spectacula, Amores. Quae{que} placent ori, quae{que} auribus, omnia temnis. Nae tu grande sapis, Sapor at sapienti non est: Omnis & in paruis benè qui scit de sipuisse, Saepe supercilijs palman sapientilius ufer. Ludit Aristippum mdò trïca Tura Sophorum. Mitia purpureo moderantem verb Tyranno Ludit Aristippus dictamina vana Sophorum, Quos leuis emensi male torquet Culici vmbra: Et quisquis placuisse Stude Heribus alt, Desipuisse studet, ic gratia creit ineptis. Deni{que} Laurigeris quisqùis sa tempora vittis, Insignire volet, Populo{que} placere faenti, Desipere insanus discit, turpem{que} pudend Stultitia laudem quaerit. Pter Ennius vnu Dictus in innumeris sapiens: laudatur at ips Carmina vesano fudisse liquentio vino. Nec tu pace tua, nostri Cato Maxime sacli, Nomen honorati sacrum mreare Poëlae, Quantamuis illustre canas, & nobile Carmen, Ni stultire velis, sic Sultorum omnia plena. Tuta sed in medio superest via gurgite, nm Qui
Nec reliquis nimiùm vlt desipuisse vidri, Nec sapuisse nimis, Sapientem dixeris vnum. Hinc te merserit vndae, illinc combusserit Ignis. Nec tu delicis nimis aspernare fluentes, Nec sero Dominam, venientm in vota, nec Auru Si sapis, ablatum, (Curijs ea, Fabricis{que} Linque viris miseris miseranda Sophismata: quondam Grande sui decus ij, nostri sed dedecus aeui:) Nec sectare nimis. Res vtra{que} crimine plena. Hoc bene qui callet, (si quis tamen hoc bene callet) Scribe, vel invito sapientem hunc Socrae solum. Vis facit vna pos: Instos facit altera: & altra Egregiè cordata, ac fortia pectora: verùm Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci Dij mihi, dulce diu dederant: verùm vtile nun{que}: Vtile nunc etiam, ô vtinam quo{que} dulce dedissent. Dij mihi, (quippe Dijs aeqialia maxima paris) Ni nimis inuidant mortabus esse tis, Dulce sil tribuisse queant, simul vtile: tanta Sed Fortuna tua est: pariter quae{que} vtile, quae{que} Dulce dat ad placitum: saeuo nos sydere nati Quaesitum imus eam per inhospita Caucasa longè Per{que} Pyremos montes, Babilona{que} turpem, Quòd si quaesitum nec ibi invenerimus, inges AEquor inexhaustis permensi erroribus, vltrâ Fluctibus in medijs scij quaeremus Vlyssis. Passibus inde Deam fessis comit abimur aegram, Nobile cui furtum qurenti defuit orbis. Nam{que} sin pudet in patrio, tenebris{que} pudendis Non nimis ingenio Iuuonem infoelice, virentes, Officijs frustra deperdere vilibus Annos, Frugibus & vacuas speratis cernere spicas. Ibimus ergo statim: (quis eunti fausta precetur?) Et pede Clibosas fsso calcabimus Alpes. Qis dabit interea condit a rore Britanno, Quis tibi Litterulas? quis carmen amore petulcum
Musa sub Obalij desueta cacmine monti, Flebit inexhausto tam long a silentia planctu, Lugbit{que} sacrum lachrymis Helicona tacentem. Harueius{que} bonus, (charus licet omnibus idem, Id{que} suo merito, prope suauior omnibus vnus) Angelus & Gabriel, (qumuis coitatus amicis Innumeris, geniûm{que} choro stipatus amaeno Immerito tamen vnum absentem saepe requiret, Optbit{que}, Vtinam meus hî Edmundus adesset, Qui noua scripsisset, nec Amores conticuiss, Ipse sos, & saepe animo, verbis{que} benignis Fausta precaretur: Deus illum alquando reducat &c. Plura vellem per Chites, sed non lict per Musas. Vale, Vale plurimù, Mi amabilissime Harucie, meo curdi, meorum omnium longè charissime. I was minded also to haue sent you some English verses: or Rymes, for a farewell: but by my Troth, I haue no spare time in the world, to thinke on such Toyes, that you knowe will demaund a fréer head, than mine is presently. I beséeche you by all your Curtesies, and Graces, let me be answered, ere I goe: which will be, (I hope, I feare, I thinke) the next wéeke, if I can be dispachéd of my Lorde. I goe thither, as sent by him, and maintained most what of him: and there am to employ my time, my body, my minde, to his Honours seruice. Thus with many superhartie Commendations, and Recommendations to your selfe, and all my friendes with you, I ende my last Farewell, not thinking any more to write vnto you, before I goe: and withall committing to your faithull Credence the eternall Memorie of our euer∣lasting friendship, the inialable Memorie of our vnspotted friendshippe, the sacred Memorie of our vowed friendship: which I beseech you Continue with vsuall writings, as you may, and of all things let me heare some Newes from you. As gentle M. Sidney, I thanke his good Worship, hath required of me, and so promised to doe againe. Qui onet, vt
facias, quod iam facis, you knowe the rest. You may alwayes send them most safely to me by Mistresse Kerke, and by none other. So once againe, and yet once more Farewell most hartily, mine owne good Master H. and loue me, as I loue you, and thinke vpon poore Immerito, as he thinketh vppon you. Leycester House. This .5. of October. 2579. Per mare, per terras, Viuus, mortuus{que}, Tuus Immerito. To my verie Friende, M. Immerito. LIberalissimo Signor Immerito, in good soothe my poore Store∣house will presently affourd me nathing, either to recom∣pence, or counteruaile your gentle Masterships, long, large, lauish, Luxurious, Laxatiue Letters withall, (now a Gods name, when did I euer in my life, hunt the Letter before? but, belike, theres no remedie, I must néedes be euen with you once in my dayes,) but only for soothe, a fewe Millions of Recommendations, and a running Coppie of the Uerses en∣closed. Which Uerses, (extra iocum) are so well done in Lat∣tin by two Doctors, and so well Translated into English by one odde Gentleman, and generally so well allowed of all, that chaunced to haue the perusing of them: that trust mée, G.H. was at the first hardly intreated, to shame himselfe, and truly, now blusheth, to sée the irst Letters of his name, stande so néere their Names, as of necessitie they must. You know yt Greeke prouerb, , and many colours, (as in a manner euery thing else) that
seuerally by themselues, séeme reasonably good, and freshe y∣nough, beyng compared, and ouermatched wyth their bet∣ters, are maruellously disgraced, and as it were, dashed quite oute of Countenaunce. I am at this instn, very busilye, and hotly employed in certaine greate and serius affayres: whereof, notwithstanding (for all youre vowed, and long ex∣primented scre) you are not like to heare a worde more at the moste, till I my selfe sée a World more at the leaste. And therefore, for this once I beséech you (notwithstanding your greate expectation of I knowe not what Uolumes for an aunsweare) content your good selfe, with these Presentes, (pardon me, I came lately out of a Scriueners shop) and in liu of many gentle Farewels, & goodly God be wyes, at your departure: gyue me once againe leaue, to playe the Coun∣aylour a while, if it be but to iustifie your liberall Master∣shippes, Nostri Cato maxime sacli: and I conure you by the Contents of the Uerses, and Rymes nclosed, and by al th good, and bad Spirites, that attende vpon the Authors them∣selues, immediatly vpon the contemplation thereof, to aban∣don all other fooleries, and honour Uertue, the onely immor∣tall and suruiuing Accident amongst so manye mortall, and euer-perishing Substaunces. As I strongly presume, so good a Terte, so clearkly handeled, by thrée so famous Do∣ctours, as olde Maister Wythipole, and the other two bée, my easily, and will fully perswade you, howsoeuer you tush at the fourths vnsutable Paraphrase. But a worde or two, to your large, lauishe, laxatiue Letters, and then for thys time, Adieu. Of my credite, youre doubtes are not so re∣doubted, as youre selfe uer suspiciously imagine: as I pur∣pose shortely to aduize you more at large. Your hotte y∣ron, is so hotte, that it striketh mée to the hearte, I dar not come neare to strike it: The Tyde tarryeth no mann, but manye a good manne is fayne to tarry the Tyde. And I knowe some, whyche coulde be content to bée theyr own Caruers, that are gladde to thanke other for theyr courte∣sie:
But Beggars, they saye, muste be no choosers. Your new-founded  I honoure more, than you will or can suppose: and make greater accompte of the twoo worthy Gentlemenne, than of two hundreth Dionisij Areopagitae, or the verye notablest Senatours, that euer A∣thens dydde affourde of that number. Your Englishe Trimetra I lyke better, than perhappes you will easily beléeue: and am to requite them wyth bet∣ter, or worse, at more conuenient leysure. Marry, you must pardon me, I fine not your warrant so sufficiently good, and substauntiall in Lawe, that it can persuade me, they are all, so precisely perfect for the Féete, as your selfe ouer-par∣tially wéene, and ouer-confidently auouche: especiallye the thirde, whyche hathe a foote more than a Lowce (a wonde∣rous deformitie in a righte and pure Senarie) and the sixte, whiche is also in the same Predicament, vnlesse happly one of the féete be sawed off wyth a payre of Syncopes: and then shoulde the Orthographie haue testified so muche: and in steade of Haunli Virginls, you should hae written, Heanl Virgnls: & Virgnls againe in the ninth, & should hae made a Curtoll of Immrt in the laste: being all notwithstandyng vsuall, and tollerable ynoughe, in a mixte, and licentious Iambicke: and of two euilles, better (no doubte) the fyrste, than the laste: a thyrde superfluous sillable, thā a dull Spon∣dee. Then me thinketh, you haue in my fancie somwhat too many Spondees beside: and whereas Trochee sometyme presumeth in the firste place, as namely in the second Uerse, Make thy, whyche thy, by youre Maistershippes owne autho∣ritie muste néedes be shorte, I shall be faine to supplye the office of the Arte Memoratiue, and putte you in minde of a pretty Fable in Abstemio the Italian, implying thus much, or rather thus little in effect. A certaine lame man beyng invited to a solempne Nup∣tiall Feaste, made no more adoe, but sate me hym round∣lye downe foremoste at the hyghest ende of the Table.
The Master of the feast, suddainly spying his presumption, and hansomely remoouing him from thence, placed me this haulting Gentleman belowe at the nether nd of the bourd: alledging for his defence the common verse: Sedes nulla da∣tur praeterquam sexta Trochae: and pleasantly alluding to this foote, which standing vppon two syllables, the one long, the other short, (much like, of a like, his guestes féete) is alwayes thrust downe to the last place, in a true Hexameter, and quite thrust out of doores in a pure, and iust Senarie. Nowe Syr, what thinke you I began to thinke with my selfe, when I began to reade your warrant first: so boldly, and venterous∣ly set downe in so formall, and autentique wordes, as these, Precisely perfit, and not an inch from the Rule? Ah Syrrha, and Iesu Lord, thought I, haue we at the last gotten one, of whom his olde friendes and Companions may iustly glory, In eo solùm peccat, quòd nihil peccat: and that is yet more ex∣acte, and precise in his English Comicall Iambickes, than uer M. Watson himselfe was in his Lattn Tragicall Iam∣bickes, of whom M. Ascham reporteth, that he would neuer to this day suffer his famous Absolon to come abrode, onely because Anapaestus in Locis paribus, is twice, or thrice vsed in steade of Iambus? A small fault, ywisse, and such a one in M. Aschams owne opinion, as perchaunce woulde neuer haue béene espyed, no neither in Italy, nor in Fraeùnce. But when I came to the curious scanning, and fingering of euery foote, & sllable: Lo here, quoth I, M. Watsons Anapaestu for all the worlde. A good horse, that trippeth not once in a iourney: and M. Immerito doth, but as M. Watson, & in a manner all other Iambici haue done before him: marry he might haue spared his preface, or at y• least, that same restrictiue, & streightlaced trme, Precisely, and all had béen well enough: and I assure you, of my selfe, I beléeue, no péece of a fault marked at all. But this is the Effect of warrantes, and perhappes the Er∣rour may rather procéede of his Master, M. Drantes Rule, than of himselfe. Howsoeuer it is, the matter is not great, and I alwayes was, and will euer continue of this Opinion,
Pauca multis condonanda vitia Virtutibus, especially these being no Vitia neither, in a common and licencious Iambicke. Ve∣rùm ista obiter, non quidem contradicendi animo, aut tiam corri∣gendi mihi crede: sed nostro illo Academico, pristino{que} more ratio∣cinandi. And to saye trueth, partely too, to requite your gentle courtesie in beginning to me, and noting I knowe not what breache in your gorbellyed Maisters Rules: which Rules go for good, I perceiue, and kéepe a Rule, where there be no better in presence. My selfe neither sawe them, nor heard of them before: and therefore will neither praise them, nor dis∣praise them nowe: but vppon the suruiewe of them, and far∣ther conference, (both which I desire) you shall soone heare one mans opinion too or fro. Youre selfe remember, I was wonte to haue some preiudice of the man: and I still re∣maine a fauourer of his deserued, and iust commendation. Marry in these poyntes, you knowe, Partialitie in no case, may haue a foote: and you remember mine olde Stoicall ex∣clamation Fie on childish affection, in the discoursing, and deciding of schoole matters. This I say, because you charge m with an vnknowne authoritie: which for aught I know yet, may as wel be either vnsufficient, or faultie, as other∣wise: and I dare more than halfe promise, (I dare not saye, warrant) you shall alwayes in these kinde of controuersies, inde me nighe hande answerable in mine owne defence. Re∣liqua omnia, quae de hac supersunt Anglicorum versuum ratione, in aliud tempus reseruabimus, ociosum magis. Youre Latine Fare∣well is a goodly braue yonkerly péece of work, and Goddilge yée, I am alwayes maruellously beholding vnto you, for your bountifull Titles: I hope by that time I haue béen re∣sident a yeare or twoo in Italy, I shall be better qualifyed in this kind, and more able to requite your lauishe, and mag∣nificent liberalitie that way. But to let Titles and Tittles passe, and come to the very pointe in déede, whiche so neare toucheth my lusty Trauayler to the quicke, and is one of the praedominant humors yt raigne in our cōmon Youths: Heus mi tu, bone proce, magne mulircularum amator, egregie Pamphile,
eum aliquando tandem, qui t manet, qui mulierosos omnes, qui v∣niuersam Faeministarum sectam, Respice finem. And I shal then be content to appeale to your owne learned experience, whe∣ther it be, or be not, too too true: quod dici solet àme saepe: àte ipso nonnun{que}: ab expertis omnibus quotidie: Amare amarum: Nec deus, vt perhibent, Amor est, sed amaror, & error: & quicquid in eandem solet sententiam Empiric̄s aggregari. Ac scite mihi quidē Agrippa Ouidianam illam, de Arte Amandi,  videtur correxisse, meritó{que}, de Arte Meretricandi, inscripsisse. Nec verò inepte alius, Amatores Alchumistis comparauit, au∣reos, argenteos{que} montes, at{que} fontes lepidè somniantibus, sed interim miserè immanibus Carbonum fumis propemodum occaecatis, at{que} e∣tiam suffocatis: praeter{que} celebratum illum Adami Paradisum, alium esse quendam praedicauit, stultorum quo{que} Amatorum{que} mirabilem Paradisum: illum verè, hunc phantasticè, fanatice{que} beatorum. Sed haec alias, fortassis vberiùs. Credite me, I will neuer linne bai∣tyng at you, til I haue rid you quite of this yonkerly, & wo∣manly humor. And as for your spéedy and hasty trauell: me thinks I dare stil wager al the Books & writings in my stu∣dy, which you know, I estéeme of greater value, than al the golde & siluer in my purse, or chest, that you wil not, (and yet I muste take héede, how I make my bargaine with so sub∣tile and intricate a Sophister) that you shall not, I saye, bée gone ouer Sea, for al your saying, neither the next, nor the nexte wéeke. And then peraduenture I may personally per∣forme your request, and bestowe the swéetest Farewell, vp∣on your swéetmouthed Mashippe, that so vnswéete a Tong, and so sowre a paire of Lipps can affoorde. And, thinke you I will leaue my Il Pellegrino so? No I trowe. My Lords Honor, the expectation of his friendes, his owne cre∣dite and preferment, tell me, he muste haue a moste speciall care, and good rgarde of employing his trauaile to the best. And therfore I am studying all this fortnight, to reade him suche a Lecture in Homers Odysses, and Virgils AEneads, that I dare vndertake he shall not néede any further instru∣ction, in Maister Turlers Trauayler, or Maister Zuingers
Methodus Apodemica: but in his whole trauaile abroade, and euer after at home, shall shewe himselfe as verie liuelye and absolute picture of Vlysses and AEneas. Wherof I haue the stronger hope he muste néedes proue a most capable and apt subiecte (I speake to a Logician) hauing the selfe same Goddesses and Graces attendant vpon his body and mind, that euermore guided them, & their actions: especially ye ones Minerua, and the others Venus: that is (as one Doctor ex∣poundeth it) the pollitique head, and wise gouernement of the one: and the amiable behauiour, and gratious courtesie of the other: the two verye principall, and moste singular Companions, of a right Trauailer: and as perhaps one of oure subtile Logicians woulde saye, the two inseparable, and indivisible accidents of the foresaide Subiects. De quibu ipsis, caeteris{que} omnibus artifici Apodemici instrumentis: inprimis{que} de Homerica illa, diuina{que} herba ) qua Vlissem suum Mercurius, aduersus Cyrcea & pocula, & carmina, & venena, morbos{que} omnes praemuniuit: & coram, vti spero, breui: & longè, vti soleo, copiosius: & fortasse etiam, aliquantò, quàm soleo, cum subtiliùs, tum verò Polliticè, Pragmatice{que} magis. Interim tri∣bus eris syllabis contentus, ac valebis. Trinitie Hall, stil in my Gallerie. 23. Octob. 1579. In haste. Yours, as you knowe. G. H.
Certaine Latin Verses, of the frailtie and mutabilitie of all things, sauing onely Ver∣tue: made by M. Doctor Norton, for the righ Worship, M. Thomas Sackford, Master of Requestes vnto hir Maiestie. . Th. TEmpora furtiuo morsu laniantur amaena, S Sensim florescunt, occubitura breui. A Anni vere salit, Senio mox conficiendus, C Cura, labor ditant, non adem{que} premunt? F Fallax, vel vigili studio Sapientia parta: O Oh, & magnatum gloria saepe iacet, R Res inter varias fluimus, ruimus{que} gradatim: D. Dulcia Virtutis praemia sola manent. The same paraphrastically varied by M. Doctor Gouldingam at the request of old M. Wythipoll of Ipswiche. T. TEmpora furtiuo labuntur dulcia cursu, S Subsidunt{que} breuî, quae viguere diu. A Autumno capitur, quicquid nouus educat annus: C Curta Iuuentutis gaudia, Fata secant. F Fallax Ambitio est, at{que} anxia cura tenendi, O Obscurum decus, & nomen inane Soph. R Res Fors humanas incerto turbine voluit, D. Dulcia Virtutis praemia sola manent.
Olde Maister Wythipols owne Translation. OVr merry dayes, by theeuish bit are pluckt, ad torne awy, And euery lustie growing thing, in short ti doth decay. The pleasaunt Spring times ioy, how soone it groweth olde? And wealth that gotten is with care, doth noy as much, be bolde. No wisedome had with Trauaile great, is for to trust in deede, For great Mens state we see decay, and fall downe like a weede. Thus by degrees we fleete; and sinke in worldly things full fast, But Vertues sweete and due rewardes stande sure in euery blast. The same Paraphrastically varied by Master G. H. at M. Peter Wythipolles request, for his Father. THese pleasant dayes, and Monthes, and yeares, by stelth do passe apace, And do not things, that florish most, soone fade, and lose their grace? Iesu, how soone the Spring of yeare, and Spring of youthfull rage, Is come, and gone, and ouercome, and ouergone with age? In paine is gaine, but doth not paine as much detract from health, As it doth adde vnto our store, when most we roll in wealth? Wisedome hir selfe must haue hir doome, and grauest must to graue, And mightiest power sib to a flower: what then remaines to craue? Nowe vp, now downe, we flowe, and rowe in seas of worldly cares, Vertue alone eternall is, and shee the Laurell weares. L' Enuoy. Soone said, soone writ, soone learnd: soone trimly done in prose, or vers: Beleeud of some, practizd of fewe, from Cradle to their Herse. Virtutnon tibi Feci. M. Peter Wythipoll. Et Virtuti, & mihi: Virtuti, ad laudem: Mihi, ad vsum. FINIS.
