23591 S100150 99836002 241
A HEAVENLY Voyce. A Sermon tending to call the people of God from among the Romish Babylonians: Preached at Paules Crosse the 12 of Ianuarie. 1606. By William Symonds. Ephesians. 5.11. Haue no fellowshippe with the vnfruitfull workes of darknesse, but euen reprooue them rather. At London Printed by I. R. for Edmund VVea∣uer, and are to be solde at his shoppe, at the great North-doore of Paules Church. 1606.
The Printer to the Reader. Gentle Reader, this Sermon came to my hands without any Title giuen to it by the Author. I haue therefore, of my selfe, aduentured to take a Title for it out of the first words of the Text, calling it a heauenly Voyce. This would I admo∣nish, to stop the mouthes of such as happilie might cauill or her at it, or the Author for it. Farewell.
To the right Honorable and reue∣rend Father in God, Richard Vaughan, Doctor of Diuinitie, and Lord Bishoppe of London, my very good Lord. RIght Honorable and reue∣rend. When Moses, vpon the top of Pisgah,Deut, 34, 1, & 3, 27. did view the Geo∣graphie of the promised land, to the East, West, North, and South, with the Plaines, Mountaines, and Seas; he de∣parted satisfied, because his eie was not dim.Iosua, 18, 8, 9. And whē the land was Topographically to be described, to giue vnto seuerall men their inheritances, the Suruaiors presented their plots to Ioshua, the Captaine of the Lords host; who, by Gods authoritie, should quiet all questions that might arise by striuers. But when I climed the Pisgah of the Re∣uelation, where might bee taken the perspectiue of the land, that Christ, with his holy people, shall possesse, by the preaching of the Gospell; taking due notice of the dimnes of mine eies, I submitted all my labour to your Lordshippes true, and perfect sight, and censure. And now, hauing drawne a plot of one particular place thereof, labouring to put the seuerall tenures, in their di∣uers, yet proper colours, (seeing the importunitie of ma∣ny would not suffer me to secreate it) I doe humbly returne
my suruey, not onely to your Lordships censure; but also to your most fatherly and Christian patronage. Humbly cra∣uing your good Lordship, (seeing all the tenants will neuer be pleased with my doing) both to defend me frō the cauils, and calumniations of the contentious, (of whose fury I haue had too much experience:) and also to interpose your honou∣rable authority, that all men may content themselues with theyr owne lots. My skill is small, & therfore I desire the iust to reproue mee, where my hand, or eye hath fayled: but I dare be bold to say, that, in that which I was able to doe, I haue been faithfull. If your Lordship vouchsafe me this ho∣nourable fauour, to accept, and protect my labours, I shall be much encouraged to take the like paines in the rest: I hope, to the glory of almightie God, the benefite of his Church, & demonstration of my dutie vnto your good Lordship, whom God euermore preserue vnto eternall happines. Ianu: 25. 1606. Your Lordships most humble in all Christian obedience, VVilliam Symonds.
❧ A heauenly voyce. Reuelar: 18.4. And I heard another voyce from hea∣uen say, Goe out of her my people, that ye be not par∣takers of her sinnes, and that yee receiue not of her plagues. Reuelar: 18.5. For her sinnes are come vp to heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities. WHen the Lord would proue himselfe to be GOD, and all that is worshipped be∣sides him to be vanitie, he chuseth men to be his Iudges, and witnesses; and the issue to be,Esay, 41, 23. that he that can shewe things to come hereafter, should be knowne to be God. Then doth he referre himselfe to themselues,Esay, 44, 7. that none is like vnto him, that shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order before him. By this argument hee conuicteth his ene∣mies, to the time of the Apostles: who were his wit∣nesses, that all things were befallen Christ, which God be∣fore had shewed by the mouth of all his Prophets.Acts, 3, 18, And by this argument he conuicteth all tyrants,Chap, 10, 7, and heretickes of the later, & most perilous times, in this booke, shew∣ing,
before hand,Cap. 1.19. to his seruants, thinges present, and to come. And this so perfectly, that Nothing can be added thereto,Cap. 22, 18, 19 neither any thing diminished from the wordes of this prophecie. In the former part of this Booke, was handled the story of the Church, which for her sinnes, and tryall, was, from time to time, troden vnderfoote by her ma∣nifold enemies,Cap: 2, 5, 10 16, 22, &c. and cap. 3, 3, 19, according as the Lorde had threatned, and foreshewed in the second and third Chapters. And this is it which is contained from the beginning to the 15 verse of the 11 chapter. Thence, to the end of that Chapter, is the prophecie of the better estate of the Church, both deliuered frō the handes of her enemies, destroying them that destroy the earth, and reuiuing the couenant of Grace, against all oppositions, vnto the ruine of Antichrist. In the second part of this Booke, beginning at the 12 chap: the Lorde doth giue the Church a more preg∣nant demonstration of her enemies, and their procee∣dings against her, that they may be the better knowne vnto her.Cap. 12, 3. They are therefore described by the Dragon, presenting the heathen Romane Empire, the monster compounded of three beasts,Cap. 13.1. (which cannot be tamed by any art of man) that riseth out of the sea: and signi∣fieth the Romane Empire corrupted with the heresie of the Arians:Cap. 13, 14. and the Image of them both, presenting the Antichristian ecclesiasticall Monarchie of Rome. There is also shewed the manner of their preuailing against her, and howe they are ouercome, vnto the seauenth verse of the 20 chapter.Cap. 13, 3, The second beast, is destroyed with the sword of many Nations. The third, namely the ecclesiasticall Monarchie, called also Babilon, the I∣mage
of the ciuile Monarchie, is brought to naught by the preaching of the Gospell, and by the iudgements of God inflicted vpon her for his seruants sakes, whom she hath killed. And this is generally declared in the 14.15 and 16 chapters, but more particularly in the 17 & 18 chapters. And because this wicked popish Antichristian beast, required so diligent a description of her person & sinnes, that the Saints might be deliuered from so pe∣rilous a temptation; that point is effectually handled in the 17 chapter; insomuch, that the Papists thēselues are enforced to acknowledge her to be Rome. In this chapter are shewed the meanes, and manner of her destruction. The meanes by which her enemies are encouraged to bring her plagues vpon her, are two speciall doctrines of the word of God, preuailing with Prince and people. Princes conuerted to the Gospell, (figured by a mightie Angel,Cap, 18, 1, 2, 3. that enlighteneth the earth with the glory of the Gospell) doe iudicially decree, that Popish Babylon shall fall into a damnable estate, for her great sinnes. Namely, first for troubling of states; se∣condly, for corruption in doctrine, with which shee hath poysoned other Nations; thirdly, for the immo∣derate riches of her Merchants, who sold both iustice, and the soules of men. Both Prince and people that o∣bey the Gospell of the kingdome, shall bring her plagues vpon her at once, by embracing, and vrging a double doctrine of exhortation; and that is it which is contai∣ned in my text. Of this doctrine, first is shewed the place frō whence it commeth; to wit, the Temple of God, and his Christ, euen the sincere profession of the Gospel; which in this booke, in a manner, continually is called by the name
of Heauen. Here then, all godly men, both Prince and people doe ioyne together in those wholsome admoni∣tions of the Lord. So that those of the spirit of S. Iohn, who can well vnderstand the things that are spoken, do heare these heauenly doctrines enforced by them. And this is the meaning of these words; And I heard another voyce (from that which Princes decreed for their pri∣uate benefite) from heauen, say. The matter of the ex∣hortation is double; first to forsake her, euen this po∣pish Babylon, and then to pursue her with iust reuenge. The doctrine, or exhortation to forsake her, hath the proposition, and the arguments to enforce it. The pro∣position hath the parties admonished, and their dutie. Their dutie is to flie from this confused and cursed Ba∣bylon of poperie, in these wordes, Goe out of her. The parties on whom this heauenly voyce doth vouchsafe to bestow these holy things, are no deafe Adders, but onlie such which by Gods election doe belong to God: and by the couenant which they make, and holde, and by theyr sufferings, for his sake, are knowne so to do. And therefore the voyce of Iesus Christ the Lord, by his ser∣uaunts, doth call them from heauen, My people. The reasons why they should forsake her are two; both drawne from manifest perill. The first is the perill of contagion, and defiling themselues with touching this pitch, in these words; That ye be not partakers of her sinnes. The second is the perill of vengeance to be in∣flicted vpon her, and all her complices, in these wordes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues. This argument of her plagues is further enforced; & is proued to be hea∣uie and certaine; first, by the iustice of God, that requi∣reth great sinnes to be greeuously punished. Where∣fore,
seeing her sinnes exceede, it is not possible to hope for sparing. The greatnesse of her sinnes, is expressed in an vsuall prouerbiall speech of the Scripture, when it is said, for her sinnes are come vp to heauen. The second reason to prooue her plagues to be cer∣taine, is the diligence that GOD now vseth, in laying together her faults, that shee may receiue for euery one of them, that which shee hath deserued; and that is the purpose of these wordes; and God hath remembred her iniquities. And thus much of the interpretation of the first doctrine of exhortation to the people of God. It remaineth that wee proceede to informe our conscien∣ces hereby. I heard another voyce from heauen. Heere we see, that those of the spirit of S. Iohn, Doe heare the voyce that re∣quireth men to separate themselues from Babylon, and to reuenge themselues of her, to come from heauen. By hea∣uen, in this booke for the most part, is not vnderstood the place whether our Lorde and Sauiour is ascended,Acts. 1, 11, but the cōgregation of the faithfull, professing the Go∣spell of Christ, in his Church, where himselfe is in the middest. For in the fourth chapter, where S. Iohn doth see a throne set vp in heauen, about which are 24 seates,Cap. 4, 2, 4 and 24 elders sitting vppon them, in the 5 chapter these Eders doe praise Christ,Cap. 5.10. that had made them Kinges and Priests vnto God, that should raigne on the earth. And this is proportionable to the rest of the Scriptures, which doe call the Church of Christ, heauenly Ierusalem;Ephe, 2, 6, and the kingdome of heauen; and those that are conuerted thereto, are said to be made to sit together in heauenlie places. The meaning is, that those of the spirit of Saint Iohn, doe heare this heauenly doctrine of God, gene∣rally
taught among them that do sincerely professe the Gospell of Christ, Come out of her, &c. Reward her &c. Heerevpon it doth followe, that the doctrine of se∣peration from this popish Babylon, and the doctrine of reuenge to be inflicted vpon her, which is reduced into lawes by godly Princes, conuerted to the Gospell; and which is dilligently taught by the Preachers of the word; and is put in execution by good and godly sub∣iects, whether vnder Magistrats or priuate men, is to be acknowledged for none other but a voice from hea∣uen. And when it is sayd to be a voice from heauen, it appeareth that the doctrine is, and ought to bee estee∣med, as effectuall as if God did immediately speake from heauen. So that it is all one, whether God from heauen, doth commaunde Noah to make and enter the Arke, or that an Angell bid Lot get him out of So∣dom; or Moses importune the people to get them from the tents of Dathan, and Abiram, or the Prophets Isai∣ah and Ieremie, by their prophecies before hand, doe instruct both Prince and people, to teach, and obey this rule, Get out of Babylon; or the godly Princes, and Preachers exhort the people of God, to seperate them∣selues from the Romane popish beast. Euery voice, in this kind, is of like weight and authoritie. We knowe that it is blasphemed by these vndutifull Babylonians to be tirrannie in Princes; to be affectation of liberty, and spoyle in inferior Magistrates; to be faction, and igno∣rance, and heresie in Ministers and people. So doe we also knowe, that whatsoeuer the deuill saith in these serpents: yet Saint Iohn and those of his spirite, doe ac∣knowledge they heare this voice from heauen, euen from Iesus Christ; teaching, and instructing the con∣gregation
of all faithfull people, out of his holy word, in the Church. Heere therfore let all Christian Kings, Counsailors, Bishops, and all Magistrates, remember the generall Canon of the Apostle;Heb: 12.25. See that yee dispise not him that speaketh: For if they escaped not which refu∣sed him that spake on earth, much more shal not we escape, if wee turne away from him that speaketh from heauen. Moreouer, seeing this voice is from heauen, it fol∣loweth, that whosoeuer doth teach, by writing, or preaching; or doth aduise, in deliberations, that any other course is to be held, that these popish Babylonians are in some things to be yielded vnto, and that some more milde, and gentle proceedings towards them would doe better; such I say, neither can truly, nor may iustly be commended, that this wisdome descen∣deth from aboue, but it is from belowe,Iam: 3.15. and is earthly sensuall, and diuelish.2 Cor: 6.14 &c. For they labour to reconcile the things which haue no agreement, as righteousnes with vnrighteousnes, light with darknes, Christ and Beliall, the belieuer with the infidell, the temple of God with idols; and doe with Saule desire to spare Agag, whom God requireth to punnish. Againe, if the voice be from heauen, it shall bee established; they that speake other∣wise are false Prophets, and they that striue against it, doe kicke against the pricke.Act: 5.38.39. Wherefore as Gamaliel faith, in another case, refraine your selues from opposing it, least yee be found fighters against God. Come out of her my people.Gen. 14.12. Ioshu: 2 1.8 Iudg: 4.11 17. 1 King: 19.7 Heere first we see that a∣mong the wicked are the children of God. A thing very commonly noted in the Scripture. Lot was in Sodom; Rahab in Iericho: Iaell among the Gentiles: Obadiah, that feared God greatly, and saued an hundreth of the
Lords Prophets, was the gouernor of Ahabs house: and to be short, there were Saints of Caesars houshold, e∣uen of Nero, that cruell monster. For good seede, and weede growe vp together; and corne and chaffe are on the floore together.Exod. 6,9. Yea, we know that in Egypt were many Israelites, that could be cōtented to liue still, with the onions and flesh pots of Egypt, & in Babylon, were many Iewes,Ezec. 20, 32 that said, We will be like the heathen and fa∣milies of the countries. Yet were these the redeemed of the Lord,Ezec. 36, 26 and sanctified by him. In this Booke, the same is often shewed to be the condition not onely of many godly Christians, but also of the most glorious Church. For shee flyeth into the wildernes, beeing min∣gled among the Gentiles, and such pretended Christi∣ans, as followed the Antichristian Papacie. Out of this, doe arise many godly considerations. First, that such as thinke that it is not possible for Chri∣stians to liue vnder the gouernment of vnchristian Go∣uernors, but that they must loose the name of godlie men, and their number must not be called a Church, doe exceedingly bewray their ignorance, both of the Scriptures in generall, and of this booke of the Reuela∣tion in particuler. The Church of Pergamus, was a Church,Reue. 2, 13 and a golden Candlesticke, though shee dwelt where satans throne was. Yea, that which is more, it had them that maintained the doctrine of Balam, that taught Balack to put a stumbling blocke, before the chil∣dren of Israell: and also those that maintayned the doc∣trine of the Nicolaitanes. And the Church, is clothed in the sunne,Reue, 12, 1, &c. treadeth the Moone vnder her feete, and is crowned with twelue starres: a Woman, and a glorious Church, and holy, though she be fled into the wildernes,
and mingled among the Antichristian Babylonians, de∣priued of publique assembles, sacraments, & discipline, as doth appeare by this speech; Come out of her my peo∣ple. So that heere I cannot but reproue the Brownists, or rather the reuiued Donatists, which haue made a se∣peration from vs, and our Church; which they cannot blame as guiltie of the sinnes of Pergamus, or Sardis, or Corinth, which notwithstanding are acknowledged to be churches, thēselues being our Iudges. Much lesse are we guilty of the sins of Antichrist, among whō were the people of God notwithstanding. Sure their ignorance is much to be lamented, and their dissoluing of Christian Cōmunion to be detested, & therefore to be auoyded. Secondly, heere we learne to aunswere the Papists, that demaund of vs where our Church hath beene for these thousand yeeres. It was among them, though they were not it, as the chyldren of Israell were in E∣gypt,2, Kings, 17 and 24. and Babylon, in Goshen, in Holah, and Habor, and in the Citties of the Medes: and you were translated into their wonted places, as were the Assyrians into the cit∣ties of Samaria, the seate of the people of GOD. But they say, that the Israelies were knowne to be in Goshen, during their seruitude in Egypt. The scripture that saith also that the Iewes in the captiuity were in Holah & Ha∣bor, & in the cities of the Medes, doth note the place. But as for your Goshen, and Holah, and Habor, they were no where to be seen, by such as were as sharp sighted as the Egyptians or Babylonians. To this I answer, first that it is no merueile, that they see not the godly among them, partly because, like the deuill, they thinke that all is theyr owne, and neuer consider Iob,Iob, 1.8. that is an vpright and a iust man, one that feareth God, and escheweth euill:
and partly because of this time, that the question is de∣maunded, Saint Iohn doth say, that the woman the Church,Cap: 12.14. was in the Wildernesse, nourished from the face or sight of the serpent; which for subtiltie and quicke sight (whereof this Dragon taketh his name) may ve∣ry neere be compared to the Papists. But they say, where were their assemblies, their sacraments, and ser∣mons with other seruices. As if there could bee no Iewes in Babylon,Amoc. 6.10 because according to the prophecie, they durst not remember the name of the Lord; as it doth also appeare in the booke of Ester, wherein the name of the Lord is not once mentioned. Were Ester, Mor∣decai, and the people that fasted and prayed no people of God?Mare 7.6. Or are the godly bound to bewray, and be∣tray themselues, by casting holy things to dogs, and pearles before swine, to bring the graces of God in them into contempt; and themselues into manifest perrill? Secondly, wee answere, that our Church was among them, themselues being our Iudges. For when they tell vs with what difficultie they gat the title of supre∣macie, what masculine opposition they found, when, at Constantinople, and in the second counsell of Nice, they would erect the worship of the Dragon, by the a∣doration of idols; when they tell vs, by what arts, they wronge themselues from the subiection of Princes; when they proclaime bloudie,5 Deer: de haeres: ad abolendum. and blasphemous lawes againse such as teach and beleeue any otherwise; then they teach or beleeue (for so do they define heretickes) when they bragge of the many fiers, and warres that they consumed them by, and insult of their conquests this way; they also tell vs, that such as maintained the doctrine of the Apostles, and such as worshipped the
God of their fathers after the way which they call heresie, were among them, persecuted for the same doctrines, that we differ from them in: and therefore, by their owne confession, our Church was among them, which in this place is called the people of God. Thirdly, heere wee learne that such which doe liue among the Papists, though stained with some of their superstitions may be saued: but alwaies with limitati∣on. First that their sinne be of ignorance, & not of pre∣sumption:Num. 15.30. for there remaineth no sacrifice for the sinnes of such. And secondly, that though they be smitten in∣to the place of Dragons, yet must they not forget God,Psal: 44.17.20. nor deale deceiptfully with his couenant, &c. Nor hold vp their hands to any strange God. The Lord calleth his people out of Babylon, now at hand to be destroyed, for her sinnes. For the rule is generall, that the Iudge of all the earth will not slay the righteous with the wicked: as Abraham saith to God.Gen. 18.25. For how in∣extricable soeuer the perrill seeme to be,2 Pet: 2.9. the Lord know∣eth how to deliuer the godly out of temptation. The Churches of the old Testament, had heere of plentifull experience, when we reade that Noah was deliuered from the floud; Lot from the burning of Sodom: and diuers others from diuers other great dangers. The Churches also of the new Testament, haue found the hand of God nothing shortened. For besides the ma∣nifold deliuerances of the godly in the Acts of the A∣postles, it is reported, that when Ierusalem was to be de∣stroyed, because she knewe not the day of her visitati∣on; the godly were forewarned by a voice from hea∣uen,Euseb: 3.5. to get them from Ierusalem to Pella, a Cittie be∣yond Iorden, there to saue them selues.
The same mercie doth the Lord shew to his people. For purposing to bring a finall destruction vppon that Rome,Cap. 11, 8, which crucified our Lord Iesus, and after become that Antichristian Babylon, which is drunken with the blood of Saints,Cap. 17, 6, and Martyrs of Iesus, hee first, by a hea∣uenly voyce, calleth his people out of her. By this merci∣full prouidence are risen all the protestant Churches; and the same mercy will the Lord continue, till he hath drawne all his people from among them; and till hee bring vppon this Babylon, her last and greatest plagues. Heereby we know, that such as fall vnto them, are ga∣thered together like Baals priestes, that none of them be wanting when God will haue them consumed; & they that are gained from them,Luke, 3, 7 are escaped from the venge∣ance to come. The people of God must come out from her. What is heere meant by Babylon, frō whence the people of God must come, there is no great doubt; for both the Pa∣pists and wee doe agree,Ributa in 14 Reue. no: 27. &c. that it signifieth Rome vnder Antichrist, which doth reuiue the sinnes of the heathen Emperors: But the difference betweene vs, is, when shee is to be called Babylon. The circumstances of the text, which doe conuict Rome to be the place, will also teach vs when she is Babylon. She must of force be then Babylon, when she is guiltie of the faultes for which this Babylon is said to fall.Supra. verse 2, 2, 3. Her first sinne is, that All Nati∣tions haue drunken of the Wine of the wrath of her fornica∣tions. That is, that all Nations haue beene afflicted, with warres, treasons, cruelties, and diuers other cala∣mities, because they would not submit themselues to to her abhominable pride, idolatrie, and other spiritu∣all fornications.
Secondly, when the Kings of the earth hane com∣mitted fornication with her, corrupting themselues, and theyr kingdomes with filthy superstitions, and wicked inuentions, which they haue fetched from her. Third∣ly, when the Merchants of the earth are waxed rich, of the abundance of her pleasures, getting much mony by sel∣ling iustice, and the soules of men. Nowe because Rome hath been guiltie of these three impieties, for the most part, these thousand yeeres (as the many lamentable examples doe make demonstra∣tion, but especially in these later dayes, before and in the age in which wee liue,) wee doe confidently, and demonstrably conclude, that Rome, for these thousand yeeres past, hath beene; and especially in the time in vvhich wee liue nowe is, the Babylon from whence the people of GOD is to come. The rule is generall, that all godly men, ought, at all times, to seperate thēselues from the wicked. For thus saith Saint Paule,2, Cor, 6, 17 Come out from amongst them, and seperate your selues, (saith the Lord) and touch no vncleane thing, and I will receiue you. But as the dangers haue been the greater, so haue the vvarnings beene more importunate. Wherefore, see∣ing Babylon, for her many cruelties & corruptions, was worthy to be destroyed, Prophets Isaiah and Ieremie,Psal, 137, 8, pre∣pared many parables, for those that came after, in due time, to drawe the people of GOD from thence, the plaee of the greatest danger. The same wordes which these Prophets vsed, to draw the posteritie of Iacob frō that first Babylon, doth S. Iohn heere vse, to vvithdrawe the people of God frō this second Babylon, more dan∣gerous then euer was that first.
Heerevpon it followeth, that what were the sinnes, and cruelties of that first Babylon, the same are iustly im∣puted to this second Babylon: What perill the Iewes there were in, the same are the people of God in here; & what equitie, by reason of the condition of the peo∣ple, or iniquitie of the oppressors, induced the Israe∣lites to depart from Babylon, the same is to preuaile with Christians, to depart from this Antichristian Babylon of Rome. It was a cursed miserie for the children of Israell in the captiuitie, to be spoken vnto in a strange language, and with a stammering tongue:Esay, 28, 11 But in this Babylon, the whole religion is in a strange tongue. Wherefore, see∣ing strange tongues are a signe to them that belieue not,1. Cor. 14.22. it is a signe, that they whom God hath deliuered ouer to these, which speake these strange tongues, are in the condemnation of Infidels. The people of God among the Babylonians,Ierem. 50, 6, were lost sheepe: But heere, they that follow this Beast, are in the case of reprobates, Whose names are not written in the booke of life of that Lambe.Reue. 13, 8, In the first Babylon, the shepheards of Gods people cau∣sed them to goe astray:Ierem, 50, 6 but heere, theyr shepheards like the Scribes and Pharises, compasse sea and land to make one of their profession,Mat. 23, 15. and when hee is made, hee is made two folde more the child of hell, then themselues: bring∣ing them to meditate, and commit treasons, and to be hanged when they haue doone. All that found the people of God in Babylon, deuoured them:Ierem. 50, 7. and theyr enemies said, We offend not, because they haue sinned against the Lord: But heere, as many as are knowne, or suspected, to differ from them, are deuou∣red, bodie,5 Deer. de haeresibus. and soule, and goods, and name, & friends.
And heere, I cannot but let them that are seduced know, that now, they suffer many of them to discourse of Religion, at theyr tables, and in markets, and other meetings; whom, if they catch so dooing, where they haue power in theyr handes, or shall finde so dooing in theyr natiue Country, when they shall haue preuailed, such discoursers must to the pot, and suffer as heretikes, notwithstanding now they speake thē fayre for a pur∣pose, and for a while. Wherefore, flee from the mids of Babell, and depart out of the Land of these popish Calde∣ans,Iere. 50, 8, Esay, 52, 2, 3, 11. and bee yee as the hee goates before the flocke. Loose the bands from thy necke, ô thou captiue daughter. They that rule ouer the people of God, make them to howle. De∣part, depart yee, goe out from thence, & touch no vncleane thing, goe out of her, and be ye cleane, that beare the ves∣sels of the Lord. Come cleaue vnto the Lord,Iere, 50.5, in a perpetu∣all couenant, that shall neuer be forgotten. It shall not be with you, as it was with the children of Israell, that came out of Egypt vppon a suddaine. For yee shall not goe out with hast, nor depart by flying away:Esay, 52, 32, but the Lord will goe before you, and the God of Israell will gather you together.Esay, 28, 17, The Lorde thy God will teach thee to profit, and leade thee by the way that thou shouldest goe. Hee will teach you the feare of the Lord, and instruct you by his holy word, to escape the most vnprofitable doctrines of superstitions, and treasons, which directly tend to the destruction of body and soule, and are on∣ly enforced vppon you, by fables, and lyes; euen by ly∣ing prophecies of alterations, and hopes, which shall neuer bee accomplished.Zac. 14, 12, For this shall bee the plague where-with the Lord will smite all people, that haue fought against Ierusalem, euen the profession of the Gospell of
Iesus Christ,Heb: 12.22. theyr flesh shall consume away, though they stand vpon their feete, and their eies shall consume in their holes,Hosca: 12.1. and their tongue shall consume in their mouth. They are fed with the wind, and follow after the east wind, they increase daily lies, & distruction. But if yee will imbrace the Gospell,Iohn. 17.17. Reue: 7.17. the word of truth, the Lambe which is in the mids of the throne shall gouerne you, euen the godly and Christian King shall leade you to the Scriptures the foun∣taine of liuing waters, and God shall wipe all teares from your eies. Moreouer, when it is sayd by a voice from heauen; come out of her my people, it is the office of as many as belong to heauen: be he King, or Bishop, or Minister, or Magistrate, by enticing, as God did the Israelites from Egypt, by thrusting out, as the Angels did Lot from Sodom; by importuning, as Moses did the people from the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram: or by pulling them out of the fire,Iud: 23. Zach: 3.2. as God did Iehoshuah, to call to them that belong to God, to come out from this Babylon of poperie, which is horrible for sinne, and to be made horrible by destruction. And so much the rather, because the enemie is proud. They insult to see the slacknes of the Ministery, that are nothing so dilligent to saue, as they are to de∣stroy; they insult for the generall coldnes, if not Aposta∣sie, that is in the gentlemen, and their inclination to them wards; they insult that the commissions against them, doe find so many failings; they insult for discord, their auncient helper; they insult that though the face of the lawe bee against them, yet the edge is turned from them. Wherefore let them see, that euery hea∣uenly voice, of this Land doth crie, come out of her my people,Act. 2.4. and saue your selues from this froward generation.
And heere I might haue passed to another point, were it not for the Brownistes, that abuse this place to maintaine their wilfull sinne,Heb. 10.25.26. in for saking the fellowship that we haue among our selues. Let them consider, whe∣ther, the circumstances of this text, and the like, where Babylon is mentioned in this booke, or the Prophets, whence Saint Iohn doth borrow his speech, may truly agree to our Church, which maintaineth so many cō∣tradictions vnto Antichristian Babylon. Nay, if it may be prooued, that we haue departed from as many cor∣ruptions, in doctrine and pollicie, as did conclude Rome to be Babylon; and haue imbraced as many doctrines, as did the children of Israell that came out of Babylon; ey∣ther must they find vs another Babylon among the Iewes, departed from the captiuitie; or else their seper∣ation is an Apostasie and no departure from Babylon. Popish Babylon, like the first Babylon, was builte by such, whereof one did not vnderstand anothers speech;Gen: 11.7. Beda Eccles. hist: Lib: 1. cap: 15.27. Act: 2.11. Amos. 6.10. Cap: 13.6. but with vs, as in the times of the Apostles, all men doe heare in theyr owne tongues the wonderfull things of God. Among the Babylonians, it was not lawful for the children of God to remember the name of the Lord; but we teach all men to reuerence the sanctuarie of the Lord, and them that worship therein according to the Gos∣pell. In Babylon,Dani: 3.2.3. Reue: 13.15 the people of God were vnder a for∣raine Tyrant, & were constrained to worship the image of the beast, vnder paine of death; but we are deliuered from that captiuitie, and now the Lord is our God,Ezech: 34.24. and his seruant Dauid (a Prince of our owne Nation) is our King; as the Lord did promise. Who seeth not then, that we are the people of God, come out of Babylon; & therefore they that are departed from vs, haue erred in
their hearts, because they haue not knowne the wayes of God, and doe blaspheme when they call vs Babylon. But my purpose is to vrge that onely, which directly Saint Iohn would haue vs pursue. That yee be not partakers of her sinnes. Here first is to be marked, that such as will not depart from them, shall be infected by them:Ecclus. 13,1 as it is said, Hee that toucheth pitch, shall be defiled there-with. The rule is generall, sinne is infectious, and this not onely with vnrighteousnes, but also with impietie.Prou, 22.25 Make no friendshippe with an angry man, &c. least thou learne his wayes, saith Salomon. But in matters of Religion, a man is exceeding weake, and the temptation mightie; so that a man soone learneth these wicked waies. Therefore did the Lord, so often, by Moses, & so earnestly, by Ioshua forewarne the Iewes to make no compact with the Nations,Exod, 23, 33 and 34, 15 Deu, 7, 2, &c Iosua, 23, 13 and inhabitants of the Land, least they should be vnto them a snare, to cause them to serue other Gods. And as it was fore-told, so fell it out, as it is in the Psalme. They were mingled among the heathen,Psal. 106, 35 & learned their works. But more perilous is this time of Antichrist:2, Tim. 3, 1 2, Thes. 2, 11 because in it, the Lord doth send strong delusion, so that if it were possible, the elect should be deceiued.Mat, 22, 24 Reue, 13.8, No maruel the, if all those whose names are not written in the booke of life, do follow the beast. And to iustifie the truth heereof, wee daily see many loose fel∣lowes, practising, & vndutifull wits, that meditate vp∣pon an alteration, to be daily seduced by the Popish priests, which swarme in the Land. Insomuch that it is to be supposed, not onely by the wit of man, but also by the Word of God, that except some speedie voyce come from heauen, to commaund the people to come out from her: and that the Lord send some mightie North
wind, to take away these Popish frogs, which are the spi∣rits of deuils, these trayterous Iesuites and Priestes,Cap. 16, 13, and violently to cast them into the sea, without all question,Exod: 10.19 many subiects will partake in the traiterous sinnes, of this Babylonian tyrannie. Their sinne is, That as many as will not worship the beast, the Pope, must be killed. For this doctrine,Reue, 13, 15 the spirit of the beast dooth continually inforce by all meanes, what euer other pretence hee make. Besides, when it is said, Least yee be partakers of her sinnes, heere it is further shewed, that the people of GOD must not communicate with the sinnes of this Antichristi∣an Babylon. The rule is generall, that the godly must not partake with any sinners, as the Apostle saith,Ephe, 5, 1 Haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of darknes. And againe, Come out from among them,2, Cor, 6, 17 and touch no vn∣cleane thing. And againe,Iude, 23, Hate the garment that is spot∣ted with the flesh. To this purpose did Christ admonish his Disciples, not to partake with the wicked Clergie of his time, say∣ing; Take heede of the leuen of the Pharasies, and Saduces,Mat, 16, 12, meaning their euill doctrine, & Woluish conditions. And Saint Paul requireth to hold an Angell, or Apostle,Gala. 1, 8, 9, or any other man, accursed, that bringeth in any other doctrine, then was at first receiued. What meruaile is it then, if Saint Iohn, in so perrilous and damnable a time as this, when the holie Cittie is become an harlot, yea, a Tyrant, and head of the Gentiles, proude Baby∣lon, Rome, a Cittie drunken with the blood of the Saints, if (I say) hee forbid all people to partake in her barbarous, blasphemous, and couetous sinnes, directly contrarie to the saluation of body and soule.
It seemeth a heauie, and grieuous thing, to depart from the consent of so many Nations, and ages; and to be esteemed scismaticall: But when the commaun∣dement of God, doth require vs, not to ioyne hand in hand with the wicked to euill, but to come out frō Ba∣bylon, the commaundement doth minister vnto vs a iust Apologie before men, and stablish the conscience be∣fore God, to be innocent, and defensible, in this sepa∣ration. What are the sinnes of this popish Babylon, is partly to bee gathered out of Daniell, Isaiah, Ieremiah, Ezechiell, and other scriptures, where mention is made of Babylon. For when Rome is heere called Babylon, we haue this libertie, to impute the cruelties, & other sius of the former Babylon, to this. In this booke more especially, are mentioned these sinnes,Reu, 9.20, 21. Idolatry, murther, sorcerie, fornication, theft, and these are further explaned in other places of this booke. In the tenth chapter her sinne is, when Princes haue ro∣red as Lyons,Cap. 10, 3, 4. to keepe the possession of the people and soyle, to cry them downe with thundring execrations, and excommunications.Cap. 11, 7, In the 11, to make war with the witnesses of Iesus, when they haue finished their testi∣monie. In the thirteene it is said,Cap. 13, 6, 7 that hauing got power to speake, and doe, what her lift, she abuseth her authoritie to blaspheme, and to make warre with the Saints; euen to kill all that are not of her faction.verse 15. All of her sinnes may be reduced to these twoheades; The prophanation of the worship of God, and the barbarous ouerthrow of all charitable communion among men. Whē therefore wee are commaunded not to partake with her sinnes, we are forbidden to defile the feare of God with any of her abhominations; or to dissolue Christian
Communion with any of her cruelties; and oppressions. A man may partake in sinnes, eyther by ioyning in the action, or by fauouring them that doe it. Wherefore,Rom. 1. vit. we are heere required, neither to ioyne with her, in any of her sinnes, nor to fauour them that doe. Wee haue many in our Country that partake manifestly with this Romish Babylon, in her fornications and superstitions; as dooth appeare by the many ratles, idols, beades, and such other trumperie, that are found cōtinually among them. Yea, we haue many that haue beene willing to minister the cup of the wine of the wrath of her forni∣cation, to Prince and people; as appeareth by the ma∣nie treasons, which are attempted: and the correspon∣dence of multitudes with the traytors. Yea, that which is more, there are found in England, (I had almost saide in London) schooles to traine vp Gentlemens chyldren, in this impious, & rebellious religion, where the Gouernours disclaime his sacred Maiestie, King Iames, to be theyr King, and professe themselues the Popes subiects. But the holy Ghost heere speaketh to them all, Bee not partakers with her sinnes. Others happily there may be, euery way as pestilent, who publiquely seeme to fauour the Gospell, but co∣uertly, and vnderhand, fauour, and much further this vngodly, and pestilent religion, playing fast and loose with the state. Howe perilous this kinde of persons is, may be seene in the story of Constantine the great. In his time, certaine supposed Arian conuerts, abusing the singuler lenitie, and credulitie of the Emperour, insinu∣ated themselues into the fauour of the Prince,Socr. 1, 10, 18, &c. wrought themselues into offices, and imployments in the com∣mon wealth; they openly seemed to maintaine the
faith of the Nicaene Creede; but keeping their old cor∣ruption, in theyr harts, by all meanes they could, colla∣terally, with slaunders and iniustice, through the sides of godly men, wounded the holy and innocent cause. I feare among the Iustices of the Land, &c. may bee be found very many such, euery way as preiuditiall to the Gospell. Blessed be his mouth that said, hee would remooue them, and put better in theyr roomes; and blessed be his hand that doth it. In the meane space, this heauenly voyce dooth speake to such, Partake not with her sinnes. And heerein it is required wee be the more circumspect; because her sinnes are so subtile, that they enter in, and possesse many a man, which dooth seeme to himselfe, and to others, to hold this filthy Babylon in singular abhomination. But it followeth in the next place. And that ye receaue not of her plagues. For such as will continue in a place to be destroyed, must fcele the smart of the same destruction. Lots wife beeing deliuered frō Sodom, in compassion, would looke back towards her old neighbours, and was turned into a piller of salt. Remember Lots Wife,Luke 17.32 saith Christ. As her sinnes are many and foule, so are her plagues very many and hea∣uie. For the better discouering of her sinnes, shee is called the Image of the beast, which was wounded with the sword,Cap. 13, 14, and did liue, as hauing as many sinnes, as were found in the Empire, whether corrupted by the Arians, or in the handes of the heathen Tyrants. Her plagues therefore are as many, as are the plagues of the enemies of the Gospell, mentioned in this Booke. In the sixt chapter, the contempt of the Word of God by the heathen,Reue. 6, 8, is punished with sword, mortality,
famine, & beastes: kindes of plagues which haue much afflicted this popish beast. Wherefore we must know, that when the Land, or Cittie is punished with warres, or murthers, with famine or pestilence, or other mor∣talitie, it is for the sinne of such as partake in the Anti∣christian sinnes, of the contempt of the Word of God. For instance, this Cittie, When vpon the death of the late Queene, worthy of eternall memorie, it became to giue entertainement, and rest, to such which plotted treasons, and drifted the rooting out of the Gospel, did lately feele the scourge of pestilence, the Pale horse: since haue we beene threatned with the shaking of the great sword of him that sitteth on the redde horse.Cap. 6, 4. And if wee repent not, by our more zealous embracing of the Word of GOD, which sitteth vpon the white horse,Verse, 2, and by comming out from among the popish enemies therof, we may feare the experience of Famine, that sit∣teth on the black horse. In other places of this booke, the plagues of this Babylon are wofull, by the incursion of fieree strangers; by the continuall warres with vnre∣concileable & mortall enemies; by the seuerity of god∣ly Kings; & by the reprofe of the preachers of the Go∣spell.Cap. 9. & 10 and 11. Cap. 16. In other places, are mentioned the plagues of sores, of bloodshed by sea & land, of vnseasonable and dis∣tempered ayres, of darkning her kingdome, &c. When these things also come vpō the places where the gospell is professed, we must know, that it is because of the sins of such, as partake in the sins of the Babylontan King A∣baddon, the great Antichrist. I know the brags, & lies of that Sect; They perswade theyr damned Proselytes, that in former times, before the dayes of Queene Elizabeth, (vvhose memorie bee alwaies blessed)
the times were peaceable, plentifull, holy, and of one minde with them. Howbeit, theyr owne Writers doe make demonstration, that all the world besides, can∣not afford vs so many barbarous tragedies, vnspeakea∣able dissentions, horrible impieties, lamentable desola∣tions, and terrible iudgements from aboue. Insomuch, that the earth, for giuing power to this Babylonian beast, hath frō time to time beene smitten with all man∣ner of plagues.Cap. 11, 6, Then to deliuer our selues from so ma∣ny calamities, come out of her my people, and receaue not of her plagues, saith this heauenly voyce. Many haue thought it an excellent policie, to pre∣uent the euils that may come by barbarous heretickes, to come as neere vnto them as they can.2, Reg. 16, 2 Chro, 28, So is it saide of Ahaz, King of Iudah, that hee made an altar accor∣ding to the fashion of that of the Aramites of Damas∣cus, drew neere to the religion of the King of Ashur, made peace with him, and gaue him large rewards. But all helped not. For when he called to him for ayde, hee did not strengthen him, but afflicted him. Neither found the Iewes any better successe, with drawing neer to the religion of the Cananites. For then did the Philistims, and other Gentiles,Reade the book of the Iudges. tyrannise ouer them most extreame∣lie. Thankes be to God, wee be vtterly departed, from this popish Babylon, in deede. Yet some very small sup∣posed appearances, that they thinke wee partake with them in, haue caused them to be exceeding confident in their owne religion, as it were, by our testimonie; They detest our differences from them, and haue pre∣sumed, that by one practise or other, of wit or force, we might easilie be reduced againe, full and whole to their subiection. Yea, they haue beene heereby much
exasperated; but nothing reconciled, notwithstanding their hypocrisies. By this, it may appeare how perrilous it is, as much as in the least seeming to partake with her sinnes. But if once all the Princes professing the Gos∣pell, being cleane departed from her, did ioyne toge∣ther, in that great Hallelu-iah, which Dauid prayeth for,Psal: 67.5. when he sayth, let all the people praise thee O God, yee let all the people praise thee: then should they find the bles∣sing that followeth; then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God, euen our owne God, shall giue vs his bles∣sing. For so do the godly sing Hallelu-iah, because God hath condemned the great Whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication.Cap: 19.2. Now the better to forewarne vs of her plagues, he sheweth that they must needes be great. For her sinnes are come vp to heauen. There is no sinne so small, which doth not come vp to heauen, vn∣to the sight of God; euery teare is put in his bottell, and all these things are written in his booke. How be it, the Scripture is not wont to vse this kind of phrase, but whereas sinnes doe so exceede, that their punnishment cannot be deferred. So the cry of the sinnes of Sodom are sayd to come vp to God, that is, to be exceeding grie∣uous.Gen: 18. 20.21. 2 Chro: 28.9. The sinnes of Israell, for which he was captiued, were such, that their rage is sayd to reach vp to heauen; that is, to be excessiue; not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight of men. When finnes seeme small, by reason of the grosse ignorance that is in the world, it is one thing; but when, by the abundance of know∣ledge, they appeare as they be, the case is otherwise; as Saint Paule saith,Act: 17.30. the time of this ignorance God regar∣ded not: but now he admonisheth all men, euery where, to
repent. So, while the daies were darke, the grosse smnes of the Antichristian Babylonians seemed very small; nay the world did thinke them holy, and righteous. But now, that the maruelous light of the Gospell doth shine; her sinnes, which haue gotten a wonderfull inctease, are manifestly discerned to be heaped vp to heauen. Be∣sides her sinnes of crueltie, whereby she iustifieth her elder Sister, the first Babylon: both the law and the Gos∣pell, doe prooue her sinnes to be heaped vp to heauen. The L'ord, in the law, doth seuerely condemne the ha∣uing of many Gods; but there neuer was Nation vnder the sunne, that could be compared to this Antichristian Babylon, for multitude of Gods. The Lord did alwaies abhorre such kinds of wor∣ship, as him selfe had not prescribed, which yet for the most part consisted in many friuolous obseruances; but these haue not only defiled the worshippe of God with abhominable inuentions; but also haue translated the true, and spirituall worshippe of God to creatures; nay to idols;Petrus de Natale nay to figments, as witnesseth their fable of Saint George. It is a sinne that God will not hold guiltles to take his name in vaine. But these, doe not only abuse the name of God; but also God himselfe; not only to vanitie, but also to the committing of the greatest ab∣hominations; as to curse Kings, and to stirre vp rebel∣lion against them, by their Bulles. In the primitiue Church,Plim: lib: 10. example: 97. Eus: 3.30. the Christians did assemble themselues in the morning, praising Christ their God; and bound them∣selues with the sacrament, not to commit adulterie, not to murther, not to bee perfidious, or trayterous; but these abuse the Sacrament, which they call theyr God, & their maker, to vnspeakeable euils. For Pope Victor
the 2. was poysoned in his Chalice, by his Deacon,Genebrard. Chron. Paral. vrsp. and Henrie the 7. the Emperour, was poysoned by a Domini∣can hypocrite, in the Sacrament. But now, they vse the Sacrament to conuay the deuill into men, before some∣what honest. For they do bind men by their Sacrament, to murther Princes, nobles, yea, the whole Parliaments, & the whole Church of God. And their subiect, like Iu∣das Iscariot, who vpon receiuing of the sop was ouerruled by the deuill to betray his Maister, doe resolue vpon such murthers; as the like is not to be found in the stories of the most infamous tyrants. And so their sinnes are come vp to heauen. As for the second table, they teach not only children to dishonor their parents, & wiues to despise their hus∣bands; but also subiects to rebell against their lawfull Princes. Yea, they thrust out the lawfull heires, & vfurpe the kingdoms & Empire. They arrogate vnto thēselues power to plant and depose whom they list.Dist. 40. Si papa. in Glosla De∣ponendus si minus vt: lis. Fasc. Tem. in Zach. 1. The cause is counted sufficient to depose a Prince, if hee be lesse for their profit, and the cause is sufficient to place whō they list, if he be more for their profit. They murther, and that in such horrible maner, that they iustifie the most abho∣minable persecutors; withes be their indeuour to blowe vp the Parliament house, & to fire citties,Reade the massacre in Paris, anno. 1572. to paue streetes with dead carcasses, and to staine great riuers with the blood of the slaine. They can giue you a reason, vvhy stewes of both kindes be profitable in a cōmon wealth. They teach it for good diuinitie, for those of their facti∣on, to rob the goods of the Protestants, which I take to be the cause that so many Papists be thieues. And I think the popish thieues, if they were demanded by the Iudge, would not let to cleare their cōsciences by their religion.
They condemne the memory of all godly men, & so are the falsest witnesses that euer trode vpon the earth. Ge∣nerally, there is nothing so contrary to wholsome doc∣trine, which among them is not good diuinitie, if it may any way serue to aduance their greatnes. Yea, they haue turned that gracious rule,1, Tim, 6, 5, 6. Godlines is great gaine, into Gaine is great godlines. And as they deale with the Law, so do they with the couenant of Grace. For they haue cleane left off to giue knowledge of saluation to the people, by the remission of their sinnes,Luke. 1, 77 78. through the tender mercie of our God, in the blood of Iesus Christ: and soules are bought & sold at a base price, of siluer, & gold, & corrup∣tible things;1, Pet, 8, 18, contrary to the words of S. Peter. Yea, for a small price,Guicciar. lib 13. an. 1520 & somtimes are set vpon a game at tables, as a writer of their owne doth acknowledge. And while they thus make vile the blood of Christ, it may iustlie be said, that her sinnes are gone vp to heauen: and so beeing great, are neere vnto destruction. A second reason to proue her plagues to be at hand, doth follow. God hath remembred her iniquities. It is true, that in God is neither forgetfulnes, nor recalling to memorie. For all things are alwaies present,Heb, 4, 13 and naked, and bare vn∣to him, with whom we haue to doe. But the Scripture spea∣keth of God after the manner of men, for our better vn∣derstanding. Namely, that as men, whē they purpose to right or reuenge the wrongs that are done them, do call enery partieuler to memory, the better to further theyr determination; so God, when hee purposeth to relieue his seruaunts, or punish his enemies, is saide to Remem∣ber his Couenaunt, and to remember their sinnes. So when the Lord doth intend to punish,Hosea, 8, 13 and 9, 9. the Prophet saith, The Lord will remember their iniquities, & visite their sinnes.
Wherefore, when heere it is said, that God hath remem∣bred her imquities, it must be supplied, and will visite her sinnes. As men haue their meanes to remember thinges forgotten, so God, by such means, doth let it appeare he remembreth such things, as men suppose he hath forgot∣ten. Men vse to remember their wrongs, when they be∣hold the thinges in which they are wronged; so doth God remember the cruelties of the Egyptians,Exod, 2.23 and 3, 9. when hee beholdeth the burthens of his seruaunts, the children of Israel. Againe, men call to mind, when they haue remē∣brancers; such vnto God, are his Prophets, & Ministers of his word & Sacraments. For thus saith the Widdow of Zarephtah to Elias, when her sonne was dead,1, Kings, 17, 18, What haue I to do with thee thou man of God, art thou come to call my sinnes to remembrance, and to fley my sonne? But espe∣cially, men recall things to memorie, when the persons that doe the wrong, doe renue their old manner of mis∣chiefe. So doth God, when the wicked returne to theyr vomit, and so abuse the patience of God, by prouoking him by the same sins, which they seemed to haue broken off. Such are the sins of the Romish Babilon here spokē of,Ribera in Apoc. cap. 14, and 18. as the papists thēselues confesse. For they say, whē Rome shalbe guilty of the sins of the heathen emperors, & per∣secutors which were before in her cruell daies, Then shall God remember her miquities present & past. And indeed such are Gods proceedings. For he threatneth the man, that leauing his sm became righteous, that if he forsaketh his righteousnes, he shal die for his transgression & sin. vz.Ezec. 18, 24 first and last. Now let euery man that hath any braines in his head, to iudge, or conscience in his bosome to ac∣knowledge thinges as they bee, consider, and speake, if hee can finde anie idolatrie so sinfull, or crueltie
so barbarous among the greatest heathen Emperors, or among the most beastly and bloody Arians, which may not be iustified, being compared with the spiritual forni∣cations of this Babylonian synagogue of Antichrist, & with her continuall drunkennes with the blood of the Saints. Wherfore, seeing the bloud & ashes, of milions of inno∣cent Martyrs; & the indignities & treasons offered to so many godly princes, doth cry for vengeance; seeing the faithful preaching, & profession of the gospell, doth call for the assistance, & testimony of the iudgemēts of God; & lastly, seeing that her exceeding rage, & violent mad∣nes, in committing the sinnes of her abhominable impi∣eties, formerly condemned, doth repeate her sinnes past, how can wee thinke, but God hath remembred her iniqui∣ties. And, thanks be vnto almightie God, we see, at this time, the high court of Parliament, now, by the grace of God to be assembled, so effectually put in minde of her sinnes, that if now, they do not awaken, it is to be suppo∣sed, that nothing wil awaken them, till it be too late. But wee hope, and earnestly pray vnto almighty God to see such lawes concluded, as well for the matter, as for the faithful maner of their executiō, both in this parliament, and also in the assemblies of other Princes abroad, that may proue, that God hath so remembred her iniquities; & may make their harts to quake that partake in her sinnes, because they shall see no remedy, but to receiue of her plagues. The same Lord, which was wont to confirme the word of his seruants,Esay, 44, 26, & performe the counsell of his Messen∣gers, bring this heauenly voyce to so happy an effect, euen for Iesus Christ his sake, who sitteth at the right hand of his Father, till all his enemies be made his footestoole. And let all true Christians say Amen Amen. Hallelu-jah. FINIS.
