23923 S118367 99853574 18964
TEXEDA Retextus: OR THE SPANISH MONKE His Bill of Diuorce against the Church of ROME: Together with other remarkable Occurrances. woodcut image of a circle of clouds, with six heads including a pope, a cardinal, friars, and a devil, surrounding and blowing against the world, which is labelled "IMMOTA" IMMOTA LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his Shop at the great South dore of Pauls, 1623.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, AND worthy Knight, Sir Edward Conway, one of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuie Councell, and his Maiesties SECRETARIE. SIR: THe sinne of Ingrati∣tude hath euer beene ranked by men of in∣genious and liberall education in, the first place amongst the of-scouring and scum of vices, whose iudgement and opinion here∣in, I professe I alwaies approued. To wipe off then, and cleare my selfe from the asper∣sion of this foule enormitie, I haue, on adui∣sed
deliberation presumed to consecrate and offer vp vnto your memorie this small Treatise concerning my vnfained conuersi∣on vnto Christ, as a pledge and token of my thankefulnesse for many benefits and fa∣uours plentifully conferred on me. For your most eminent and conspicuous vertues, whereof I oft haue had experience, especi∣ally your wisedome, bountifulnesse, courte∣sie, your feruent zeale to the reformed reli∣gion and pietie, which so attend and guard your person, that you can hardly be seuered or abstracted from them, promise and assure me, that this small Treatise giuen and con∣secrated on the Altar of an honest and sin∣cere heart, will be most gratefull and accep∣table to your Honour. Your Honours most humbly deuoted, Ferdinando Texeda, through the mercy of God, a Conuerted Spaniard, V.D.M.
To the Christian Reader. SAint Ierome relating Iacobs Vision,Epist. ad Ager. 11. in which he saw Angels ascending and descending on a Ladder reaching from the earth to heauen; gathers these profita∣ble and comfortable lessons from thence, That no man should de∣spaire of grace to recouer him from sinne, for Iacob saw Angels ascending; nor yet any presume of his owne strength, for Iacob saw Angels descending, as well as ascending; his owne words are, Videbat scalam per quam ascendebant Angeli et descendebant, vt nec peccator desperet salutem, nec iustus de sua virtute fecurus sit. The Church of Christ in this respect re∣sembles the Sea, which, what it looseth in one place, it alwaies gaines in another. And therefore let no weake Christian be scandalized at the reuolt of so many now a dayes to Popish errors and superstitions. For the spi∣rit speaketh expresly, That in the latter times,1 Tim. 4.1. some shall depart from the faith, giuing heed to seducing Spirits and doctrines of Diuels; yea, that many shall follow their pernitious waies, by reason of whom, the way of truth shall be euill spoken of.2 Pet. 2.2. When there∣fore
we see the truth of these Prophecies fulfilled, in the falling away of many from the truth, euen this their falling away from the truth, ought to confirme vs in the truth; the rather because wee finde by experience, that the Apples that fall from the tree with the least shog,De simplicitate praelatorum. or smallest puffe of winde, are rotten at the core. This was Saint Cyprians obseruation, long agoe; Ne∣mo aestimet bonos de Ecclesia posse discedere; triti∣cum non rapit ventus, nec arborem solidâ radice fun∣datam procella subuertit: inanes paleae tempestate iactantur, inualidae arbores turbinis incursione euer∣tuntur: Let no man imagine that good men can de∣part from the Church; The winde blowes not away the Corne, neither doth a storme throw downe a tree that hath sure rooting in the earth; it is but light chaffe which the winde scattereth abroad, and they are but hollow and rotten trees which are ouerturned with a blustring winde. And Saint Austen and Saint Grego∣ry make good this obseruation of Saint Cyprian, by ex∣cluding all those from the number of Christs Disci∣ples, and the true Sonnes of God, whose reuolt and a∣postacie euidently proues their hypocrisie. Saint Au∣sten speakes definitiuely,Decorrept. et . 9. Qui non habent perseueran∣tiam, sicut non verè discipuli Christi, ita nec verè filij dei fuerunt, etiam quando esse videbantur, et ita vo∣cabantur: Those who perseuer not in the truth, as they were neuer the true Disciples of Christ, so neither were they euer truely the Children of God, no, not when they seemed so to be, and were so called also: And Saint Gre∣gory is as peremptory; It may trouble, saith he, a weake Christian,Moralium in ob l. 34. cap. 13. that this Leuiathan hath such power, vt au∣rum, hoc est, viros sanctitatis claritate fulgentes, quasi
lutum sibi vitijs inquinandum subijciat: That he can trample Gold vnder his feete like dirt; that is, men shining with a bright lustre of sanctitie, by defiling them with viciousnesse: Sed citiùs respondemus, quia aurum quod prauis Diaboli persuasionibus sterni sic∣ut lutum potuerit, aurum ante oculos dei nunquam fuit; et qui seduci quandoque non reuersuri, possunt, quasi habitū sanctitatisante oculos hominū videantur amittere, sed eam ante oculos dei nunquam habue∣runt: But we readily answere, That that gold which by the wicked perswasions of the Diuell, could be thus trodden vnder foot by him like dirt, was neuer gold in the sight of God; and whosoeuer may so be led away from the true Church, that they neuer returne thither backe againe, well they may seeme to lose an habit and shew of sanctitie before men, but the truth is, in the eyes of God they were neuer indued with any sanctitie at all. If this suffice not to keepe the weake from stumbling at this rocke of offence, I meane the Apostacie of see∣ming Saints, and reuolt of outward professors of the truth, let them consider in the last place, that this losse of the Church (if it be any) is in some measure repai∣red by the daily accesse of new conuerts. Not to goe farre for instances at this present, for an Italian Apo∣stata, we haue a Spanish Conuert; for a loose Bishop, we haue a strict Augustine Monke; the former lately left Christ, to follow his preferments in the Court of Antichrist; the latter hath left all his hope of prefer∣ments in this world, and stript himselfe of all his tem∣porall meanes, to follow Christ naked: whose solid mo∣tiues set downe in this short and pithy relation, if thou
weigh diligently, thou canst not but afford this trea∣tise a like commendation, to that which Homer giues Diomedes, : A lit∣tle Man, but a great Souldier. For thou shalt finde in it arrowes taken out of the Romish Quiuer, drawne to the head against the Romish faith; besides, diuers rarities touching the fopperies and ridiculous superstitions of that Church. There are not many leaues in this Treatise, but there is much fruit, yet this is but a tast: The Author hath furnished alrea∣dy a Table richly with such kinde of fruit, to which he wil shortly inuite thee: In the meane while, let this stay thy stomacke, and if any thing herein please thy appe∣tite, blesse God for the Author; if any thing distaste thee, pardon the Author for Gods cause; for which the more losse he hath, and doth sustaine, the more he deserues to gaine thy loue and charitable opinion of him. Thine in Christ, D.F. Ferdinand Texeda hath by his religious conference and carriage, ap∣proued himselfe vnto vs, to be sound in Faith, and honest in Life, and one that deserues respect amongst all good Christians. Daniel Feately, Doctor of Diuinity. Richard Sibs, Preacher at Grayes Inne. William Crashaw, Preacher at White-Chappell. William Boswell, Preacher at Saint Laurence Iewrie. Iohn Squire, Preacher, at Leonard Shore-ditch. Thomas Wood, Preacher at Michaels Crooked-lane. Timothy Suite, Preacher at Andrew Hubbard. Iohn Regius, Pastors of the Dutch Church in London. Ambrose Regemorterus, Pastors of the Dutch Church in London. Nathaniel Marius, Pastors of the French Church in London. Abraham Aurelius, Pastors of the French Church in London.
THE SPANISH CONVERT, OR, FERDINANDVS TEXEDA his Con∣uersion to the Reformed Church, with the cause mouing him thereunto. IT will not seeme strange to those whose mindes God hath illightened with the know∣ledge of Christian truth, that I a Spaniard and a Monke, trai∣ned vp and grounded in the er∣rours of Poperie, and some∣time a most sharpe and vehement prosecutor and maintainer of them; should now imbrace and professe the true religion, sith the sacred Scripture informes them that there is no respect of persons with God:Acts 10. Notwithstanding it will be a very hard taske for any to vndertake to perswade such as are enemies to this truth, that it was the finger of God that wrought this worke of my conuersion: for sith they with the vttermost of their indeauour, teach and maintaine,
that the reformed religion is most odious and execra∣ble to his diuine Maiestie, without all doubt they will neuer ascribe and giue vnto him the glory of my con∣uersion hereunto; for God tempts not, nor solicits any man to perpetrate any euill: yet neuerthe∣lesse, to the intent that I may farther establish, and build vp in Christ such Christians as are truely cal∣led, and re-call such Catholikes (falsly so called,) as wander from the truth; I haue thought good to pro∣duce and publish some of the motiues and reasons that preuailed with me, to the vtter abandoning and re∣nouncing of Poperie, which hee that shall but seri∣ously and aduisedly weigh and consider, vnlesse hee wilfully be blinder then a Mole, I doubt not but hee will freely and ingeniously acknowledge this truth, that it was onely a tender regard of my soules health that induced me to shake hands with Poperie: But o∣mitting these circumstances, as not so pertinent, ile now buckle my selfe to the matter in hand. A Principle, and an especiall motiue exciting mee to abandon Poperie, was their celebrating of diuine seruice in an vnknowne tongue: For, as Saint Paul teacheth vs, hee that speakes in an vnknowne tongue, speakes not vnto men but vnto God:1 Cor. 14. Therefore when we speake vnto men, it is requisite and necessary wee expresse our conceits in such notions and language as they best vnderstand vnto whom we speake: But the Papists setting light by Saint Pauls Doctrine, teach and exhort the rude and barbarous people in Lat∣tine, which tongue they vnderstand not, as it is ap∣parant to any that shall be pleased to peruse their Masse for the dead, where the sub-Deacon sings after
this manner, Fratres ecce mysterium vobis dico: Brethren, behold I tell you a mysterie; hee pretends he speakes vnto his Brethren, but he speakes a noto∣rious vntruth, because according to the determinati∣on of the Apostle in the place before cited, hee that speakes in an vnknowne tongue, speakes not vnto men, but vnto God. I may presse this reason yet further, because the Priest before the preface, saith (orate & me fratres) Brethren pray for me: the Papists them∣selues will not denie that these words are directed to the common people, and therefore neither can they gaine-say that they most shamefully oppugne the Apo∣stles Cannon in the rpractise; for, intending & directing their speech vnto their Brethren, they speake vnto them in an vnknowne tongue: but the very simple, and illiterate people daily reproues, and sufficiently discouers this their grosse errour, in that immediately after the deliuery of these words (orate & me fratres) all of them in their assemblies for Masse, irreuerently sit still and chat vntill the Priest begins seruice, as if in stead of Brethren pray for me, hee had said vnto them, Brethren sit ye still and discourse together: And it is worth the noting, that whilst they thus talke, the Priest mumbles to himselfe certaine short Ori∣sons which they tearme secret prayers, with a very soft and low voyce, and afterwards lifts vp his voyce and saies, per omnia saecula saeculorum; from generati∣on to generation, and the common people they an∣swere Amen: Now if it should so happen, as it is very credible it hath, especially when as the Moores in∣habited Spaine, amongst whom there were very ma∣ny Priests, that in outward shew seemed to professe
and countenance Poperie, but indeed were Mahumi∣tans in heart, if I say it should so fall out (which God forbid) that one of these saying Masse, instead of these short Orisons, should in his prayers vtter blasphemy against, Christ, and afterwards should say aloud, per omnia saecula saeculorum, should not the vulgar people in replying Amen, euen ioyne with him in that his most execrable prayer? Wherefore it behoues them to remember that of the Apostle, to him that blesseth onely with the spirit. How shall hee that oc∣cupieth the roome of the vnlearned, say Amen at the giuing of thankes, sith he vnderstands not what thou sayest? This their absurd errour is yet more appa∣rant in their Nunnes, whilst they both at Mattens and Euensong, sing and rehearse certaine Homilies of Pope Gregories venerable Beades, of Thomas Aqui∣nas in Latine, whereof they vnderstand, no not a syllable; I would faine know of them, to whom those excellent Sermons are rehearsed, to God, hee needs them not; to the people, they are aboue their spheare and capacitie: What will the Papists reply hereunto, or what can they say to this ensuing argument? All those that deliuer words that are not intelligi∣ble, doe but beate the ayre. All the Prayers and Sermons of the whole Corab∣ble of Romish Priests are of this nature. So the whole rabble of Romish Priests in their Prayers and Sermons, doe but as it were beate the ayre. The proposition is, Saint Pauls experience proues the assumption, therefore certainely no man will ex∣cept against the conclusion, vnlesse some barbarous
and illiterate rusticke not versed in his Moodes and Figures. A second motiue inforcing me to forsake Poperie, was their doctrine of humane satisfactions, because it is most iniurious and derogatorie to the meritori∣ous and al-sufficient sufferings & satisfactions of our blessed Lord and Sauiour, and directly thwarts and crosseth the whole streame and current of the sacred Scriptures: By that one oblation of himselfe, once of∣fered,Heb. 10. as the Author to the Hebrewes hath it, he hath perfected for euer those that are sanctified; and hee e∣uidently and plainely teacheth elsewhere, that we are perfect and compleat in him: but that which in eue∣ry respect is perfect, needes not ought to make it more absolute. Neither will I passe ouer in silence that I haue of∣tentimes-ruminated with my self; viz. that this their doctrine of humane satisfaction, vtterly ouerthrowes their Indulgences and Masses, together with their Churches treasurie as they so call it: for the bolste∣rers and maintainers of this opinion teach, that of ne∣cessitie, satisfaction must be made to the diuine iustice of Almightie God, euen to the vtmost farthing, and hereupon they would faine ground their Purgatorie, where insufferable flames of fire are prouided, and attend for all that depart this life, according to their doctrine, from whence there is no redemption vntill Gods wrath be fully appeased by their condigne pu∣nishments. On this foundation I erect this edifice; If of necessitie satisfaction must be made to the iustice of Almighty God in deserued punishments, euen to the vttermost farthing, then it is impossible to shunne or
auoide these, but of necessitie they must be vnder∣gone, euen to the vttermost farthing: If this inference be true, that we must needs satisfie the iustice of God in condigne punishments, to the vttermost farthing, how then can Masses, Indulgences, and the merits of Saints haue any vertue in them to extinguish the flames of Purgatorie? But the very truth is, howsoe∣uer the Papists denie in words that there is a necessi∣tie imposed on vs to suffer condigne punishments as well in this life, as the next, for our demerits; yet they make it good in their practises: For, according to the Cannons of the Church of Rome, all those pe∣nances imposed by a confessor on petenciaries, may be exchanged and conuerted into pecuniarie mulcts, yea, as Tolet: in his summes auerres, these penances may be deferred and put ouer heare, to be vndergone in Purgatorie; yea, they may purchase their deliue∣rance from thence also for money: For, although a man deserue to remaine in that same fiery furnace vn∣till the day of the Lord, that last generall Audit, yet at one only Masse said at any allowed and priuiledged Altar (which may be purchased for two or at the most three groates) hath power and vertue enough to set the prisoner at libertie, and to transport and carry him into heauen: yea, in that instant, when he is rendring vp his body, as due debt to nature, ha∣uing a pasport which they call, bulla cruciata, which is sold in Spaine for two groates, any petty Priest hath power not onely to absolue him from the guilt, but a so to free him from the punishment he hath deser∣ued: What are become then of Popish satisfactions, when the most hainous offender may be discharged
and acquitted for two groates? Where wee may note by the way, how that euer in the Church of Rome, retribution is not made to any to his workes as he hath done in this life (as the tenour of the Scripture runnes) but according to his estate in the goods of this life: For, put the case that it should so fall out, that two men of equall merit and desert (to speak in their owne language) so that if they were waighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary, they would euenly poise, should in one instant of time surrender vp their interest and title in this life, and both of them should be adiudged to remaine in the fire of Purga∣tory vntill doomes-day; if so in the behalfe of one of them, one onely Masse be celebrated at a priuiledged and allowed Altar, his partner that cannot be so be∣friended as to haue one saide for him, hee poore soule must lie still by it there to receiue the recom∣pence of his sinnes, without the least hope of remis∣sion, vntill the generall Iayle-deliuery; whereas the former is forthwith loosed from his Fetters, and carryed by Angels into Abrahams bosome, alwayes prouided, the Priest haue his money for the Masse, for otherwise it hath not any vertue at all. A third motiue perswading me to abandon Po∣pery, was their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, affir∣ming that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is really conuerted and transubstantiated into the very Body and Bloud of Christ: First, because it is not grounded on the Word of God, as in a manner Thomas Auio, sometimes a Cardinall in the Church of Rome, the Popes Legate and President at one of their Councels ingeniously acknowledgeth
in these words,Caictan super 3. partem. S. Thomae in quaest. 75. & art. 50. Alterum autem quod Euangelium non explicauit ab ecclesia expresse accepimus scilicet conuersionem panis in corpus Christi: but the other point is not plainely set downe in the Gospell, but wee haue receiued it by tradition, expresly from the Church, to wit, the conuersion of the bread in the Sacrament into the very body of Christ. Iohannes Douns-Scotus fauours this opinion;Super l. 4. sen∣tent. quaest. 11. Fides, saith he, de hoc Sacramento est propter solam ecclesiae determina∣tionem: The ground of our beliefe concerning this Sacrament, is onely the sentence and determination of the Church. Occanus and Durandus de Sancto Porciano, who was sometimes the Popes Penitentia∣rius Priest, the Bishop of Melda, and Prior generall of the order of Preachers, all concurre herein in their iudgements, as also some of the learnedst Do∣ctors of the Romish Church adhere vnto them. Secondly, also it implies a contradiction, that the bo∣dy of Christ should be at one and the same instant of time both in heauen and in the consecrated hoast, which these reasons I shal now produce, seeme to me impregnably to proue. First,The Heauens containe our Lord and Sa∣uiour. Christs body is in heauen circumscriptiue∣ly, therefore he cannot be in any place without the heauen. The Antecedent needes no proofe, the in∣ference is thus strengthened, because as Thomas A∣quinas, Bonauentura, Capreolus, teach, to whose opinion Vasquez also subscribes concerning the de∣finition of circumscription,Apud Suarem. tom. 3. part. 3. viz. Circumscribi loco est corpus ita esse in hoc loco vt non sit extra illum: To be circumscribed in place, is for a body to be so in his place that it cannot bee without his place;
Therefore it is impossible that the Body of Christ should be circumscribed or contained in hea∣uen, and be also without the heauen. The antecedent is acknowledged of all Thomists, and is a principle in philosophy; onely the Iesuites exccept against it, who had rather oppugne and euen wage warre with truth it selfe, then not humour the Pope: but sith there is no contending with such as deny principles, I haue done with those glosing parasites of Antichrist, and come to the Thomists, who that they may not fall into the danger of the Inquisition, inuent cer∣taine shifts to auoide the consequence, affirming that circumscription or circumscriptiue being in place, doth imply a denyall of any other circumscription or circumscriptiue being in place,Circumscripti∣on in one place, doth as well exclude definitiue be∣ing in any o∣ther place at the same time, as a circum∣scriptiue being; for that that is circumscri∣bed in a place, can no way be without that place nor defi∣nitiuely nor circumscrip∣tiuely, as the Schooles speake. but not of a defini∣tion or definitiue being in place; and therefore that Christ may be in heauen circumscriptiuely, and yet in the hoast definitiuely. But thus I reply, this an∣swere is altogether groundlesse: for what reason can be giuen, why one circumscriptiue being in place, should bee more repugnant to another circum∣scriptiue being in place, then to a definitiue? And therefore this answere of the Thomists, as Suarez saith, is a very poore shift, and cousen German to a petitio principij, or begging the poynt in question; Nay its a harder thing to conceiue how a body should be in one place definitiuely, in another cir∣cumscriptiuely at the same time, then to be in two places circumscriptiuely, because to be definitiuely in place, is a manner of existence in place, no way agree∣ing to a body. Secondly, it implies a contradiction, that the bo∣dy
should be distant and seuered from it selfe; But should it be in many places at once, it must needes be seuered and distant from it selfe; Therefore it cannot possibly exist in many places at once. The propositi∣on is infallible, because distance necessarily implies a distinction, but no body is distinguished from it selfe; The assumption is thus strengthened, The di∣stance of bodies is taken from the distance of the places wherein they exist; therefore if the places are distant wherein Christs body exists, Christs body necessarily must needs be distant from it self. Neither could I euer admit or approue of the answere of the Papists hereunto, viz. that indeed the body of Christ is not distant or seuered from it selfe, but onely that it hath distant vbities or different being in place, from the which the body is not simply deno∣minated distant, but onely it is said as it exists in the place to be distant from it selfe, as being existant else∣where: For, who perceiues not apparantly that this answere of them is a meare illusion and cauill? As for example, Peter is not distant from Iohn, but as Iohn exists in another place, and yet neuerthelesse he is ab∣solutely and simply said to be distant from him; Nay, he cannot be distant and seuered from him, but one∣ly in this consideration, as Iohn exists in another place, and existing or hauing his being elsewhere, he cannot but be distant from Iohn; neither can Christs body haue distant vbities or a different being in place and not be distant from it selfe. Thirdly, if Christs body should in one instant of time be both in heauen & in the consecrated Hoast, then it might be questionlesse in innumerable places
at once, and so by consequence should be infinite. All of them grant the first consequence, but denie the se∣cond; because, as they define immensitie, it is, prae∣sentiam naturâ suâ constituentem rem in omnibus spa∣tijs possibilibus, &c. A present setting or placing a thing of its owne nature in all possible places: But admitting Christs body should be placed or set in all such places, yet it hath not this propertie from its essence. But to wound them with their own weapon, I retort their answere backe vpon them. Immensitie is a present setting or placing a thing of its owne na∣ture, in all possible places; Therfore onely that thing that is infinite may be in all possible places; The in∣ference is euident, because the proper passion of any thing cannot agree to any other thing, vnlesse the thing it selfe also agree thereunto; therefore if Immen∣sitie be repugnant to the nature of a body, it must also be repugnant to it to be in innumerable places at once. Moreouer, that which they affirme, viz. that a body is not to be accounted infinite, although it be set or exist in infinite places, because it hath not this from its owne nature, is very ridiculous. For, thus I argue, that if God therefore cannot possibly be con∣tained in any bounds, because by reason of his great∣nesse and immensitie he is euery where, and in euery thing most inwardly present; therefore by the selfe same reason it followes, that neither may a body be present in all places, because it is his nature to be cir∣cumscribed and contained within the limits of place, because as Gods infinite greatnesse makes him vnca∣pable of circumscription, so likewise the finite nature
of a body, makes it vncapable of vbiquitie. To conclude, this was alwaies my faith, that the Bread in the Sacrament, after consecration, remaines still pure Bread; for I my selfe haue seene wormes in∣gendered in the consecrated hoast, which could not haue beene if the substance of bread after the deliue∣rie of the words of benediction vanished away: for then there would not be any pre-existent matter,For euery sub∣stantiall forme necessarily re∣quires some substantiall matter pre-ex∣istent, out of which by the vertue of the agent, the forme is edu∣ced. out of which the formes of wormes might be drawne. Neither like I that answere of the Papists hereunto, who affirme that God miraculously supplies there the first matter; for Christs existencie in the hoast, is most pleasing and acceptable vnto him, as they teach: wherefore then would he by working miraculously aboue nature, leauing the accidents, flye into hea∣uen? and especially sith the accidents of bread haue no contrarie to expell and expose them to corrupti∣on. Besides, all men know that there are many vest∣ments amongst the Papists, that for many generati∣ons, (if it be not impietie to beleeue them) are preser∣ued incorrupted, and that onely because they haue touched the bodies of some of the Saints: what pro∣bable reason then can they render why the body of Christ should not exempt these accidents from cor∣ruption, with which hee is actually couered? This argument is further vrged and pressed, because the ingendering of these vermine, redounds to the disho∣nour of Christ, and the condemnation of the faith∣full; for all that enter into the Church, adore and doe obeisance to the consecrated hoast included in the Pyxe; which if it should be transubstantiated into wormes, they should attribute diuine worship vnto
them. From hence then we may infallibly conclude, that this Doctrine, concerning the carnall and corpo∣rall presence of Christ in the Eucharist, which Pa∣pists so stifly maintaine, is a meere figment of their owne braine. Neither euer would it enter into my minde, that our blessed Lord and Sauiour should by working miraculously aboue the ordinarie course of nature, administer matter for the generation of worms (no second cause requiring their production) & there∣by cause that those accidents hauing no cause to cor∣rupt them, should yet be corrupted; neither haue we reason to beleeue, that Christ for no cause should re∣linquish a place so gratefull and beloued of him, as they say; and so depriue the faithfull of his healthfull and louing presence, especially sith hee must needes foresee, that his absence must needes be manifest and apparant detriment to the faithfull. I haue also obserued very many places in the anci∣ent Fathers, expresly crossing and oppugning this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, some whereof I will here produce. In the first place, Saint Augustine, (in whose name, the Order of which sometime I was, much glorieth) confutes this errour, saying,Contra Adim. cap. 12. Non dubi∣tauit dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum signum da∣ret corporis sui: He doubted not to say, This is my body, when he deliuered onely, the signe of his body: and in another place, Sicutergo secundùm quēdam mo∣dum sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi est; sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est: ita sacramentum fidei fides est:Ep. 22. ad Boni∣facium. Therefore euen as the sacrament of Christs body is after a sort (or after a kinde of manner) his body; and the sacrament of his
bloud, is his bloud, euen so the sacrament of faith, is faith:Saint Austen vseth the like speech of both. From which place I collect this Argument; The sacrament of faith is not transubstantiated into faith, therefore neither is the symbole of Christs body, conuerted into his body: and Tertullian in his booke against Marcion, in the 19. Chap. saith, Panem suum corpus appellat, vt iam inde eum corporis sui fi∣guram pani dedisse intelligas: He cals Bread his bo∣dy, that from thence thou mightest vnderstand that he gaue the figure of his body to the bread, (that is, made bread a figure of his body;) and Gelasius in his Booke of two natures, Tamen, inquit, esse non desinit substantia vel natura panis et vini, et certe imago et si∣militudo corporis et sanguinis Christi in mysteriorum actione celebrantur: yet saith he, the substance, or the essence of the bread cease not to be, and truely the image and similitude of the body and bloud of Christ are celebrated in the action of the mysteries in the sacrament. Moreouer, I abandoned and renounced Poperie, for that it commands praier and inuocation of Saints, that hath neither promise, nor precept, nor president in the sacred Scriptures for its warrant and allow∣ance, for we ought to be assured and perswaded in our consciences by some testimonies from the word of God (the rule and square of our actions) that Al∣mighty God will be pleased to heare and accept of our prayers, through him, and for his sake, in whose name they are tendred vnto him, because that praier that is not of faith, is not pleasing or acceptable to him; but we haue no such promise concerning any of the Saints, but onely concerning that holy and
iust one, Iesus Christ the righteous:Ioh. 16. ver. 23. Whatsoeuer yee shall aske the Father in my name, he will giue it you. Neither yet is there any precept extant in sacred writ, inioyning vs any such duty, but we are excited & com∣manded to flye vnto Christ, by prayer, in time of di∣stresse, according vnto that, Come vnto me al ye that are wearie and heauie laden, and I wil ease you:Math. 11. Neither can any examples be produced out of the Booke of God, whose practise might at the least seeme to fauour or countenance this Doctrine concerning the inuocati∣on of Saints; there are very many places that expres∣ly teach, or necessarily imply, that wee owe the de∣uout affection of our mindes onely to God. Their comparison drawne from the manner and fashion in Princes Courts, is not of any moment; For, should the King constitute and appoint one onely Master of Requests, doubtlesse he would neuer admit or grant any suits preferred vnto him by any other; sith then our blessed Lord and Sauiour is appointed by his Fa∣ther to be our onely Mediator and Intercessor, why then haue we recourse to any other? why relye we vpon, and preferre a most doubtfull and incertaine course, to a most certaine and infallible meanes? How are we assured that the Saints heare and vnderstand our grieuances? and admit they doe, that God ap∣proues and accepts of our petitions tendred vnto him in this sort; nay, wee are certainely assured, and ex∣presly taught the contrarie, for our Lord and Saui∣our saith of himselfe, I am the way, the truth,Ioh. 14. ver. 6. and the life, no man commeth vnto the Father but by mee; If it be his pleasure that wee should vse no other meanes vnto the Father but himselfe, doubtlesse it is
not his will that wee should vse the mediation of Saints.Aug. tract. 22. super Ioan. This was Austens opinion when as he said in the person of Christ, Non est quò eas nisi ad me; non est quà eas nisi per me: Thou hast no whither to goe but to me, no way but by mee: Hereunto also Saint Ambrose assents, saying, Sedtamen Domine tu solus inuocandus es; But thou O Lord, onely art to be called vpon. Moreouer, I detested this their inuocati∣on of Saints, because they not onely pray vnto them, but equalize and ranke them in an equall degree of honour with Christ; I charge them not falsly, the thing it selfe is too apparant; for when as not onely the vulgar sort, but euen their learned Rabbins haue poynted out, and as it were giuen in commission, es∣peciall charges of administration and gouernement to euery seuerall Saint: Christ is not once thought of; they all imagine Christ to be more hard, and the Saints of a more benigne disposition, and easier to be intreated: and had rather trust to, and throw them∣selues into the armes of their mercy, then relye and depend on him for helpe; and leauing Christ, they flye vnto the Saints, they apprehend and apply vnto themselues the merits of the Saints for the pardon of their sinnes. And in the Romish Breuiarie, euery where God is intreated that hee would be pleased to bring men into his Kingdome in heauen, and that for the merits of his Saints; as it is apparant in this Col∣lect, appointed for the feast of Saint Martha: Almighty and most mercifull God, whose Sonne vouchsafed to be feasted in the house of blessed Mar∣tha; grant wee beseech thee for her merits that so friendly and louingly entertained him, wee may be
mercifully receiued and entertained in thy Kingdome of glory. There are many such curtaild Prayers in their forenamed Breuiarie, which euidently declare, that the Papists make their Saints not onely their In∣tercessors, but also their Reconcilers and pacifiers of Gods wrath: and Gabriell, the interpreter of the Cannon of the Masse, blusheth not to affirme that we ought euen by the prescription and appointment of God himselfe, to flye vnto the Saints for succour, that we may through their prayers and merits obtaine saluation: Hereunto Pope Innocent the third assents, saying, Necessarium nobis esse in viâ sanctorum suf∣fragium: Whilst we are yet in the way to our Coun∣try, we need the suffrages of the Saints: and Thomas Aquinas peremptorily affirmes,1.2. quest. 178. art. 1. opera miraculosa quae fiunt à Sanctis non solum intercedendo pro nobis ad deum praestari abillis, sed etiam cum imperio et pote∣state orta ex quâdam virtute ipsis à deo communica∣ta; that is, That the miracles that are done by the Saints, are performed not onely by praying for vs to God, but with a kinde of command and power, ari∣sing from a kinde of vertue communicated to them from God: And in a certaine Spanish Booke, compo∣sed by a Doctor of Diuinitie, and a Monke, of the or∣der of Saint Marie de Mercede, and approued of by the Archbishop of Valentia, and of the Iudge of Sancta Cruciata, and committed to the Presse with license from the Deputy of the kingdome of Valentia; the title whereof is, Breue historia de la orden de la Mer∣ced; the Author thereof affirmes, that the hope of our saluation is fastened with to Ankers, viz. Christ, and the Virgin Mary, and that none but may feare to
be reiected of God, if he be not cloathed with the me∣rits of Mary; but I had rather deliuer it in his owne words, Quiso dios estribasse el bien del hombre en dor ancoras esto es en Christo y en Maria benditissima, su Madre, Porque Como no avia elhombre por si solo sin el apoyo y arrimo delos nurecimientos desta esclarecida reyna de recelar le auia de desechar dios? To this pur∣pose I might alledge that same most detestable Pi∣cture which represents Austen betweene Christ and Mary; turning towards Mary, hee is made to speake these words, I sucke out of these Teats, looking to∣wards Christ, these, I am fed of these words, where∣vnto is added in the midst,Earradius in concord. in e∣uang. tom. 1. l. 8. cap. 11. I know not whether to turne me, and that of Barradius the Iesuite, who de∣mands of Christ, wherefore ascending into heauen, he would not take his Mother along with him? and he himselfe answeres himselfe thus, peraduenture O Lord, thy heauenly Courtiers would be at a stand whe∣ther first to greet and entertaine thee their Lord, or her their Lady: and that the cursed and bitter fruits of their inuocation of Saints, may be the better perceiued and discerned,In lib. hisp. supra allegato, fol. 180. let vs heare the Papists themselues in one breath, inuocating Mary and blas∣pheming God. Here followeth their Letanie. HOly Mary, Pray for vs. Holy Mother of God, Pray for vs. Holy Virgin of Virgins, Pray for vs.
Thou that art the liuing Temple of the blessed Tri∣nitie, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Lady of Angels, Pray for vs. Thou that art the of∣spring and honour of the Patriarkes, Pray for vs. Thou that art the desire of the Prophets, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Mi∣stresse of the Apostles, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Com∣fortresse of Martyres, Pray for vs. Thou that art the instru∣ctresse of the learned, Pray for vs. Thou that art the hope of Eremites, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Stan∣dard-bearer of Virgins, Pray for vs. Thou that art a patterne for the married, Pray for vs. Thou that are the com∣fort of Widdowes, Pray for vs. Thou that art the ioy of holy men and women, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Para∣dice of pleasure, Pray for vs. Thou that art the tree of life, Pray for vs. Thou that art the onely parcell of earth, free from the curse of Adam, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Doue, carrying an Oliue branch, Pray for vs. Thou that art Iacabs lad∣der, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Bush of Moses, that burned, and consumed nor, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Arke of the couenant, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Rod of Aaron Pray for vs.
Thou that art the golden pot of heauenly Manna, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Altar of sweet perfume, Pray for vs. Thou that art a Citie of refuge. Pray for vs. Thou that art Gedeons Fleece. Pray for vs. Thou that art a Lilly a∣mongst thornes. Pray for vs. Thou that art a Garden enclosed, Pray for vs. Thou that art a Foun∣taine sealed vp, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Pit of liuing waters, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Tower of Dauid, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Palme exalted, Pray for vs. Thou that art the pre∣tious Myrrhe, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Rose of Sharon, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Cedar of Libanus, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Cypresse of mount Sion, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Sprigg of Iesse, Pray for vs. Thou that art the beauti∣full Oliue, Pray for vs. Thou that art the liuing Altar, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Torch of the faithfull, Pray for vs. Thou that art the rising Sunne that neuer sets, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Moone alwaies at the full. Pray for vs. Thou that art the Kings Court, Pray for vs. Thou that art the fragrant Meadow of the holy Ghost, Pray for vs.
Thou that art a Sanctua∣ry alwaies holy, Pray for vs. Thou that art the mirror of all vertues, Pray for vs. Thou that art the bright morning-Starre, Pray for vs. Thou that art the throne, and seate of God, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Castle of Iesse, Pray for vs. Thou that art the safe harbour of Seafaring∣men, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Sea∣starre that reioyceth the hearts of Marriners, Pray for vs. Thou who alone art a Virgin, and a Mother, Pray for vs. Thou who alone art a fruitfull Virgin, Pray for vs. Thou that art louely to heauen, terrible to hell, Pray for vs. Thou that art the confi∣dence of the godly, the terrour of the wicked, Pray for vs. Thou that art priuie to all the secrets of God, Pray for vs. Thou that inlightnest the highest Seraphins, Pray for vs. Thou that art the glory of the people of Israell, Pray for vs. Thou that art all faire throughout, Pray for vs. Thou that art beautifull as the Moone, pretious as the Sunne, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Mo∣ther of our Creator, Re∣deemer, and Sauiour, Pray for vs. Thou that art the true Mo∣ther of the Sons of Adam, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Queene of Kings, and Ladie of Lords, Pray for vs. Thou that art most hum∣ble in Maiestie, Pray for vs.
Thou that dispensest the graces of the holy spirit, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Mo∣ther of deare loue, Pray for vs. Thou that wert foretold by the Prophets, adored by Angels, Pray for vs. Thou that art espoused, yet ignorant of the mar∣riage bed, Pray for vs. Thou that art the Nurse of him that nurseth all things, Pray for vs. Thou that containedst him that containeth all things, Pray for vs. Thou that art the fairest among the Daughters of Ierusalem, Pray for vs. Thou which wast onely free from the sinne of A∣dam, Pray for vs. Thou which wast ouer∣shadowed by the power of the most high from aboue, Pray for vs. Thou that first imbraced the word of God, Pray for vs. Thou which inclosedst him in thy womb, whom the heauens could not containe, Pray for vs. Thou which onely didst bring forth without sor∣row, Pray for vs. Thou which didst breake the head of the craftie Ser∣pent, Pray for vs. Thou who firmely didst retain faith in his passion, Pray for vs. Thou whose body saw no corruption, Pray for vs. Thou who art assumed into heauen in thy glori∣fied body, Pray for vs. Thou that art exalted a∣boue the quire of Angels, Pray for vs.
Thou that sittest at the right hand of the Sonne of God, Pray for vs. Thou that reconcilest vn∣to vs God angry with vs, Pray for vs. Thou that art called on by a thousand attributes and titles, Pray for vs. Be thou fauourable vnto vs, Heare vs Lady. From euill and the dan∣ger of euill, Defend vs Lady. We beseech thee by thy immaculate conception, Defend vs Lady. We beseech thee by thy holy Natiuity, Defend vs Lady. We beseech thee by thy comfortable Annunciati∣on, Defend vs Lady. We beseech thee by thy ioyfull visitation, Defend vs Lady. We beseech thee by thy most pure purification, Defend vs. By thy glorious Ascenti∣on, Defend vs. By thy triumphant Co∣ronation, Defend vs. and afterward, That thou wouldest bee pleased to grant concord and peace to thy whole Church, We beseech thee to heare vs. And beneath, O Daughter of the high God, Defend vs. Thou that art the Mo∣ther of the Lambe, that taketh away the sinnes of the world, We beseech thee to heare vs. Thou that art the Spouse of the Holy Ghost, We beseech thee to helpe vs.
An Encomiasticall Letanie to the blessed Virgine, the Mother of GOD, gathered out of the sacred Scriptures and holy Authors. First of all sung in the great Church of the Citie Valentia, when as the holy Image of that Virgine, named Del Puig, fa∣mous and renowned for her frequent miracles both on Land and Sea, in the time of Warre and Peace, was brought in great state into Valentia, at that time when as the inuincible Armada was sent to inuade Eng∣land, which was on the 17. day of Iuly, being Sunday, in the yeere of our Lord God. 1588. VVEe beseech thee to heare vs sinners, that thou wouldest obtaine true repentance for vs. We beseech thee that thou wouldest take care to preserue the Apostolicke See, and all the orders of the Clergie in the true Religion. We beseech thee that allaying all stormes, thou wouldest conductWhat successe and effect this prayer had, ide, the Christ∣mas hangings in the great Chamber at Thue-hall. safely the Catholicke Fleet of the Catholicke King, to the much desired and wished∣for Hauen. We beseech thee that thou wouldest grant victo∣fry to the Catholicke Fleet of the Catholicke King, ouer most barbarous and sauage heretickes. We beseech thee to enlarge those Christians that are still oppressed with the yoke and tyranny of the English, that they may freely professe their faith and conscience. We beseech thee that thou wouldest astonish and smite the hearts of the stubborne and obstinate here∣tickes of England, with feare and trembling.
We beseech thee that thou wouldest giue wise∣dome and courage to those faithfull souldiers that fight for the Catholicke faith. We beseech thee that thou wouldest cause those holy Churches which are either vtterly ruinated or impiously prophaned, to be re-edified and restored to the honour of God, and to the honor of holy men and women. That thou wouldest be instant with God by prayer, that the kingdome of England (the darkenes of blindnesse being dispeld) may be reduced to the ancient and Catholicke faith, and to the obedience of the Church of Rome. We beseech thee to heare vs. That thou wouldest be pleased to preserue all Spaine from the contagion of euill, especially this Ci∣tie most deuoted to thy seruice. We beseech thee to heare vs. That thou wouldest be pleased to obtaine peace in loue for thy whole Church. We beseech thee to heare vs. Moreouer: This likewise excited me to detest Pope∣ry, that it presumptuously dares, contrary to the ex∣presse commandement of God, set before the people all sorts of Images to be worshipped and adored; The ground of my dislike hereof, was not onely be∣cause God hath prohibited it, but because I very well knew, and was certainely perswaded, that this their adoring and reuerencing of such images, is the Lac∣quy and Page of the grossest Idolatry; wherefore I thought it most meete, that these Images of Popery
should be handled, as we reade the Brasen Serpent was by Hezekiah; for if Moses erected that Serpent in the Wildernes, not without his especiall warrant frō God; yet neuerthelesse because the people in long tract of time, fell to the worshipping of this Image, King Hezekiah detesting and abhorring this their Idolatry, commanded it to be taken downe and cut in peeces; with farre better reason should the Images of Popery, set vp contrary to Gods commandement, bee remoued and cut in peeces, who haue for their author and maintainer, not Moses the seruant of God, but the Pope, who is Christs enemy. And experience shewes, and their writings giue me euidence, that they haue degenerated so farre, as not onely to adore these Ima∣ges, but also to haue forsaken their Creator, that they might settle and fixe their hope and confidence wholly on them, as this ensuing Eglogue, taken out of the fore-cited Spanish Booke will make it most plaine to the Reader. A gratulation of this Sacred house, to the blessed Virgin, the Mother of God for her returne. I Lay comfortlesse, being destitute of thee my light, & most glorious ornament, as a dead body deuoyd of life and motion, me thought I heard euery one say∣ing vnto me; Where is that pretious gold which Princely hands haue laide vp in thee? Where are these infinite riches? Where is that bottomelesse depth of graces? Where is the Ocean of miraculous cures? Where is that louely Image of the blessed
Virgin the Mother of God? To whom I replyed, she is gone, she is gone that imparted wonderfull holi∣nesse vnto me, that hath made mee a most renowned Church; shee is gone, guarded, and attended with Angels and Saints; she I say, who hath made me an euer flowing fountaine of miraculous cures, a remedy against diuels, the onely refuge to all that flye vnto me; but she who seemed to be absent from me in bo∣dy, was present with me by her wonderfull miracles, for shee which was manifested to our ancestors, as with starre lights, now by miraculous lights sent from heauen vnto me, hath testified how much shee loues me: All haile therefore, my life, light, honour and ornament, now comming vnto mee, for in this thy most happy and fortunate returne, there is sprung vp a new light to all the inhabitants of this Citie, ho∣nour, ioy, and exaltation; Welcome thou that art full of grace; Welcome thou Sea of ioy; Welcome thou only ease in troubles; Welcome thou that art the one∣ly salue for al the hearts sore; Welcome holy Virgin, through whose meanes alone, we see the Kingdome of Valentia is brought and vnited to the Kingdome of Christ, and we hope many others will be. All this they vtter to a stone, being indeed more sencelesse and stupid then it, and yet they would needes beare vs in hand that they worship not the I∣mage but God in the Image: Certainely if this were true, those ouer-blessed Monkes in their Cloysters, that haue Christ, who is life it selfe, inclosed in a boxe, should not so plainely acknowledge, that by reason of the absence of the Image, they were euen dead, de∣uoide of life and motion: for if Christ were their life,
those that haue him in their custody cannot be said to be dead, yet these men brag that they haue him, and yet liue not; therefore Christ is not that life whereof they speake, but the Image of blessed Mary, as neither is Christ their treasure, but the louely I∣mage of the blessed Virgin, the mother of our Lord; for these Monkes suppose not that they inioy their treasure, because they haue Christ presentin the conse∣crated hoast, but they esteemed that they had lost it, because they wanted the Image of the Virgin Mary: In like manner, it was not Christ that communicated and imparted his holinesse to those most sacred hou∣ses, for Christ is there present, but the party is absent that hath endued them with wonderfull holinesse, and hath made it a most famous and renowned Church; and truely, if Christ did dwell in their hearts, as he doth in the hearts of Christians, they should not lye comfortlesse, for he is the true light that il∣lightneth euery one that comes into the world, but be∣cause he is farre from them (I speake not of their meale God, but of our Sauiour) it is not his light, but the Images that shines before them; neither is it to be wondred at, if that same new light be sprung vp to the Papists, that forsaking the true God, who is α, and ω, the first and the last, they forge new corruptible Gods, betweene whom, and those the auncient hea∣then worshipped, I finde this remarkeable difference, Those ancient Gods had feete and walked not, these walke, yet haue no feete; Those had eares and heard not, these heare and haue no eares; Those had eyes and saw not, these discerne and discouer the most re∣motest obiects, yet haue no eyes. That these and farre
more remarkeable matters are done by Popish Idols, euidently appeares by this insuing narration. That is, Bartholomew de Billaro saw a certaine bo∣dy going on fore-right through the ayre, towards the Altar of the Image, accompanied with twelue white Tapors; he could not certainely discerne whi∣ther it were that very Image or some other; but hee testified before a publike notarie, that hee did verily beleeue, that it was the very same Image, which with∣out all doubt, returned from visiting some sicke per∣son, that implored its helpe, which is very probable, for in the Legend of Miracles you may reade, that she hath performed this courteous office, and that very often. The writings of the Papists are fraught with these, and farre groser lyes, to the intent, that they might perswade men, that these images are to be called vp∣on, and their aide implored in imminent dangers; and to this purpose they teach, that they ought to make vowes vnto them, and in briefe, to offer gifts vnto them; for it is vnto this marke that their legend of ly∣ing miracles aimes and leuelleth, viz. that the know∣ledge of Christ be wholly supplanted and subuerted, and the affiance we ought to haue in God, to be trans∣ferd and set onely on the image; whereof this is an euident and infallible signe and token,Psal. 144. The Author of the fore al∣leadged Spanish Booke. Elque de lexos inuecare est a imagen sera par∣ticipante de sus fauores. that when as they know that God is neere vnto all those that call vpon him, yet they forsaking Christ, not onely pray themselues vnto Images that are farre distant, but al∣so teach and perswade men so to doe in a set forme; and whereas they should know that the Lord stands at the doore and knocks, that he might sup with him
that opens vnto him, and freely and liberally feedes him with heauenly food, yet these contemning him, forsaking their houses and families, goe in pilgrima∣ges to the Images of Saints; whereby they are so far from being refreshed, that on the contrary, they de∣priue themselues of those goods whereby they should maintaine their Children and Families, and contrary to natures law, heape them on those Images, not that the Images should receiue any fruit or benefit by those gifts that are offered, but that the slow-bellies of the Monkes might be filled and stuft: Besides, when as they heare Christ so louingly inuiting them, Come vnto me all ye that are wearie and heauie laden,Math. 11. and I will refresh you: they flye from him and haue recourse vnto Images, and aske counsell of them. I will touch, by the way, what I haue often thought on with my selfe, viz. that the Idolatry of the Pa∣pists herein, is more manifestly discerned by making a supposition, which they labour for with might and maine, as for their life, viz. that Christ is present in the consecrated hoast, which inclosed in a boxe is perpetually preserued in euery Popish house: If they haue their Sauiour Christ present with them, whom they assuredly know both can and will helpe them, wherefore then is it that they betake themselues to Images that are not present perhaps farre remote from them? How comes it to passe that they set light by him who is the expresse Image of his Fa∣thers substance,Heb. 1. that gouernes all things by the Word of his power,1 Tim. 2. and gaue himselfe for the redemption of all and who (if we may beleeue the Papists) is well pleased to remaine here on earth vnder the accidents
of bread, that by his gratious presence, hee might comfort his distressed Church, and ease her of her af∣fliction? How comes it to passe, I say, that they set∣ting so light by him, they place him on an abiect and meane alter, with one only lamp burning before him, where he is visited of very few, and very seldome saluted, whilest that the Image of Mary his Mother,I speake not of all Images, but of those that are most famous, as our Lady of Lau∣retto in Italy, and our Lady of Monserat in Cataluania, & our Lady De Attocha, et de Guadalupe in Casteele. indeede but his handmaide, also, is set on an altar of gold, or Iuorie, curiously carued & polished, richly set forth with gemmes and pretious stones, cloathed with Princely garments, hauing not one onely, but fortie or fiftie tapers shining gloriously before her? Very many, being strucke with blindnesse, by reason of these lights fall downe on their knees trem∣bling before her, spend whole dayes and nights in powring forth dolefull prayers vnto the Image; they lament, they make their complaints, lift vp their hands in pittifull manner, earnestly begge of her re∣mission of their sinnes, and to conclude, with the wel∣fare of the Popes Kitchin and Monkes bellies, they offer liberally to her with a full hand. Verily sith the truth of these things haue beene ratified and confirmed by long experience, when I my selfe haue beene an eye witnesse, none can deny that such as doe such things as these are strucken both with blindnesse and madnesse, for mine owne particular, I freely confesse that this absurde error of theirs, amongst others of the like nature, was my first motiue to the abiuring and abandoning of Pope∣ry; and were the Church of Rome in all other articles of beleife orthodoxall and conformable to the Chri∣stian truth, yet this onely rocke in my way would vt∣terly
haue driuen me from the profession thereof. But it is to be lamented with teares, that as in part I haue euidently and clearely shewed vnto you, the Church of Rome hath swarued from the rules of the Apostles in many tenents of faith, and haue brought in an innumerable company of Pestilent errours and diabolicall superstitions; therefore let no man maruell that I haue vtterly forsaken and a-abandoned Popery: I heard the voyce of the Lord calling me, and not willing to harden my heart, I came forth of Babylon, lest pertaking longer with her in her sinnes, I might also pertake in her punish∣ments. Although these things were so as hath been related, for which I blesse and praise God; yet there were many Remoraes or hinderances that detained me in Spaine, and diuerted my minde from seeking the meanes of my saluation by Christ; insomuch that almost for the space of two yeares, my con∣science struggled with mee, and endured many a bitter conflict: For, first, the world and the flesh obiected vnto my eyes, and whispered in my eares, that if I forsake Babylon, and cleaue to Christ, I must make account to take my farewell of all the plea∣sures and allurements of this life; of my noble Parents, of my Riches, Brethren and Sisters, of my Friends, Country, Patrimonie and Pleasures, which here I inioyed; together, with Honours and promotions; for I was a Monke of the fa∣mous Order of Saint Augustine, a Priest, a Preacher, a Professor of Philosophie, and Batche∣lor in Diuinitie; all which assuredly promised, as yeares increased, to aduance and raise mee to
higher dignitie and preferment. Againe, I seriously and aduisedly pondered with my selfe, that hi∣therto I was both an honour and a comfort to my Parents, that hereafter the newes of this my conuersion would set a publike and eternall marke of infamie on them. I cast also daily in my minde, the pouertie, nakednesse, perpetuall exile, hatred of Parents, Countrie, Friends, and in briefe, the want and depriuation of all necessarie things towards the preseruation of this life, which I must needes indure if I quite my for∣mer religion; but all these carnall respects I slightly regarded and past-by, when I seriously considered, That wee must through many tribu∣lations,Acts 14. enter into the Kingdome of God;2 Tim. 2. And that all that desire to liue godly in Christ Ie∣sus, must suffer persecution: and therefore, about some two yeares and a halfe since, I left Spaine, that I might settle my selfe in this flourishing Kingdome, where euery man praiseth God in the Sunne-shine of the Gos∣pell: It is neere about two yeares since I first made my abode in this Citie, wherein by the meanes and fauour of God, I haue professed publikely the reformed Christian Religion, and haue vowed and sworne solemnely to con∣tinue in it to my liues end. Neither shall my great want, wherewithall I am much perplexed, I trust in God, euer alter my purpose and resoluti∣on, but that God that hath begun this good worke in mee, will perfect it; to the praise of his blessed and glorious name, to my eternall saluation,
to the edification of all my Brethren, and to the confusion of the aduersarie, for which I bow my knees to Almighty God the Fountaine of all goodnesse, with my whole heart beseeching him to establish and confirme mee more and more in his truth. Laus Deo, Amen. Errata. PAge 3. l. 8. lege pro, ibid. l. 18. lege pro, p. 4. l. 25. lege rabble, ibid. l. 27. le∣ge Ergo, p. 6. l. 21. dele at, p. 7. l. 2. dele euer, ibid. l. 3. adde according, ibid. l. 13 adde be that, p. 8. l. 4. adde with, ibid. l. 12. lege Occamus, ibid. l. 14. lege Penitentiarie, ibid. l. 32. lege this, p. 10. l. 15. lege vbieties, ibid. l. lege beings, ibid. l. 17. lege this, ibid. l. 27. lege vbieties, ibid. l. dele a. ibid. l. lege beings, p. 11. l. 3. dele it is, ibid. l. 5. lege presens, ibid. l. 11. lege presens, ibid. l. 28. le∣ge its, p. 12. l. 4. lege true, p. 13. l. 25. dele onely, p. 17. l. 25. lege Iudges, p. 18. l. 12. lege with, ibid. l. lege wounds, p. 21. l. 14. lege Iesu. FINIS.
