3802 99846556 11533
¶A REPLY TO FVLKE, In defense of M. D. Allens scroll of Articles, and booke of Purgatorie. By Richard Bristo Doctor of Diuinitie. Tit. 3. Haereticum hominem post vnam & secundam cor∣reptionem deuita: sciens quia subuersus est, qui eiusmodi est, & deliquit cum sit pro∣prio iudicio condemnatus. Auoyde the Heretike man after the first and second correption: knowing that he which is suche, is subuerted and sinneth, syth that he is condemned by his owne Iudgement. Perused and allowed by me Th. Stapleton. Imprinted at Louaine by Iohn Lion. Anno Dom. 1580.
¶TO THE READER. IT may serue greatly to thy edification (gentle Reader) as it also perteineth much to my purpose in this booke, to let thée vnderstande, that where as there are two wayes of finding out Christian truth when it is in controuersie, the one by trea∣ting of euery matter in particuler, the other by giuing certayne generall rules that are infallible: Twelue or thirtéene yeres agoe M.D. Allen, hauing amongst other learned Catholikes of our time and countrey on this side the sea, opened and defended in print most perspicuously and substantially, cer∣tayne speciall articles of the Catholike saith: and béeing driuen not long after by sicknes to séeke to the ayre of his natiue soyle, did in the short space of his abode there, deale also the other waye with many Gentlemen, confirming some, and setting vp agayne others, by most euident and vndouted rules of truth, which were alwayes common for the most part among Catholikes, but the weight of them déepely considered of very few, and the number of them as yet neither by him nor by any other bound vp together. Onely to one gentleman requesting so much, he gaue a copie of them, suche a one as of extemporall and priuate writing might be looked for. It is now nine yeres since I heard the same of his own mouth, what time I came first into his blessed familie, and was present very often when amongst vs he discoursed familiarly vpon the said rules, to such liking of my part, that I left him not vntill I had intreated him to take his penne one morning, and out of his memorie to frame me also a copie. Which copie a friende hauing séene here with me, who afterward was sent home into our lords haruest, in a letter from thence desired instantly to be made par∣taker therof, affirming that he saw how medicinable it would be to many soules, I communicated the matter to the Author of it. He béeing wholly occupied him selfe in publike teaching of Di∣uinitie, would haue me who then had more leasure, though for
skill not worthy to beare his booke, to deuise somewhat vpon those and the like rules, which might in print be published to the world: not as though the very bare rules, as in the foresaid co∣pies, were not conuenient and sufficient, specially for men of in∣telligence and that willingly would be informed, but that by the declaration and confirmation of them the rude also and obstinate might be induced. And this was the occasion of my Motiues in the ende of the yeare 1574. and also of my Demaundes in the beginning of the yeare 1576, which I made vpon the motion of certayne, who desired to haue the Motiues printed agayne, be∣cause the first impression was for the greater part taken and de∣stroyed by the aduersaries. And now after all this, the last yeare 1577. commeth foorth from one W. Fulke an heretike, a pretended answere to the first copie aboue mentioned, or to some extract thereof, ioyned with another like answere of the same Authors to D. Allens booke of Purgatorie, and to my handes it came a fewe wéekes agoe, euen an. 1578 stylo R.this late Christmas. Sith which time reading it twise o∣uer, I finde, that he neuer so much as once mentioneth either my Motiues, or my Demaundes, and much lesse doth he euer goe a∣bout to infringe any of my probations therein conteined. And yet notwithstanding this depe silence,Fulke li. 2. p. 107. in one place he bewrayeth him selfe to haue knowen of them, where he glaunceth at the di∣uine worke of a certayne healing which I reported in my Mo∣tiues,Moti. 5. fol. 19. and sayth, As you haue myracles now in Flaunders of the honest woman of the olde Baily in London. Although other∣wise also who can thinke it possible for him to haue heard no∣thing (at least when he sought to print his) of bookes written so late of the same matter, and so well knowen to the Superinten∣dent of London and innumerable others of that side, whiche also any man that had séene the copie that Fulke answereth, might easily conceiue to procéede from the same Author, and me onely to be his scholar, howbeit I also not obscurely professed as much, where I said:Mot. f. 2· [The preiudices and euidences for the Catholike faith against all heresies, are innumerable and superable: and my chaunce it hath bene, through the mercifull prouidence and goodnes of God, to liue certayne yeres in companie with Catho∣like men of great vertue, wisdome, and knowlege, blessed of God
most liberally with his graces, such as our miserable countrey is not worthy of: whose dayly familiar talke of such things I haue vsed to heare, as to my great admiration, so likewise with all diligence and attention. And what I haue through such com∣munication at sundry times, or of my selfe at other times, by meanes thereof obserued, I purpose as memorie shall serue me, and God assist me, béeing thervnto both iustly moued, and ear∣nestly required, in this booke at once to vtter it in part.] If I may say what I do ghesse hereat, I suppose that it should still haue lyen by him,Fulk to the Reader. as it hath done (he saith) these eyght or nyne yeares, and neuer haue bene put in print, but only for shew of an answere to my Motiues and Demaundes, specially séeing that, where as D. Allens writing was called onely by the name of Articles, this man at euery Article hath also printed the worde Demaundes, because euery Article consisteth of certayne Demaundes: by meane whereof I knowe already my selfe, some that are deceyued, and thinke it to be an answere vnto me, yet in trueth it toucheth not me at all, neither maketh any iuste answere to D. Allen, but all so simply and so féebly, that he is fayne to set it out without priuiledge, as also his other booke agaynst Purgatorie,Ibidem. though that booke was authorized (he saith) almost two yeares ago, wherein I knowe not whether we may beléeue his bare worde, for many causes easie to be here noted, and one namely, for that he thus writeth in the same: We be∣leeue that Pa. 450 VVhat if the Church vvere in Englande only: or one vvere king of al coun∣treis some∣time vvher it is? the Catholike Church hath no chiefe gouernour vpon earth but Christ, vnto whom all power is giuen in hea∣uen and earth. Well, if it haue authoritie, at the least with∣out priuilege it hath it, and his former booke neyther hath pri∣uilege nor authoritie. and yet out it commeth, by permission at the least, to make forsooth a face and showe of somewhat for a time, and if after it chaunce to be of some Catholike dasht out of countenaunce, then the shame to be no mans but onely Fulkes. All which considered, I doubted a while, whether it were good to returne him an answer, or no, least peraduenture I should but lease my labour, & rather to expect yet somewhat longer, whe∣ther any do answer my Motiues or Demaunds, as by aduise out
of England, I haue nowe more then this tweluemonth wayted therevpon. Yet my resolution hath bene, séeing that abundans cautio non nocet, to put out my hande a litle, and take of his vi∣zard, that being playnly discouered, euery man may beholde and abhorre his foule fauour, and beare me witnesse that he had bene better to kéepe in, not onely those nine yeres and two yeres, but also for euer, following rather the ensamples of those other two brethren mentioned in his preface to the Reader, of whom the one purposed to haue answered the booke of Purgatory himself, but afterward vndertooke rather the printing of Fulkes answere: the other learnedly began the answering of it, but was, he kno∣weth not how, letted from the accomplishing of the same. So hath Satan hitherto hindred the setting abrode of this answere (sayth he of his owne) but God hath now at length brought it forth: I doubt not (he addeth) but to his glory, and the confusion of satan in his members the Papistes. As I also doubt not, but God in déede hath brought it forth, to his glory, and to the confu∣sion of heresie, so, that satan had done more politikely, to haue hindred still, if he could, the setting abrode of it, such stuffe it con∣teineth. Better stuffe we should haue had, if better had they had. Well, séeing that M.D. Allen is otherwise and better occu∣pied, I, who haue already succéeded him in his Articles, and do owe vnto him (at one worde) all duetie, both for the publike, and namely for my priuate, will here with the helpe of God, laye so much of Fulks wares open, out of both his bookes, that although my meaning is directly against his first booke, yet my treatise shall appeare to be a iust reply to both his bookes. First therefore I will shew briefly, how he confesseth, that out of the true Church is no saluation,See the con¦tentes more at large in the ende of this booke. to this ende, that when as in my processe it shall be manifest, that he and his felowes are out of the true Church, and that we haue the true Church, both they may clearely sée in what case they stand, and their felowes may looke in time vnto their reconciliation. Secondly, I will shewe somewhat more at large, for what space he graunteth the true Church to haue continued in sight and knowledge of the world, and what persons and companies to haue bene of it: to the ende, that neither he nor no man else being able to proue that we agrée not with those times and per∣sons
in substance of religion, or haue gone out of the vnitie of their communion, it may euidently be séene, that we likewise at this time be of the same true Church, and he with his fel∣lowes to be without the true Church, because they be out of our Church. Thirdly, for as much as on the other side he could not denie, but that he and his agrée not with the saide true Church, I will shew, how he is fayne to holde that the true Church may erre, and that he chargeth it then with the same errours, with the which he chargeth vs now: to the end that thou mayst sée, that for all those surmised errours, he hath not any iust cause to de∣nie vs the true Church, which he giueth to them that with vs were in the same errours. Nay, I will further declare in the fourth place, that he char∣geth  them with diuers errors, wherewith he neither can nor doth charge vs: that it may much more appeare, that we haue the true Church nowe, if they so much worse then we, had the true Church then. Fiftly, I wil report the reason for which (by his saying) they  had the true Church then, notwithstanding their errors: to the end, that where thou shalt sée it to be such a reason as agréeth to vs nowe as well, thou mayst perceyue, that he must no lesse graunt vs the true Church now. After this I will note briefly his zeal towards Caluin and  others that in déede are, or at least be vnfaignedly thought of him to be of his Church at this time, how that he can not in any wise beare any thing to be spoken agaynst them, whereas yet he not onely can beare, but also him selfe speaketh so much agaynst the olde auncient Church, and the members thereof. And in consideration hereof my Catholike zeale must do no lesse (as béeing in déede with all other Catholikes of this time, a member of the very same auncient Church in olde time) but answere for the said Church, shewing in euery particuler, how vnworthily and vniustly he chargeth it with erring. Which I will in like maner do for the Church also of later times, defen∣ding it likewise against all his like accusations of it. Seuenthly, I will declare, howe that, séeing manifestly the  true Church, Councels, Fathers, and all other euidences of
Christian Religion, to make cléerely against him and his, he is faine, and nothing abasht at the matter, to take exception a∣gainst all, by the bare name and colour of Onely Scripture: and therein behaueth him selfe so boldly, as if the holy Scripture were as manifestly with him, as all the other are manifestly a∣gainst him. Where also because, like an other Phormio homo confidens, he prouoketh vs to a disputation of Scripture, I will make him a reasonable offer. Eightly, I will most cléerely shew, how that, not withstan∣ding all these great crakes and bolde facinges of his, he hath not for all that in these two bookes alleaged so much as one text of Scripture that maketh any whit against vs. And to that pur∣pose, I will aunswer all his allegations: first, concerning One∣ly Scripture to be credited: next, concerning the Church, whe∣ther it can erre, and whether we haue it or they: then, concer∣ning Purgatory: and last of all, concerning all other matters that any where he mentioneth by the way. Ninthly, I will likewise shew, whereas he maketh himselfe so sure of Scripture, that he holdeth the testimonies of Coun∣cels and Fathers to be no confirmation of trueth, and allea∣geth them sometimes notwithstanding: although because of his so holding, I might neglect those allegations, yet I will shewe (I say) that of all which he alleageth, no one, neither expoun∣deth any Scripture, nor beareth any other testimonie with him against vs. Which wil be a plaine demonstration of that which I proposed here aboue in the second Chapter, to wit, that wée haue still the true Church, because we still so throughly and en∣tirely agrée with them, who by his owne confession had in their time the true Church. Tenthly, because all D. Allens Articles are in effect contai∣ned in my Motiues and Demaundes, I will examine what he answereth, not to my probations (for to them, or any one of them, he lightly answereth not, as I say afore) but euen to the bare titles of them. And for as much as his answeres will soone appeare to be no answers, I will examine, whether at the least∣wise he obiecteth any thing to the purpose: to the end, that when thou shalt sée that all is so litle or rather nothing at all, thou maist perceaue, that God for his Churches glory blinded them,
to send such a booke abroade. Which thou shalt againe more plainely perceaue in the ele∣uenth  Chapter, where I will lay forth his marueilous grosse and palpable contradictions, yea and in great numbers also. And againe, as plainely in the twelft Chapter, where I will  display certaine straunge and detestable positions of his, and al∣so his ignoraunce in the Scriptures and other learning Theo∣logicall. To the which I might but for prolixitie ioyne many ensamples perteining to a falsarie, putting him in minde with∣all, of his horrible blasphemies, as him selfe also must confesse them to be, because he can not auoide it but that the Church a∣gainst whom he hath poured them, is the true Church. In the conclusion, I will amongst some other things aduer∣tise  the Reader, what more may be desired for the full iustifying of the booke of Purgatorie, though this much be ynough and su∣perabundaunt. but, for iustification of the Articles, that no more can be desired. But now, let vs come to the perfourming of these our pro∣misses. Ar. and Pur. in the margins, signifie the page of Fulkes bookes against the Articles and a∣gainst Purgatorie.
¶A REPLY TO FVLKE, In defence of M. D. Allens scroll of Articles, and booke of Purgatorie. ¶The first Chapter. That he confesseth out of the true Church to be no saluation. THis I shew briefly and most plainly by his owne words, as where he saith: The house of refuge or defence, may be applied to the Church,Ar. pag. 108. out of which is no saluation: and in whose bosome it becommeth euery man to rest, which shall looke for the refuge and defence of God.Ar. 83. And in an other place: There is no man of what age or yeres soeuer he be, that can be saued, except he be a mēber of the Catholike Church. Agayne: This we affirme, that out of the Church there is no sal∣uation. Agayne: We vtterly denie, that beside the true Church,Ar. 62. Ar. 76. there was an vntrue church, that practised those offices (of bapti∣zing and other spirituall actions) to the saluation of any man. And agayne: No man aliue,Ar. 73. that knoweth what the true Church meaneth, will say, that any man can be saued out of the true Church. For he that is not a member of the body of Christ, can by no meane receiue any benefit of Christ to his saluation. Ther∣fore this is certaine, that out of this Church none could be saued. This then béeing so confessed (as in our Church it is also openly practised, first in baptisme to take men in, then in reconciliation, if they went or were cast afterwarde out, to receiue them in a∣gaine) I will stande no longer vpon it, but procéede further. ¶The second Chapter. That he confesseth the knowen Church of the first 600. yeres after Christ, and the knowen members thereof. THis likewise will be euident by his owne wordes (if the Catholike eare can beare his blasphemies withall) & first if we consider what he writeth of the Romans and their Bi∣shops,
both since Bonifacius the third, and also afore him. Ar 35.Being asked, [What yere the religion of the Papists came in and preuayled?] Thus he answereth: We may well say, that the religion of the Papistes came in, and preuayled, that yeare in which the Pope first obteined his antichristian exaltation, which was in the yere of our Lord 607, when Boniface the third for a great summe of money, obteined of Phocas, the trayterous mur∣therer and adultrous Emperour, that the Bishop of Rome should be called and counted the head of all the Church. And what af∣ter that? Since that time (saith he) that diuelish heresie hath al∣wayes increased in error, vntill the yeare of our Lorde 1414. Wherevpon in other places he saith agayne:Ar. 27. Pur. 344 From Boniface the third all blasphemous heretikes, and antichristes. And agayne: Or any succeeded Boniface the third, which beside their abhomi∣nable life, were all heretikes and antichristes. And where he speaketh of the olde Doctors, by and by he addeth as in an anti∣thesis:Pur. 405 Nay rather count vpon the Popes to be pillers of your Church, Doctours of your learning, and Fathers of your fayth, that haue bene within these seuen or eyght hundred yeres. By this that he saith of the time after Boniface the third, you perceyue his confession as touching the time afore him. Yet to make it more playne, he shall expressely make him selfe his owne confession:Pur. 194. Gregory was the last of all the Romishe Bishops in whom was any sparke of goodnes: because Boniface his succes∣sor,See pag. and all the rest, by Gregories owne iudgement and prophe∣cie, were all Antichristes. And moste manifestly in an other place,Pur. 372 where D. Allen vrgeth the succession of the Romane Bi∣shops by example of Ireneus, Cyprian, Tertullian, Optatus, Hierome, Augustine, and Vincentius Lirinensis, who con∣founded therewith all heretikes, and saith: [It is a straunge thing, that the Fathers hauing then store of Apostolike Succes∣sions, did euer choose out for the warrant of their fayth, from amongst the rest, the Romane Seate: and nowe when there is no Apostolike Churche lefte in the whole worlde but it, that they will not haue vs referre our fayth to it, which was euer of all o∣ther moste free from falshood.] To this Fulke in his aun∣swere saith: That these men specially named the Churche of Rome, it was, because the Churche of Rome at that time, as it
was founded by the Apostles, so it continued in the doctrine of the Apostles. And a litle after: As for that which M. Allen counteth so straunge, it is for lacke of skill and right iudge∣ment. For the same cause that moued those auncient Fathers to appeale to the iudgement of the Churche of Rome, moueth vs nowe to condemne the Churche of Rome of heresie. Where∣fore did they reuerence the Churche of Rome? Aske Tertullian, he answereth,True doc∣trine in the true Chur∣che, hovv long? because it had by Succession reteyned euen vn∣till his dayes, that fayth which it did first receyue of the Apo∣stles: Therefore it was a true Churche, therefore it was an Apo∣stolike Churche. This answere he learned of his master Cal∣uine, who in his Institutions first putteth downe our allegati∣on, saying:Cal. Ins. li. 4. ca. 2 nu. 2.3. Magnifice illi quidem suam nobis Ecclesiam com∣mendant. Allegant enim eam apud se initio sana doctrina & sanguine Martyrum bene fundatam, perpetua Episcoporum Successione conseruatam fuisse ne intercideret. Commemorant quanti hanc Successionē fecerint Irenaeus, Tertullianus, Origenes, Augustinus, & alij. that is: They in deede set foorth vnto vs their Churche very gloriously. for they alleage that beeing in the beginning well founded amongest them with sounde doctrine and with the bloud of Martyres, it was by the continuall Suc∣cession of Bishoppes preserued from decaying. They report out of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origene, Augustine, and others, howe highly they esteemed this Succession. And then he putteth herevnto his owne aunswere, saying: Cum extra controuer∣siam esset, nihil a principio vsque ad illam aetatem mutatum fu∣isse in doctrina, &c. that is: Considering that it was a playne case, that from the beginning euen vntill that time nothing was chaunged in doctrine, the holy Doctors tooke in argument that which was sufficient for the ouerthrowing of all newe errors, to witte, That they oppugned the doctrine which euen from the verye Apostles them selues had bene inuiolably and with one consent reteined. This graunt both of the master and of his Scholar, as more by a great deale, then in this Chapter we néeded, The true Churche not onely to haue continued so long it selfe, but also to haue kepte inuiolably and general∣ly with one accorde the true faith and true doctrine which of the Apostles thē selues she had receiued. The like he confesseth of our
owne Countrey also,Ar. 49. where he saith: The Church of the Bry∣taines before Augustine (whom Saint Gregory sent from Rome to conuert the English in our said countrey of Britannie) came in with Romish seruice, had they not trow you Authentical Ser∣uice: which continued in the faith of Christ euen from the Apo∣stles time. To which confession let it be added out of S. Bedes Storie, that the Bed. hist. li. 2. ca. 4.2. & li. 3. ca. 25. greatest point wherein the Christian Bry∣tons and our Apostle S. Augustine differed, was about the kée∣ping of Easter day, and that also not so great as in olde time be∣twéene S. Victor of Rome and the Christians of Asia (as this man ignorantly Pur. 371. here. ca. 10. pag. somwhere affirmeth) that is to say, not whe∣ther it should be alwayes kept with the Iewes vpon the verye day of the full Moone according to the heresie of the Aug. he∣resi. 29. Tessares∣decatite or Quartadecimani. (for that obseruation, Eus. in vi∣ta Const. li. 3. ca. 28. Britan∣nie, as the Emperour Eus. in vi∣ta Const. li. 3. ca. 28. Constantinus witnesseth, detested no lesse then other prouinces at the time of the Nicene Councell) but onely vpon what Beda su∣pra. sonday it should be kept. So then this being their greatest difference, and yet therein also the right ob∣seruation being that which was brought from Rome, as no man will denie, you sée what graunt this man must make, as to Bri∣tannie, so likewise to Rome at that time, to witte, not onely the true Churche, but withall the same faith which the Apostles taught, though in this Chapter (as I haue alreadie said) we looke no more but for the true Church. Which same true Church he graunteth againe many other wayes vnto the Romanes and their Bishops, in that he geueth it to sundry notable personages and companies that were in v∣nitie and in one Church with the said Romaines: as to the aun∣cient Doctors and Councels, to the Martyrs, Monkes, and other Christians, not onely that frequented those Cryptes or holye vautes vnder the heathen and persecuting Emperours, but also that gathered themselues afterward in those magnificall newe Temples vnder the Christian Catholike Emperours: and fi∣nally to those Catholike Emperours themselues, euen to Mau∣ritius who liued with S. Gregory. Ar. 60.Of the Doctors his confession is this: The most approued writers, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origen, Epiphanius, Hilarius, Chry∣sostamus, Ieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, &c. were doubtles
members of the true Church of Christ. Againe,Ar. 71. The Church of the Arians, was not the Catholike Church: but Athanasius, and a Such is his skill in the sto∣rie of that time. few other, that were banished and persecuted, were the true Catholike Church. Againe, Ar. 59. Iustinus Martyr, and Irenaeus, two of the most auncient authenticall writers, that the Church next vnto the Apostles had. And againe, Pur. 434. The old doctors had their measure of Gods spirit. Cyprian and Cornelius were both endu∣ed with Gods spirit, and both martyrs. Againe,Pur. 405. The Doctors of Gods Church, Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostome, Basill, &c. A∣gaine, It is a good argument,Ar. 27. that the Popish Church is not the Church of Christ, because it was neuer hidden since it first sprang vp, in so much that you can name all the notable persons in all ages in their gouernment and ministerie, and especially the suc∣cession of A proper di∣stribution, the Popes in all ages to be ours: and yet the A∣postles & Doc∣tors, to be his. Sapientes con∣fitentur & non abscondunt pa∣tres suos: quoth Eliphaz against Iob. cap. xv. Popes you can rehearse in order vpon your fingers. But our Church (which hath not had so many registers, chroni∣clers, and remembrancers) hath perhaps fewer, but yet honester men to name: we can name Peter, Paul, &c. Iustinus, Irenaeus, Cy∣prianus, Athanasius, Hilarius, Ambrosius, Augustinus, Gyldas, &c Then as touching auncient Councels, thus he saith: Ar. 97. The foure best generall councels were gathered by our Churche. A∣gaine, Pur. 430. Pur. 296. If any Councell decree according to the Scriptures (as the Councell of the Apostles did, Act. 15, and the Councell of Nice, with diuers other) we receaue them with all humilitie as the oracles of God. To this place of Doctors and Councels pertai∣neth that also which he confesseth of the Church that resisted and ouercame the olde heresies: as where D. Allen had said, [It is not you that shall outface Gods Church. she hath by the spirit of God beaten downe your proudders, the Arrians, the Macedo∣nians, the Anabaptistes (as the Donatistes, &c.) and all your pre∣decessors.] He answereth,297. You boast that your Church hath bea¦ten downe our proudders, the Arrians, Macedonians, Anabap∣tistes. It was the Church of Christ, that ouerthrewe those Here∣tikes. And in an other place likewise:Ar. 10. [I demaund (saith D. Allen) what Church hath mightely gone through, borne downe, & ful∣ly vanquished, all heresies in times past, aswell against the blessed Trinitie, as other articles of our Religion?] I answere, (saith Fulke) the true Catholike Church hath alwayes resisted all false opinions, contrarie to the worde of God, as her dutie was: and
fought against them with the sworde of the spirite, which is the word of God, and by the aide of God obtained the victory, and triumphed ouer them. So did the fathers of the primitiue Church, from time to time, confute heresies by the Scriptures, and declare in their writinges, that by them they are to be confuted. for ex∣amples sake of a great number, I will alleage a fewe: and he al∣leageth Hilarius, Basilius Magnus, Chrysostome, Augustine, Leo the first Bishop of Rome, and the whole Councell of Constanti∣nople the sixt. And so concludeth saying: Thus I haue declared by ensample and authoritie of these fathers, that the true Church of Christ, hath conuicted all heretikes, onely by the Scripture. If onely by the scriptures,See cap. 9. par. 2. pag. Ar. 52. so much the better you doe like of her, and that in this Chapter nothing misliketh me. Now let vs see what he confesseth of the auncient Monkes also. The Church of God (saith he) hath alwayes had Scholes or Vniuersities for the maintenance of godly learning: for the first colledges of Monkes in solitarie places, were nothing els, but Colledges of studentes, that were afterward, as occasion serued, taken to serue in the Church, as appeareth by Chrisostom in his booke de Sacerdotio, where he sheweth that Basilius, who was a Monke with him, was taken by violence and made a minister of the Church, as he him selfe was afterward. Also in the Bishops house was a Colledge of studentes: and our histories testifie, that at Bangor in Wales was a great vniuersitie of learned men. Whether S. Chrysostome, S. Basill, and those other auncient Monkes, both in our owne and also in other countreys, were nothing else but studentes, it is not the question of this place:See cap. 10. dem. 25. pag. but onely doe I note here, that he confesseth them to haue bene of the Church of God. Then as concerning the times first of persecution, afterward of peace, vnder the Emperours both heathen and Christian, he vttereth his confession of the true Church, in these wordes: Our assemblies were kept in secret places,Ar. 51.52. long time after Christes as∣cension, in most Countries that were subiect to the Romane Em∣pire, and when Constantinus had geuen peace to the Church, he builded Oratories and great Synagoges called Basilicas, for our assemblies and Seruice. Also, necessarie furniture (for the ser∣uice of God) was decreed to the Church by the Emperour Con∣stantine and his Successors, that were of our Church, before the
reuelation of Antichrist, that is (as before you heard his mea∣ning) before the time of Bonifacius the thirde.Pur. 342. Likewise in an other place he confesseth both those Caues and Vaultes vnder the earth that the olde Christian Bishops were content to serue in, before the time of Constantine, and also, those princely buil∣dinges that by Constantine and other Christian Princes were first set vp for the publike exercise of Christian Religion. To which times belongeth also that, wherein he confesseth the con∣uersion of Nations by the true Church, saying: It did not onely require, but also subdue all Nations to the obedience of the faith,Ar. 97. so many as were euer subdued, in the dayes of the first Christian Emperours, and before. Finally, he confesseth the Emperours yet more expressely and more particularly, saying:Ar. 33. It is an easie matter, to name you the Emperours and princes, which both of∣fered to the ministers of iustice in the right of our Church, and al∣so mainteined our faith and congregation, by Ciuill lawes: as Constantine the great, Iouinianus, Valentinianus, Theodosius, Archadius, Honorius, Marcianus, Iustinianus, Mauricius, and di∣uers others. And to signifie that he meaneth these Emperours to haue bene such as he would wish for, he addeth of the latter Em∣perours, and saith: I passe ouer as to well knowen many of the Grecian Emperours. Likewise I passe ouer Charles the great. I will not rehearse those (later Germane) Princes, that, &c. For al∣though these and such like defended some part of the trueth, which we holde against you, yet least you should obiect, it was but in one or two poyntes, I passe them ouer with silence. And so much for the true Church in the first. 600. yeares. ¶The third Chapter. That he confesseth the foresaid true Church to haue made so plainely with vs in very many of the controuersies of this time, that he is faine to hold, that the But not his Caluinicall Church. true Church may erre, and also hath erred. AFter all this so smoothly by him confessed of the true Church, and sometime also of the long continuing thereof in incorruption, if any man maruell to heare nowe, that yet withall he holdeth, the same true Church at the same
time to haue bene corrupted and to haue erred, let him sée here in the eleuenth Chapter his manifolde manifest contradictions, & he will quickly leaue his marueiling: the matter (he shal perceiue) is not so straunge in this man, but very vsuall & common to con∣trarie him selfe, as it is also no rare thing in his master Caluine and the other heretical writers of our time. But here in the meane while, be it disagréeing, or be it agréeing with that which he hath confessed already,Infra ca. 11. cōtra∣dict. 4. I will in this present Chapter laye forth his words, first generally that the true Church may erre, and afterwarde of the particuler errors common to the true Church then, and to our Church now. The first part. That the true Church may erre. Ar. 86Therefore that the true Church may erre, thus he saith: The true and onely Church of Christ can neuer be voyde of God his spirite, and yet she may erre from the trueth, and be deceiued in some things. And a litle after: Wherefore the whole Churche militant consisting of men, which are all lyars, may erre all toge∣ther.Ar. 88. Agayne: The true and onely Church of God, as it is decla∣red before, hath no such priuilege graunted, but that she may be deceiued in some things. And there beneath: And if it may erre, and be deceiued it selfe, what man is he that neede to doubt, whe∣ther it may induce any error among the people? In so much that he is bolde to say in an other place:Pur. 367 368. Of an hundred argumentes that S. Augustine vseth agaynst the Pelagians, this insultation (that their heresie was contrarie to the publike prayers of the Church) was one of the feeblest: which tooke no holde of the Pelagians by force of truth that is in it, but by their confession and graunt. In so much agayne that a few lines after he saith to D. Allen, or rather to S. Augustine if it be truely scanned: In deede they were but sory whelpes, that could not say baffe to the bleating of such a calfe as you are,Modestly. which thinke that such a foo∣lish cauill can cary credite with them that haue any cromme of brayne in their heades, to wit, The Church prayeth so, therefore it is true.Ar. 83.84. Moreouer in an other: If you meane (as it seemeth, and as the rest of the Papistes doe interprete that Article) I beleeue the Catholike Church, that is, I beleeue whatsoeuer the Church
doth allow, to be true: I denie that it is necessarie to saluation, that a Christian man should so beleeue the Catholike Church, because the Church may erre. Agayne in the same place: But to beleeue al and euery thing that the Catholike Church by com∣mon consent doth mainteine, is no Article of our fayth, and ther∣fore not necessarie to saluation. The second part. That the true Church did also erre: and that in the same poyntes as we now do erre in. j. Where he chargeth them with many poynts together. Now further that the true Church did also in dede erre, & first in the same poyntes wherein our Church now erreth, as they charge it, thus he saith:Ar. 35. Si patrem f. Beelzebub vocauerun quanto ma∣gis domesti∣cos eius Matt. x. Many abuses and corruptions were en∣tred into the Churche of Christe immediatly after the Apostles time, which the diuel planted as a preparatiue for his eldest sonne Antichrist. By Antichrist he meaneth (God forgiue him his blasphemie) the vicar of Christ him selfe, and so consequently by that preparatiue he meaneth such poynts of the Popes religion as are found agaynst the Protestantes in antiquitie. Where to minister him some light by the way (if it may please God to open his eyes) let him consider that he must confesse no lesse,Infra c. 11. cont. 8. yea much more, that the Arian, Sabellian, Nestorian, and infinit other old Heresies detested now of both our parts, were a preparatiue for Antichrist: and therfore séeing that Bonifacius the third, and the other Popes after him, haue not receiued those confessed heresies, that it followeth necessarily therof, that the Popes are not Anti∣christ. But that I stray not further from my matter, but rather reserue euery thing to his proper place: he cōmeth else where to particularities, and saith:Pu. 419. And this was a great corruption of those auncient times, that they did not always weigh what was most agreable to the worde of God, but if the Gentiles or Here∣tikes had any thing that seemed to haue a shew of pietie or cha∣ritie, they would draw it into vse. What, any thing, without ex∣ception? Go too then, and name somewhat for ensample. So they tooke the signe of the crosse from the Valentinians. What more? Oblations for the days of death and byrth, of the Gentiles. Foorth a Gods name. Prescript times of fasting, and vnmeasurable ex∣tolling
of Sole life in the ministers of the Church, from the Mani∣chees, Tacianistes, and Montanistes. And yet what more? Prayer for the dead, of the Montanistes. Forth agayne? Purgatory fire, of the Origenistes. Say on still: Yea Ieronym was almost fallen into the heresie of Tertullian, in condemning seconde mariage. Once more to ease that stomacke: Yea euen the name of sacrifice which was commonly vsed for the celebration of the Lords sup∣per, they tooke vp of the Gentiles. All these eyght poyntes he so noteth in the Fathers of Gods Church together in one place. A∣gaine in an other place after the sayings of Iustinus Martyr and Ireneus alleaged:Ar. 60. The other writers of later yeres (saith he) we are not afrayd to confesse that they haue some corruption, wher∣by you may seeme to haue colour of defence for Inuocation of Saintes, prayers for the dead, and diuers superstitious & superflu∣ous Ceremonies. And that to the same they were no lesse addicted then we are, he confesseth plainly, where he graunteth that they accounted the contrarie for no better then heresie.Ar. 44.45 46. You may per∣chaunce (saith he) note the names of them, that preaching the truth of our doctrine, against your receiued errors, were accounted of the world for Heretikes. And a litle after: I wil not dissemble that which you thinke the greatest matter. Well then confesse the truth: Aerius taught that prayer for the dead was vnprofitable, as witnesseth both Epiphanius and Augustinus, which they count for an error. Also he taught that fasting dayes are not to be ob∣serued. if he espied the superstition of fasting dayes, and reproued it, that was no error at all. And who els? Iouinian affirmed that virginitie was no better then mariage: which if it be well vnder∣stood, is no error at all. And if he taught further, that suche as could not conteine, though they had vowed virginitie, should ne∣uerthelesse be maried. Moreouer, if he taught that fasting, absti∣nence from certaine meates, and other bodily exercise, of them selues profite litle: it was no error, he saith, and yet S. Ieronyme was a most bitter enemie vnto Iouinian. Any more? Last of all Vigilantius wrote agaynst Inuocation of Saintes, superstition of Reliques, and other Ceremonies. Him Ieronym reproueth, or rather rayleth on him:Modestly. for his reasons are nothing worth that he hath against him. Therefore howsoeuer Ieronym esteemed him in his rage, if he had none other opinions contrary to the trueth,
we doubt not to acknowledge Vigilantius (as many godly and learned Bishops of his time did) for a true preacher and reprehen∣der of that superstition whervnto Ieronym was to much addict. He said afore that he would not dissemble, and yet you sée his ifs, and Hierome alone against many godly and learned Bishoppes. Therefore to make it yet more playne, howe in clearing these Heretikes he chargeth the Fathers, I must report what he hath likewise in other places. ij. As touching Vigilantius, and inuocation of Saintes, by it selfe. As where D. Allen said:Pur. 306 310. [So their citing out of S. Ambrose for the improuing of the inuocation of holy Saintes, is no more but an abuse of the simples ignorance: knowing well that he and all other of that time did practise prayers both often to all holy Martyrs, and sometimes peculiarly to such, whom for patronage they did especially choose of deuotion amongest the rest.] To this he answereth:Honorably. Touching Ambrose (which was sodenly made a Bishop, before he was a perfect Christian) if some steppes of Hethenish Inuocation or Rhetoricall apostrophees and proso∣popees appeare to be in him, and some other about his time, yet was not that generally receiued of all the Church in his time. Al∣so where the question is asked,Ar. 39. [Whether men began sodenly to require the helpe of Saintes in heauen?] He answereth: Whe∣ther sodenly or by litle and litle man were brought to suche su∣perstition, that they required helpe of Saintes, it maketh litle matter, yet it is to be thought, that it grewe vp, as other er∣rors, by litle and litle. And S. Augustine in his booke, De cura pro mortuis agenda, wearieth him selfe, and in the ende can define nothing, in certayne, Howe the Saintes in heauen should heare the prayers of men on earth.Pur. 315.316.317. Although he can not de∣fine, Howe, yet neuerthelesse (sayth D. Allen) he nothing doub∣teth but intercession maye profitably be made to them, and that also for the deceased.] Wherevnto Fulke sayth agayne: Augustine in hys booke De cura pro mortuis agenda, is full of doubtes, that he knoweth not hym selfe what to de∣termine, but that he wyll holde the common opinions
receaued in his time. And beneath: M. Allen affirmeth, that S. Au∣gustine neuer doubteth, but intercession may be made vnto them for the dead: whosoeuer wil take the paines to reade the trea∣tise, de cura pro mortuis agēda, shal find nothing els but doubtes and questions of that matter. So he saith, not marking what him selfe there citeth out of that booke,August. de ur. cap. 16. to witte, where S. Augustine concludeth the whole matter in the end, and saith: [Ista questio vires intelligentiae meae vincit, quemadmodū opitulantur Mar∣tyres ijs, quos per eos Certum est opitulari: This question pas∣seth the strength of mine vnderstanding, how the Martyrs helpe them, whom it is certain to be helped of them.] Certum est, saith S. Augustine, and Fulke alleageth it, and euen so Englisheth it, it is certaine: and yet, onely because he can not define, Howe, as to this day also it remaineth a very hard question, he sticketh not againe to say there immediatly, These places and the whole dis∣course of that booke, doth proue, that although Augustine were willing to maintaine the superstition that was not throughly confirmed in his time, about Burialls and Inuocation of Saintes, yet he hath nothing of certaintie, &c. At least wise, this decla∣reth that S. Ambrose and S. Augustine are ioyned of him with S. Hierome in that error,Hier. li. 2. con. Vigil. and not with Vigilantius amongst those many godly and learned Byshops of that time, of whom also he hath no author, so to count them. by S. Hierome it ap∣peareth that they were very few vngodly and vnlearned, and a∣gainst all the thrée Patriarchal Churches, of the East, of Egypt, and of the See Apostolike, in that they tooke part with Vigilan∣tius, and so with Iouinianus condemned by the authoritie of the Romane Church. And so much of the auncient true Churches erring in Inuocation of sainctes. iij. As touching Iouinian: of fasting, of Virgini∣ties merite, of Varies mariage. Now to adde more likewise of their erring in condemning of Iouinian, D. Allens wordes are these: [Iouinianus taught the contempt of Christian fastes: matched mariage with holy mai∣denhood,Pur. 11.13. and afterward (to the great wonder of all the Church) perswaded certaine religious women in Rome to forsake their first faith,Hier. con. Ioui. li. 2. and mary to their damnation: for which plaine sup∣porting of vndoubted wickednes, S. Hierome calleth them often,
Christian Epicures, boulsterers of sinne, and doctors of lust and lecherie. Neuerthelesse the force of Gods grace, which was great in the spring of our Religion, (the sinne of the world not yet ripe for such open shew of licentious life) speedely repressed that wic∣ked attempt. for as S. Augustine declareth, it was so cleare a fals∣hood, that it neuer grew to deceaue any one of all the Cleargie.] Fulkes answere herevnto is no more but this: If Iouinian were so great an heretike, as you make him, yet he him selfe (as you shew after out of Augustine) offended not in that which he per∣swaded others to doe. He meaneth that place when D. Allen somewhat after speaketh of these newe Superintendentes and ministers, and saith, that [they much exeede Iouinianus,Pur. 17.22. who (as Augustine reporteth of him) being a Monke, mainteined the ma∣riage of Votaries: but yet for diuers inconueniences, him selfe for all that would not be maried.August. ad quod. haer. 28. And there to S. Augustine by name he saith nothing, but turneth his talke to D. Allen, demaū∣ding of him thus: Where learned you but of the diuell him selfe, to commaund abstinence from meates and mariage for Religi∣ons sake, to some men at all times, and to all men at some times? If for these and for an hundreth such, you can shewe no better warrant, then the termes of your fathers,A good child. the practise of your el∣ders, or the authoritie of mortal men, the curse of God pronoun∣ced by Esay, against them that call euill good, or good euill, must needes be turned ouer vnto you. With the same boldnes in an other place, where D. Allen had giuē this obseruation [You shal not lightly heare an heretike that denyeth praying to sainctes,Pur. 41 402. or holdeth with open breach of holy vowes, alleage Iouinianus or Vigilantius. But they will trauaile to writhe, with plaine iniurie to the author, some sentence out of Augustine, or Ambrose, or some other, that by their whole life and practise open them sel∣ues to the world to beleeue the contrarie.] He saith thervnto. M. Allen geueth a speciall note, that we name not Iouinian or Vi∣gilantius, but rather hang vpon some sentence of Augustine or Ambrose, and thinketh we are ashamed of the other.But we nei∣ther boast vpon Augustine, nor Ambrose, when they dissent from (our) doctrine: neither are ashamed of Vigilantius nor Be∣rengarius, when they agree therewith.
iiij. As touching Ceremonies. Likewise of their erring in Ceremonies, and such other tra∣ditions, this he saith more, besides that which I haue already re∣ported:Pur. 256 Their time (he speaketh of Gregory Nissen, and Athana∣sius the great) had diuers errors and superstitious Ceremonies. A∣gaine,Ar. 91. If the Church had not approued many vnprofitable and hurtfull vsages among the people in S. Augustines time, what neede had he to complaine, that many of God his commaunde∣mentes were litle regarded, and mans presumptions so highly e∣steemed?See the answer. cap. 6. pag. [Sed hoc nimis doleo, &c. But herewith I am to much greeued, that many things which in God his booke are most hol∣somely commaunded, are lesse regarded: and all things are so ful of so many presumptions, that he is more greeuously reproued, which in his Vtas hath touched the earth with his bare foote, then he that hath buried his minde in dronkennes:] So farre out of S. Augustine. Therefore if it be an vnprofitable and hurtfull vsage, to preferre mans traditions before God his commaunde∣ments, the Church in S. Augustines time approued an vnprofita∣ble and hurtfull vsage. Furthermore if the Churche can not ap∣proue an vnprofitable or hurtfull vsage, wherefore are so ma∣ny Ceremonies, as were approued in S. Augustine and S. Am∣broses times, abrogated and disanulled, either because they were vnprofitable,Pur. 391. Tert. de coro. mil. or else hurtfull? Againe where D. Allen sayth: [They confesse Tertullian. 1300. yeares agoe to haue practised oblations for the dead. And aske him where he had it (for surely he inuented it not him selfe) and he appointeth vs to his forefa∣thers: He nameth the Apostles for the authors and founders thereof, as of many other thinges, which he there reckeneth be∣side, that were generally receaued, and now be of heretikes like∣wise condemned.Pu. 400 393.264] He answereth: Tertullian fathered manifest fables vpon the institution of Christ and the Apostles, as you your selfe Infra- cap. 6. pag. can not denie, if you haue any conscience at all. As, On the Sonday and betweene Easter and Whitsontide not to fast or pray vpon our knees. Also, To crosse our selues in the foreheade at all thinges whatsoeuer wee doe. Also, To geue to them that are newly Baptised, a temper of mylke and hony: and from the day of their Baptisme, forbid dayly washing all the weeke after.
v. As touching Purgatorie and Praying for the dead. But for Purgatorie and Praying for the dead, because his whole booke is of that matter, he is most profuse in charging that auncient true Church both fathers and people thereof: and ther∣fore I must stand the longer hereabout, specially because the Reader shall sée therein as in a notable example, to what shame∣full confessions against them selues they are driuen, whensoe∣uer they take in hand to answere throughly to any learned Ca∣tholike that hath throughly written of any controuersie. And first I will shewe what he saith of particular Doctors and their particular times: secondly, of the whole Churche in some of those times: thirdly, of the glorious originall that they referre it vnto: and lastly, of the shamefull original or head that he refer∣reth it vnto, and them also for it. j. What he saith of particular Doctors, and their particular times, for it. And for the first to beginne alowe and so goe vpwarde:Pur. 158. Ber∣nard (saith he) is a very late writer, and therefore his authori∣tie with vs is of small accompt in such cases, as he followeth the common error of his time. I take this in the way, without our compasse, yet not without good cause, that conferring the times both within and without those first .600. yeares, thou maist be∣holde how he chargeth both a like. Well then, to come nowe into our compasse,Pur. 166. of S. Gre∣gorie thus he saith: When the proofe commeth, you leape but 600. yeares from Christ to Gregories Dialogues: from which time I will not denie but you may haue great store of such stuffe. And not afore that time likewise? Theodoret was an .100. yeares before S. Gregory:Pur. 123. and what of him and his time? Oecumenius and Theodoretus (saith he) were writers about that time, when corruption of doctrine had greatly preuayled. Againe before that time, from the yeare .430. vp to .360. much about one time these did florish, Augustine,See M. Ri∣shtons ta∣ble. Am∣brose, Hierome, Paulinus, Efrem, Chrisostome, Basil, and Epi∣phanius. And what of them and their time? I haue alreadie re∣hearsed what he saith of S. Augustine vpon his booke De cura,Pur. 315.317. that he woulde hold the common opinions receaued in his time,
and that he was willing to mainteine the superstition that was not throughly confirmed in his time.349. As againe: If he had dili∣gently examined the Common error of his time, of prayer for the dead, he would not so blindly haue defended it, as he doth in that booke De cura pro mortuis agenda, and else where. And againe: In celebration of the Sacrament,326. the superstitious error of that time allowed prayers for the dead generally, and speciall remem∣brance of some in the prayers, as of Monica & Patritius the pa∣rents of S. Augustine.78. Againe: But Augustine speaketh of the amending fire in the place alleaged by M. Allen. He doth so in deede: but Augustine had no ground of that fire, but in the com∣mon error of his time.161. And againe: Concerning Augustine, that error of Purgatorie was somewhat risely budded vp in his time. Then of Paulinus:322. Purgatorie in those dayes was but euen a breeding, and yet not throughly shaped out of prayers for the dead, and such other superstitious ceremonies as were vsed about the departed. How handsomly he agréeth here with him selfe, I dissemble till Contr. 46.47.the 11. Chapter. Nowe of Ambrose and others: Ambrose in deede alloweth prayer for the dead, as it was a Com∣mon error in his time.Pur. 320 262. Againe: But of memories of the dead, and prayers for the dead also, we wil not striue, but that they were vsed before the times of Beda, Ephraim, & Ambrose. Moreouer, Chrysostome and Ieronym allowed prayers for the dead.194. 370. Then of Epiphanius: Because the olde Liturgies vsed to make memo∣rie of all sortes of men that were dead in Christ, he expoundeth it according to the error of his time, that this memorie was a prayer for the sinners: for the iust, as Patriarkes, Prophets, &c, a signifi∣cation that they were inferior to Christ. a simple cause why they should be remembred: but this shift he is driuen vnto. So S. Augustins exposition of the like practise,279.280 August. euc. 110. & ad dul. q. 4. saying: [When the sa∣crifices either of the Altar or of any kind of Almes, be offered for all men departed and baptized: for the very good, they are Gratia∣rum actiones, thanks giuing: for them that be not very euill, they are Propitiationes, procurements of mercy: for the very euil, although they be no succor to them being dead, yet they are certayne com∣forts to the liuing.] He condemneth it likewise in these words: These matters stand al vpon a false supposition, that any prayers are auailable for the dead. which when it can not be proued, it is
in vaine to shew who taketh profite by them, who not. And so much of that time, yea and of more then that time, where he said, before the times of Efrem and Ambrose. Let vs now ascend to Constantinus Magnus his time, who was the first full Christian Emperour, and beganne his raigne soone after the yeare .300.Pur. 313. In the buriall of Constantinus (sayth he) there is mention of prayer for his soule, according to the er∣ror of the time, which was Inough for any Christi∣an man. the time euen of the first Nicen Councell also, and he buried in the Gréeke Church at Constanti∣nople. Long afore that againe about the yeare .200. florished Ter∣tullian and Origines, of that time so he saith, after a certaine saying of Origens alleaged: By this place it is manifest,Pu. 249. that O∣rigen (whom notwithstanding here a little after we shall haue for the founder of Purgatorie) and the East Churche in his time acknowledged no Purgatorie paines. Againe: This one testimonie of Origen shall testifie, what the iudgement of the Greeke Church was concerning Purgatorie and prayers for the dead, from the Apostles time vnto his dayes.Pag. To Origens place I must answere in the ninth Chapter: but nowe doe you say on: I wotte well superstition in the Latine Church was som∣what forwardes, in as much as there was the seat of Antichrist appointed to be set vp. Where by the waye may be noted his For the .xii. Chapter. ignorance, being the foundation of his malice, that he knoweth not, all the old heresies to haue sprong of the Gréekes (wherevp∣on also were holden in the Gréeke Church those first foure gene∣rall Councels against them) and not of the Latines, but contra∣wise the Romaine Church specially to be commended of the fa∣thers, Vinc. Lir. cap. ix. Ruf. in ex∣po. Symb▪ num. iii. For maintaining alwayes most earnestly susceptae semel Reli∣gionis integritatem, the puritie of Religion whiche it first receaued, ne{que} heresis vlla illic sumpsit exordium, and that no heresie did spring there. But to our matter, that forwardnes in the Latine Churche he confesseth, I thinke in respect of Tertullian, whose manifest tes∣timonies he coulde not otherwise shift him of, and therefore of him somewhere he saith thus: I denie that any of the auncient Fathers in Christ his time, or Scholars to his Apostles,Pu. 435. or within one or two hundreth yeares after Christ (except one that had it of Montanus the heretike, as he had more thinges besides) in any
one worde mainteined your cause, for Purgatorie or Prayers for the deade. Mary, Montanus of whom Tertullian receaued his heresie, had in all pointes the opinion of the Papistes. Againe, I will not denie but you haue much drosse and dragges of the later sorte of Doctors,Pur. 247. and the later, the fuller of drosse. But bring me any worde out of any that did write within one .100. yeares after Christ, that alloweth prayer or almes for the dead. Where (as we sée) by the later sort of Doctors, he sheweth him self to meane such as were without one .100. yeares after Christ. But of that one .100. yeares also, together with Tertullian, and the Fathers afore him vp vnto Christ, we shall haue occasion to say more anone in our third Article. Hauing therefore thus shewed in this first Article, howe he chargeth the true confessed Fathers of the true confessed Church with this error (as which he summeth vp together in an other place,Pur. 458. and saith: The error was continued from a corrupt state of the Church of Christ, vnto a plaine departing away into the Church of Antichrist.) Let vs now sée, how he chargeth the same whole true Churche for some time with the same, and that the more briefely, because we haue nowe so often hard him say of so many times, that it was the common error of that time and that time. ij. What he saieth of the whole Church in some of those times. Pur. 382.Thus he saith in one place: If we be asked, how we can shifte our selues against the generall practise of Gods Churche, for all popish assertions, and namely this of praying for the dead: We answere, that we denye the practise to be generall, because wee finde it Is nothing ge∣nerall, but that vvhich you find in them? not in the most auncient writers, that liued within an hundreth yeares and more, after the time of Christ. But what say you to the later practise, which for places then was generall, though for times you count it particular? And to the particu∣lar practise of later times, we answere, that it is not sufficient to controll the auncient doctrine and primer practise. Againe in an other place:370. The same order (that was before Epiphanius) and error (that was in Epiphanius time) doe all the later Liturgies followe (and therefore, saye I, all the later Byshoppes and Priestes, and people, because they vsed those Liturgies) making
memorie and prayers for all them that are departed in the faith. What saye you then to that practise so generall? In the me∣morie of all departed, they followe the olde order: in pray∣ing for all, they followe the later error, which had chaun∣ged the sacrifice of thankes geuing into the sacrifice of prayer. But more of the olde Liturgies nowe in the thirde Article, which must be of the originall that the Fathers referred this their practise vnto. iij. To what origin he confesseth the Doctors to referre it, to wit, vnto Scripture, and Traditi∣on of the Apostles. And here first, for perspicuitie, I remember to the Reader, what S. Augustine saith of fasting:August pist. 86. Casul. [In the Scriptures of the new Testament, Video praeceptum esse Ieiunium, I see that fasting is commaunded: But what dayes we must keepe fast, Non inuenio in illis literis euidenter praeceptum, I finde not in those scriptures euidently commaunded.] And yet the fast of fortie dayes before Easter, and some others, both he & many moe of the Fathers doe say to be Au. in p 110. & e 119. cap Hie ep Marcel. Monta commended vnto vs in the Scripture of the new Te∣stament: but specially that it cōmeth expresly vnto vs of the Au. in p 110. & e 119. cap Hie ep Marcel. Monta A∣postles tradition without Scripture. The like they say of prayer for the dead, that it is expresly found in the holy Scripture: But the certaine times that it is solemnely practised as vpon the bu∣rial day, the third, seuenth, thirteth, fourteth, yeares day, and also in a certaine speciall prayer of the holy Masse: are (they say) ey∣ther all or some of them, of the Apostles plaine Traditiō, though also commaunded to vs out of Scripture. So say the Fathers: and for their so saying, let vs now sée what this mā saith of them. And to omit, (because it requireth a longer treatie) that he ma∣keth in effect no lesse then heretiks, of S. Augustine with others,Infr ca.  Pur. 214 for auouching sacrifice for the dead, out of the booke of Maccabées as out of Canonical scripture: Gregorie, Bernard, & Bede, (whō D. Allen alleageth vpon the place of Mathew. 12) are of opinion,Pur. 19. Gre. 4.19. Ber. Ser. in Cant Bed. in Mar. 3. saith Fulke, that sinnes not remitted in this world, may be remit∣ted in the world to come. But howe happeneth it, that Chryso∣stome and Ieronym, which both interpreted that place, coulde gather no such matter, although they otherwise allowed Pray∣er for the deade? the reason must needes be, because the error
of Purgatorie growing so much the stronger, as it were nearer to the full reuelation of Antichrist, Gregorie and Bede sought not the true meaning of Christ in this Scripture, but the confirmati∣on of their plausible error. Then S. Chrysostome bylike will please him:Pur. 251.247. Chris. ho. 4. in. 1. cor. 15. Such pitie may bring you into the pit of hell. Pur. 237. but heare I pray you, out of an other place: I denie not but that Chrysostome doth alleage this example (of Iob sa∣crificing for his children. Cap. 1.) for prayers to profite the dead. What shall we say? Those good men in that declining state of the Church to superstition, being destitute of the cleare testimo∣nies of Scripture, to maintaine those plausible errors, are driuen to such simple shiftes to vphold them, as it is great pittie to see. Againe, But where learned Chrysostome, that prayers and al∣mes had any comfort in them for the dead? surely he alleageth Scripture, but he applieth it madly, and yet he often applieth it to the same purpose.Pur. 226. Amb. de. obit. Theod. Alas good man. Likewise, Ambrose com∣mendeth Honorius (the young Emperour) for solemnising the funerals of Theodosius (his father) by the space of .40. dayes af∣ter the example of Ioseph. Genesis .50. such superstition crept in∣to the Churche first by emulation of the Paganes, and after see∣king for colourable confirmation in the examples of the Patri∣arkes.Pur. 363. Againe, Those Doctors that would seeke confirmation of prayer and oblation for the dead in the Scriptures, as Chryso∣stome and such like, doe manifestly wrest them to their purpose. I doe here no more but note that he chargeth them whom he con∣fesseth to haue bene of the true Churche, euen so as he chargeth vs: But what Scriptures, and how substantially they alleaged, I must reserue to See ca. 13. an other place: As that also which See cap. 9. pag. he gra∣teth vpon so often out of Tertullian, as if he should confesse, that prayer and oblation for the deade is not taken at all out of the Scriptures: Whereas in déede he doth not so say, but onely of the solemne times of such oblation, in such manner as I alleaged a litle before out of S. Augustine concerning fasting and fasting dayes. The offring anima die, vpon the yeares myndday for the dead, and the solemne memorie of them in the Canon of ye Masse, these thinges Tertullian and others ascribe to the Apostles tra∣ditions, and not to precept of the Scripture. And now for making it such a tradition, what saith Fulke a∣gaine of them?Pur. 39. Thinke you, that prayers for the dead came from
the Apostles because Tertullian saith so? And a litle after: If Tertullian had no ground of his saying when he affirmed that oblations for the dead came from the Apostles, what ground can Augustine haue which was 200. yeres further from the Apostles time then he? And againe: Where Chrysostome saith,Pur. 303. It was a∣greed by the Apostles, that in the celebration of the holy myste∣ries, a remembrance should be made of them that be departed, for they right well knew great profite to arise thervpon vnto them: he must pardon vs of crediting him. It is no maruell now after this to sée him fayne to denie the See cap. 13. most certaine works of the A∣postles Scholars, Clemens Romanus, & Dionysius Areopagita, witnessing the same tradition, and to say, that we haue them but of some counterfayting knaue that could not otherwise main∣teine his heresie to be olde,Pur. 268. The modestie of the man to∣vvardes the old vvriters. but by falsifying and counterfayting anew, that which neuer was in the olde writers heades. Finally vnlesse he make the like counterfaiting knaue of S. Chrysostome also, he may sée by this testimonie of his, that he had no cause for this poynt to charge him or any other after him with suche a chaunge of the olde Liturgies, as he doth in many places, saying: But be it that Chrysostome & Basil did write these Liturgies,Pur. 356. I∣tē. 360.371. the oldest Fathers that can be giuen them: I would know what Li∣turgies they had in those Churches, before Chrysostome and Basil deuised those formes that are said to be theirs. If you would in déede know it, and namely for this poynt about the dead, Chryso∣stome him selfe, as also Augustine, Epiphanius, Tertullian, and others alleaged by D. Allen, hath tolde you, that it was all one and the same, afore and after. It followeth in him: And whye Chrysostome, Basill, Gregorie, or any other that prescribed newe formes of seruice, were not content with the old formes that were vsed in their Churches before their dayes: See his boldnes.vndoubtedly because they were too simple for their curiositie, too sincere for their su∣perstition, sauouring of the auncient truth, not fauouring their lately receiued errors. And a litle after: The authors of these Liturgies thought to confirme it by publike authoritie, whiche was before but a blinde error without a head. I shall answere this why of yours in the sixt Chapter, where I must answere for these Fathers.
iiij. He contrariwise feareth not nor basheth not to say, they had it from the diuel and his limmes. Now let vs come to the fourth and last article, to sée him so farre confronting those Fathers which haue thus fathered this matter vpon the Apostles partly their writings, partly their tra∣dition, that he cleane contrarie fathereth it vpon the diuell him selfe & sundry lims of his, saying boldly that thence the holy Fa∣thers had it.Ar. 39. It is certayne (saith he) that prayer for the dead was first planted by the diuell, as were other abuses: and because it hath a great pretence of charitie, deceyued simple men the soo∣ner.Pur. 386. And with more particularitie in an other place: First the diuel suggested superstitious deuotion into the Gentiles: by per∣uerse emulation of whom, Iudas Machabaeus might be decey∣ued. And his facte gaue occasion to the ignoraunt people of error: And their ignoraunce first winked at, because it had a shewe of pietie, confirmed by custome, might at length, (Pur. 436.for none of the auncient Fathers within foure hundred yeres was wholly of your error) be allowed of Augustine and others, who neuer weyed the matter by Scriptures, but by the common practise. And this I thinke (saith he) is the righte pedigree of prayers for the dead and Purgatorie. And in an other place yet more particularly:Pur. 416. Pur. 152.266.386.410. I haue promised (sayth he, and that ve∣ry often, and therefore so muche the more to be noted) to proue that the opinion of Purgatorie had the same originall that the moste notable Heresies had. He beginneth that paragraph with these wordes: Nowe at the length commeth the author of this Heresie, by the testimonie of Epiphanius and Augu∣stine: whom D. Allen there alleageth, that Aerius an Arian was the firste that denied prayers and oblations to profite the dead. Vnto that Fulke goeth about there to aunswere, to quitte Aerius, and to counteraccuse those Fathers and their felowes. Well then, Purgatorie (sayth he) had the same ori∣ginall that the moste notable Heresies had. And what was that? Heresie was receyued from the diuell by Philosophers and Gentiles. And howe proue you that Purgatorie was so receyued? Mary, all Philosophers whiche graunted the Im∣mortalitie of the soule, as Phythagoras, Empedocles, and Plato,
assigned three places for the soules departed. And who else? Carpocrates was a great admirer of Philosophie. This Heretike learning out of Plato his Philosophie, that mens soules must be purified after their death, inuented a kinde of Purgatorie out of the opinion of Pythagoras. Yet forwarde: Origen to muche a Philosopher, was not content with Plato his purification, but he must bring in Platoes fire also. Is this all? Afterwarde about S. Augustines time, the name of Purgatorie was first inuented, by some mediators and conciliators of Origens error with the er∣roneous practise of the Churche. Here loe we haue the thirde place, the purification, the fire, and the name: We lacke nowe but the relieuing of the Soules there. For that he saith: The Heracleonites would redeme their dead after a new maner, name∣ly by oyle, balme, water, and Inuocation said ouer their heades in the Hebrew tongue. But (at one stroke to strike vs starke dead) Montanus had in all poyntes the opinion of the Papistes. First that the Patriarkes before Christes comming were in hell: That Abrahams bosome was in hell, or in the lower partes: That on∣ly Martyrs and perfect men are priuileged of God to goe to Pa∣radise: That all small offences must be punished after this life, where the prison is, and the vttermost farthing to be payed. Then for prayers a litle after: And therefore (sayth he) it is not other∣wise to be thought, but that the Montanistes vpon the grounde of this opinion, not content with the oblations for the dead (whi∣che the Church then had by peruerse emulation of the Gentiles,Oblations of thanks giuing also, are hea∣thenish. and yet were but oblations of thankes giuing) they added also prayers for the spirites of them that were dead, whereof Tertul∣lian maketh mention. And that you may not doubt whether he charge vs alone, or also the auncient Fathers, with all this, goe to his wordes alleaged out of the same place in this Chapter by me afore, beginning thus: And this was a great corruption of those auncient times, that if the Gentils or Heretiks had any thing that seemed to haue a shew of pietie, or charitie, they would draw it into vse, &c. After all this he concludeth in the ende, saying: Wherfore it is left that Montanus and his felowes were the first that taught prayers for the dead to be profitable. And agayne: Therfore Aërius was not the first that held our opinion: but Mō∣tanus before him was the first that held your opinion throughly.
Mary you haue played the man in déede, and performed (I trow) euery iote of the vaunting promise that you made a litle before, when you said:Pur. 410. That we can not reade out of the word of God, we shal heare of Purgatorie, among the Paganes, Carpocratians, Heracleonites, and Montanistes, of whose heresies and pestilent practises, the whore of Babylon (that is as your owne mouth hath here confessed, the Church at the farthest by S. Augustines time) hath pacht vp her Purgatorie and sacrifices for the dead, as by and by I shall declare. Thus I haue shewed, how he noteth the true Church for so many particular errors of ours, as about Ceremonies, about the Crosse, about the name of Sacrifice, about Fastingdayes, and ab∣stinence from certaine meates, about Sole life of the Cleargie, and vowe of virginitie, about merite of the same & of abstinence, about inuocation of Saints, and worshipping of their Relikes, about Purgatory, and reliefe of the soules in Purgatory: and that they were so much addicted therevnto, that they counted the contraries to be Heresies, and béeing opposite to the holy Scrip∣tures, and Traditions of the Apostles. vj. As touching the Popes primacie. To all these errors I will yet adde one more, which he maketh so much of, that he ascribeth the Apostasie of the Church by him imagined, to the same. Which, for all that, I will here shew to be imputed by him also to the true Church that in the second Chap∣ter we heard him to confesse. It consisteth in the matter of the Popes Superioritie. To begin therfore with him an high & come downward along the true Church vntil it And yet no mā then in the vvorlde that vvent out frō the Pope. Ar. 47. Ar. 36.vanished quite away forsooth vpon a soden by force of a summe of mony giuen & taken of Bonifacius the third and Phocas the Emperour, thus he hath first of Pope Victor: Victor went about to vsurpe authoritie o∣uer other Churches. And againe: Victor Bishop of Rome about the yere of our Lord 200. passed the boundes of his authoritie, in excommunicating of all the Churches of Asia. Afterwarde he noteth Cornelius and Stephanus Bishops of Rome for the like, in S. Cyprians time for medling with Afrike, Asia, and Spaine. Furthermore, Anastasius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, Bi∣shops of Rome all in a row, chalenged prerogatiue ouer the Bi∣shops in Aphrica, by forging of a false Canon of the Nicene
Councell. And againe: Celestinus Bishop of Rome dealt hard∣ly with the Nouatians. And there in the end: By these examples it is plaine, that the mysterie of iniquitie beganne to worke (or as he spoke there a litle before, The Popes authoritie first beganne to aduaunce it selfe) in Victor, Cornelius, Stephanus, Anastatius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caelestinus. And in an o∣ther place of some of them againe:Pur. 255. The Nicen Councell the first and the best, was corrupted with counterfected Canons by the Bishops of Rome, to maintaine their vsurped authoritie, in the dayes of S. Augustine. And in the nexte Chapter we shall heare him call the Churche in Innocentius his time,Pur. 148. the companie which hath the Pope for their head, Item, the Pope and al them that take his part. Finally to come to S. Gregories time: where D. Allen saith thus: [So if thou would know whether that place that our aduersaries impudently doe alleage out of Gregorie the great, against the Soueraigntie of the See of Rome,Pur. 305.310.194. was in deede written for their seditious purpose: beholde the practise of the same father, and thou shalt finde him selfe exercise iurisdiction, at the very same time when he wrote it, in all Prouinces Christi∣aned throughout the world: both by excommunication of Bi∣shops that gouerned not well, by often citation of persons in ex∣treeme prouinces, by many appeales made vnto him, by continu∣all legacies to other Nations, sent either to conuert them to the Faith, or to gouerne them in their doubtfull affaires, and by all other exercise of spirituall iurisdiction, &c.] He in his answer is driuen to say to this: The practise of Gregorie although it were much more modest then of his Successors, yet can it not be excu∣sed, but it was contrarie to his doctrine whereby he reproueth an other (to wit the Bishop of Constantinople) in that he was not altogether cleare him selfe. As though either he or any his suc∣cessor vsed the stile of vniuersall Bishop, and not all the cleane contrarie, [Seruus seruorum Dei, Seruaunt to Gods seruauntes.] All this I haue so copiously alleaged out of him (though not so copiously as I might) for these thrée purposes: First that ye Rea∣der might clearely sée, that in so many pointes he confesseth him selfe and his fellow protestantes to dissent from them whom he confesseth to haue bene of the true Churche: Secondly, that a∣gaine he confesseth vs in the same points to agrée with the same:
Thirdly therefore and especially, that he hath not for these poin∣tes (and so neyther for such as depende of these) iust cause to denie vs the true Churche,Note vvell vvhosoeuer seeke the Chur∣che. which he so graunteth to them that holde the same pointes, and that vpon the same groundes, and as earnestly, or (if he will) euen as obstinately, as we doe nowe, condemning their aduersaries therein of heresie, and so consequently of separation from the true Churche, howsoeuer them selues rather are charged by him to haue receiued of older heretikes their opinions: but that contrariwyse wée are for so muche to bée more excused then they, as wée doe erre by their authoritie and the authoritie of their Successors after them to this time, no greater authoritie in the meane time clearely ru∣ling ouer the case to the contrarie parte, but rather the more it is scanned, the more continully it appeareth, that their part is still to bée followed, and the contrarie parte still to be condem∣ned and accursed. ¶The fourth Chapter. That he chargeth the saide Primitiue true Church with sundrie errors, wherewith he nei∣ther doth, nor will, nor can charge vs. HEre I haue to present him with an other reason, why he shoulde graunt vnto vs the true Churche, rather then to the olde Fathers, for so muche as he will confesse vs to bée frée from diuers errors, that he chargeth them withall: most of them also being so great and so grosse, that none of the errors that he imputeth to vs, can be thought com∣parable, by the iudgement of any man that is any whitte indif∣ferent, and not altogether blinded with an huge beame of par∣tialitie. And let the Reader lay this to the last Chapter before, and conferre all diligently together: That he confesseth (I say) that there may bée a Companie which erreth, not onely some principall members, but also the whole bodye of it, and which erreth obstinately, and moreouer whiche erreth the grossest errors that can bée, and them in no small number: and yet
the same companie maye bée the true Churche, and in déede al∣so hath bene the true Churche: so that no péece of this, nor all this together will serue him (him I saye) to proue, our com∣panie not to bée the true Churche. And then afterwarde let it bée considered, what better, or what other stuffe he hath to proue the same: and if he haue any suche, eyther better, or other then this, refuse (a Gods name) to bée of our Chur∣che, and séeke after hym thy saluation where else thou canst finde it. Well then, to come to those other errors that were (as he sayth) the Primitiue Churches, and are not ours, and to be∣ginne at the toppe:Ar. 35. D. Allen [requireth the Protestantes to de∣clare, when the true Church decayed.] To this: I answere (saith Fulke) First, Euen in the Apostles time there arose manye he∣resies whiche did not a little trouble the Churche. Secondlye: But immediately after the Apostles time (while the Fathers of the Churche were earnestly occupied in resisting of horrible he∣resies) by the crafte of Satan, some errors and abuses crepte in∣to the true Churche of Christ: which at the first, because they were small, and men occupyed in greater matters, were eyther not espyed, or not regarded. And howe declareth he this? Iusti∣nus Martyr was in this error that the Angells lusted after wo∣men, and therefore were turned into diuells. What more? I∣renaeus affirmeth that our Sauiour Christ lyued here .50. yeares. And what more? Also both he and Papias the Disciple of S. Iohn helde this error, that Christ shoulde raigne a thousande yeares after the Resurrection here in fleshe. And what of all this? Whereby it is manifest, seeyng these auncient Fathers and pil∣lers of the Church, were thus stained with errors, that the Church in their time could not be free from the same. Againe, It seemeth also, that the Churche in Iustinus his time was in some error a∣bout Second mariages and diuorcementes. After all whiche he concludeth in the end: And so it is euident, that the true Church decayed immediatly after the Apostles time. Where the diligent Reader marketh, that he vseth, decaying and erring, indifferently one for the other. As for that which he sayeth there, of abuses and corruptions entered into the Church of Christ as a prepara∣tiue to the Religion of the Papistes, it belonged to the last Chap∣ter,
and therefore I noted it there.Supra pag. And so much of the Apostles time, and also of the time immediatly after the Apostles. Let vs procéede and come downe lower: Cyprians time was such a time (saith he) as Cyprian and all the Byshops of Africa decreed in Councell,Pur. 287. that those which were Baptized by heretikes, shoulde be Baptized againe. And therefore it was no such time, but that he and all his fellowes might and did erre, in some opinions, contrarie to the trueth of Gods worde. And lower agayne, Vnder the Emperours,Ar. 15. Constantius, Constans, and Valence, the true Churche was greatly infected with the heresie of Arius: what time also Liberius Byshop of Rome was infected with the same heresie. Straight after that time did Sainct Hierome florishe, whom amongest others in the seconde Chapter he confessed to bée a member of the true Churche: And him he chargeth not onely,Supra. pag. as I alleaged in the last Chapter, that he was almost fal∣len into the heresie of Tertullian in condemning Second mari∣ages:Pur. 419. Ar. 46. But also thus in an other place: Consider what perilous assertions these be: that the Lambe is euery where: and that the Martyrs are euerye where: this is to destroye the humanitie of Christ, and to geue diuinitie vnto the Martyrs. I doubte not but Sainct Ieronym, if he had quietly considered these absur∣dities,He lacked but such a monitor. woulde haue reuoked them as erroneous and hereticall: but whyle he rather followed affection then iudgement, you may see howe he was deceaued. At the same time was the thirde Councell of Carthage, and Sainct Augustine one of the Byshops thereof.Ar. 89. It he chargeth thus: The Councell of Car∣thage the third, Cap. 23. determined, that all prayers at the Altar should be directed onely to the Father, and not to the Sonne, or the holy Ghost. Whether this be an error, to define, That it is vn∣lawfull to pray to God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost, let euery man iudge. And to put more weight to this his accu∣sation, he addeth: But you will except that this was a prouin∣ciall Synode, and not a Generall Councell. But I answere you, it hath the authoritie of a generall Councell, because it was con∣firmed in the sixte generall Councell holden at Constantinople in Trullo. But of all others most insolently he insulteth and triumpheth against the auncient Church, for ministring the blessed Sacra∣mēt
to Infants.Ar. 87. I will proue vnto you (saith he) that the Church of Rome hath falsly interpreted diuers sentences of Scripture: and therfore by that which she hath done, it can not be doubted but that she may do it. One then for example: S. Augustine was in this error, that he thought Infants must receiue the sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, vnder payne of damnation: and was deceiued by false interpretation of this Scripture, Except ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, & drinke his bloud. &c. Ioh. 6. This error and false interpretation he affimeth to be common to all the Westerne Church, and to Pope Innocent him selfe. Con∣tra duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium li. 2. cap. 4. & contra Iulia∣num li. 1. cap. 2. Againe in an other place where D. Allen admo∣nished his Reader, saying: [Pose M. Iewel, where he had,Pur. 145.148. that the Church of God might erre.] Behold, I pray you, the confi∣dence of this man in his answere therevnto. Whatsoeuer M. Ie∣wel hath affirmed against the Papistes, he hath so substantially and learnedly defended, that For many P¦testants nee no other bo to become Ctholikes.he neede not to haue any other man to answere for him. Therfore if it were not to choke M. Al∣len in his owne coller, I would trauell no further in this question. How then doth he strangle the man? The Church (you say) can not erre: and that companie is the Church which hath the Pope for their head. Very true, both the one and the other. If therfore it can be proue, that the Pope and all they that take his parte haue erred, it is sufficiently shewed, that the Churche maye erre. Say then: S. Augustine was in this error (as you will not denie) that the sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ was to be mi∣nistred to Infants: But of the same opinion he affirmeth that In∣nocentius Bishop of Rome, and all the Church in his time was: Therfore the Pope and all the Church did erre. Reade Augu∣stine contra Iul. li. 1. cap. 2. Whether he saith of Innocentius, Qui denique paruulos definiuit, nisi manduc auerin carnem filij hominis, vitam prorsus habere non posse, Which hath defined, that Infantes, except they eate the flesh of the sonne of man, can haue no life at all in them. And by eating the flesh of the sonne of man, he meaneth eating the sacra∣ment of his flesh and bloud, as it is euident to them that will be∣stow the reading of Augustines discourse in that place.Pur. 309. Againe in an other place. And by the waye note here, one practise of a notable error in Augustines time, that the Sacrament of the
Lords supper was giuen to children, which wist not what it ment, contrarie to the worde of God, who requireth men to examine them selues before they receiue it. Wherfore if any other practise were in his time, or allowed by him, contrarie to Gods worde, we are no more bound vnto it, then vnto this, which euen the Papistes them selues Or els you can not el.will confesse to be erroneous. Yea he is not afrayde to preferre the very Pelagians in this poynt before all Gods Church of that time,Pur. 390. saying: In S. Augustines dayes (of whose time the historie of the Church is By vvhat Hi∣storiographa?largely set foorth vnto vs) who preached or writ agaynst that error, which he and Inno∣centius Bishop of Rome, and all the Church (as he confessed) did hold, that Infants must receiue the holy Communion or els they should be damned? who preached against this error, except per∣haps the Pelagians that were horrible heretikes. Agayne: Why was it reuealed to the Pelagians,Pur. 422. that Infantes might be saued without the participation of the sacrament of Christes body and bloud, rather then vnto S. Austine, Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and (as Augustine saith) and the Catholike Fathers of that time? which thought it was as necessarie for them to receiue the Com∣munion, as to be baptized. The reuealing of his ignorant saw∣cines herein, I reserue to the sixt Chapter. Here I do no more but note what errors he layeth to the true Churches charge, which bene these that you haue heard. ¶The fifte Chapter. What reason he rendreth▪ why they in those auncient times had the true Church, notwithstanding these their errors. THus haue we heard of him, that the true Church may re∣mayne the true Church although it erre, and that it hath erred in many of the same articles wherein we do nowe erre, and moreouer in many other articles beside wherein we do not erre, wherof it followeth playnly, that neither our er∣ring, nor these our errors, no nor any other our errors, are alone sufficient for him to depriue vs of the true Church. And now, not béeing able to depriue vs of the true Church, if any man do yet thinke, that for all that he is not constrayned to
graunt to vs the true Church, let the same man in this Chapter consider, what reason he yéeldeth why our Fathers, notwithstan∣ding their foresaid errors, had the true Church: and he shal most euidently perceiue, that by the same reason we, notwithstanding our errors, haue likewise the true Church. He nameth somewhere, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origen,Ar. 61. Epipha∣nius, Hilarius, Chrysostomus, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Augusti∣nus, &c. and saith of them as followeth: But for as much as they holde the foundation, that is Christ, though they haue diuers er∣rors and superstitions, they were doubtles, the members of the true Church of Christ.Pur. 336 In an other place hauing said that in S. Au∣gustines time, they vsed vnprofitable prayers for the dead, and many other superstitions, he addeth: neither doth it folow that al that taught or beleeued those errors, so long as they buylded vp∣pon Christ the onely foundation, haue perished. Againe:Ar. 74. We take not vpon vs to medle with God his iudgementes, whom he condemneth, or for what causes, further then the worde of God teacheth vs, namely that as many as haue not beleeued in the on∣ly sonne of God, are condemned for their vnbeliefe: other secret causes we remit to his secret counsel and knowledge.Pur. 34 In so much that where D. Allen presseth this newe founde Cleargie in our countrey, for vsurping those Colledges & other ecclesiastical pro∣uisions against the willes of the first founders, who meant them to such as should pray for their soules, and not to suche as should preach agaynst the same: he answereth of them likewise & saith: Whether any meant to mainteine preaching agaynst Masse or prayers for their owne soules, as we know not whether they did or no, so we count it not materiall, &c. and whether the buylders of such places be saued or damned, it perteyneth not to vs to iudge, or to enquire. Agayne, where D. Allen had shewed by example of S. Augustine, of his mother, and of others, that they offered prayers and the sacrifice of the Altar for the dead,Pur. 325 328. and therevpon concludeth, saying: [Thus loe all these Fathers taughte, thus they practised, thus they liued, thus they dy∣ed: none was saued then but in this fayth, let no manne looke to be saued in any other nowe.] Nay, saith Fulke, not so: For althogh they were in that time infected with some errors, yet was the faith of their saluation in the only foundation Iesus
Christ,Pur. 238. &c. in the only mercy of God. Againe: We confesse that in Chrysostomes dayes the onely foundation Iesus Christe was taught, and the article of iustification by the only mercy of God was preached: but yet we affirme that muche straw, wood, and other impure matter was buylded vpon the foundation, whiche was a preparatiue to the kingdome of Antichrist which was not long after to be reuealed.Pur. 287. And in an other place, Cyprians time was no such time but that he and al his felowes, though they held the foundation of Christ, yet might, & did erre in some opinions, contrary to the truth of Gods word. And agayne: Cyprian and al the Bishops of Aphrica, were, notwithstanding their error (of Heretiks baptisme to be no baptisme) in the vnity of the church. In all these places he alludeth (although he neuer expresse it) to S. Pauls saying,1. Cor. 3. that, The foundation is Iesus Christ, and, if any man buyld vpon this foundation, he shalbe saued, yea also though his buylding or worke be wood or straw, such (to witte) as will wast away in the day of fire. Let vs conferre with it this saying, Matt. 7. He buildeth vpon the Rocke which heareth or beléeueth my sayings,Aug. in Ps. 103. cor. 3. & de fide & op. ca. 16. Gala. 5. and worketh them. S. Augustine expoundeth it most aptly in very many places, when he saith, that, Christ to be in the foundation, is, that he haue the principall place in our heart, and nothing at all be preferred before him. Which is done, if he dwel in our hearts by a working faith: for, That fayth which by loue worketh, being layde in the foundation, suffereth none to perish. So that if we be either out of faith, or out of charitie, then be we without this sauing foundation: As are all they that eyther be∣léeue any one heresie, or breake any one commaundement by any mortall sinne. For so saith S. Paule expresly of Heresies with all other works of the flesh,Gala. 5. That they which do such thinges, shall not inherite the kingdome of God. For which purpose agayne thrée places are diligently to be conferred, in all which the first part of the sentence he chaungeth not at all, but the other part he varieth thrée wayes,1. Cor. 7. Gala. 5. Gala. 6. geuing vs playnly thereby his meaning: In Christ Iesus (saith he) neither circumcision nor vncircumcision is ought, or can do ought, but a new man, but fayth working by charitie, but keeping of Gods commaundementes. This is the truth. But nowe commeth Fulke with an other exposition, which first requireth not workes of charitie, or obseruation of
the cōmaundements, nor secondly also so much as fidem integram in∣uiolatam{que}, a sound and vncorrupted faith: but onely to holde this one article of faith, to beleeue in the onely Sonne of God, and, in the onely mercy of God. And if any man erre about other ar∣ticles, and that also so obstinately that he condemneth his aduer∣saries for heretikes, yet he holdeth the foundation, and by vertue of it shall be saued notwithstanding: and so did S. Augustine and those other Fathers, and therefore they were of the true Church, and are saued. Howe much more warely dealt your maister Peter Martyr vpon this place to the Corinthians, who séeing the absurdities hereof,Pet. Mar in. 1. Cor. thought better to say that the Fathers in the agonie of their death acknowledged their errors. Et non raro fit, &c. It happe∣neth often (saith he) that such as in their whole life time had not the gift to thinke a right of Religion, haue it often geuen them at the last houre: to vnderstand in the agonie of death, that the su∣perstitions and abuses to which afore they had yealded them sel∣ues, were both vaine and also hurtfull. Which thing I would not doubt to haue happened to Bernard, Frauncise, Dominike, and many of the auncient Fathers: because liuing in the foundation, that is, in Christ, although they builded many abuses and very many superstitions, yet they might be saued: howbeit through fire, what time at the last houre they wrestled against death and the terrors of their sinnes, and in that wrastling acknowledged the vanitie of their fansies. Thus you sée how they are troubled to saue them whom (no lesse then vs) they should, but dare not to condemne: and while they labour so to do, they do it (specially Fulke) by such meanes, as no lesse serueth to saue vs. For who knoweth not, that we be∣léeue in the onely Sonne of God, and in the onely mercy of God? and that therefore we looke not to be saued by our owne works, that is to say, which we did without him, as when we were in Paganisme, or in Iudaisme, or in Caluinisme, and any other he∣resie, or finally in any mortall sinne, but onely by his workes, that is, by his Sacraments that of his great mercy he hath insti∣tuted for vs, & the good déeds that of his great mercy he hath crea∣ted in vs, in Christ Iesus? euen as S. Paule saith:Tit. 3. Not for any works of righteousnes, that we did (before Baptism quae fecimus nos)
but for his mercy he hath saued vs, by Baptisme per lanacrum generati∣onis: that thou maist sée his mercy and his sacrament stande well together.Eph. 2. And againe: for wee be his (new) creature, created in Christ Iesus, in good workes. And therefore afore we were in Christ Iesus, we had no works to saue vs: but they are our wor∣kes only in Christ Iesus, that saue vs. For so the same S. Paule teacheth vs (as I said afore) what it is, that in Christ Iesus is of power to saue vs, to wit, our new creation in these good workes, our faith working by charitie, our kéeping of Gods commaunde∣mentes: so that againe his mercy in Christ Iesus, and his crea∣ture or good workes in Christ Iesus, stand well together. And e∣uen thus did also those old fathers beléeue of ye Sacraments, & of good workes,Supra. pag. whom he confesseth notwithstanding to haue belée∣ued in ye onely Iesus Christ, & the onely mercy of God: beléeuing likewise ye communion of prayers betwixt all that are in Christ Iesus,Infra. pag. either quick or dead, as him selfe likewise confessed of thē in ye .3.Supra. pag. Chap. And therfore séeing they notwithstanding that, are confessed to haue beléeued in the onely sonne, & the only mercy of God, we no lesse for all that our beliefe, must be likewise con∣fessed to beléeue the same onely foundation, and so consequently to haue likewise the true Churche and saluation: be the impu∣dent audacitie of Fulke neuer so great, to say, that we build vp∣on no foundation at all, and seeke by all meanes to digge vp the onely true foundation of our faith Iesus Christ, making him no∣thing better then a common person, except his bare name. Euen as his friendes and masters be altogether as lustie with the Fa∣thers them selues,Flaccus Illyric. in Claue Scrip∣turae, parte. i. in praef. one of them saying of S. Hierome by name, that he was Et morbi humani & medici Christi ignarus, ignorant both of mans disease and of Christ the Phisitian. Therefore let him wrangle as much as he will, this is the plaine case, euery indif∣ferent man doth sée, all like both in vs and in the Fathers, a∣bout his supposed foundation: if they helde it, we hold it, if we holde it not,Infra. pag. they held it not: and therefore both to be alike iusti∣fied, or both alike condemned, as I shall haue a place againe in the .9. Chapter to declare further, when I answere to all that he alleageth vp and downe to proue that wée agrée not throughly with the Fathers in substance of doctrine.
¶The sixt Chapter. An answere first to all the foresaid errors wherwith he hath charged the Church of the first .600. yeares: and af∣terward likewise to all errors that he layeth to the Church of these later times. HItherto I haue so procéeded in this my defence of our Churche that now is, as supposing that both it & the aun∣cient Church before it hath erred in manner as he char∣geth it: and declaring that he must confesse it to be the true Church still notwithstanding that it erreth now, as he con∣fesseth it to haue bene the true Churche afore, notwithstanding that it erred in many of the same articles, and also in sundry o∣thers, then. But now if I can further defend it, that for all his accusations, yet it hath not euer erred, neither in those former, nor in these later ages:Note vvel, you that seeke for the Church. then will the curable Reader (I hope) much more acknowledge, that it is most worthely to be sought vnto and obeyed, and their Antisynagogue to be forsaken and abhorred: and that much more againe, if moreouer I defend it, that also it can not erre. For then, séeing they confesse, that theirs may erre, it will follow therof, that theirs is not the true Chur∣che. But that point I wil reserue to the .8. and .9. Chapter, where I will answere the Scriptures and fathers that he any where alleageth to proue, that the true Church may erre, here I will but maintaine, that it hath not erred. Fulkes zeale in answering for Caluine and others being in deede of his Church. And this to doe I am moued specially by the truth of the mat∣ter it selfe, but secondarily also by example of this same Fulke. who though he say that their Church may erre, yet can not his zeale abide to heare that it doth erre: or rather he saith no more, but that the true Church may erre, so, as where he may séeme to speake of a true Church distinct from their Church now, to wit, of the Fathers Church: But else when he speaketh expressely of their owne Church that now is, as he holdeth alwayes earnestly that it doth not erre, so he neuer saith so much plainely, as that it
may erre: yea sometimes also in his zeale he breaketh out a∣gainst the Fathers them selues at once and against vs: as where D. Allen said:Pur. 369.371. [One of them was so impudent, to say in an open booke, that the Liturgies of the Fathers made all against the Ca∣tholiks.] And a litle after: [If their Seruice like you so well, or at least better then S. Gregories Masse: you might with more hone∣stie haue coped for any one of them, then haue forged a new one of your owne: which in deede is directly repugnant to all other ;rites in the Christian world.] To this: I answere, saith Fulke, We haue with more honestie reformed our Liturgie according to the word of God, & example of the oldest Church, then Gre∣gorie, Basill, Chrysostome (if they were theirs) or whosoeuer were authors of those Liturgies did: leauing the ancient Liturgies that were vsed in the Churche before their time, because they did not sufficiently expresse their errors & superstitiō, & forge them new of their owne contrary to the word of God. And in another place first on ye one side he accuseth S. Ambrose & the Church afore & in his time,Pur. 226. saying, Such superstitions crept into the Church, by e∣mulation of the Paganes. Then on the other side, of his owne he saith: For auoiding of all which inconueniences, that haue risen and may rise,The vvise Church of Ge∣neua. by ceremonies practised at burialls, the Churche of Geneua very wisely & godly, vseth no more ceremonies in bury∣ing their dead, then are conuenient for the reuerent laying vp of the corps.Pur. 412. Againe where D. Allen saith: [They be as saucie with Gods Churche, Councells, and chiefe gouernours, as we be with the Iackestrawes of Geneua.] See here, I pray you, the zeale of the man: You confesse hereby your selfe to be a saucie Iacke. And he addeth, that the world can testifie, that there is (passing) grauitie and modestie in the lightest persons of all that Churche. Againe where D. Allen saith,Pur. 341. [If all Ecclesiasticall foundations should returne to the founders againe, because their willes are not fulfilled, that then perhaps this wiued newe Cleargie might be driuen to serue in a reformed French barne.] his zeale is so great that he can not hold, but, You iest (saith he) like a scornfull caitife, of those holy assemblees of Gods childrē in Fraunce.Pur. 203.205. Infra. ca. 12. num. So likewise by name, for Caluin & other his masters, let vs a litle behold his impacience. D. Allen toucheth Caluine for denying all commu∣nion betwéene Christes members that are in this life and in the
next. For this, Fulke saith vnto him: You haue a pleasure to spue out your pestilent poyson against that noble light of Gods Church, M. Caluine. Againe where he noteth his strange doctrine about Christes discending into hell, Fulke answereth:Pur. 61.63 Infra. ca. 1 pag. He vtte∣reth his spite against Caluine: he spitteth out agaynst him moste impudent slaunders, raylings, and lyes: not satisfying him selfe with the voyce of a man, he hath borowed the tong of the diuell him selfe. Whose doctrine God him selfe, the Angels, and all the worlde doth know and testifie, to be directly contrary to these slaunders. And straight after: But because he woulde not be thought to haue spued out all his poyson, agaynst Caluine, he goulpeth vp another bowlefull of rayling & slaundering, against our Bishops, who haue not onely suffered, but also commended Caluines bookes to be read and studied of the simple Curates, affirming that they do priuily set forth by books, that which they dare not openly preach. All this and more of like sorte he hath there, and yet saith in the very same place that he doth somewhat moderate his corrupt affections. Also in an other place:Pur. 45. Without all shame or shew of truth most impudently, he faineth a contra∣rietie betwene Melancthon and Caluine. O brasen face and yron forehead. With litle zeale he saith for another:Pur. 147.89. Whatsoeuer M. Iewel hath affirmed against the Papistes, he hath substantially and learnedly defended. Againe: As for that reuerend father M. Iewel, whom this arrogant Louanist calleth the English bragger, how well he hath answered his chalenge, his owne learned labors do more clearly testifie vnto the world, then that it can be blemi∣shed by this sycophantes brainlesse babling. In déede he hath so well quitted him selfe, that the very reading of his answere hath turned many earnest Protestantes into earnest Catholikes, as both by the numbers and by the noblenes of the persons it is no∣toriously knowen. And euen no better stuffe in Caluines Insti∣tutions find they, that take the like paynes to examine them and are of iudgement to discerne, although you trust so much therein, and say: I would to God that al Papists in England would reade that booke, and pray vnfainedly,Pur. 45 that God would open their eyes, that they may see the truth if it be taught therein. No syr, not so, that is not the way: There is no booke of Heresie, Iudais∣me, nor Mahometisme, but it would ouerthrowe or shake the
common sort: and therfore to reade them, and pray, that is not the way to truth, no more then to swalow poyson, and pray, is the way to get or kepe health of the body. You should rather haue exhorted men that can, to reade the auncient Fathers works, or such partes of their works as are Institutions or summes of our faith, as S. Augustines Enchiridion ad Laurentium, also, De he∣resibus ad quoduultdeum, the bookes De fide ad Petrum, and De Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus: Vincensis Lirinensis his generall rules, as it were preseruations against all heresies, with diuerse other: or because we speake of bookes written at this time, spe∣cially and aboue all others the Councell of Trent, where it in∣treateth of doctrine. But your zeale is to Caluine & his doctrine, as here you haue shewed: it is not to the Fathers and their do∣ctrine, no nor to the doctrine of the whole Churche, whiche also your selfe confesse to be such. For Caluine erreth not, you say, D. Allen slaundereth and belyeth him: but the Fathers and the whole Church haue erred. Well touching Caluin, Melancthon, and such others, you shall (I trust) in time conuenient heare D. Allen answere to you for him selfe. My purpose here is onely, by this ensample of your zeale towardes your Fathers, to shewe a litle of my zeale for our Catholike Fathers, though not with such bigge wordes and lowde exclamations against you as you haue done against D. Allen, yet with suche truth and reason, as euen your selfe also, if God of his mercy wil take from you that stoute heart, may well confesse that you are fully satisfied. ¶The first parte. Concerning the errors that he layde (ca. 3. par. 2.) both to the Fathers, and to vs. And because I diuide this matter into thrée partes, to witte, the errors that you lay both to them and to vs, the errors that you lay to them and not to vs, and finally the errors that you lay to vs, or to the Church of later times: and not to them. As con∣cerning the first sorte which I collected in the third Chapter, I answere playnly and briefly at once, that they are no errors. But you will proue it: let vs sée how.
j. Of the Crosse and Images. They tooke the signe of the Crosse from the Valentinians,Pur. 419.416. you say. And a litle before in the same Paragraph. I could proue out of Irenaeus and Epiphanius, that the first that brought in esti∣mation the figure of the Crosse and Images, were the Valentini∣ans and Carpocratians. And a litle after, Carpocrates (as Irenae∣us doth testifie) was a great admirer of Philosophie, in so much that with the Images which he made of Christ, he ioyned the I∣mages of Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle. Elsewhere you quote also the places, saying to vs:Ar. 22. Of the Valentinians you learned to haue in price the signe of the Crosse, and to abuse the places of Scripture for the same superstitious vse: as, God forbid that I should reioyce but in the Crosse of Christ, &c. Irenaeus li. 1. ca. 1.Gal. 6. Epiphan. li. 1. Tom. 2. heraes. 31. And there afore: To make the I∣mages of Christ and the Apostles, and to cense them, you lear∣ned of the heretikes called Gnostici and Capocratitae, Epiphan. li. 1. Tom. 2. in the Preface, and li. 1. Tom. 2. haer. 27. And Irenaeus, li. 1. cap. 23. I answere (that the Reader may wonder at your audacitie) that those authors there speake not a worde of the figure, nor signe, nor vse of the Crosse: they tell how those heretikes in their fables inuented .30. Gods which they called Aeones, and in them two or thrée Christes, and one of the Christes they called (a∣mongst other names) stauros, or Crux: And to that Christ they racked that saying of Sainct Paule with others, as also other Scriptures they wrested to their other Aeones: euen so properly as you alleage this same Crosse of theirs against our Crossing, as well might those Christes be alleaged against our Christ. And as properly agayne doe you against our Images al∣leage the Images of those heretikes:Epiph. li.  Tom. 2. in praef. & Haer. 21. Si¦moniano∣rum. Iren. li. 1. c 1. in fine. Simon Magus (of whom those Gnostici did beginne) gaue to his Disciples his owne I∣mage In specie Iouis, In forme of Iupiter, and also the Image of hys strumpet Helena in figura Mineruae in forme of Minerua: Et adorant has hi qui ab ipso decepti sunt, and these Images doe they adore. As if the Lutheranes should haue and adore the Images of Luther and of Katherine his woman, and a Catholike note them for it: that were you know a sore argument for vs to answere.
Likewise the Carpocratians, who also were Gnostici, had the Images of Iesus,Epiph. li. 1. To. 2. in pr. & Haer. 27. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24. and withall of certayne Philosophers: Cum quibus Philosophis etiam alias Imagines Iesu collocant, &c. With which Philosophers they set vp those Images of Iesus, and then adore them, and celebrate the mysteries of the Paganes. For hauing set vp these Images, they do afterward keepe the rites of the Paganes. And what be the rites of the Paganes other, then sa∣crifice, and so forth? Which Epiphanius addeth vpon those words of Irenée: Et reliquam obseruationem circa eas similiter vt Gen∣tes faciunt, They set them together with the Images of the Philo∣sophers of the world, and kepe about them the other rites like as the Paganes do to their Idols, of whom we reade in the times of persecution, that the worship which they would haue the Mar∣tyrs to giue to their Idols, was partly sacrifice, partly Incense, which whosoeuer did, were called Sacrificati, and Thurificati. And so this maner of those heretikes, maketh euen as much agaynst our Images, and agaynst the worship that we giue to God in the place where they are, as the Samaritanes example maketh a∣gainst the worshipping of our Lord, because with him they wor∣shipped other Gods,4. Reg. 17. as it is written: They both worshipped our Lord, and also their owne goddes withall. Or rather maketh lesse against our doing, because we agrée not with those heretikes in neither side, neither making Gods of the Philosophers Images, nor yet of Iesus his Images, but onely of Iesus himselfe, who is God in déede aboue all, and of all to be blessed for euermore. Ar. 22.And the same answere take you to that you obiect to vs in like sort againe in one of the places aboue noted, saying: Of the Col∣liridianes you learned to make Images of the virgin Mary, and worship them and her, with offering of candles, &c. as they did of cakes, &c. Epiph. li. 3. Haer. 79. These Collyridianes heresie was this, that certayne women at a certaine solemne time of the yere certaine dayes together did decke a square table, and vpon it Offerebant panem, &c. They did offer a cake in the name of Mary, as if Mary were eyther a God, or a Priest, and women her ministers to sacrifice for her. So saith Epiphanius confuting thē at large, and shewing that women could neuer sacrifice, and that none but one is to be adored as God, though our Lady be moste honorable. Sit in honore Maria: Pater & filius & Spiritus sanctus
adoretur. Reuera sanctum erat corpus Mariae, non tamen Deus. My purpose is here but to answere: else if any man desire testi∣monies for our Images & for our vse aboue them, he may reade D. Saunders booke and many other of that matter: It is inough for me here that Fulke him selfe hath acknowledged,Supra. ca. 3. pag. Tertullian to hearse it as a thing then vndoubted, that our crossing of our selues (which is a making of Imagesa, nd a great religion to the same) commeth vnto vs from the Apostles by tradition. And be∣cause we are thus come from Images to the Sainctes, let vs heare what more you haue against the Fathers and vs in that behalfe. ij. Of Inuocation of Sainctes, and worshipping of their Reliques. You remember since the thirde Chapter that (by your owne report) the true Church counted Vigilantius an heretike for de∣nying the Inuocation of Saintes and the worshipping of their Reliques (of which and of their Images, againe,Supra. pag the case is all one.) But now you will proue, that the Churches opinion rather was heresie: for thus you say to vs for that matter:Ar. 21. Of the Os∣senes, you receiued the superstition of Reliques: for they vsed to take the spittle and other filth from the bodyes of Marthys and Marthana, which were of the seede of Elxai (that is,In peregrina∣tione religion ergo? great Sainctes with them) and vsed them to cure diseases: as Erasmus witnesseth at Caunterbury were kept the clowtes that Thomas Becket did occupie to wipe of his sweat, & to blow his nose on, which were kissed as holy Reliques, and thought also to be holsome for sicke folkes. Epiph. li. 1. Tom. 1. Haer. 19. This againe maketh as much against our Reliques, as the Valentinians Crosse against our Crosses, and the Carpocratians Images against our Images. Epiphanius telleth, that this Elxai was in Traianus time a great master of that sect, and that Marthys his kinswoman and Marthana his sister, In the Ossenes countrey were adored in their life time as Gods. Pro dijs adorabantur, &c. Because they were of the said Elxai his stocke. quarum etiam sputa, &c. which wo∣mens spittle also, and other filthes of their bodies the foresaide heretikes in that countrey tooke to them, in auxilium videlicet morborum, as to cure diseases: nihil tamen efficiebant, but yet without any effect at all. As for Erasmus, he knoweth nowe (if
he did not afore) what it is to haue Religion in dirision, and you may remember from whose body were caried to the sicke Sudaria vel Semicinctia,Act. 19. and their diseases, and euill sprites went awaye therewith. Open your mouth also against those Nap∣kins, and call them likewise Clowtes for sweat and for the nose. Or rather doe you applie them (with good counsaile) to your disease also,Chris. To. . De vita Bab contra Gentiles. as S. Chrysostome applieth them and the Reliques of the Martyr Babylas together, vnto the Paganes, declaring thereby most excellently that Christ must néedes be God, séeing he coulde geue such passing power to the clothes and bones of his seruaunt. Ar. 22.You say moreouer to vs: Of the Cayanes, you learned to call vpon Angels. Epiph. li. 1. To. 3. haere. 38. Those heretikes worship∣ped Cain, Iudas, & such like: & litle estéemed Abel, & such others, yea and (some of them) also Christ him selfe. They said also, that none could be saued vntill they had gone through all sinnes. And therfore committed all abhominations, & referred them to this Angel & that Angel, with this inuocation: O tu Angele vtor tuo opere, O tu potestas ago tuā actionem. O thou such an Angell, I worke now thy worke: O thou such a power, I now do thy actiō. And this with them was called perfecta cognitio,Epip. Haer. 26. & 21. & 27. euen doctorship it selfe. They agréed in this with the Simoniani, Gnostici, and Carpocratite, who in their beastlines directed the like most hor∣rible inuocations to God him selfe, whom they termed Patrem vniuersorum. Which is as substantiall an argument against all inuocation of God, as the other is against the inuocation of Angells. Simon Magus was (you know) in the Apostles time. He inuented many heauens, and many names of Angells, pla∣cing these in this heauen, and those in that heauen, with sun∣drie sacrifices for men to offer by them that they might so bée brought at length to the Father of all. And that none might o∣therwise be saued,Epip. Haer. 21. except he learned, hunc mysticum ductum, this mysticall passage, and howe to offer suche Sacrifices by those Angels, to the Father of all. Against these fables it is, that S. Paule instructeth the Ephesians and Colossians in those two Epistles so like in wordes also,Colos. 2. that no man deceyue them with those inuocations of Angelles Religion, non tenens ca∣put, not holding the heade Iesus Christ. But otherwise hol∣ding
hym for the heade, that wée are brought to the Father by the holye Angells, as by Christes ministers,Hebr. 1. who séeth not in the Scriptures in infinite places? And so doth the Churche make all her petitions, all through Christ our Lorde, Per Christum dominum nostrum, to none shée commendeth her o∣therwyse, neyther in heauen nor in earth, so doe we all praye and desyre to be prayed for one of another:Apoc. 1. Apo. 4. v. 5 & 5. ver. 6. with Heb. 1 ver. 14. Apo. 1. ver. 16.20. Heb. 3. ver. 1. Apo. 19.22. Apoc. 3. and so prayed S. Iohn, saying: Grace and peace to you from God the Trini∣tie: and from the seuen Spirites that are before his throne: and from Iesus Christ according to his humanitie: putting Christ in the last place, that he myght so, more hansomely adde the rest which he had to saye there of him? And this in that verye booke, out of which the Protestantes abuse two places against the worshipping of Angells, forgetting also where in the same booke God doth promyse to make the obstinate Iewes to come, and to adore before the feete of one Angell. Et scient quia ego dilexi te: and they shall knowe that I haue loued thee. Which all if you also did knowe, you would not say thus in one place to vs: Euen in the Apostles time, when the superstition of Angels beganne to be receiued, there was one steppe of your way,Pur. 287. which you holde euen to this day, Colos. 2. iiij. Of abstinence from fleshmeat and from mariage. Nowe to another error common to the Fathers and to vs:Supra. ca. 3. pa. 2. diui. 2. You sayde in the same thirde Chapter, and confessed, that they counted Aerius an heretike, for teaching against our prescript Fastingdayes, and so Iouinianus likewyse, for denying the merite of abstinence from fleshe and from mariage, and for licensing therevpon Votaries and Priestes to marrie. You on the other syde charged the Fathers, and saide,Pur. 419. that they tooke prescript tymes of Fasting, and vnmeasurable (so you terme it) extolling of Sole life in ye Cleargie, frō the Manichees, Taciani∣stes, & Montanistes. But you bring no proofe thereof.Ar. 45. Onely this you haue in another place: Augustine by authoritie of Phila∣ster, chargeth the same Aerius, with abstinence from fleshe. If this bee an heresie, then bee all Papistes heretikes, which count abstinence from fleshe an holy fast. Still you take Richard for
Robert. These thrée heresies condemned fleshe & mariage as per∣taining to the yll God, and not to the good God, according to the heresie of ye Valentinians before them. So writeth S. Augustine of the Tocianistes or Eucratites: Nuptias damnant, &c. They con∣demne mariages,August. ad quoduult. haer. 25.40 53. and esteeme of them all a like as of fornicati∣ons and other pollutions: neither admitte they to their number, any that vseth mariage, be it man, or be it womā. Non vescuntur carnibus, eas{que} omnes abominantur: They eate no flesh, but count all flesh abominable. He hath there of Apostolici or Apotactite likewise, saying: Eucratitis isti similes sunt, &c. These are like to the Eucratites. They receiue not into their Societie them that vse mariage, and haue proprietie: Such as the Catholike Chur∣che hath both Monkes and of the Cleargie very many. Sed ideo isti haeretici sunt, &c. But therefore these are heretikes, because se∣parating them selues from the Churche, they thinke that there is no hope for them which vse these thinges, that they do not vse. Nowe saieth he of the Aerians afterwarde: Some saye that these doe not admitte into their Societie, but onely such as con∣teyne them from mariage, and haue renounced all proprietie: being therein like to the Eucratites or Apotactites. Yet from flesh meate, Epiphanius saieth not that they absteine: But Philaster layeth to them also this abstinence. What abstinence, and howe from fleshmeate, but such as in those Eucratites he had saide a∣fore? Sure it is, that this Aerius of his maister, called Eusta∣thius,Gang. con. Can. 1.19. Soc. li. 2. cap. 33. had this heresie, to whom therfore Concilium Gangrense sayeth Anathema, and to all that holde the like, to witte, that a Christian vsing mariage, and eating fleshe, in Regnum Dei in∣troire non possit, can not enter into the kingdome of God. Et spem non habeat, Nor hath ought to hope for. Though withall he taught Ieiunia praescripta auersanda, that the prescript fastes shoulde be detested, Dominicis{que} diebus ieiunandum, and to fast on Sondayes. iiij. Of Ceremonies and Liturgies. Ar. 91.Next after this you charge the auncient Church with appro∣uing Ceremonies that were (as you thinke) vnprofitable and hurtfull, because S. Augustine complained them of presumptions, and because many of them are nowe abrogated. I might here, and in many other places, exclaime against you (as you did often
against D. Allen vpon light causes) for not quoting your testi∣monies, and that you haue not read them in the authors, but ta∣ken them out of some blinde or wilfull collector. But to spare words all that I can, and let the things only to cry agaynst you: Doth not S. Augustine in the very same Epistle and the very same Chapter (whence your place is taken of certayne that were more earnest for their owne priuate obseruations,Au. ep. 119. ad Ianuar. cap. 19. then for Gods commaundements, as that against dronkennesse) say constantly, Tamen Ecclesia dei quae sunt contra fidem vel bonam vitam, non approbat, Yet the Church of God approueth not any thing that is against the faith or against good life. And there also playnly distinguished those presumptions, from such things as are eyther conteyned in the authorities of holy Scriptures, or, found in the statutes of Bishops Councels, or, fortified by custome of the whole Church. Saying also in the Epistle next afore to the same man,Au. ep. 118 ad Ianuar cap. 5. that if the whole Church vse any thing, it is a poynt of most insolent madnes, only to call in question, whether that thing should be so vsed. Neither if some such vsages be afterward abrogated, doth it folow therof,Pur. 265.393.400. Tertul. de Cor. mil. Hier. adue Lucif. Act. 15. that therfore they were before vnprofitable, or hurtfull, or not of the Apostles tradition, though Tertullian affirme it, & S. Hie∣rome also euen in Tertullians words, or els that the Church is blasphemous which abrogateth them, as you conclude. For there might be good cause both of that afore, and of this after: as you sée euen in that decrée of the Apostles which is recorded also in the Scripture, Of not eating bloud, nor fleshe that hath not the bloud let out of it. Likewise in that custome of the Apostles and of the Churches of God,1. Cor. 11. for men (publikely) to praye and prophecie (or preache) bareheaded. Which of Bishops in olde time, and nowe also of Doctors, yea in many countries, of all preachers, is not obserued. What ordinarie authoritie ye Church had in the Apostles time, the same it hath still, and also the same spirite to vnderstande what are the immutable grounds of Reli∣gion, and what traditions howe and vpon what causes maye be chaunged. Of euery particuler to giue a reason, requireth a spe∣ciall worke by it selfe: but generally the quicker witted maye consider, that in a Nation, when the fulnes thereof is baptized, and the articles of faith throughly rooted, there may iustly & must néedefully be a great mutation in the Ceremonies, specially of
Baptismus adultorum, and Missa Catechumanorum. And so to plant the Euangelicall article of the Resurrection, the Apostles vpon Sondayes and in Quinquagesima, did forbid Solemne faste and Solemne genuflexions: and the Church afterwarde muche more straictly, what time the Manichées & other heretikes put al their strength to plucke vp againe the Apostles plant. But nowe all such heresies being by such diligence of the Church quite con∣founded, and that marueilous article so fastned in all Christian hearts, as it is wonderfull, specially knowing what resistance and rebellion it hath suffred: Now (I say) the Church might wel be more remisse therin, though yet she kepeth those Ceremonies still.Aug. ep. 86 Reade S. Augustine ad Casulanum of those matters, where also besides this you shall finde also another generall reason ac∣cording to the diuine wisdome of that most Ecclesiastical doctor, to wit, that it sufficeth if the Church haue vnitie of faith, as it were intus in membris, inwardly in her limmes, and that she wel may withall haue diuersitie of obseruations, as it were varieta∣tem in veste, varietie in her queenely garment, according to the Psalme.Psal. 44. Which he speaketh for diuersitie of Ceremonies in sun∣dry places at one time▪ but it serueth for the like diuersitie in one place at sundry times, as it is euident. As for your boldnes with the Fathers for their Liturgies, pro∣nouncing that vndoubtedly they chaunged the auncient truth in∣to their owne lately receiued errors,Proc. apud Claud. de Sainctes praef. in Liturg. or else why were they not content with the olde forme? Proclus Bishop of Constantino∣ple about a thousand yeres agoe answereth your Why, & telleth you, that S. Basill, and S. Chrysostome did no more but abridge the Liturgie of S. Iames the Apostle (which thrée Liturgies the Councell in Trullo also doth acknowledge) and that vpon iuste cause.Can. 32. But that with errors they corrupted eyther it or any other forme which was vsed before them, if any man be so farre gone so to thinke vpon your light worde for all the most renowmed cre∣dite of those Fathers, let the studious of truth notwithstanding take the paynes to conferre those Liturgies, and they shall easily be able of their owne inspection to controll you,Supra pag. 21. as I also before in the third Chapter by playne demonstration disproued you for the same, and namely in the very same article that forced you to this absurde and shameles shift.
v. Of Sacrifice: and for the dead. Now are we come to your next accusation of the auncient Church, concerning Sacrifice, & concerning the dead. The name of Sacrifice,Pur. 419. which they cōmonly vsed for the celebration of the Lords supper, they tooke vp of the Gentiles: so you say, but you proue it not. You might as well say, that they or the Apostles had it of the Gentiles, to name that Sacrifice which Christ offered vpon the Crosse. No syr, they named it so, because it was so: and therfore Christ also said not, This is I that was borne of the vir∣gine, though that were true, but, This is my body, vpon the one,Matt. 26. and, This is my bloud, vpon the other. The Apostle also for the same cause saying of him that commeth therevnto vnworthily, not that he is guyltie of Christ, though that be true,1. Cor. 11. but that he is guyltie of his body and of his bloud, because it is such a celebra∣tion of his death. Wherevpon if you knew what is the sacrifi∣cing of a liue thing, you should sée, that how properly he was sa∣crificed on the Crosse in an open maner, euen as properly he is sacrificed here in a mysticall maner. The same Apostle therefore agayne saying, that we haue an Heb. 13. Altar to eate of, (which place your blindnesse Pur. 45 alleageth against this Sacrifice) and also cal∣ling it 1. Cor. 10 The table of our Lorde in that forme of speache as he calleth 1. Cor. 10 The table of the diuels the sacrifice of the Gentiles, and the Leuiticall sacrifices likewise the Leuiticall 1. Cor. 10 Altar. Yet you can not find Pur. 200 289. one word, nor one syllable in the Scripture, of any Sacrifice instituted by Christ at his last Supper. Whereof we shall say more Cap. 10. Dem. 24. Purgatorie. But to go forwarde with you to your accusation first of Pur∣gatorie, and afterward of Purgatorie fire: To proue that Pur∣gatory came of the Philosophers, as al most notable heresies did,Pur. 416. Tertul. de anima cap 31.32. you alleage out of Tertullian De anima, that all Philosophers which graunted the soules immortalitie, assigned three places for the soules departed, heauen, hell, and a third place of purify∣ing. This argument proueth as well, that heauen, and hell, and the Immortalitie of the soule, had their originall of
the Philosophers. Howbeit also to report the truth, there is no word of any third place of purifying: but onely that such Philo∣sophers made two sortes of Receptacles, to wit, Supernas man∣siones, for Philosophers soules onely, and Inferos, for all other soules: and that about the first they did varie, for Plato placed it in aethere: Aerius in aëre: the Stoikes, circa lunam. This is all. Againe you proue out of Irenéeus, that Purgatorie came of Carpocrates the Heretike,Iren. li. 1. cap. 24. because he inuented a kinde of Pur∣gatorie, and proued it out of that place of S. Mathew, Thou shalt not come forth vntil thou hast payd the vttermost farthing,Mat. 5. euen as the Papistes do. By this argument againe you will winne much honestie.Epiph. li. 1. To. 2. Haer. 27. Tertul. de anima. c. 17 Ireneus, and after him Epiphanius, as also Ter∣tullian in your owne booke De anima, do write that the Carpo∣cratians helde, that a man must wallow in al the filthe of sinne that is in this world, before he can come to life euerlasting: and therefore if he haue missed any sinne, his soule is reuersed into a body, and so againe, and againe, vntill he haue fulfilled all. And for this purpose Iesus (they say) vsed this Parable of agreeing with the aduersarie in the way,Matt. 5. &c. Corpus enim dicunt esse car∣cerem, &c. For that prison they say is the body: and that which he saith, Thou shalt not go out thence, vntill thou hast payed the last farthing, they interprete as if the soule should be turned ouer by certayne Angels from body to body, semper quoadvs{que} in om∣ni omnino operatione▪ quae in mundo est, fiat, Continually euen vntill it haue bene in all and euery acte of this world, vt nihil am∣plius relinquatur (saith Epiphanius) ad nefarium quicquam fa∣ciendum, so that nothing remayne that is abhominable but it is fulfilled. Purgatorie fire. Pur. 419.418.You goe forward and say, that they tooke Purgatorie fire of the Origenistes, and the name of Purgatorie of certayne Media∣tors who about S. Augustines time would accorde Origens error with the erroneous practise of the church. For it was Origen that brought in the fire also, and that he would buylde (as the Papists do,See here ca. xij. of Christes dam¦nation tempo∣rall, according to Caluine. and as he had better reason then the Papistes haue, out of the 1. Cor. 3. This you say, but you proue it not, Origens error was that hell fire is not an euerlasting fire, but onely a temporall fire, which should in time purge not onely them that had ended their
liues in most horrible sinnes, but also the diuels them selues,Augu. ad quod. haer. 43. Orige∣nist. (as S. Augustine writeth) and so restore them to the kingdome of God: Et rursus post longissima tempora omnes, &c. And that all againe should at length returne to the same miseries: And that the felicities and myseries of men and Angels, haue alwayes had, and always shall haue, their turnes and courses after this maner. Thus he erred (you sée) about hell and heauen, and about Pur∣gation of the damned: but of the Purgation of suche as die in Gods fauour, here is no word. Vnlesse you reason thus: There is no such Purgatorie as Origen and Carpocrates would haue, ergo, no Purgatorie at all. Which followeth euen as necessarily as this doth: There is no such hell nor such heauen as Origen did put, ergo, no hell at all, nor heauen at all. Releeuing of the dead by prayer. Now for the Reléeuing of them which else must (as we say,1. Cor. 3. Supra. ca. 3 pa. 2. and as S. Paule saith) endure a fierie and therefore a most pain∣full Purgation: you graunted in the third Chapter, that the aun∣cient Fathers of the true Church, as Epiphanius & Augustine, counted Aerius an heretike, for teaching,Aug. hae. 5. Epi. hae. 75 Such absurd shiftes he is driuen vnto. That Prayer for the dead was vnprofitable. Orare, vel offerre pro mortuis oblatio∣nem non oportere, he taught (saith S. Augustine) That we must not pray, nor offer oblation for the dead. But you will nowe proue, and that also Ar. 45. by the selfe same Fathers, and out of the selfe same bookes of theirs, that their doctrine rather was here∣sie. For, If Aerius (say you) was an heretike for denying prayer for the dead to be profitable: why were the Heracleonites accu∣sed of heresie, because they buried their dead with inuocations? Epipha. li. 1. Tom. 3. haere. 36. Epiphanius after Secundiani, and Ptolomaitae, writeth in order of Marcosiani, Colarbasiani,See Epip ab. haer. 32. ad haer. 36. and Heracleonitae, saying that they were all Gnostici, (as their pre∣decessors the Valentinians and Carpocratians) that is to saye, men of knowledge. Which Gnostici, all of them, did count per∣fectam cognitionem, perfect knowledge or perfection to be this, if a man forsooth had wallowed himselfe like a swine in all and euery filth that is, otherwise his soule after death shoulde by the Iudge and his Minister (who were, according to their fables, two of the Angels that created the world) be imprisoned agayne
in a bodie. This saide all the Gnostici, and I touched it also a∣boue. But the later of them (after the vsuall maner of heretikes, as Epiphanius noteth) not content with their Fathers inuenti∣ons, would adde somewhat also of their owne inuention. They inuented therefore a certaine Redemption, as they called it: which consisted in a fond imitation and corruption of the Sa∣cramentes of Christ, but in that againe, after the manner of he∣retikes, disagréeing much amongst them selues. For looke how many are the professors of this doctrine,Epiph. haer. 34. Iren. li. 1. cap. 18. so many are their Re∣demptions, sayeth Ireneus, and out of him Epiphanius spea∣king of the Marcosians. Some did it by way of a mariage. Some as it were at Baptisme, one sort by water, an other sorte by a mixture of oile and water, both which sortes did after anoint the partie with balme: and all, with certaine fond words according to the fables of their heresies. Alij verò haec anima auersantes, &c. But some other woulde none of all these, saying, that the myste∣rie of the vnspeakeable and inuisible power, ought not to bee celebrated in visible and corruptible creatures. Esse autem perfec∣tam redemptionem, ipsam cognitionem inenarabilis magnitudi∣nis. But that the very knowledge of the vnspeakeable maiestie, was perfect Redemption.Epiph. haer. 36. After ye foresaide Marcus, came Hera∣cleon, taking his occasiō of Marcus, yet not redeeming any more as he did, but otherwise, redimens videlicet ad finem vitae eos, &c. at the houre of their death he redeemed his followers: powring on the heade of the partie, eyther oyle mingled with water, or baulme & water (such againe was the vnitie of these Heracleo∣nites) together with Marcus his madde inuocations, and some others: All this to this end, that by vertue of such anointing and such Inuocations, his body being lefte here, & his Anima, Soule, being cast of, apud Opificē, where the Angel or God Creator is, his Interior homo, Inwarde man, might inuisibly passe the said Creator & them that are beneath & about him, & so scape vp to his proper place aboue all: specially, if withal he could remember to say to the Creator & those other powers, as Heracleon had instructed him. The wordes are to be séen in Epiphanius, who at length concludeth al this geare, & saith: Et de Redemptione quidē haec sunt quae ad nos deuenerunt, And concerning the redempti∣on, this is all that hath come to my knowledge.
Now this forsooth maketh much against our Solemnization of Mariage, much also against our Baptisme or baptizing with water. And euen as muche against our oyle in Baptisme, or Chrisme made of oyle and baulme, after Baptisme: as much also against our Anealing at the houre of death, and our prayers for men after their death: howbeit of praying for the dead in all this was neuer a worde, neyther in it selfe, nor in any lyke∣nesse of it, vnlesse you will therevnto liken those wordes that the Heracleonites were taught to say after their death, I know not to whom, that they myght goe inuisible. And yet you doe so triumph in the Heracleonites, that you are vp with them a∣gainst vs, in moe places also, saying: The Heracleonites (as Au∣gustine witnesseth) came yet a step more towardes the Papistes:Pur. 417. for they would Redeeme their dead after a new manner, namely by oyle, balme, water, and inuocations saide ouer their heades in the Hebrew tongue. And againe: Of the Heracleonites you lear∣ned to anoint men at the point of death, with oyle, and balme,Ar. 22. and to cast water vpon dead men, with Inuocations. Epiphani. lib. 1. Tom. 3. Haeres. 36. Euen as of the foresaide heretikes wée learned to Baptize men, and to marrie men. Who séeth not ra∣ther, that those heretikes tooke their rites of the Catholike rites, with such mutation as they thought good, so as nowe the Calui∣nistes haue made them out of our Masse, a Communion of bread onely and wine. But if the Heracleonites fayle you,Pur. 417. Montanus had in all poyntes the opinion of the Papistes. All those poyntes I did put in your wordes, in the thirde Chapter. But how doe you nowe proue the same? Because Tertullian was a Montanist:Supra. ca. 3. pa. 2. diui. 4 and he hath all these poyntes in his Bookes that he made be∣ing a Montanist, speciallye in hys Booke De anima, where also he telleth a Myracle that confyrmeth prayers to profite the deade: this is all your proofe. But I praye you syr, is all Montanisme, that Tertullian hath in his Booke De anima, and in so many other Bookes which he wrote beyng a Monta∣nist? then what article of our Créede almost is not Montanisme? Euen in those fewe lynes that you cite, he hath Immortalitie of the soule, & Resurrection of the flesh, and that which is his scope in the same place, to wit, (for you séeme not to vnderstande it)
the soules suffering in her betweene this and the Resurrection. If otherwise therefore, some be trueth, though some other bée Montanisme, what shoulde you haue done but to looke in Epi∣phanius, in Augustine, and such others, what were the heresies of Montanus: and not finding prayer for the dead amongst them, to haue refrained your rashnes. You knew this well inough, & therfore notwithstanding your bragges to proue it, &c. you confesse yt it is but your owne lyght suspicion,Pur. 417. saying: And therfore it is not otherwise to be thought, but that the Montanistes added (to ye abuse in the Church afore) also prayers for the spirites of them that were dead, wherof Ter∣tullian maketh mētion in his bookes De Castitate & De Mono∣gamia, which were both written to heretikes of his secte, and by those prayers laboureth to proue (his Montanisme, to wit) that Second mariages are not lawfull. And againe: And therefore it may well be,Pur. 263. that all that Tertullian speaketh of prayers and ob∣lations for the dead, was onely in the conuenticles of the Monta∣nistes.All in Tert. is Montanisme, that Cypr. doth not mention. And this coniecture (you say) seemeth the more probable, (not, because it is by any imputed to Montanus, but) because Cyprian (which was afterward a Catholike Byshop in the same Citie, where Tertullian some time had lyued) maketh no men∣tion of prayers for the deade. A goodly cause: and yet in déede Cyprian maketh such mention thereof, as D. Allen alleageth him,Pur. 239. Infra. pag. that your selfe doe say there: This place of Cyprian hath more collour, but yet not so cleare for Purgatorie as M. Allen would seeme to make it. And when you haue all done, you sticke fast in the lyme. But this by the waye. Againe you vtter your suspition,Pur. 419. saying: Finally it appeareth that the faithfull in Ter∣tullians time, &c. allowed no Prayers for the dead. And yet of this, least for lacke of courage so great a verse shoulde geue vs so much as a fillip, though you haue bene so vncertaine in your premisses, you must néedes be certaine in your conclusion not∣withstanding, and say to vs: Therefore Aerius was not the first that helde our opinion (although Epiphanius and Augustine say it neuer so muche) but Montanus before him was the first that helde your opinion throughly, against the Catholikes of his time.
Oblations for the dead. And so much of prayers for the dead. But because Aerius de∣nied not onely the profite of them, but also of oblations for the dead, and was no lesse for that also condemned of the Church, you must take paynes to quit him of that heresie likewise, and to charge the Church rather that condemned him, yea & the Church long before he was borne. Thus then you say, speaking of the times of Tertullian & Montanus before him:Pur. 417.418.419. The Church then had oblations for the dead by peruerse emulation of the Gentils, and yet they were but oblations of thanks giuing. You go about to proue it a litle after, saying: And that the practise of the Chur∣che for oblations for the dead at the yerely day of their death, were taken from the Gentiles, it appeareth by this that Tertullian counteth them of all one origen (to witte, of the Apostles tradi∣tion) with the oblations pro Natalitijs, that is, for the birth days. And if this be not inough, Beatus Rhemanus (you say) a Papist, and a great antiquary, doth confesse it, affirming that by the Ca∣nons of the Nicene Councell and other Councels, whiche he hath seene in Libraries, those oblations pro Natalitijs, with other su∣perstitions, that Tertullian fathereth vpon tradition of the Apo∣stles, were abrogated. After this you be bolde to crowe agaynst those auncient times, and to say amongst many other corruptions which they tooke of the Gentiles and Heretikes. So they tooke oblations for the dayes of death and birth of the Gentiles. He is a poore antiquarie, which knoweth not what Natalitia were in olde time, and still are, to wit, the dayes of Martyrs,Natalitia. so called, because they were then after many sore pangs deliuered out of their mother the militant Churches wombe, and borne vnto the life & ioy of the world to come. Which mother of theirs and ours vsed therfore alwayes, and stil vseth,Ioan. 6. for ioy that a man is borne to heauen, to offer from yere to yere vpon the dayes of their Martyrdome, the oblation or sacrifice of the Altar. For any other of her children she offereth also the same oblation vpon the day of his death, and so forth vpon his yeres Mindeday, yere by yere, but not with such ioy, but rather mourning with them, and for them, to get them comfort, knowing that though they also be borne into the worlde to come, yet, it may be, crying for a time as all children into this world, and not laughing by and by
as the glorious Martyrs. And these two sortes are the oblations that Tertullian speaketh of, saying: Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs,Tertul. de Coro. mil. Cypr. Epi. 37.34. anima die facimus: We make oblations for the dead, and for the byrthes (of Martyrs) vpon their yeres day. S. Cyprian likewise: We celebrate the passions and dayes of Mar∣tyrs with an yerely commemoracion. We celebrate oblations and sacrifices for their commemorations. And in See Molanus de Martyrolo∣g ca. xv. after Martyrol. v∣suardi. Aug. in ps. 118. in. res. all Martyrologies you may sée them called Natalitia, or, Natales. S. Paulinus hath left verses that he wrote ten yeres together vpon the Natalis of S. Felix. S. Augustine shewing that the olde persecutors could not hurt the Church, but rather that they did much good agaynst their willes, amongst other vtilities, as that the whole earth is clad in purple by the bloud of Martyrs: Heauen is all in flowers by the garlandes of Martyrs: Churches are decked with the Relikes of Martyrs: Often cures are done by the merites of Martyrs, hath also to our purpose, and saith: Insignita sunt tem∣pora Natalitijs Martyrum, Times are notably marked with the birthdayes of Martyrs.Orig. li. 3. in Iob. Finally Origen saith expresly (& the place is often alleaged by your selfe) Nos itaque non natiuitatis, &c. We do not celebrate the day of birth (into this world) conside∣ring that it is the entrie into dolours and temptations: but we celebrate the day of death, as being the laying off of all dolours, and profligation of all temptations. Pamel. in Cyp. ep. 34And therefore it litle forceth what your antiquarie saith a∣gainst antiquitie, of whom also for so saying Pamelius a farre better antiquarie then he, saith thus: Quod quàm sinistrè detor∣queat Rhenanus ad dies natalitios Ethnicorum, nemo ignorare debet, &c. Rhenanus turneth this (place of Tertullian) from the right meaning very vntowardly, to the byrthdayes of the Gentiles. Howbeit in my iudgement Rhenanus there might be better construed, not to say that the oblations of Christians were euer for their owne birthdayes, but that vpon the byrthdayes of the Martyrs which the Church did celebrate with the solemne oblations of the Altar, many of the people kept drunken fea∣sting, as the Gentiles did, euery one vpon his proper byrthday: Which drunken vtas the Church was fayne to tolerate for a time, but afterwarde the Canons of the Nicene Councell, and others following did forbid it, and chaunge it into almes. If
you could shewe those Canons, we might be more certayne of his meaning. Playne it is, that he speaketh very confusely of birthdayes: And playne agayne it is, that suche rioting was v∣sed of some in Paulinus (whom he there citeth) and S. Augu∣stines times, long after the Nicene Councell.See Rhen himselfe  Tert. ad Mtyres, num.  And agayne most sure it is, that the Church alwayes from the beginning hath vsed, and no Councell euer did forbid the kéeping of the Martyrs birth∣dayes with oblations of the Altar. Finally Rhenanus in those annotations is full of scapes & ouersightes (and noted according∣ly by the learned of this time, very much) though no yll meaning. Beeres to cary home the Corpses. One error more you charge vs withall about the dead, tou∣ching their bodies, as the former were touching their soules,Ar. 22. George the Arian Bishop of Alexandria, inuented Beres to cary dead corpses, charging all men to vse them for his owne aduaun∣tage: as do you Papistes your Bearing clothes, and other toyes for funerall pompes, Epiph. li. 3. tom. 1. haer. 76. Epiphanius doth not say, that George inuented Beres, but that he deuised to haue them in a certayne number. His wordes are these, to shewe the miserable couetousnes of that man: No trade almost so base, no thing so meane, whereof he sought not gayne. For, so muche as Beres for the dead, he deuised to make the number of thē certayn, & without those that he ordeined, no corps of the dead, specially of strangers, was buried: non propter hospitalitatem, not for any charitie towards strangers, but (as I haue said) for lucres sake. For if any buried a corps otherwise, he came in daunger. Now if this or the like miserablenes be in any Bishop of ours or yours, ey∣ther to racke his people, or to vsurpe the liuing of his Cleargie, what is that agaynst Béeres, or Bearing clothes, or comely pompe of funerals, or against the Church that vseth them, speci∣ally your selfe also commending in your Geneua Church,Pur. 22 suche Ceremonies as are conuenient for the reuerent laying vp of the Corps? vnlesse you thinke it much for the Church to reape their Carnalia, to whom she soweth Spiritualia: or would prouide for your selfe a Béere & Bearing clothes against you shal be buried,1. Cor. 9 rather then to pay the common duties to your parish Church. Thus haue I folowed you through all the errors common to vs with the auncient true Church, taken (as you saye) of the
Gentiles or of Heretikes: but (as I haue playnly shewed) not any one of them so nor so. What more you haue of them, belon∣geth to the eyght and ninth Chapters, where I haue promised to answere all your testimonies out of Scripture and others, about any matter to day in controuersie▪ and thither I referre the Rea∣der for the last error also about the Popes Superioritie, hauing nothing here to be answered, because though you say, that the auncient Church had that error also, yet you do not say, that it tooke it of the Gentiles or of any Heretikes. The second part. Concerning the errors that he layed (Cap. 4.) to the Fathers, and not to vs. j. Touching the heresies which were in their times. Now followeth the second sort of the Churches errors, that is, those errors which you lay to the auncient true Church, and not to vs also. To answere you therevnto likewise, and that very briefly: What a thing is this that you charge the Church in the Apostles time, with the heresies that were in the Apostles times? And the same Church agayne in the thrée Arian Emperors time, with the heresie of Arius? As if a man would charge the same Church now, that is, our Romane Church, with your heresies. For you say,Ar. 15, 35. Dem. 45.46. not only Pope Liberius (of whom I must answere in the tenth Chapter) but the true Church was greatly infected with the heresie of Arius: And you bring in the heresies of the A∣postles time, to declare that euen then the Church decayed, coun∣ting it also all one to erre and to decay. And yet of your owne i∣magined Church that in the time of Pope Bonifacius the third fled into the wildernes, you can say thus: Where she hath not de∣cayed,Ar. 16.15. Infra. ca. 11 cont. 31. but bene alwayes preserued. D. Allen notwithstanding when he saith, that [the Church alwayes stoode still and stedfast, whilest all other Congregations, as Arrians, &c. haue decayed:] must be controlled, and tolde of the persecutions vntill the time of Constantine, and of great detriment vnder Iulianus the Apostata, and of a great Eclipse vnder the barbarous Gothes, &c. Besides the foresaid infection vnder the thrée Arrian Emperors. If amid those persecutions and heresies it had not bene alwaies preserued, then you might haue said, that it had decayed. You shew wel that
hell gates haue fought sore against it: but you shewe not that they haue at any time preuailed. Yea the truth is (& in my Booke of Demaundes, in the second Demaund, you haue it) that the Churche alwayes preuailed, according to Christes promise and predictions, and that so cléerely and so gloriously, that both the persecuting Romane Emperours gaue ouer at length their ob∣stinacie and vaine kicking against the pricke, submitting them∣selues to the very same Church which afore they persecuted, yea moreouer continuing Christians euen to this day: and also all heresies, Arrians, and others, vanished quite away: neither the persecutions being ought els in effect, but an occasion of innu∣merable Martyrs, the commodities of whom we heard a little Supra 55. Greg. ¦ral. li. 9▪7. before out of S. Augustine: nor againe the heresies ought els, but an occasion of so many most worthy Doctors both Gréeke & Latine, and their most excellent writinges, at which to this day all the later heretikes doe quake and tremble, by which to this day the Catholike Church alwayes conquereth and triumpheth. ij. Touching the errors of S. Cyprian, S. Irenee, and S. Iustinus. Which Doctors, if any of them haue erred in some thing or other, yet this is notable, that not so much as in their errors or any one error of theirs, they are of your side. The Luciferians and the Donatistes had for them the error of S. Cyprian and of his Councell in Afrike, and therewith they vrged the Catholikes very sore, as we sée in S. Hierome and in S. Augustine. But the Protestantes (I say) haue not so much as any error of any father to vrge vs withall. And to charge the Churche with the errors of those Fathers, as you doe, What a thing againe is that? as if you would charge Pope Stephanus and the other Catholikes that erred not, with the foresaid error of S. Cyprian. For so you charge the Churche in the times of Papias, Iustinus Martyr, and Ireneus, with their errors, to shew that it decayed (at least) immediately after the Apostles time. But at leastwise (you will say) some Fathers haue erred in some thing, and therefore it is true that the Fathers may erre. Why syrs? Do we attribute infallibilitie to euery father? De∣ceaue
not the people,Pu. 383.432. make not as though you had infringed the fathers authoritie, when you haue shewed yt a father hath erred, that is not the point betwene vs, therein we agrée together. But this it is that we charge you with, that you resist their full and whole consent. For to these we ascribe infallible trueth: To the Canonicall Scriptures, and tradition of the Apostles, without any limitation at all: in matters of Religion, To the decrées of Peter and his Chaire, because it is the rocke of the Church: and to the whole Church, and therefore againe to the Consent of the Fathers, and to Generall Councells confirmed by Peters Suc∣cessor, because these two imploy the whole Churche. Yea also to Prouinciall Councells confirmed by the same Chaire. And ther∣fore any one of these (wée saye) can not be against any other of these, no more then Canonicall Scripture can be against Cano∣nical Scripture. And therfore againe, if against these or any one of these, there be (as it may be) any Doctor or Doctors, any pro∣uinciall Councell, or any Generall Councell, it is therein with vs of no authoritie, as you sée in Sainct Cyprian and his Coun∣cell of Afrike. But yet so long as the matter is not plainely a∣gainst these, the particular Doctors and Councell are with vs of great authoritie, though some more then some, according to the persons, number, question, and other circumstaunces. And herevpon it is, that we are not hastie (as you are) to charge them with errors when they did not erre, nor also to reueale and to amplifie their errors when they dyd erre, but rather when you reueale them and amplifie them, to couer them and make the least of them,Iren. li. 2. cap. 39.40. so farre as trueth will permitte vs. Nowe the trueth is, that, séeyng the Gnostici saide that Christ beganne to preache in the beginnyng of his thirtieth yeare, and preached but one yeare, and then suffered in the twelfth moneth of the same yeare, being so of the age of thirtie yeares, to signifye their thir∣tie Aeones: Ireneus had occasion hereby to racke the age of Christ not onely aboue thirtie yeares, but also towarde .50. yea∣res, beyng able, as he thought, to yelde a good reason agaynst their fabulous reason, why Christ would bée so olde, which was, to bée an infante with infantes, and so forthe, tyll he were at length also an olde man with olde men, as the sanctification and example of all ages: specially because he thought he had both the
Ioan. 8 Gospell, and also tradition of his side, hauing heard of Sainct Iohns Schollers in Asia, that seniorem aetatem habens domi∣nus noster docebat, Our Lorde was of olde age when he Prea∣ched, and thinking by olde age they must haue ment aboue .40. towardes .50. howbeit the matter of it selfe is not great, and then also it was muche lesse. Againe, the Gnostici reiected the God Creator withall his creation,Iren. li.  in fine. as another God from God the Father of our Lorde Iesus Christ. Therefore was Ireneus glad, if he could shew that Christ not onely tooke his owne flesh, and made his owne Sacramentes, of the Creators Creatures, and raised from death his saide owne fleshe, and so will raise our fleshe likewise, but also that he will after our Resurrection dwel here in the Creators earth with vs for a thousand yeares:Apoc. 2 so well he lyketh the Creator and his Creatures: speciallye be∣cause he thought the Apocalypse of Sainct Iohn to bée on hys syde herein, and had in déede on his syde Papias, who either was scholler to Sainct Iohn, or rather scholler to his schollers,Euseb. li. 3. ca. v but homo ingenij pertenuis, a man of a verye slender witte, as it is easie to gather of hys writinges, sayth Eusebeus, and ther∣fore not altogether suche a one as Sainct Paule required,2. Tim.  spea∣king of the schollers of his scholler Timothie, qui idonei e∣runt, &c. such as shall be meete to teach others also: because him selfe was not sufficient to vnderstand Apostolicas interpretati∣ones, &c. The Apostles expositions being made in mysticall fy∣gures and darke parables. Howbeit the matter was not then so great, vntill Eus. li 7. ca. 19 Au. de.  li. 20. ca  See Bib¦cta Sixt Se. li. 5. not. 233 afterwarde the Churche condemned per∣aduenture that opinion in the Heretikes called Chiliastae or Millenarij (who according to Au.  Cerinthus the Heretike in the Apostles tyme) encreased the error with Eus.  7. ca. 19 Au. de.  li. 20. ca  See Bib¦cta Sixt Se. li. 5. not. 233 intollerable aug∣mentations of belly cheare and fleshely lust whiche they ex∣pected in those thousande yeares, as the Turkes and Iewes doe. Dionysius Alexandrinus wrote agaynst Nepos for it, as Eus. s Hic. C in Dio Alex.  per Esa 18. in p Iusti. i pol. ad natum. Eusebius hath recorded: and also Sainct Hierome De viris illust. And therefore it séemeth, some wordes to bée lac∣king in another place of his, where nowe wée reade as though it was Ireneus, agaynst whom Dionysius wrote. No more was it at that tyme a great matter for (g) Iustinus Martyr to be ouerséene in the sinne of the Angels: both because his whole
drift there, is, notwithstanding this by word, very true, that one God made all, but some of his Angels did fall from him, & vsurpe a tyrannie ouer men, till Christ came to deliuer vs, and therfore the same wicked Angels do stirre vp their Gentiles now against the Christians being men most innocent and the faithfull ser∣uauntes of the true God: And also because that place Gen. 6. is the first place in the Scripture where expresse mention is made of the Angels and of their sinne: for that place Gene. 3. The ser∣pent was craftier then any beast of the earth, how parabalicall it is? but Gen. 6. the Septuaginta in their authenticall translati∣on had then (as S. Augustine witnesseth) plainely Angeli Dei,August. de. Ciu. li. 15. cap. 22.23. The Angels of God, where we haue nowe but onely Filij Dei, The sonnes of God, meaning (as it is now commonly thought) The ofspring of Seth, that they marryed with the daughters of men, that is with the ofspring of Caine, which aore they re∣frained religiously. iij. Touching Second mariages, and Sainct Hierome. Ar. 35.But of Iustinus his time you saye further: It seemeth also that the Churche in his time was in some error, about Seconde mariages and diuorcementes. Had you no more to saye, but It seemeth: and yet coulde not absteine from accusing the Churche of God? neither yet doe you tell vs why it séemeth so, you ney∣ther alleage, nor so much as quote any place to proue it. In the workes of Iustinus him selfe, I dare say you haue it not. If you tooke it out of the Magdeburgian Centuries, followe my coun∣sell hereafter, and looke euerye thing first your selfe in the Au∣thors, before you beléeue your fellowes or masters any more: o∣therwise they will deceiue you still, and so you againe deceyue your puenies, if they againe will trust your word. Supra. ca. 4Of like stuffe it is that you accuse S. Hierom also for Second mariages, & say: Pur. 419. Yea Ieronym (Ar. 46. the great aduācer of virgini∣tie, & dispraiser of mariage) was almost fallen into the heresie of Tertulliā in condemning second mariages. You say but almost, & yt also wtout any testimony either alleged or quoted. Bylike you neuer read S. Hieroms, Apologie pro libris aduer. Ioui. where at
large he defendeth him self against all such cauils of his enemies. Amongst much more, thus he saith there: Non damno digamos,prope  imò nec trigamos, &c. I do not condemne them that are twisema∣ried, no not thrisemaried, also (if it may be saide) eightmaried. Reade that booke from the beginning, and stand out (if you can) that very countenance onely of this most graue & singular doctor, wherwith he speaketh to his backbiters, saying: An ego rudis in Scripturis, &c. O belike I was altogether ignorant in the Scrip∣tures, and began then first to reade the holy bookes: and therfore was not able in my writing to walke straight betwene virginitie and mariage: but whiles I exalted virginitie agaynst Iouinian, I condemned mariage with Marcion and Manicheus. And yet so bold you be with him, behind his back as you think, that you lay vnto him agayne other two such perilous assertions▪ such erroneous and hereticall absurdities,Ar. 46. as no yong scholar of di∣uinitie would fall into, To destroy the humanitie of Christ, and, To giue diuinitie vnder the Martyrs. To report the trueth, Vigi∣lantius the heretike did say, against praying to Saintes,Hier. ad Vigil. 2 That the soules of the Apostles and Martyrs can not be present at their sepulchres, and where els they would. This doth S. Hierom proue to be absurde and against the Scripture: considering that The diuels gadde ouer all the world, and with marueilous celeritie are present euery where. And the Apocalipse saith of the Saintes,Apoc. 1 They folow the Lambe whither soeuer he goeth. Of which place S. Hierome gathereth thus: Si agnus vbique, &c. If the Lambe be euery where, Ergo, also these that are with the Lambe, must be beleeued to be euerywhere. Not meaning in personall presence euery where at once, for so much nedeth not to the Inuocation of Saintes: but of such power they be that they heare their suiters in all places at once, and can be personally present to heale and helpe whom they will: euen as the Lambe (that is Christ accor∣ding to his humanitie, as your selfe confesse, and as throughout that booke the worde is vsed) heareth his suiters in all places at once, and in personall presence assisted S. Stephen,Act. 7. & whomsoe∣uer els he will: I say according also to his humanitie, as in that respect likewise he said:Mat. 2. All power is giuen to me in heauen and in earth. And therfore you shal neuer be able in the matter of In∣uocation of Saints to answer that text, They follow the Lambe
whither soeuer he goeth, hauing said afore that he stood ouer the mount Sion, so as Stephen saw him standing: But you must be fayne to deny the Inuocation, hearing, assisting of Christ accor∣ding to his humanitie, as much as you denie the inuocation, hea∣ring, and assisting of them that be so with Christ. S. Hierome is to olde a scholer in the Scriptures, or rather to perfect a master, for you to answere or oppose him. iiij. Touching praying to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost. If these afore be but particuler or such other persons as im∣ply not the whole Church: but yet two most euident examples you haue in store against the whole vniuersall true Church. The first, that the third Councell of Carthage (though a Prouinciall Synode, yet hauing the authoritie of a generall Councell, because it was confirmed in a generall Councell) defined that it is vnlaw∣full to pray to God the sonne, and God the holy Ghost. Mary this is a great matter in déede, and incomparably worse, then for Vigilantius or you to say, that it is vnlawfull to pray to Christ according to his humanitie, or to his Apostles and Martyrs. But how appeareth it that they defined so? because they determined, that al prayers at the Altar should be directed only to the Father, and not to the Sonne,Con. Car. 3. ca. 23. or the holy Ghost. The wordes of the Councell truely reported, are these: Vt nemo in precibus, &c. That no man in prayers name eyther the Father for the Sonne, or the Sonne for the Father. For that were to confound the per∣sons, after the heresie of Sabellius. It followeth: And when the Altar is stoode at, let the prayer be directed alwayes to the Father. Now doth it folow of this, that no prayers may be dire∣cted to the Sonne and holy Ghost?Such are his necessarie col∣lections. or also, that the very prayers at the Altar, may not be directed to them, that they may not (I say) because for order sake they are appoynted to be directed to the Father? The Arrians in S. Fulgentius time, aboue a thousande yeres agoe,Fulgen. ad Moninum li. 2. quaest. 2. ca. 2.5. knowing this selfe same order to haue procéeded from the Apostles, and to haue bene receiued and alwayes continued in all Liturgies or Masses throughout all Christendome, esteemed it amongst their arguments as aperse. But he teacheth the Ca∣tholikes
to answere both those Arrians, and this Protestant. First he repeateth the argumēt, speaking to his friend Moninus: Dicis a nonnullis te interrogatum, &c. Thou sayest that many haue asked thee of the sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ, which many thinke to be offered to the Father onely. Also thou saiest that this argument is as it were the triumph of the heretikes. Then he answereth it at large, to our purpose at length he saith, that the Catholikes must vnderstande, that all seruice of any ho∣nor and sacrifice is giuen of the Catholike Church together both to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost, that is, to the holy Trinitie. For though he that offereth, directeth the prayer to the person of the Father, this is not any preiudice to the Sonne, or to the holy Ghost. He declareth it thus, because The conclusion of the same prayer, for so muche as it hath the name of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, sheweth that there is no dif∣ference in the Trinitie. Looke in the Canon of the Masse, and you shall more easily perceiue his meaning. The prayer there begin∣neth thus, being directed to the Father: Te igitur clementissime pater, &c. Therefore ô most mercifull Father, with humble sup∣plication we beseech thee for Iesus Christ his sake thy sonne our Lorde, &c. And it is in the ende concluded thus: Per ipsum, & cum ipso, & in ipso, &c. By him, and with him, and in him, is to thee God the Father, in the vnitie of the holy Ghost, all honor and glory world without ende, Amen. Wherevpon also among his instructions to his friend Petrus Diaconus (which you al∣leage vnder the name of S. Augustine, here cap. 10. dem. 24.Fulg. (alia Aug.) de fi de ad Pet. Diac. ca. 19) bée∣ing too light in very diuerse companies in his pilgrimage to Hierusalem, he sayth: Holde most firmely, and in no wise doubt, but to the Sonne with the Father and the holy Ghost, they did sacrifice those beastes in the time of the olde Testament: And to him nowe in the newe Testament, with the Father and the holy Ghost, (cum quibus illi est vna diuinitas, he hauing one God∣head with them) the H. Churche Catholike ouer all the worlde ceasseth not to offer in fayth and charitie the sacrifice of bread and wine, &c. Therefore you might as well haue charged Christ him selfe, for directing so likewise the prayer that he taught vs: Our father, &c.
v. Of ministring the blessed Sacrament to Infantes. But the other error is (he saith) a notable error, and suche a practise as euen the Papistes them selues will confesse to be erro∣neous. This it was: S. Augustine, and Pope Innocentius, and al the Catholike Fathers of that time, and all the Westerne Church, yea all the Church, excepting none but only the Pelagians: mini∣stred the Sacrament of Christes body and bloud to Infantes, yea and thought it as necessarie for them as Baptisme, to wit, that they must receiue it, or els they should be damned. And will not D. Allen deny this, will the Papistes them selues confesse it? for so you say boldly, but in your boldnesse you open withall your wilfull ignorance.Fulke neuer read the Coun∣cel of Trent. Who would thinke it, if your selfe did not by this confesse it, that you neuer read the Councell of Trent? And what a presumption is this, for you to preach, yea and to write against the doctrine of the Catholike Church, nothing regarding eyther what it is, or how it is explicated, defended, defined, by oc∣casion of your heresies, of the Catholike Bishops in their Gene∣rall Councell: As if an Arrian doctor should neuer haue séene the Councel of Nice. Well, our countrey men may perceiue by this, what blind guides they haue of you▪ Reade the Councel of Trent (I exhort both you and all other that can) specially that halfe of it which is of doctrine, and you wil either imbrace it, as it is most worthy, and as I pray God to giue you the grace: or at leastwise you shall better know therby what it is that you must confute, where now most of you do commonly fight only with your owne shadowes, either of ignorance, or (which is worse) of wilfulnes, not knowing what in déede we teache. There (to our present purpose) you shall find the said Councel, after that it hath said,Trid. Con. Se. 21. ca. 4. That Infantes lacking the vse of reason, are by no necessitie bound to the sacramentall receiuing of the Eucharist, to declare moreouer, and say: Ne{que} ideo damnanda est antiquitas, &c. Neither for all that is antiquitie to be condemned, if it practised that maner sometime in some places: For as those most holy Fathers had pro illius temporis ratione, answerable to that time, sui facti probabilem causam, a reasonable cause of their so doing: so verily that they did it not for any necessitie to salua∣tion, without controuersie it must be beleeued. This declaration of the Councell may satisfie not onely all Catholikes, to whom
it is the declaration of the Holy Ghost him selfe, but also any o∣ther reasonable man, to whom it can not possibly be lesse then the declaration of many most learned and most discrete men, which knew well what they said, and that they could not be ther∣in disproued. In so much that Kemnitius the Lutheran Prote∣stant not so much as once toucheth the Councell for this, though he write of purpose against the Councell. Yet for more satisfaction of all men, I say further to open the case particularly: The heresie of the Pelagians was, that Man or Fréewill of man, is still, notwithstanding the fall of Adam,See A ad quo haer. 88 lagian sufficient of his owne naturall strength, without Christ or the grace of Christe, to saluation: And so consequently they saide, children to be borne in innocencie, and not in sinne. The Ca∣tholikes to proue the contrarie of children, alleaged the ne∣cessitie of their Baptisme, confirming it by that Scripture, Ex∣cept one be regenerate of water, non potest introire in Regnum Dei, he can not enter into the kingdome of God.Ioan. 3 The Pelagi∣ans séeing so plaine a text, confessed they Originall sinne? No, hereticall pertinacie would not let them: but a straunge shifte they had. They graunted vpon this text, that children vnbapti∣zed should not in déede come into the kingdome of God, for lacke of Baptisme: but yet for their naturall innocencie without Christ, they should haue life euerlasting in a certaine other place out of the kingdome of God. The Catholikes replyed against that vaine shift, and alleaged this text:Ioan. 6 Except ye eate the fleshe of the Sonne of man and drinke his bloud, non habebitis vitam in vobis, you shall not haue life in you. Who now would accuse those Fathers of error? Yea who would not admire in them such readines to replye so properly to the purpose? or let any man stand vp, and say, that the Pelagians are not by this confuted: and their children excluded, as before from the kingdome of God, so now also from life, and so left in death, and therefore in sinne, and therefore againe not innocent, and all this for lacke of the Grace of Christ in Baptisme? But now putting the case, that a childe were baptized, and then immediately died before he recei∣ued sacramentally the Eucharist, who reading innumerable pla∣ces of those fathers concerning the force of Baptisme, séeth not that they geue to such a childe remission of sinnes, and therefore
also, liuerie from death, & therefore againe life euerlasting & the kingdome of God? Or let any man bring me one place of those Doctors, speaking to this case, (of a child I say baptized but not communicated,) & holding the contrarie. For betwéen them & the Pelagians that was not the case, nor the question as I haue she∣wed, but they brought in the Eucharist onely to proue that Bap∣tisme is necessarie to the euerlasting life of children. All which by this one place of S. Augustines will be euident: euen for your owne purpose also it is plainer then ye two places that your selfe alleage:Augu. De pec. mer. & rem. li. 1. ca. 20. If a child (saith Augustine) hauing recea∣ued baptisme depart out of this life, soluto reatu cui originaliter erat obnaxius, &c. Seeing the guilt is loosed to the which he was bond by birth, he shal be perfite in that light, which with the pre∣sence of the Creator doth lighten such as are iustified. Peccata e∣nim sola separant inter Deū & homines, for nothing but sinnes maketh separation betwene God and men, and sinnes are loosed by the grace of Christ. Then a litle after, of ye Pelagiās he saith: They would geue to children vnbaptised saluation and life euer∣lasting, for cause of their innocencie, but shutte them from the kingdome of heauen, because they are not Baptized. For they haue forsooth a starting & a lurking hole, because our Lord said not, If one be not regenerate of water and the spirit, non habebit vitam, he shall not haue life: but he said, non intrabit in Regnum Dei, he shall not enter into the kingdome of God. Nam si illud dixisset, for if he had said that, (quoth they) it had bene so playne that no doubt could haue risen therof. How then doth S. Augu∣stine ioyne issue with them herevpon? Auferatur ergo iam dubi∣tatio, &c. Say you so? Now then away with doubting, let vs heare our Lord, not the suspitions & coniectures of mortal men. Why? haue you a plaine word of our Lordes owne mouth, for the ne∣cessitie of Baptisme, also to life euerlasting? Dominū audiamus, inquam, non quidem hoc de Sacramento lanacri dicentem, Let vs heare our Lorde, I say: I graunt he speaketh it not of the Sacra∣crament of Baptisme: sed de Sacramento sanctae, &c. but of the Sacrament of his holy table, quo nemo rite nisi, &c. And yet ne∣uerthelesse it serueth well to our question of Baptisme, because no man commeth lawfully to that table vnlesse he be Baptized. Then he bringeth forth the place, Except yee eate, &c. you shall
not haue life in you. And so he triumpheth, saying: What seeke we further? what can they answere to this, if they will not be ob∣stinate? By and by he declareth, though it were said of baptisme, Qui non renatus fuerit, He that is not regenerate, and here it is not saide likewise, He that doth not eate, but, If you doe not eate, as though he spoke to men of vnderstandyng, and not to Infantes, yet that this place must needes pertaine also to In∣fantes. And so it is euident, that, although he vnderstande the place of the Sacrament and of Infantes, yet he bringeth it not to proue the necessitie of that Sacrament to Infantes, but the necessitie of Baptisme to Infantes. Marie, perceiuing that he might be mistaken of his Reader, he doth commonly, though it néeded not against the Pelagians, insinuate most vigilantly by the waye, that in Baptisme it selfe, they receyue also the other Sacrament, not sacramentally, but spiritually, that is,Augu pec. m 3. cap. the ef∣fect of the other Sacrament, Quoniam nihil agitur aliud cum paruuli baptizantur, nisi vt incorporentur Ecclesiae, id est, Christi Corpori membrisq́ue socientur, Because when Infantes are Bap∣tized, it is for no other cause, but that they maye bee incor∣porated to the Churche, that is to saye, ioyned to the bodye and members of Christ.See D len d cha.  31. pa It is so therefore with children by Baptisme, as it is with older people by an earnest desyre to the Eucharist: for as these haue Votum explicitum, an expresse desyre to it: so they haue Votum implicitum a close desyre to it, and that serueth them both, to obtayne the effecte there∣of, though not in so great measure, as if they receyued it al∣so sacramently. Neuerthelesse there may be iust causes, to keepe it from children generally, as there are iuste causes to keepe it sometyme, yea at Easter also, from some of the older sorte. But if antiquitie dyd not counte it necessarye for chyl∣dren, at least wyse they gaue it (you wyll saye) to children, and that is contrary to, Probet semet ipsum homo,1. Co let a man examyne hym selfe before he receyue it. Why syr? is there anye feare, least chyldren that are Baptized, come to it vn∣worthyly, that is, beyng in mortall synne? hath any adul∣tus by penance a better warrant to presume vnto it, then a childe by Baptisme? Knowe you not howe S. Augustine and the whole Church holdeth, that in Baptisme a childe repenteth and belée∣ueth
by others? euē so he there also examineth himselfe by others. As other repenting, and other beléeuing, so likewise other exami∣ning is not necessarie for a child, though for so great a sacrament it be more conuenient. And so both the Churche now doth well not to Communicate children, & they also afore did not ill, who did Communicate them, who yet were not so many as Fulke doth make them. We heard erewhile what the Tridentine Fa∣thers said,Falsification by adding. Aliquando in quibusdam locis, that maner was some∣time in some places. The third part. Concerning the errors that he laieth to the Church of later times, and not of old. And thus much of the second sorte of errors, laid by you to the auncient true Church, and not also to the Churche of these later times, which you take not to be the true Church. Now therefore (as it followeth) let vs heare and examine the third & last sorte of errors, such as you lay to this Church of later times, and not al∣so to the primitiue Church as you call it, meaning the first .600. yeares. Which errors wil be so few, & so light (in respect of those which he hath already charged the true Church withall) specialy when they are duely scanned,Note you that vvould the true Church. that it may be both a sure confir∣mation to the Catholikes, and a iust motiue to all others to em∣brace the Church of this time, no lesse then of olde time, conside∣ring that it is no lesse, yea much more vnreproueable of the ad∣uersarie: as in déede also of good reason it must so be, because more time hath geuen to the Holy Ghost and stil doth geue more occasions to define and declare many pointes, that were afore doubted of by some. Referring them to the .10. Chapter, Cap. 10. de. 45.46 such errors as he layeth to the later Popes personally, because they concerne not the whole Churche, as neither the pretensed Arria∣nisme of Liberius in old time: Cap. 10. dem. 38. such errors also as he layeth to vs now, in respect of our shauen beardes, rounded heades, with other like, taken (as he saith) of certaine old heretikes, because he him selfe also counteth these but small matters: Therefore (I say) reseruing these to their proper place, we haue here no more but foure or fiue to speake of.
j. Touching the bodies of Angels. One he reporteth thus:Ar. 90. The second Councell of Nice deter∣mined that Angels and soules of men, had bodies, were visible, & circumscriptible, and therfore might be paynted. And this it affir∣meth to be the iudgement of the Catholike Church. Con. Nice. 2. Actio. 5. I answere, you mispeport the matter: for it is not the Councels determination, no nor saying also, but the saying onely of Ioannes Bishop of Thessalonica, rehearsed in the Councell a∣mongst many other authors, with this admonition giuen after it to the Councell by Tharasius Bishop of Constantinople, that they consider hereby the madnes of them that ouerthrew the I∣mages of our Lord and of his vndefiled mother, séeing this holy father doth shew, that Angels also may be paynted. And touching Ioannes him selfe, his error is not so great as your ignorance maketh it, saying: If this be not to induce an error, to make men beleeue that Angels and spirites haue bodies visible and circum∣scriptible, there was neuer any error since the world began. Soft man, you go to farre, other maner of errors (you may remember) haue bene since the world began, which might not be defended, as he defendeth his, saying to the Gentill (with whom he there tal∣keth) of Angels, ipsa Catholica Ecclesia sic sentit, The Catholike Church so thinketh, (quibus & animas nostras adiungo, To whō I ioyne also our soules) that they are pardie intellectuall,Heb. 1 of psa but not altogether vnbodily and inuisible, as you Gentiles do say, but of a thin, and ayrie, or fierie body, as it is written, His Angels he ma∣keth spirites, and his ministers burning fyre. And by the Catho∣like Church what he meaneth, he straight declareth, saying: So thought And so P must put  rather to errors of primitiu Church.many of the holy fathers, we know, as Basilius, Athana∣sius, Methodius, and they that holde with them, qui stant ab illis: signifying that some other Catholikes helde otherwise.Aug.  cap. 5 And not only S. Augustine numbreth it amongst the things, That with∣out sinne a man may be ignorant of, and therfore néede not cum discrimine, with perill to be affirmed, or denied, or defined: but also to this day no such determination or declaration of the que∣stion is made, (as the Th in q. d moni. best also do graunt) to condemne the assertion as hereticall, though Co sub I cap. 1▪  sufficient to count it nowe te∣merarious and erroneous.
ij. Touching the Popes superioritie ouer the Councell. But the next error of our Church, is (I trow) vnanswerable, being such a one also, as not only sheweth vs to erre, but moreo∣uer depriueth vs of al certentie of truth. Mary that in déede must be séene vnto, as you tell vs, saying, that we haue nede to lay our heades together about it.Ar. 63.85. And this it is: Your Canonistes and Diuines (he saith) be not agréed about the chiefest articles of your Religion, that is, 1 Whether the Pope be aboue the Councell, or the Councel aboue the Pope. 2 Whether the Pope may erre and not the Councell, or whether the Councell may erre and not the Pope. And what then? These two, The Popes determination, and the Councels determination, being the rules of truth in your religion, and not agreed vpon: how can any truth be certayne in your Church? Agayne by and by after: You Papistes, some hol∣ding of the Pope, and some of the Councell, as rules of truth, can haue no ground nor certentie of truth. Therefore if you woulde haue me, or any man to be of your beliefe, first determine how I shall know when I am in a right beliefe. And that be all which troubleth you, me thinketh I should be able to satisfie you or any other reasonable man as you are, if I say, that you may know, (and that by the consent of both these parties) that you are in a right beliefe, when you holde those determinations, that without controuersy are ioyntly the determinations both of the Pope and of the Councell together, as the determinations of the Councell of Trent, and of all other Councels without controuersie confir∣med by the Pope. Other Councels that are certayne not to be confirmed by him, or also not certayne to be confirmed by him, no man wil binde you to beléeue them, or at the least not before it be certayne, and so are you easily answered, though it be supposed the matter to be so vncertayne amongst vs as you make it. But now how much more, if it be not so? For how do you proue this disagréement: The Councell of Ferraria and Florence, determi∣ned, That the Pope was aboue the Councell, and that the Coun∣cell might erre. And Eugenius quartus, that gathered the Coun∣cell of Ferraria and Florence, was of the same iudgement. All this I graunt. Now what haue you for the other side? The Coun∣cels of Constance and Basill, determined, That the Councell was
aboue the Pope, and that the Pope may erre. Let this also be graunted. And Martinus quintus the Pope, chosen by the Coun∣cell of Constance, was of the same iudgement. Nay syr, whoe there, that you proue not, nor neuer shall proue: but onely, that Sess. v Con. Cō Martinus quintus, at the petition of the Polonian Ambas∣sador, confirmed those determinations alone of the Councell of Constance, which were agaynst the errors of Wiclefe, Hus, and Hierome of Prage. And that Sess. 4 Con. Ba Nicolaus quintus, to auoyde much confusion, ratified the collations of Benefices and such like thinges done in the Councell of Basill. And that Sess. 16 Con. Ba Eugenius quartus did no more but declare, that from the beginning to a certaine time the same of Basill was Legitimum Concilium, a lawfull Councell, and lawfully continuated. But otherwise, as concerning the determinations and decrées of it, neither Euge∣nius, nor he that Ar. 91▪you name, to wit, Nicolaus, confirmed it, yea Leo decimus afterwarde in his Sess.  Lateran Councell most ex∣presly reiected it, comparing it to the seconde Ephesine Synode commonly called Lestrice, whiche was repealed afterwardes by commaundement of Pope Leo the first, in the Councell of Chal∣cedon. Go now, and say still in your vayne spirite of childish in∣sultation: Gentle master N. reconcile me these togeather:This triu vvanteth ¦thing but  victorie. be∣cause it is a case, that may trouble a mans conscience that would beleeue your Church, and if he haue any wit, restrayne him for euer cōming into your Church. If you can not vntye this knot, nor winde your selfe out of this maze, &c. So insoluble forsooth are your argumentes agaynst the Church of God. iij. Touching the Constance Councell presumption. But the thirde error (I trow) will sticke faster by vs, be∣cause it is amongest those determinations of the Councell of Constance whiche were made agaynst the foresaide Heretikes, which I haue confessed to be confirmed also by the Pope. And this it is in Fulke his owne wordes:Pur. 4. It is horrible presump∣tion, that any man, or multitude of men, should take vpon them authoritie to define agaynst the worde of God: as the Coun∣cell of Constance, which decreeth in playne wordes, That not∣withstanding Christ instituted the Sacrament to be receiued in both kindes, and that the faythfull in the Primitiue Churche
did so receiue it,Manifest falsi∣fication. yet the custome of the Church of Rome shall preuayle, and whosoeuer saith contrarie, is an heretike, &c. These he printeth in a distinct letter as the playne words of that Coun∣cell,Con. Cōst. Sess. 13. but the words truely reported are otherwise. The Councell first telleth that certayne temerarious persons not onely do com∣municate the lay people in both kinds, and after supper, but also obstinately holde that they must be so communicated.See Augu. ep. 118. ca. 6 Then saith the Councell, Hinc est, &c. Vpon this occasion this Councell doth declare, determine, and define, that although Christ did in∣stitute after supper this venerable sacrament (there is one piece:) And did minister it to his disciples vnder both formes of bread and wine, (there is the other piece:) yet this notwithstanding, the authoritie of the sacred Canons, also, the laudable and approued custome of the Church, hath obserued, and doth obserue, that this same sacrament must not be consecrated after supper, nor recei∣ued of the faithfull when they haue broken their fast, &c. (there is agayne for the first piece:) And likewise, that although this same sacrament were in the primitiue Church receiued of the faithfull vnder both formes: yet for the auoyding of certaine dangers and scandles, this custome was reasonably brought in, that they which consecrate, receiue it vnder both, and the layetie onely vnder the forme of bread, &c. (there is agayne for the se∣cond piece.) That which you report is one thing, and this is an other thing. For you also your selfe (I thinke) will not deny, but that it is a good custome, not to consecrate nor receiue it after supper, although Christ did institute it after supper. Neither do you therein graunt, Christes institution to be agaynst that cu∣stome. 1 No more doth the Councell graunt, that practise of the primitiue Church to be against the custome of one forme. For both are very reasonable, and therefore both standing well toge∣ther, not onely at diuers times, but also at one time in diuers places, or of diuers persons. 2 Muche lesse doth the Councell graunt (as you make it to do) that Christes institution was a∣gaynst this custome of one forme, 3 adding also such presump∣tuous words, to say, and yet the custome of the Church of Rome shall preuayle. No such words are there, reade the whole Chap∣ter who will, he shall finde to be spoken very reasonably, very modestly, and euery way as may beséeme a Councell.
iiij. Touching certaine false interpretations of Scripture. To the last error I referre certaine outcries that he maketh against our Church, for the false interpretation of certaine scrip∣tures. But first let ye Reader heare D. Allen out of his booke of Pur∣gatory: [Marke well, (he saith) and you shall perceiue,Cap. 11. Pur. 14 that the Church of Christ hath euer giuen roome to the diuersitie of mens wittes, the diuision of graces, and sundry giftes, in exposition of most places of the whole Testament: with this prouiso alwaies, that no man of singularitie should father any falsehood or vn∣truth vpon any text.] And to declare this doing of the Church, he there alleageth that worthy Doctor of the Church S. Augustine,Au. co li. 12. c ad. 32. Doc. C¦sti. li. 1.36 & li cap. 27 who in two bookes writeth excellently and copiously to this pur∣pose, requiring principally that in euerye texte a man alwaies shoote at the sense of the writer, Least by vse of missing the way, he be brought to goe also the sideway or the contrarie way. But although he misse that sense, if he hit any other sense, quae fidae re∣ctae non refragatur, that is not repugnāt to the right faith, or, quae aedificandae charitati sit vtilis, that may serue well to the edifying of charitie towardes God and our neighbour: that then nihil pe∣riculi est, there is no daunger, non perniciosè fallitur, he is not harmefully deceiued, nec omnio mentitur, no nor is a lyar at all: But rather the writer him self, Et ipsam sententiam forsitan vi∣dit, peraduenture saw euen that sense also, or at the least, the Spi∣rit of God which was in him, foresaw that the same sense also would come in the Readers way, Imò ut accurreret, quia, &c. Yea and ordayned that it should come in his way, for it also standeth on truth. Now vpon this in his article of the Churches erring,Ar. 86. he offe∣reth the Protestants, & saith: [Let any man proue vnto me, that the true and onely Church of God, may falsely interpret any sen∣tence of holy Scripture, & I recant.] Fulke herevnto saith: This gentle offer must needes be taken. I will proue vnto you, that the Churche of Rome hath falsely interpreted diuers sentences of Scripture: and therefore by that which she hath done, it can not bee doubted but that she may doe it. And for the first he there bringeth forth Pope Innocentius with S. Augustine and all the
Westerne Churche at that time, falsely interpreting this Scrip∣ture,Supra. ca. 6 pa. 2. Except ye eate the fleshe, &c. Wherevnto I haue already answered. For the next, he saieth: Furthermore, the second Councell of Nice, howe many textes of Scripture doth it salsely interprete? which it were to tedious to repeate: yet for example sake, I will rehearse some of them: God made man to his owne image, Gen. 1. therefore we must haue Images in the Church. No man lighteth a candle and setteth it vnder a Bushel. Mat. 5. therefore Images must be set vpon the Altars. As we haue heard, so we haue seene in the Citie of our God, Psal. 48. that is: God must not be knowen by onely hearing of his word, but also by sight of Images. If these be not true interpretations, I report me to you. This is answered already by y• which hath bene said out of S. Augustine. For, to interpret any text for Ecclesiastical Images, is to inter∣pret it, for the right faith, & not to interpret it falsely, or to father any falshood vpon it. We néede not to defend in Councells any more but their definitions: & therfore if they define, that this text hath this sense, as the Councell of Trent hath done in some, we defend it accordingly. Otherwise neither ye Councell taketh vpō it to hit alwayes the very sense of the text. And yet notwithstan∣ding (by S. Augustine à maiori, in the places aboue noted) I ad∣uise all men, not to be saucie with Councels, no nor with parti∣cular Doctors, lightly iudging them, and saying, that they misse ye right sense: least their saucines haue one day sowre sauce. And specially you Sir, if you make not amendes in time, looke you to drinke of your Master Caluins Cuppe,Calu. Insti. li. 1. ca. 11. whose malitious steppes you here blindly followe, neglecting to looke before you leaped. For I must tell you yet further, that the Councell, for all your saying, doth not so interpret those textes. But only ye litle Empe∣rour Constantinus & his mother Irene in their Epistle to ye Sy∣node, doe exhort the fathers being then gathered, to declare their Synodicall iudgement,Actione. 1. as other Synodes before them had done, & so to geue forth the world their light and the light of the Holy ghost. For as much as no man lighting a Candle, putteth it vn∣der a bushel, according to our Lordes saying, but vpon a Candle∣sticke,
that it may geue light to all that are in the house. Is not this application most apt to that text, and euen to the intention of our Lord when he spoke it? Likewise it is not the Councell, but ye Pope Adrianus, which in his Epistle to the forsaid Emperours saith,Acti Yea also our Ma∣ker & worker God our Lord, after his owne Image and likenes did shape man of the clay, and did lighten him, setting him in free power of him self. Not citing it to cōclude, that therfore we must haue Images in the Church: but to answere Nugas the triflyng obiection of the Heretikes, who pretended, the making of an I∣mage to be against the article of one God. Not so, saith the Pope: Nequaquam autem sic statuamus, Let vs not bee so perswaded. For all yt we exhibite, in desideriū dei Sanctorū{que} eius perficitur, is in fine a great list to God & to his Sainctes. For (as he there ci∣teth the saying of Stephanus Episcopus Bostrorum) If Adam had bene an Image of the diuels, yt is to saye, of false or other Gods, vndoubtedly he had bene to be reiected, and vnworthy to be re∣ceiued: But seeing that he is the Image of God, he is to be hono∣red, and worthy to be admitted. For euen so euery Image is holy, that is made in the name of God, be it an Image of the Angels, or of the Prophetes, or of the Apostles, or of the Martyrs, or of o∣ther iust persons. Reply now vpon this answere, if it be so vnapt, and prosecute the former trifling obiection. Neither againe is it the Councell, which citeth that verse of the Psalme of hearing & seing, but a Deacon called Epiphanius,Actio tom. 1. readeth to the Councell a confutation that he him selfe (as it sée∣meth) made for Images against the booke of the Image breakers Synode: and therein hauing shewed, that the tradition of the Church alwaies vsed to paint Christes life, as well as to reade ye Gospell of it: he descanteth by and by thereon, both out of true Philosophie, how that reading, by the eare, and painting, by ye eie, ingender in the minde Vnam cognitionem, qua ad recordatio∣nem rerū gestarum peruenitur, One knowing, wherby to come in remēbrance of the actes them selues▪ & also out of diuine scripture Canwhere ye bride desireth to see the face of her bridegrome, & not only to heare his voice: where also we sing out of the Psa Psalme, As we haue heard, so also haue we seen. To this purpose he citeth those texts, not to shew how God must be knowē, as you pretēd,
but, About the storie of Christes Manhood and mercifull actes therof: neither to proue immediatly, that the said storie must be painted, but to declare, that whereas it must be remembred, the Church therfore hath done conueniently alwayes both to reade it and to paint it, because both these together tend to one remem∣brance. What is here for Momus to carpe or cauill at? Let vs sée what more he hath of this sort, for false interpreta∣tion of Scripture. Beside these, I will bring you (saith he) a sen∣tence of holy Scripture, not onely falsely interpreted in sence, but also falsified in wordes, and concerning not a small matter, but euen one of the chiefe articles of our faith. This ensample shall be a knocker I trow, and without all redemption, manifestly a∣gainst some article of faith. Let vs heare it then: It is written in the .10. Chapter of the Gospell after S. Iohn, the .29. verse. My fa∣ther which gaue them vnto me (speaking of his sheepe) is greater then all.Cap. 2. This sentence hath the Councell of Laterane, holden vnder Pope Innocent the third (where were present 70. Metro∣politanes, 400. Bishops, 12. Abbates, and, 800. Priors conuentu∣alles, in all .1300. Prelates) falsified in wordes, after this maner, Pater quod dedit mihi, maius est omnibus, that is, That which the father hath geuen me, is greater then all. This sentence they al∣leage, to proue, that God the father begetting his Sonne from e∣uerlasting, gaue his owne substance vnto him. Why? is that to proue a falsehood, or the trueth? your selfe séeme to haue confes∣sed, or no doubt you will confesse, that it is to proue the trueth: And yet what a doe you make about it? for you say againe: Goe your wayes now and perswade vs, that your Church can not in∣terprete any sentence of the Scripture falsely, when the Laterane Councell, which is your represented Church, hath thus both falsi∣fied, and falsely interpreted this Scripture. And againe: Perswade men, that they may safely leane to the interpretation of your Churche, when among a thousand and three hundred Prelates, gathered Canonically in a Councell, not one was founde that could espie such grosse abusing of the worde of God, but let it passe in a Canon, vnder the name of the whole Councell. And yet once againe: Perswade men, that in all controuersies, & con∣demning of errors they must be reuealed by the determination of your Church, when the Fathers of the Laterane Councell, can not
confute the error of Ioachim Abbot, concerning the diuinitie of Christ, but by falsifying and false interpreting of Scripture. By this we may, I thinke, easily perswade the Reader, that if you had in déede any matter against our Church, you would both let vs heare it, and also neuer haue done with it. Why man? here is no false determination any way, nor no false interpretation, in D. Allens sense, and therfore also here is nothing to the purpose. Yea I adde moreouer, here is no false interpretation also in your owne sense, that is to say, no vnapt interpretation, as your selfe also will graunt, supposing once the text to be as the Councell alleageth it. And therfore, of your two crimes, you must strike out the one, to wit, false or vnapt interpretation, and then all is about the other, wherein you say no lesse then foure times, that the Councell hath falsified the words of that text. And what rea∣son, yea what colour haue you for that? Is it not in the vulgar Latin translation verbatim as the Councell alleageth it? And so is the Councell cleared of that crime also. Will you now charge your copie, and frame your accusation anew agaynst the transla∣tion, as differing from the original, that is, from the Greke? But afore you do so, take my counsaile with you, and be sure first that the Greke is so as you say. For some Greke copies,Cyr.  Ioan. Au. i 10. tr Hila. li. 7. p medi Amb Spi. S li. 3. c of auncient also had euen as we haue: as namely the copie which S. Cyrill, being a Greke Doctor, expoundeth. And who can doubt, but the copie also of our most auncient, yea and most authentical Tran∣slator, had euen as he translated? Which also the most auncient Latine Doctors, as S. Augustine by name, S. Ambrose, yea and S. Hilarie too, did reade iump as we do. And the Latines vi Amb Rom by reason should in this matter be better witnesses then ye Grekes, specially séeing such varietie among the Grekes also them selues, for as much as the Arrians neuer raigned so, nothing like, in the Latine Church, as they did in the Greke, where they were to cancell, to chaunge, to corrupt, what they would. And so are you answered fully in euery side, nor you only, but Ioachim also him selfe, if he would go about to make his vantage as you instruct him. One text more corrupted by our Church, as he sayth, and then an ende. These be his words:Ar. 7 How corrupt that Latine transla∣tion is, which they would needes thrust vpon vs, is sufficiently
knowen to all learned men, euen in such textes as are the most colourable places for the defence of Popishe doctrine. I will giue one example for all: They alleage the texte 1. Cor. 10. Qui stat, videat ne cadat, He that standeth let him take heede he fall not) agaynst the certaintie of fayth. Whereas the Greke hath not, He that standeth,Stande out of his light that the child may see. but, He that thinketh he standeth, let him take heede he fall not. Why man? looke better in the text. 1. Cor. 10. our translation is there, not as you charge it, but euen as you say the Greke to be: Qui se existimat stare, videat ne cadat. And yet you inferre, saying: Thus the Popishe Church can not alto∣gether excuse her selfe, from corrupting the text of the Testa∣ment: whether it was of fraude, or of ignorance, or of negligence, the Lord knoweth. This is your goodly substantiall stuffe that you haue against the Popish Church: which maye séeme you well amongest the blinde, that will néedes follow such blinde guides. But vs that haue eyes, how can you alienate from it with such geare? yea could you more confirme vs in our liking of it, then after this sort to bewray your selues, that you haue no matter, no sub∣stance, yea no shadow of any thing, agaynst it? Well, in the name of God bethinke your selues in time, and humble your selues to your louing Mother, this one onely Church of God. In olde time it was the true Church, as your selfe confesse, and therefore if you had liued then, you would not haue spurned a∣gaynst it, you would haue bene a good childe of it, yea also though you thought it to erre. How much more, considering now you sée that it erred not, as you thought it did? Proue therefore that your heart meaneth, as your tongue speaketh: Proue it (I say) by yéelding to the same Church now, which you see nowe no lesse, yea muche more cleared from all errors, in this answere to eche error that you haue charged it withall. Or at leastwise  let all other men, as they loue their soules, forethinke thē selues, and ponder wel, whether these obiections are like to be admitted of their Iudge, the head & husband of this Church, for good pleas, in that generall and most terrible Court day.
¶The seuenth Chapter. That he hath no other shift agaynst our manifold Euidences (so cleare they be) but the name of Only Scripture, as well about ech controuersie, as also about the meaning of Scripture it selfe: And how timerous he ma∣keth vs, and how bolde he beareth him selfe herevpon. WHat shamefull confessions he hath bene fayne to make agaynst his owne side, and for our side, it hath here many ways in sundry chapters appeared already. But the same will now againe appeare much more clerely, if in this Chapter we runne ouer the cōmon Euidences of Chri∣stian truth, out of which I framed my declaration in my bookes of Motiues and Demaundes, and consider that he is fayne to confesse them al to be against him, and therfore to take exception agaynst them, and say, that neither they, nor any thing els that can be brought foorth, is good euidence in such suites, but Scrip∣ture alone, and such Scripture also as is so playne and manifest for the matter, that it can not by any subtiltie be auoyded of the aduersarie. For he knoweth well pardy, that we bring foorth not other euidences alone, but Scripture also with them. But the o∣thers he séeth to be so playne, that there is no remedie vnlesse they be cancelled. Mary from our Scriptures he hath an euasion, as he thinketh, to wrangle and say that they be not playne and euident for vs, but so that he can wrest thē to an other meaning. The first part. How he excepteth by Onely Scripture, against all other Euidences in the controuersies that are betwene vs. j. Against the rule to know heresie, &c. Well then, let vs heare him speake in his owne words: and first, how he maketh his exception, being charged many wayes with the crime of heresie. Notable it is, both to the confirmation of the Catholike, and also to the conuersion of the Heretike, to beholde how the more that he fluttereth to get out, the more he wrappeth him selfe in the lime.
Ar. 44. First Au∣thors. As in my fourth demaund. old heresies demaunde xxxviij.Whereas you bragge (saith he to D. Allen) to note vnto vs e∣uery one of our Capitaines, by their names, and the seuerall er∣rors that they taught, and the time and yere when they arose a∣gaynst the former receiued truth: Except you note vnto vs the Patriarkes, Prophetes, Apostles, Euangelistes, and Christ him self, you shall neuer be able to performe that you promise. For we teach nothing but the eternall truth of God. Wherfore we refuse not to be counted heretikes, if you can proue that we holde any one article of faith contrarie to the Scripture. And immediatly: You may perchaunce note the names of them, that preaching the truth of our doctrine against your receiued errors, were accoun∣ted of the world (so he tearmeth them whom he him selfe confes∣seth to haue bene the true Church) for heretikes. But you muste proue that their opinions are contrarie to the worde of God, or else all your labour is in vayne.Supra pag. 10. And for example: (more store the Reader may sée here in the third Chapter,) I will not dissemble, (saith he) Aërius taught that prayer for the dead was vnprofita∣ble, as witnesseth both Epiphanius and Augustinus: which they account for an error. But neither of them both reproueth it by the Scripture.Pur. 416. And the same againe in another place: Nowe at the length commeth the author of this heresie by the testimonie of Epiphanius and Augustine. But neither of them confuteth it by the Scriptures.Pur. 426. And in an other place, thus boldly: For our parte it is sufficient, that we knowe God in his holy word to be the first founder of our doctrine, and therfore that they lye blasphemou∣sly, which would make any heretike the author of it. And there∣vpon he concludeth, forsooth with great honestie, saying: Wher∣fore,Ar. 44. if Aërius had not bene an Arrian, this opinion could not haue made him an heretike. Where, to passe that blasphemie, on∣ly this I say,August. ad quoduu. in praef. & in epilogo. that he séemeth not to know the purpose of S. Au∣gustine in that booke De haeresibus ad quoduultdeum, whiche he saith was likewise the purpose of Epiphanius, not to cōfute, but only to report the heresies that had bene before his time, and that not without great profite to the Reader, Cum scire sufficiat, &c. because it is inough onely to know, that the Catholike Churches iudgement is against these, and that no man must receiue into his beliefe any one of these. And agayne: Multum adiuuat cor fide∣le, &c. It greatly helpeth the faithfull heart▪ onely to know what
must not be beleeued, although he bee not able to confute it by disputing. Loe then, you faithfull heartes, the case is so cleare,Note,  seeke th this con of Fulke that the very aduersarie confesseth, both that the same was the true Catholike Churche, and also that it iudged Aerius to be an heretike: helpe your selues therefore, and make your profite of this confession, assuring your selues vpon the Catholike Doc∣tors lesson, that séeing the Church was against Aerius, the scrip∣ture could not be with him, because one Spirit of truth speaketh both in the Church and in the Scripture. As for Fulke, and all that he here saith, you sée it is no other then if Aerius, Iouinia∣nus, or Vigilantius had said vnto you, Aske my fellow whether I be a théefe. Naught else it is that he there againe concludeth for those thrée heresiarkes, saying: Thus,Ar 4 you are not able to name any, which preached any article of our doctrine, but the same was consonant to the Scripture. Of the same sort also in an other place: Therefore (M. Allen, or,Pur. 3 S. Augustine rather) if you will teach your Schollers to keepe vs at the baye as heretikes, you must not teach them to bark and baule, nothing but the Church the Church, like tinkers curres,O vvor stimatio he hath Church. but you must instruct them to o∣pen cunningly out of the Scriptures, how our doctrine is contra∣rie to the truth, and yours agreeable to the same. Againe like one that would appoint his enemie not to inuade him with a gunne, because he knoweth not how to saue him selfe from the shotte of it, but to take some other weapon, & that of his making, in an o∣ther place he saith, And especially in this controuersie,Pur. 12 where ei∣ther partie chargeth other with heresie (howbeit, I trow, his par∣tie chargeth not so S. Epiphanius, & S. Augustine, though they so charge his Patriarke Aerius) it had bene conuenient, that the right definition or description of an heretike had bene first set downe, that men might thereby haue learned, who is iustly to be burdened with that crime. For an heretike is he that in the Chur∣che, obstinately maintaineth an opinion, that is contrarie to the doctrine of God conteined in the holy Scriptures, which if any of vs can be proued to doe, then let vs not be spared,An her a man in Church  Fulk, F a nobis,  Iohn. Infra. but condem∣ned for Heretikes. In déede if an Heretike, be a man in the Chur∣che, you are cockesure, and not only you and Aerius, but Arrius, Pelagius, & all other heretikes that euer were: & we rather with S. Augustine, S. Epiphanius, and such others, in daunger. To
this place it belongeth that againe he sayeth:Pur. 402. M. Allen giueth a speciall note, that wee name not Iouinian, or Vigilantius, the playne auouchers of our opinions: but rather labour to writh with plaine iniurie to the Author, some sentence out of Augu∣stine, or Ambrose, or some other, that opened them selues to the world to beléeue the contrarie: And thinketh we are ashamed of the other. In deede if we depended vpon any mans authoritie, or that any man or men were the Authors of our fayth, wee should bee iniurious vnto them if we dyd not acknowledge our founders, But seeing God him selfe is the Father of that doctrine, which we haue receyued by his holy worde, we are not asha∣med of Vigilantius nor Berengarius, when they agree therewith. Onely the Canonicall Scriptures are the rule, by which we iudge of all men and their writinges, of all doctrine and the teachers thereof.Pur. 409. Agayne: And therefore it is but vayne bragging, that you promyse to seeke out other Fathers of our perswasion, then the Apostles of Christ▪ by whose holy writinges, we neuer refuse to be iudged. For the Scripture is the onely high way to the truth, with the guidance of Gods spirite. And agayne: You spend ma∣ny wordes in vayne,Pur. 412. to proe, that the first author of an opinion beyng found, the opinion is found to be an heresie. It shall bee graunted with all fauour, but so that no man shall be counted the first author of an opinion that is able to proue his opinion out of the word of God. And withall, that whosoeuer is not able to proue by the word of God, any opinion, that he holdeth obsti∣nately, though he haue many authors before him, yet he is neuer∣thelesse an Though i be S. Augustine him selfe, & though he hold the foundation here cap. v. heretike. And so much of their first authors founde out by vs, as Aerius, Iouinianus, Vigilantius, and such other old heresiarches, condemned (he confesseth) by the true Church of Christ, but contrarie (he saith) to the Scriptures of Christ. Now on the other side, being vrged by D. Allen to finde in like maner our first Authors, or els it will follow, the Apostles to be our authors,Pur. 391. heare what he saieth therevnto: Must we finde out the authors of your heresies? nay iustifie them your selues by the word of God if you can. You shall not compell vs to tell you, where, when, or how your heresie came in. It chaufeth him, that we shew so plaine an euidence against his side, & he can not shew the like against vs: and therefore he is faine to flie againe to his
cold exception of onely Scripture, as though to iustifie our doc∣trine by the Apostles, and that so sensibly, were not ynough. But most ridiculous of all it is, to sée him come in with this exception, where D. Allen alleaged Tertulliā for this rule.Pur. 4 Ar. 42 That doctrine (saith Fulke) which is first (agreable to Tertullians rule) is vndoubtedly true, and that which is later, is false. But how shall the first doctrine be knowen, but by the word of God, wherein all the doctrine of God is taught?Tert.  praesc. Tertullian there hath an other rule against such heresies as presumed Inserere se aetati Aposto∣licae, To say that their founders liued in the Apostles time. But this our rule he giueth against all such as rise any time after, as Aerius, Luther, Caluin, &c. bidding vs then to cōsider what was taught & beléeued immediatly before they arose: for ye vndoubted∣ly is the truth, and their later doctrine is falshood. Now then how ridiculous is it for Fulke to run from Tertullians meaning, & yet to pretend that he agréeth to Tertullians Rule? The same rule, with an amplification also,Antiq Dem. & in the same mea∣ning, doth likewise Vincētius Lirinēsis geue, to wit, If any No∣ueltie arise at any time, yea & preuaile so much afterward in pro∣cesse of time, as to make an vniuersall corruption, so yt almost no countrey of Christendome be frée frō it, (as this marchant boa∣steth at this day of the most of Europe, Englād, Scotland, Ireland,Ar. 3. Infra. Dem.  Fraūce, Germany, Denmark, Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, & a great number also in Spaine, & Italy) that then we looke vnto Antiqui∣tie, that is, to the time before such noueltie preuailed, & before it arose: as what was taught & beléeued immediatly before Luther beganne these innouations. And therefore alike ridiculous it is, that he saieth: We refuse not the rule of Vincentius Lirinensis,Pur. 3 concerning Antiquitie: so you can proue that it hath God to be the Author, the Prophetes, and Apostles. As for witnesses vnder this antiquitie, we passe not for them. Why man? The rule that you receaue, proueth it? The Apostles (I say) to be the Authors of our solemne prayer for the dead in the holy Masse, and of any other such article, because it hath such antiquitie as I haue now said, and as Vincentius meant. And so much, vpō the Rule of finding out ye first authors of any doctrine, and the same therefore to be hereticall: or not finding them, and the same therefore to be Apostolicall. Whither is to be
referred that Rule also of D. Allens, that such as commonly by Christian people be named Heretikes,Names: dem. 7.8. alwayes proue in the ende to be heretikes in deede, notwithstanding their craking of Gods word. Wherevnto Fulkes exception is the selfe same againe, saying:Ar. 65. The true Christians at this day being of the Papistes (which after a sort are named Christians) called heretikes, and in reproche Protestantes and Caluinistes: in that their faith agreeth with the word of God, proue themselues in deede to be true Chri∣stians and no heretikes. ij. Against the Apostles Traditions. Traditiōs. Dem. 29. Pur. 362.Now let vs heare, how he maketh his saide exception also a∣gainst the Traditions of the Apostles. Thus he speaketh: M. Allen referreth the institution of Prayer and Sacrifice for the dead, to the tradition of the Apostles. Of whom will he be afeard to lye, when he fathereth such a blasphemie vpon the Apostles. Soft man, be good to D. Allen for their sakes that followe. For you your selfe goe forward in the same place, and say: But who is witnesse that this is the tradition of the Apostles? Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Ieronym, and a great many more. This you could not, and therfore doe not deny, but come in with your stale exception, saying: But if it be lawfull for me once to pose the Papistes, I would learne why the Lorde woulde not haue this doubtlesse institution, plainely, or at leastwise obscurely set forth by Mathew, Marke, Luke, or Paule, which all haue set forth the storie of the institution of the Sacrament? If it were not meete at all to bee put in writyng, why was it disclosed by Tertullian, Cyprian,Pur. 387. Augustine, &c? Likewise in an other place: If prayer for the deade was appoynted by the Apostles commaunde∣ment, why is there neuer a worde thereof in their writinges? If I were disposed to pose you, this question woulde make you clawe your poll a hundred tymes before you coulde ima∣gine any collourable aunswere: for right aunswere you shall ne∣uer be able to make. In déede a doughtie question it is. As though if a Christian can not answer euery why of ye Infidel, our Religi∣on therfore is straight in hazard.Ar. 48. It may trouble a wise mā to an∣swer al the questions that a foole cā propound, you say your self. And yet neither you, nor any other Infidell shall euer finde the
learned to séeke. It is for your religion to be to séeke of answers, because it began but yesterday, and is neither yet throughly sha∣ped. But the Catholike, which is the only Christian Religion, comming of God, & so many hundred yeres sithence continuing, hath bene by our forefathers and the holy Ghost so sifted to our hands, that the answere is alwayes ready, afore the question be demaunded. Briefly therfore S. Augustine one of our Masters and Doctors in Christ, hath taught vs, if we be posed about the Churches order in Baptisme, to answere,Au. d & op. that Serie Traditionis scimus, By the course of tradition we know what things are to be done therein, although they be not expressed in the Scriptures, and that, for breuities sake. So likewise, being posed about the order of this other Sacramēt, to answere, Quia multum erat, &c.Au. E ad Ia cap. 6 Because it was much for the Apostle to signifie in his Epistle to the Corinthians the whole order of the action that the vniuersall Church through all the world obserued: therefore hauing saide somewhat of the same Sacrament, yea and as much as all the Euangelistes, by and by he added, And when I come,1. Cor I will prescribe the rest of the orders. Vnde intelligi datur (saith S. Au∣gustine) And thereby we may vnderstand, that whatsoeuer is not varied in any varietie of vsages, was of his prescribing. This is our answere, and you knew it partly before. For you say: I know the Papistes will flye to those words of the Apostle,Pur. 3 The rest I will set in order when I come. And good reason, S. Augustine teacheth vs so to do. And what say you to him for it: But that is so manifest to be spoken of matters of externall comelines, (and not of doctrine of the Sacrament, as Prayers and Sacrifices) that no man which vnderstandeth what diatazesthai doth signifie, can doubt or make any question of it. Be it so, as you say: But what? haue you forgotten the thing wherof you speake? Is it not of that Solemne prayer for the dead in the celebration of the Sa∣crifice? That prayer (we say) is diatazis, one of S. Paules ordi∣nations: What vnproper speach is here? specially S. Augustine saying agayne in another place:Aug ver.  Ser. 3 Hoc enim a patribus traditum vniuersa obseruat Ecclesia. This being a tradition of the Fathers, (that is, the Apostles) the whole Church obserueth (and therefore it is such a thing as nulla morum diuersitate variatur) when they which are departed in the cōmunion (or vnitie) of the body and
bloud of Christ, be in their place mentioned at the same Sacrifice, To pray for them, and to mention that for them also it is offred. Thus you haue a piece of the cause, why the Scriptures contei∣ned not the whole order of celebration of the Sacramēts, to wit, for breuities sake. And what doth that or any other cause let o∣ther writers to make mention of such things, when Aerius the heretike compelled them, or any other iust occasion was mini∣stred? You imagine, (and that deceiueth you) as though the Apo∣stles purposed to put all in writing. Which if they had, neither so many of them,That al is not vvritten. nor one of them so often, would haue mentioned one thing. But as the purpose of the holy Ghost in the bookes of the Olde Testament, was principally, to foreshew manifoldly Christ and his Church: so in the bookes of the New Testament, as in the gospels,Ioan. 19. Luk. 24. to shew Christ, euen to Consummatum est, and Impleri omnia quae scripta sunt de me. And in the Actes of the A∣postles, to shew Christes Church according to the old predictions, beginning amongst the Iewes, and increasing to the Gentiles, yea and remouing with S. Paule from Hierusalem the head of the Iewes, worthily reprobated, and setting in Rome the head of the Gentiles, by mercy elected. And all this but as it were the first birth of the Church: for Consummatum est, could not be tolde by way of a Storie, before the ende of the world: though foretold it is (the whole course, I say, of the Church, euen to the glorious consummation thereof) in the Apocalipse. The other Bookes were written, specially agaynst the perfidious Iewes, and other false Masters of that time: As likewise in euery age afterward, agaynst the seuerall heresies of eche age, we haue the Ecclesiasticall (I say not, Canonicall) writers and Councels. And therfore, vnlesse any thing belonging to ech time, be omitted in the writings of ech time, no maruaile at all for the omission of other things, which there was then no suche occasion to expresse. This I should haue reserued to an other place, but that this inso∣lent Poser might not abide any delay. Pur. 264.Now then to go forward with him: I know (saith he) the Pa∣pists will answer, that Tradition is of as good credit as the Scrip∣ture,1. Thes. 2. 2. Thes. 2. 1. Cor. 11. and is the word of God vnwritten, as well as the Scripture is the word of God written. And good reason, for the Scripture it selfe so teacheth vs. But why then (saith he) do they not obserue
all things that Tertullian in the same place affirmeth to be Tra∣dition? This Why, I haue answered in the sixt Chapter.Supra  par. 1. d Pur. 36 More∣ouer he saith: Their writings are to vs the onely true testimonie of their tradition. So were they not to the Thessalonians. For they had of S. Paule, Traditiones per sermonē & per epistolam,Pur. 40 Traditions partly by word of mouth, partly by writing. Yea he saith further: When the Apostolike writing can not be shewed, it is but the poynt of an Heretike to boast of Apostolike tradi∣tion. So he saith to D. Allen. But to the old Fathers I hope he will be somewhat better, and content to take only his exception against them: as where he saith:Pur. 39. If Tertullian had no ground of his saying, when he affirmed that Oblations for the dead came from the Apostles, what ground can Augustine haue, which was 200. yeres further from the Apostles time then he? Againe:Pur. 39 Chri∣sostome can no more proue, that Prayer for the dead came from the Apostles, then Tertullian can proue that oblation for the dead came from them. Againe: But where he saith,Pur. 30 304. It was decreed by the Apostles that in the celebration of the holy mysteries a re∣membrance should be made of them that are departed, He must pardon vs of crediting, because he can not shew it out of the Acts and writings of the Apostles. We must not beleue Chrysostome without Scripture, affirming that it was ordeined so by the Apo∣stles. Howbeit sometime he is bolder yet with the Fathers for a∣uouching this Tradition. He dare not call them heretikes for it: but yet he dareth to charge them with doutfulnes & contradiction about it. For of Chrysostome he saith:Pur. 39 Chryso Ep. ad  Hom. 3 Lo (M. Allen) your owne Doctor confesseth it is but small helpe, that can be procured by praiers, almes, or remēbrance of thē at the celebration of the holy Mysteries. You will say, that soone after he saith, The Apostles that instituted such memory, knew that much cōmoditie came to the dead. Then see how soone he forgetteth himself, when he fol∣loweth not the rule of holy scripture. And againe:Ar. 39. Yet did not praying for the dead so preuayle in the Primitiue Church, that they durst define, what profite the soules receiued thereby: for Chrysostome saith: Let vs procure them some helpe, small helpe truly, but yet let vs helpe them. Likewise Augustine,Aug.  fes. lib. cap. 13. where he prayeth for his father and mother, declareth how vncertayne he was of the matter. One while he feareth the daunger of euery soule that dyeth in Adam: An other while he beleeueth, that
they neede not his prayer, yet he desireth God to accept the same, and moue other men to remember them in their prayers. Thus it is necessarie that they wander, which leane vnto mens traditions without the word of God. And in the same place: S. Augustine in his booke De cura pro mortuis agenda, wearieth him selfe, and in the end can define nothing in certayne, how the Saintes in hea∣uen should heare the prayers of men on earth. Such doubtfulnes they fall into, that leaue the worde of God, & leane to traditions. Although he were willing to mainteine Inuocation of Saints,Pur. 317. yet he hath nothing of certentie out of the worde of God, eyther to perswade his owne conscience, or to satisfie them that moued the doubtes vnto him. For S. Augustine De cura, I haue answered in the third Chapter.Supra pag. 12. In his Confessions he is not vncertayne of the matter, as you pretend, but of the persons néede, and that but of his mothers néede (not also of his fathers, as you say) because she was so perfit a woman. Euen as our faith also of the matter is most certayne: though of our particular friendes state after their departure, we be vncertayne. For concerning the liuing also,Iob. 1. was Iob vncertayne of ye profitablenes of Sacrifice, because earely in the morning he vsed to offer for his children, after they had bene feasting together, Dicebat enim, ne forte peccauerint fi∣lij mei, For he said, lest peraduenture my children haue sinned? And touching S. Chrysostome, whom you thinke so very a childe to forget him selfe so soone, your selfe in déede a very childe for so thinking: He there speaketh first of For such as die vnreconci∣led. them, Qui cum peccatis suis hinc abscedunt, Which go hence with their sinnes, and saith, that they can not be holpen after their death. Then he speaketh For Catho∣likes that be rich.of them, Who are departed in the faith, but yet being rich, they did not procure by their riches any comfort to their owne soules. To these, we that are their friends, may with our riches & pray∣ers procure some helpe, but litle in respect of that they might haue procured them selues. So saith he. He speaketh in such a compa∣rison. Neither is the Apostolike Memento within his compa∣rison, although it might haue bene well inough. For although by it come much commoditie, much vtilitie, to the dead: yet nothing so much when it is procured by their friends, as when it is pro∣cured by them selues: specially, because a mans owne works are also meritorious of euerlasting rewarde. so are not his friendes
workes, they are not meritorious vnto him at all, no nor so sa∣tisfactorious of temporall paine, as his owne, nothing like. iij. Against the Churches authoritie. And so much of the Apostles and their Traditions.Authoritie Dem. 34. Diuine ser∣uice, Dem. 22. Pur. 264. You shall now heare him make the same exception against the Churches Practise and Iudgement. But admit (saith he) that the Church of God in Tertullians time vsed prayers and oblations for the dead. Let vs consider vpon what ground they were vsed. Tertullian himselfe shall say for me, that the same custome, with many o∣ther which he there rehearseth, as comming from the Apostles, hath no ground in the holy Scripture. It is good to take that which is so frankely geuen: and more is Tertullian to be com∣mended, that confesseth the ground of his error not to be taken out of the word of God, then they that labour to wrest the Scrip∣tures to finde that which Tertullian confesseth is not to be found in them. You are hastie to take it, but Tertullian doth not geue it, as I haue plainely shewed you in the third Chapter.Supra. pa. 2 diui. 3. Againe, he excepteth against the Churches Practise in her Li∣turgie or Masse, and saith: We haue with more honestie refour∣med our Liturgie according to the word of God, then Gregorie,Pur. 371. Basil, Chrysostome, or whosoeuer were authors of those Litur∣gies, did leaue the auncient Liturgies that were vsed in the Church before their time, and forge them new of their owne, contrary to the word of God: we neither refuse the Latine Church, while it was pure, nor receiue the East Church wherin it was corrupt: But the Scripture is a rule vnto vs to iudge all Churches by. And yet that we may not thinke him a coward, he saith else where to D. Allen. But to follow you at the heeles (as farre as you dare goe:Pur. 349. I will agree with S. Augustines Rule▪ (quod legem credendi, lex sta∣tuit supplicandi, the order of ye Churches prayer, is euer a plaine prescription to all the faithfull what to beléeue: so saieth S. Au∣gustine, and so doth D Allen alleage it: but because Fulke could not make his florish with that end forward, he turneth the staffe, as though S. Augustine and D. Allen had said:Falsification by changing.) that the law of beleeuing, should make a law of praying. And then he bestirreth him selfe like a man, and addeth of his owne: But faith if it be true, hath no other ground but the word of God: Therfore pray∣er if it proued of true faith, hath no other Rule to frame it by, but
the worde of God. And by and by after: Which rule (of onely Scripture) if Augustine had diligently followed, in examining the common error of his time, Of prayer for the dead at that time, he would not so O videns. blindly haue defended that which by holy Scrip∣ture he was not able to maintaine. And no lesse bold he is with the Practise commended euen in the Canonicall Scripture it selfe: Seeing this fact of Iudas Ma∣chabaeus,Pur. 210. hath no commaūdement in the Law, it is so farre of that it is to be drawē into example, that we may be bold to condemne it for sinne and disobedience. Now concerning the iudgement of the Churche, he excepteth against it likewise,Ar. 86. saying: As for doubtes that arise by difficul∣tie of Scripture, or contention of heresie, they must be resolued and determyned, onely by Scriptures. For there is neuer a cause here∣tike make dbt of the Church, this heretike vvill that no Chri∣stian leane vnto it. here∣sie, but there is as great doubt of the Churche, as of the matter in question. Onely the Scripture is the stay of a Christian mannes conscience. As though that heresies neuer made doubt of ye scrip∣tures also, eyther of all, or of some péece, namely your selues now of the Machabées. And expressely against his owne Churche he maketh the same exception,Ar. 58. saying: And the Protestantes in Europe will also be ruled by their Superiors, so farre as their Su∣periors are ruled by Gods word. Againe, Among the Protestan∣tes, to the Church of Saxonie, humbly affected is the Churche of Denmarke: to the Church of Heluetia, the Church of Fraunce: to the Church of England, the Church of Scotland: But so, that none of these allow any consent or submission, but to the truth, which must be tried onely by Gods word. With that but so you will consent, I trow, to Iackstrawe also: and therefore it is a marueilous humble affection, that your Churches haue one to an other.Anno. 1. Elizab. Your owne Churche of England in generall Parliament, was then much to blame, to enact foure Rules for condemning of heresie. First, if it were against Canonicall Scripture. Secōd∣ly, if it were against ye first .4. Generall Councels, or against any one of thē. Thirdly, if against any other general Coūcel also, but ye with your acception, to wit, so far as ye said Councell followed the line of Scripture: and fourthly, simpliciter whatsoeuer this high Court of Parliament shall adiudge to be heresie. You not∣withstanding haue written, as before. And agayne: Neither do
we require you to beleeue any one companie of men,Ar. 62. more then another: but to beleeue the truth before falshood, which you must search in the word of truth. It was belike for this, & much other such Apocriphall stuffe, that your booke was kept in so long, and in the end also faine to come forth without priuiledge. Yea he is so peremptorie in his exception,Fue vvil not beleeue the A∣postles nor the Angels vvith∣out Scripture. ye most absurdly he attributeth to ye Apostles themselues without scripture no more then to Iackstraw, and consequently with scripture as much to Iackstraw as to ye Apostles. For thus he saith speaking of D. Al∣len: He speaketh it because he beleeueth it.Pur. 24.4. 2. Cor. 4. He would faine coun∣terfeit his speach like the Apostle: but the ground of his beliefe is not, as the Apostles was, the word of God, but the practise of mē, which though they were neuer so good, yet they were suche as might deceiue and be deceiued. Againe,Pur. 449. Gal. 1. where he abuseth that which S. Paule speaketh to the Galathians of preaching, & their receiuing of it, & turneth it as spoken of onely Scripture. It vex∣eth you at the very hart (saith he) that we require the authoritie of the holy Scriptures, to confirme your doctrine, hauing a plaine cōmaundement out of the word of God, that, if any man teache otherwise then the word of God alloweth, he is to be accursed. As though S. Paul there commaunded to accurse him self, and al the Apostles, & the vniuersall Church of Christ, if they confirmed not all their doctrine, with expresse Scriptures, in such maner as you here require. No Syr, nothing so: Onely he accurseth them, which should preach contrarie to that he had preached, & the Ga∣lathians had receiued, which was (as you see) traditiō by mouth, in which maner he taught them & other Churches all Christian Religion, & therein as one principall point, the Canon of ye scrip∣tures, both old & new, if at the leastwise any Bookes of the newe as then were written, which could not be many before the Epi∣stle to the Galathians, being (as by conference of times it may well be proued) the first of all S. Paules Epistles. And so much of the Churches authoritie in her Iudgements, and Practise, namely of her diuine Seruice. Whervnto I ioyne, as the principalles in the authoritie, first the Councells, and se∣condly ye Popes. For to thē likewise he maketh his exceptiō,Pur. 430. Councels. Dem. 27. say∣ing: Wherfore if any Coūcell decree according to the Scriptures, (as the Coūcel of the Apostles did Act. 15. & the Coūcel of Nice,
with diuers other,) we receiue them with all humilitie, as the ora∣cles of God. But if any Councell decree contrarie to the authori∣tie of the Scriptures, (as many did) without all presumption or pride we may iustly reiect them.Pur. 194. See Apo∣stolike. Dem. 28. Then of the other: Yet is not all that Gregorie writ, of equall authoritie with the word of God: without authoritie whereof, we beleeue not an Angel from hea∣uen, as I haue often shewed, much lesse a Bishop of Rome. And not onely against eche Pope seuerally, but also against their whole line and entire Succession he excepteth in like maner, say∣ing:Succession: Dem. 43. A. 28. Although we could rehearse in order as many Successions in our Church, as the Papistes boast of in theirs, yet were that no∣thing to proue it to be the Church of Christ, which must be tried onely by the Scriptures. And a little after: We require at the Pa∣pistes handes, that they shew them selues to hold the Church, not by Succession of Bishops, or rehearsing of their names, but onely by the Scriptures. For although wee did rehearse innumerable names of Bishops in orderly Succession on our side, wee would not require men to beleeue vs, but onely because wee proue the doctrine of our Churche by the authoritie of the Scriptures. In déede we must acknowledge,Fulke vvhat a frankeling. that you deale very frankely with vs, to renounce so fréely such a goodly euidence, because you can not make so much as any shew thereof. For otherwise, when you haue any collour of any thing at all, what mountybanke pedler is so facing, so boasting, so vaunting, as you and your fellowes. iiij. Against the Fathers. Fathers. Dem. 26.Now after all this I will open his like excepting against the Fathers both in generall, and also expressing diuerse of their names, although it hath bene opened in part alreadie by other oc∣casions. And touching the first: true it is that he often braggeth much of the Fathers which liued in the first Ar. 39. Pu. 30.177 435.370.371. two hundred, or Pur. 186.247.304.331.357.364.382. one hundred yeares, chalenging vs to proue our doctrine out of them, and not out of the later Fathers after them, euen with as much reason as he commonly chalengeth vs to proue all out of ye scrip∣tures, vtterly without all ground, & but méere voluntarily, Fulkes tvvo Onelies. the one, as the other: which ensample therefore is much to be noted. But here notwithstanding I shall declare, howe he excepteth smothly and simply, against all the Fathers, against all in gene∣ral,
and expresly also saying were they neuer so auncient. Wher∣in how well he agréeth with him selfe I deferre to the eleuenth Chapter. And in effect he hath already so done, in calling so often afore for Onely Scripture. But yet to shew it more manifestly, and as it were the very face it selfe, thus he saith:Pur. 205. Whatsoeuer he was, or howe long soeuer it be since he wrote, because it hath not authoritie in the word of God, I weigh it as the wordes of a man, whose credit in diuine matters is nothing without the word of God. Againe:Pur. 202. When all authoritie out of Gods word faileth you, wherby you should proue that the soules departed receiue benefite by the merites of the liuing, you flye to the authoritie of men. But mans authoritie is to weake to carie away so weightie a matter. Away with mens writings, shew me but one Scripture to proue it. Againe: If for these and an hundred suche,Pur. 22. you can shew no better warrant then the tearmes of your fathers, the pra∣ctise of your elders, or the authoritie of mortall men, the curse of God by Esay, must nedes be turned ouer vnto you. Againe:Pur. 58. Your reasons either be manifest wrestings of the holy Scripture, or else are buylded vpon the authoritie of mortall men. Againe:Pur. 386. We neede no shift, M. Allen, for the authoritie of the Doctors, whom we neuer allow for Canonicall Scriptures: and therefore we may boldly say, Whatsoeuer we find in thē agreable to the Scriptures (he meaneth, expressed in the Scriptures) we receiue it with their prayse? and whatsoeuer is disagreable to the Scriptures, we re∣fuse with their leaue. Againe:Pur. 363. Now touching the credite and worthinesse of these whom M. Allen so highly extolleth: as I would not go about to diminish it, if they were to be compared with vs: so when they are As though vve opposed the do∣ctors to the A∣postles. opposed against the manifest worde of God, and the credite of the holy Apostles the ministers of the holy Ghost: there is no cause that we shoulde be caried away with them. That which he saith here (as his Masters taught him) of mor∣tall men, D. Allen knew aforehand, and forewarned the Reader thereof, where he said: [Melancton,Pur. 384. as though he were no man that might erre himself, saith the Doctors were men.] And againe to sée their absurditie, in the same terme of mortall men,Mortall men. are comprehēded also the Apostles them selues: and if they sometime séeme to separate them selues from it, they meane then by the
Apostles nothing but the Scriptures of the Apostles. As Fulke in certaine places noted before, and againe where he saith to D. Allen:Ar. 59. You shal neuer bring vs to acknowledge that S. Paule is against vs in any article of our faith, but we agree wholly with him. Neuerthelesse I know what you meane, and I will not be a∣frayde to vtter it. For as much as immediatly after the Apostles time corruption entred into the Church, you thinke that we dare not depend vpon any one mans iudgement, and therein you are not deceiued, for we must depend only vpon Gods word. Euen so dealt the vnbeléeuers and the doubtfull and weake with the Apostles in their life time, yea and with Christ him selfe: and yet to winne such persons, both the Apostles, yea and Christ himself, condescended to them accordingly. If the Protestants would in like sort haue dealt with him & them, not to haue beléeued them in any thing without Scripture, the faithfull (I thinke) for all that were not so straite laced, but beléeued them vpon their own word, not Christ onely, but also his Apostles, because of the spi∣rite of truth that he sent to them, and not to them onely, but also to his Church after them for euer: and therefore they will also no lesse at all times beléeue the said Church for the same spirite, assuring them selues, that the saide spirite agréeth still with him selfe, whersoeuer and howsoeuer he speaketh, be it in the Scrip∣tures, or be it in the Church, and in the Church Primitiue, or in the Church of later times: and agayne in the Pastors of the Primitiue Church, as the Apostles, or in the Pastors of the Church afterwarde at any time in generall Councell or other∣wise consenting together. It is no maruayle after this generalitie, to sée him now except against the Fathers in particular, naming the times, and the persons.Ar. 60. as first the times, where he saith: The other writers of later yeres (after Ireneus and Iustinus) we are not afrayde to confesse that they haue some corruption, wherby you may seeme to haue colour of defence for Inuocation of Saintes, prayer for the dead,Pur. 87. and diuers Ceremonies. And, Although the custome of praying for the dead be an auncient error, so that few of the later writers there are, but they shew them selues to be infected there∣with, yet they had no ground out of the Scriptures to warrant their doing.Pur. 262. Againe: But of memories of the dead, and prayers
for the dead also, we wil not striue but that they were vsed before the times of Cyprian & Ambrose: but without warrant of Gods word or authoritie of Scriptures, but such as is pitifully wrested and drawen vnto them. Againe:Pur. 30. But it sufficeth you that your forefathers, more then a thousand yeres ago, called the place of sufferāce, Purgatory. But I pray you what is it called in the Scrip∣ture, either of the old Testament, or the new? Diuers errors be ol∣der then a 1000. yeres: but age can neuer make falshood to be truth, and therfore I weigh not your It is pride to follovv the fa¦thers and humi¦litie to cōdemn them.proud brags worth a straw. Againe: And this was a great corruption of those ancient times, that they did not alwayes weigh what was most agreable to the word of God, but if the Gentiles or Heretikes had any thing,Pur. 419. and the rest as aboue in the third Chapter. And againe:Supra. pag. 9. Those of the auncient Fathers that agreed with you in any part of your asser∣tion, notwithstanding many excellent giftes that they had,Pur. 436. dissen∣ted (therein) from manifest truth of the Scriptures. And so by name likewise he saith of certayne, as for example: Damascene your doctor should first haue reproued that perswa∣sion by Scripture. Againe:Pur. 412. Pur. 60. The supposall of S. Augustine is sette downe, which because it is but the authoritie of a man, it is not of sufficient weight to beare downe the testimonie of Gods word. Againe:Pur. 395. And euen the authoritie of Athanasius without the word of God, is the authoritie of man. We count not all his wri∣tings for Canonicall Scriptures, but we iudge them by the Cano∣nicall Scriptures. And againe:Pur. 255.256. Gregorie Nissene and Athanasius the Great, There is no cause why we should beleue either of them both in an article of faith without the authoritie of the word of God. The second part. Beeing told that the question betwene vs is not (as he maketh it) of the Scriptures authoritie, but of the meaning: howe there likewise against all the Expositors he maketh the same exception of Only Scripture, requiring also Scrip∣ture to be expounded by Scripture. Now after all this froth of words, let vs sée him come once to the poynt, & report him self the substance of our matter. These be his owne words: But the controuersie is not (M. Allen fayth) of the authoritie of the Scriptures in this matter,Pur. 363, but of the true
meaning of them, which it is more like that they (the Doctors) being such men, then we so farre inferior to them, should know. And what saith he therevnto? I answere, saith he, and yet not one worde there to the question. Else where he saith therevnto, (as I will report anone his words) that also the meaning of ye Scrip∣tures must be searched out of the Scriptures onely. Well syr, but whencesoeuer and wheresoeuer it must be searched, who is more like to finde it, the Doctors, or you? and so, neither that which you saye in other places, answereth the question. But in this place (reade it who list) your answere is quite & cleane frō the questiō, which was, Whether be more like to know the true meaning of the Scriptures, the Doctors, or you? And yet you pype vp the triumph there and say: Thus haue these Heretikes no ground of their heresie: but shift from the word of Scripture to Tradition, from Tradition to the meaning of Scripture, from the plaine meaning of Scripture to the opinions of men. Yea and he counteth him selfe and his companies happie for such blinde presumption to search the meaning of the Scriptures onely out of the Scriptures without the commentaries of the Doctors, (but not also) I trow, without the Commentaries of Caluine and such like companions) thus he saith:Pur. 407. And happy be those, which not regarding the streames of waters that runne through the vaynes of earth, but seeking to the onely fountayne of hea∣uenly truth, conteined in the holy Scriptures, haue certaine com∣fort of saluation.Pur. 285. And againe to the same purpose: Surely as the Sunne is not obscured with the dust that a Cock casteth vp when he scrapeth on the dunghill:The Doctors vvritings a dunghill. no more is the Sonne of righteous∣nesse, or the light of his holy worde, darkened by all the myste of mens deuises, which Allen, or his complices can rayse out of the whole heape of superstition and error, to deface the glory of his Church. The worde of the Lord is a light vnto our steppes, and therefore we will not walke in the darknes of mens traditions. Our doctrine shall one day be tried before God, and therefore we make no account how we be iudged by mans day.1. Cor. 4. (So properly he vttereth his presumption in the words that the Apostle clene contrarie did speake in excéeding great feare.) It foloweth: Your way is your owne way, & not the way of the Lord: and because you take another way vnto saluation then the onely right waye
Iesus Christ, therfore by his owne sentence, you are al theeues and murderers. Hath any séene a man so drunken, so blinded, with pride? Well then: in the other place, of searching the meaning out of the Scriptures them selues alone, and neglecting the receaued Expositors, what saieth he? Whether the old Doctors be more like to vnderstand the Scriptures then the Protestāts:Pur. 434. I haue an∣swered before, we will make no comparison with them. Modestly spoken, a man would thinke: but what followeth? Neither will we chalenge the likelihood to vs, neither will we leaue it to them. I mary, hold your owne we pray you. And why so? For whether soeuer we doe, we shall be neuer the more certaine of the trueth. You say true, for so much as concerneth your selues. For in déede no certaintie of trueth, but most certaine certaintie of error, in your vnderstanding. But in what so euer the Doctors doe agrée, who so expoundeth the Scripture vnto that, shall be euer most certaine of the truth (which is ynough) though not alwayes cer∣taine of that same very places meaning, as in the sixt Chapter I declared more at large. Forth now, a Gods name:Supra. cap. 6. par. 2. But this will we set downe as a most certaine principle, that no man can vn∣derstand the Scriptures, but by the same Spirite by which they were written. The meaning of some place one may attaine vnto, which hath not that Spirit: but to vnderstand them alwayes a∣gréeably to the truth, can not be without that same Spirit. Forth againe: What then? shall we arrogate the Spirit as proper to vs, and denye it to them? God forbid. They had their measure of Gods spirit, and so haue we. Hereof ariseth an obiection. How then? is the Spirit of God contrarie to it selfe, because they and we agree not in all thinges? He answereth, God forbid. Cyprian and Cornelius were both endued with Gods Spirit, yet they agre∣ed not both in one interpretation nor iudgement of the scripture. Yea Syr, Cyprian as he was of Cornelius his Spirit, so was he likewise of Cornelius his iudgement, implicitè as we tearme it, though explicite he were of an other, of an erronius iudgemēt, and that according to his owne humane spirit, and not according to Gods Spirit. As at this day likewise, and alwayes, whensoe∣uer any Catholike man of ignoraunce erreth expressely, yet not∣withstanding in effect he is of the trueth with the other Catho∣likes
which erre not, because he quietly continueth in vnitie with them, nor doth not obstinatly holde his owne error against them. Now whether the case be so betwene the olde Doctors and you, briefly and manifestly it is declared by this, that neither you at this time will be refourmed by them, nor they in their time would be refourmed by your forefathers, Aerius, Iouinia∣nus, and such like. But now that you haue abrogated the vnderstanding of the Scriptures from Gods spirite both in the Doctors and in your selues, say on, and tell vs your aduise: What then? there remay∣neth but this seconde principle as certayne as the first, That the Spirite of God hath a meaning in the Scriptures, which is not to be sought out of the Scriptures in the opinions of deceiuable men, but only in the Scriptures, where is nothing but the spirite of truth. No syr, why? suppose those men were the Apostles them selues, or any other hauing the same spirite of trueth that the Apostles first had, but of that ynough before: foorth therefore: Therefore that the spirite may declare his owne meaning,Ar. 86. one place of Scripture must be expounded by an other, (for the hard places of Scripture must be opened by easie places) all other or∣dinary meanes and helpes, of wit, learning, knowledge of tongs, diligence in hearing, reading, and praying, are subordinate, and seruing to this search and triall. And is this way so sure and cer∣tayne? I mary. For who soeuer obserueth this search and triall most precisely, shall come to the knowledge of the trueth most certaynly. And may he not trust an other which hath so precise∣ly obserued it? as for example, the Protestantes, me thinkes, as your selfe, or M. Caluine, &c. but I crie you mercy, you meant not them. Well then, may he not trust the olde Fathers therein?A comfortable doctrine for the ignorant, for∣sooth▪ or did not they obserue it diligently? No: for who so euer is negligent in this search and tryall, though he haue other∣wise neuer so many and excellent graces and giftes, may easily be deceiued, yea (you speake nowe a great worde) euen when he thinketh he followeth the authoritie of the Scriptures. Which (search) if the auncient Fathers had alwayes followed, they should not so lightly haue passed ouer some thinges (as to con∣demne the Protestantes in Aerius and Vigilantius, &c.) and o∣ther thinges so slenderly haue mainteined, (as the doctrine of
the Papistes.) Well then, I sée, all is in a mans owne diligence, to trust no man nor men, but to reade the Scriptures, conferre the places, and so gather the meaning by him selfe: this is your most certen way. I must therefore tell you a litle of our diligence therin, that you may certifie vs whether it be ynough, or no. and the rather because you exhort our master D. Allen, and say to him:Pur. 9. Trye the rule of the Protestantes, and search the worde of God in the holy Scriptures, and then vndoubtedly you shall finde the trueth, and the Church also that is the pillar of trueth. And againe,Ar. 62. Who haue the trueth, you must search in the worde of trueth, desiring the spirite of trueth, that you may vnderstande and beleeue the trueth: and so without doubt you shall come to the knowledge of the trueth, and of the Churche of God whiche is the pillar of truth. So it is then good syr: In this Seminarie of English di∣uines vnder the gouernement of D. Allen, mainteined by his ho∣lines for the saluation of our countrey (as he mainteineth the like for Germanie also, for Bohemia, and Students of Polonia,The Popes Se∣minarie for England. Suetia, Slauonia, Hungaria, &c. yea for the Gréekes likewise, yea also for the Hebrues) we haue such exercise in the scriptures, that we reade ouer ye old Testament, in euery thrée yeres, twelue times, one of which times hath ioyned with it an examinatiō by conferēce from Chapter to Chapter, and from verse to verse. The new Testament we reade ouer in the same thrée yeres, sixtéene times, with a treble examinatiō of the same sort. And not cōtent with those examinations, we afterwards write moreouer in pa∣per bookes, & lay together al the sentences that belong to the con∣trouersies of this time, euery one in his place. And without all vanitie, to speake one word of my selfe, after many yeres studie afore after the maner of Englād (as many of your owne side can beare me witnesse) I haue since then folowed this foresaid trade nine yeres. This is partly our diligence in the scriptures, besides much other exercise both in the same and in all the studie of diui∣nitie. What more diligence would you haue vs vse? this is the principall, and (as you make it) all in all. All other helpes you counte but subordinate and seruing vnto this. And yet in them also, I dare saye, if you knewe vs, you woulde al∣lowe vs for sufficient at the leaste: You maye, by the
trace of God, ere it be long, haue some taste of vs therein, when one of vs shall set forth a booke to shew to the world, that the He∣brew and Gréeke textes, in nothing make for you against vs, and in very many things make for vs against you much more plain∣ly, then our vulgar Latine text. Now then, how much more cer∣taine of the trueth be we, then you, also by your owne rule, be∣cause your diligence herein is nothing comparable: but special∣ly, because together with this rule we vse the expositiōs that you renounce, of the auncient Fathers, who for such conference of places, and all other studie of the Scriptures, were pearlesse. ¶The third part. What he meaneth by his Onely Scripture: and that thereby he excepteth also against Scripture it selfe. Thus haue we heard this Protestant call for expresse Scrip∣ture in all things, yea also in the expounding of Scripture. Now, that he séeme not too straight and rigorous in his exception, he will tell vs what he meaneth therby, as it were to geue vs more scope, but in déed (as we shall heare soone after) to shut vs straigh∣ter vp, and to except also against Scripture it selfe, vnlesse it be so plaine and euident for vs, that by no subteltie of theirs they may auoide it. Concerning the former, thus he saith: When we require ex∣presse Scripture for euery controuersie, we doe not require that euery thing should be named in Scripture, but necessarily conclu∣ded out of the true meaning of the Scriptures and purpose of the holy Ghost in them. Then on the other side, he almost repenteth himselfe againe for graunting so much, and saieth: And yet we may say,Pur. 438. it is a great preiudice against your Purgatorie and pray∣er, that it is not so much as once named in the Scriptures. Againe, If the holy Ghost had euer allowed Prayer for the deade, he would once at the least haue vttered the same plainely, in holy Canonicall Scriptures.Pur. 452. Canonicall he saith, to except against the very meaning of it also, which he séeth in the bookes of the Ma∣chabées: rather shall that Canonicall Scripture not be Canoni∣call, for so plainely naming that which the eares of the Prote∣stantes can not abide.
Well, in the other Canonicall Scriptures the name is not, and that is a great preiudice against vs. But he will be fauoura∣ble vnto vs, a great preiudice shal not make him geue iudgement against vs, if at least The thing it selfe be taught or can be pro∣ued by the Scriptures. Yet againe he remembreth him selfe,Pur. 452. that D. Allen hath alleaged many Scriptures for that thing, and the old Fathers likewise before him: and therefore to tye vs yet straighter with another exception, he said here a little afore, But we require that euery thing be necessarily concluded out of the true meaning of the Scriptures. And againe he saith, speaking of D. Allen: See the confidence of the man, he is sure,Pur. 364. that if we were examined of our conscience, what tryall of this doubt we would wish, there is none we could name, but his cause might well abide it. Wherevnto he answereth, saying: Why M. Allen, we haue testified of our conscience long agoe, that the onely authoritie of Gods word written, shall satisfie vs, as well in this as in all other matters. If you were able we should haue heard before this time some sentence of Scripture, to maintaine prayer and sacrifice for the dead. (Why? in the third Chapter here you confessed that you haue heard of him diuerse sentences, and not of him alone,Supra. pag. 19. but al∣so of the Fathers of the true Churche. Yea but now saieth he, I adde my exception, and say therfore, some sentence) not standing vpon voluntarie collection, but either in plaine wordes or neces∣sarie conclusion. For there is nothing that we are bound to know, nothing that we are bound to doe, but either in expresse wordes, or in necessarie collection (which is as good as expresse wordes) it is set forth in the holy Scriptures. Againe,Pur. 452. All truth may be pro∣ued by Scripture, either in plaine wordes, or by necessarie conclu∣sion, which is all one. And againe:Pur. 189. There is For example: your ovvne heresie. no heresie so ab∣surd, which Satā putteth into the head of wicked men, but it may finde some sound of words in so many Bookes of the holy scrip∣tures, that by peruerse wittes may be wrested vnto it. But the doc∣trine of Gods trueth and all articles of our beliefe, are plainely taught in the Scripture, either by manifest wordes, or by necessary conclusion and argument, which by no subtiltie of Satan or his instrumentes, may be auoided or deluded. And this is the diffe∣rence betweene heresie and truth, when they both appeale to the authoritie of Scripture. Which difference as it may be found in al
heresies, so in none more notably, then in this error of Purgatory. Consider what texts of holy Scripture are alleaged against it, rather.for it, & you shall see they can not bring one, out of which any necessary argu∣ment may be framed to proue their cause, or which hath not by learned interpretors of the olde time bene otherwise expounded then of their cause.Pur. 176. Yea and more then that, The worde of God doth neither expresly, nor by any probable collection allow it, but manifestly condemne it.Pur. 185. Againe, He could not with any semely colour establish purgatorie, by the authoritie of the Scrip∣ture, the onely testimonie of Gods word and will reueiled, and confirmed by his holy Spirite. The Machabées to be euen so con∣firmed as well as the other bookes, he can neuer auoyde, and in effect he graunteth, as I shall note in the eleuenth Chapter a∣mongst his contradictions. Which is sufficient, I trow, to make at the least a séemely colour, and a probable collection: but in déede also a conclusion so necessary, that he can neuer answere it, but by shaking the authoritie of all the Canonicall Scriptures, in derogating from their confirmation which yet him selfe doth attribute to the holy Spirite. The fourth part. What great promises he maketh to bring most euident Scrip∣ture against vs, and also by Scripture to proue his sence of the Scripture: Triumphing also before the victorie, & saying, that we dare not be tried by Scripture, but reiect the Scriptures. Wherevpon a fourefold offer is made vnto him. Now that we haue séene howe precise he is with vs, to admit (1) no euidence that we alleage, but Scripture onely, both in all controuersies, and also in the exposition of Scripture: and againe (2) no Scripture, which maketh so playnly with vs, that he can not auoyde it but by denying it to be Canonical, though he graūt it to haue the confirmation of the same true Church, which mo∣ueth him, as the holy Ghost, to receiue the other Scriptures for Canonicall: and againe (3) no Scripture that he confesseth to be  Canonicall, vnlesse it make so expresly, so playnly, so manifestly, and so necessarily with vs, that it can not by any suttletie be a∣uoyded. It were to be séene nowe on the other side, what Scrip∣tures he alleageth against vs, whether he obserue him selfe the
law that he so rigorously prescribeth to vs, whether his Scrip∣tures be so playne, so manifest, so euident, that by no sutteltie they can be auoyded. But that we shall sée in the next Chapter: no nede of sutteltie, I assure you, to auoyde or delude them, so friuolous are his allegations, that with al facilitie and truth we shall answere them. Here in the meane time, in the ende of this Chapter, I will onely lay forth his great promises aforehande, and so come orderly to the matter. And to omit, if he should haue to do with all the old and newe heresies, what manifest & necessary confutations he would frame against them all and euery one, out of the Scriptures alone, ha∣uing fréely afore them renounced al other probations, according to his former sayings here, that all truth, and, all articles of our beliefe are playnly taught in the Scripture, and may be so proued by Scripture, & that there is nothing that we are bound to know, nothing that we are bound to do, but it is so set forth in the scrip∣tures:His great pro∣mises. I will charge him no more but with his promise that he maketh of so confuting vs by playne Scriptures, notwithstan∣ding that all other euidences make for vs in such sort as he hath already confessed. Thus he saith:Pur. 187. And that which I haue to saye in confutation of your heresie, shall be no worse then the very word of God it selfe, which is better then the consent of all the world against it. And againe:Pur. 30. I am one of the least of Gods Mi∣nisters, yet by his grace and authoritie of his holy word, I shal be able to ouerthrow both this and all other Babilonicall bulwarks that are cast vp by Satan & all his instruments for the defence of Popish heresie against the truth of God. And neither the myst of mens inuētions (which you cal the light of Apostolike tradition) shall be able to darken the truth of the Gospell: nor the errors of mortall men (which you terme the force of Gods trueth) shall beare downe the authoritie of Gods holy spirite. Againe:Pur. 12. We be able to shew manifest euidence that our aduersaries doctrine is cleane contrarie to the Scriptures of God. Againe:Ar. 3. We affirme that the Apostles taught none other faith in stead of true Chri∣stianitie, but that which we hold, as we are ready to proue by the word of God. Againe: I can proue by S. Paules writings,Ar. 59. that in all articles of faith, he taught the same which we beleeue. And for triall of this, because it would require a whole volume,
if I should proue euery perticular article, wherein we dissent from you Papistes: If you will name an article (in the next Chapter your selfe shall name ynowe. Yet, if you will, let it be this: that Antichrist is not one certaine person, and that the Churches flée∣ing into the wildernesse at his comming, is to become inuisible to the world: and that the beginning of that comming and fleing, should be so soone after Christes passion: the continuaunce, so ma∣ny ages: the end, so long before Christes second cōming.) where∣in we agree not with S. Paule, If I be not able to proue that we agree with him in the meaning thereof, I will reuoke that article and agree with you therein. Yea and also to proue his owne meaning, and to disproue our meaning, when we both alleage Scriptures, he will séeke, as he required of vs, to nothing like∣wise but Scripture it selfe. For the meaning of the worde (he saith) you should beleeue vs rather then the Papistes, because our groundes and proues are better then theirs: or els we require not to be beleeued better then they. And there againe: If you bring out a false sense, we beleeue you not, because we knowe it to be false, and are able to proue by the word of God, that it is contra∣rie to the meaning of the holy Ghost. His triumph∣ing in lying.These are his worthie promises. Of which he hath béen so li∣berall, belike, because he knewe that we dare not once appeare, when Scriptures be alleaged by the Protestantes. For such are his wordes.Pur. 380. We can shewe no cause in the world (you say) why wee neede in any one point of controuersie depart from your Church. Yet M. Allen, this one cause shall serue for all, because your Church is departed from the truth of Gods word, and dare not abide the tryall thereof, but will sitte like a proude dame in a Chaire,Ar. 28. and controll the Scriptures. Againe: The Popish Church can by no reason chalenge Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophets, seeing she refuseth to be tried by their doctrine vttered in their writinges. Againe: The spouse of Christ, heareth the voice of Christ,Ar. 99.6. and is ruled thereby. But the Romish Church will in no wise be ruled Onely by the voyce of Christ: therefore she is not the Spouse of Christ. Where, by his foysting in of the worde (Onely) in the Minor, we may note the cause that moueth him to say, that our Churche refuseth the Scriptures: as if he should say, that we refuse faith,
because we refuse only faith: or that any man refuseth his owne best euidence, because he will not at the instance of his aduersa∣rie renounce all his other euidences, be they neuer so many, ne∣uer so good, neuer so well tried and so much vsed by his aunce∣tors, & also most agreable, euery one of them, to his foresaid best euidence.Ar. 85. He saith moreouer, She hath nothing lesse then the true sense of Gods word, which submitteth the same to her owne iudgemēt.Ar. 107. Againe: The Popish Church so manifestly dissenteth from the word of truth, that she dare not be iudged thereby, but most blas∣phemously submitteth the same to her owne iudgement. Againe, In the Popish Church Gods word is made subiect to mens deter∣minations and authorities. And againe,Pur. 219. By which it is manifest that you do reiect the whole authoritie of all the Canonicall Scriptures: when you affirme that no booke of holy Scripture is Canonicall, but so farre foorth as your Church will allowe it. Moreouer when you will not admit any sense of the Scripture, but such as your Church will allow. Here are two other causes of the same againe: As if he would say, that the Apostles in their time, or the Church then,Note vvhiche is this Popishe Church. submitted and made subiect the Scriptures to men, most blasphemously, and onely of their owne will,2. Pet. 3. because they tooke vpon them to iudge of the true sense: and namely S. Peter, for saying, that the vnlearned (him selfe being but a fisherman) and the vnstable, do misconster S. Paules Epistles, sicut & caeteras Scripturas, as also the other Scriptures, to their owne damnation. And againe, as though the same Apostles, and the Church after them, manifestly reiected the whole authoritie of all the Canonicall Scriptures,Canonicall. & did al only of their owne will, because they made a Canon or Ca∣nons (as all the lawes of the Church are called Canons) wherof the saide Scriptures were and are called Canonicall, whervpon himselfe also counteth them as confirmed by the holy Ghost. Well, for these goodly causes he is bold to say, that the Church (of which Christ said generally, If he will not heare the Church,Mat. 18. count him for an heathen and a publican) refuseth and reiecteth the Scriptures. And againe to D. Allen:Pur. 438. As for the euident word of God, you shame not to boast of that to be your triall, which you dare as well eate a fagot as abide the iudgement of it, in any
lawfull conference or disputation. Your great belwethers and bi∣shops declared before the whole world in the conferēce of West∣minster, what they durst abide; when they came to handstrokes. It is a gay matter for such a chattering Pye, as you are, to make a fond florish a farre off in words, to please your patrons and ex∣hibitioners: it is an other thing to stand to the proofe in deede. And againe to him:Pur. 346. Where as you wish that Bedes historie were made familiar vnto all English men, they were better to consider the word of God and the historie of the Actes of the Apostles: Which if you durst abide the triall thereof, you would exhort men to reade it, at least wise that vnderstand Latin. And if you were as zelous to set forth the glory of God, as you are to main∣teine your owne traditions, one or other of you, which haue so long found fault with our translations of the Scriptures, would haue taken paynes to translate them truely your selues, as well as to translate Bedes booke. You say the disputation at Westminster Anno 1. Elizab. was before the whole world, as one that care not what you say, which you declare again in speaking of D. Allens exhibitioners, and his pleasing of them, a thing wherof you know nothing, nor (as I think) no body els, vnles some body may know that which is not. He is rather him selfe the Exhibitioner of our whole countrey (like an other Ioseph) and might be yours also, if you were happy. How much more iustly then may we say, that the Councell of Trent was holden before the whole world? And what conference will you admitte for lawfull on our part, when as you refused to come to that assembly at Trent, béeing yet so earnestly, so safely, and so honorably inuited thither, as the Safeconduites extant in the Actes of the Councell do witnesse, together with the very experience also of those fewe petites of Germanie that came thither? Or what conference shall on your parte be thought iniquous and vniust towardes vs, when you shame not to extoll that mocke conference of Westminster? A fourefolde offer.Well, because you chalenge vs to a disputation, and are suffe∣red to set it forth in print, heare what I will say vnto you: The Councell of Trent counted you their subiectes as muche as you counte vs the subiectes of Englande, and the state there, is of all Catholike Princes graunted to be farre preeminent. Do
you therefore procure vs a safeconduite from the Courte in  suche fourme as the Councell gaue it to you, and certayne of vs will in the name of God come in, be the daunger to our liues otherwise neuer so great, and for the glory of God in the victorie of his trueth, we will ioyne with you in any con∣ference that shall be prescribed according to the common lawes of a Conference. Sée in my .xix. Demaunde, which is of Kinges, what I said to this effect before I knew of this your chalenge. Sée likewise of the same in my first Demaund, which is of olde Conference at Carthage betwixte the Catholikes and the Do∣natistes, about the true Churche which the Scriptures com∣mende vnto vs: Whereof I shall haue occasion to say more in the tenth Chapter. If to reiect this offer, the Gouernours by your procurement, or  of their owne mindes will stand vpon their poyntes, wheras we séeing the cause is Gods cause, are content not to stand vpon our liues, to saue your soules, and to redéeme the vnmercifull vexa∣tion and intollerable persecution of our brethren ouer all that Realme, whom your Bishops and other Commissioners do op∣pose with heauy yrons and bouchers axes sorer then you can op∣pose vs or the learned of them with Scriptures: Do you syr, at the least wise for your owne credits sake, take your pen in hand, and ioyne with me vpon that same Collatio Carthaginensis, in such maner as I haue briefly required in my said first Demaund. Or if you dare not do that neither for al your crakes, thirdly I  require you to send to vs some of your fellows or schollers, such as will behaue them selues quietly and modestly, other safecon∣duite they shall not néede: as diuers of your side haue already at sundry times, partely of their owne heades, partely at their priuate friendes motion, come hither, and founde all safe and sure for their persons, and not one of them but he was (thankes be to God) throughly satisfied by our conference, and namely by séeing and hearing our foresaid dayly reading and examination of the Scriptures. Which béeing by D. Allen our President his order vsed amongst vs, who can doubt but he exhorteth men to reade the Scriptures, them specially that vnderstande Latin, much more thē S. Bedes historie? And namely ye Acts of the Apo∣stles, what booke do I his scholler more often vse in my Motiues
and Demaundes, then that? And touching a Catholike trāslation of the Scriptures, you shew your selfe to know litle, God wot∣teth, what is D. Allens desire and minde therein. But all men may assure them selues, that any thing lacketh therevnto rather then good will and feruent zeale, specially because we sée it tran∣slated already by Catholikes into al other languages almost, and because we know sundry cōmodities that might ensue thereof, & namely because we lament to see so many soules to dye in the most holsome waters, beeing turned into deadly bitternes by your Starre Absinthin,Apoc. 8. your blindnes withall being suche, that leauing both the authenticall Gréeke of the Septuaginta, which the Apostles and Primitiue Church did vse, and also the authen∣ticall Latin, which the Church hath vsed so many hundred yeres, in some part euen from the beginning almost: you haue serued our countrey with ye olde Testament of the late obstinate Iewes vowelling, diuiding, and reading, it being of it selfe but one verse in the whole Psalter, and ech other particular booke, & onely con∣sonantes, and to be read according to the tradition of the faith∣full (which tradition we know by our authenticall translations) and not of the incredulous and perfidious. No, no, whensoeuer we should make (if we were in case and place) a Catholike translation, and send the copies in, they should be in no lesse daunger of your searchers and fyres, then our other bookes haue bene, and are euery day more and more: but yet that daunger should not stay vs, if nothing els did: knowing that such a translation will confound you ten thousande times more then all the other bookes haue done. Last of all, if none of my former requestes can finde place with you, at the least wise you shal haue here in the Chapter folowing an answere to all your Scriptures hither vnto alleaged in both your bookes, to chaw vpon for a while. And then tell your Rea∣der, when, as you haue here renounced all other euidences, so he shall sée that you are no lesse destitute of Scripture also: tell him then (I say) blaming D. Allen,Pur. 364. and saying: And yet he wondreth that we are so blinde that we can not see the cleare light of truth. And againe in the ende of your booke,Pur. 458. In Gods name let the Rea∣ders way indifferently, and as they see this poynt (of the dead) handled, so let them iudge of the rest. The trueth is vpholden by
euident testimonie of Scripture: the error by custome, practise, and iudgement of men. The truth seeketh vnderstanding of the Scriptures, of the spirite of God in the Scriptures: error, at the mouthes of mortall men. Now thē to these euident Scriptures, in the name of God, and to your diuine vnderstanding of them. ¶The eyght Chapter. To shew his vanitie in his foresaide rigorous exacting of playne Scripture, and great promises to bring playne Scripture, con∣ferring place with place so euidently. All the Scrip∣tures that he alleageth are examined, and answered. AL the Scriptures that he alleageth against vs throughout his two bookes, I do sort and distribute into foure partes. The first, concerning the question of onely Scripture: the second, concerning the question of the Church: the third, concer∣ning the question of Purgatorie: the fourth, concerning al other questions that he mentioneth. The first part. Concerning the question of Onely Scripture. And as touching the first: In the last Chapter we saw, how to make exception against all our other euidēces, he euermore said, that in all matters Onely euident Scripture must be brought and heard: confessing those other euidences to be so euident for vs, that they can not otherwise be auoyded. Now then, this bée∣ing his onely refuge, how many and how euident Scriptures hath he alleaged for it, as you thinke? Surely in all his first booke to D. Allens Articles, they being altogether our foresaid Eui∣dences, he alleageth but one place onely: and not many mo nei∣ther in his other booke of Purgatorie. And what maner of place also, thinke you, that it is? specially considering howe muche he craketh of it, as where he saith: Thus I haue declared,Ar. 11.15 &c. that the true Church of Christ hath conuicted all Heretikes, onely by the Scripture. Agayne, it hath bene already proued sufficiently,Ar. 16. that the true Catholike Church which is ledde only by the worde of God, the onely weapon by which heresies are cut downe, counting it to be sufficient for that purpose, hath ouerthrowen heresies of all sortes. And againe: Doctrine is to be sought out
and tried onely by the Scriptures,Ar. 82. as we haue declared at large in the answere to the fourth Article, first Demaunde. And once a∣gaine:Ar. 86. As for doubtes that arise by difficultie of Scripture, or cō∣tention of heresie, they must be resolued and determined, as it is abundauntly declared before, onely by the Scriptures. With that place of Scripture he alleaged certayne Fathers, as Hilarius, Basilius, Chrysostome, Sainct Augustine, Leo the first, and the Councell of Constantinople the sixte. To whom I must aun∣swere in the next Chapter.Infra pag. But he graunteth pardie, that the Fathers authoritie is no warrant to him so to crake: as another where also expresly he saith,Pur. 383. It is not for confirmation of the trueth, that we alleadge the authoritie of the Doctors and olde Councels. Then must all these crakes be onely in respect of the Scripture that you there alleaged. Let vs therefore nowe heare  that Scripture: So did Paule ouercome the Iewes, Act. 18. that is to say,Ar. 11. only by the Scripture. That he often disputed against the Iewes, prouing Iesus to be Christ, I there finde, but that his argumentes were none but Scriptures, I finde not. But reade you Actes .13. and you shall finde, that he vsed also other argu∣mentes agaynst them, to witte, the testimonie of certayne men, as of S. Iohn Baptist, and of his owne Disciples, that sawe him many dayes together after his resurrection, qui vsque nunc sunt testes eius ad plebem, Who to this day are witnesses for him to the people. Reade likewise Act. 4. for the argument of Miracles, specially where it is sayde, Hominem quoque vi∣dentes stantem cum eis qui curatus fierat, nihil poterant contra∣dicere, Seeing the man also standing with Peter and Iohn, whom they had healed, the Gouernours of the Iewes were quite put to silence. And therefore also if S. Paule had in your place ouer∣come them onely by Scriptures, it would not follow thereof, that no other argumentes are good ynough agaynst Iewes and Heretikes. Now to the places alleaged in your other booke: Other per∣swasion (say you) then suche as is grounded vpon the hearing of Gods worde,Pur. 6. will neuer of Christians be counted for true be∣liefe, so long as the tenth Chapter to the Romanes remayneth in the Canon of the Bible. S. Paule there saith, that hearing is presupposed to beléeuing, and agayne to hearing is presupposed
the worde of God. But in what sorte, the worde of God? onely in writing? doth he not there expresse, that by the worde of God he meaneth preaching, and preaching of suche as be Sent? for that which he saith in one place, Hearing is of Gods worde, the same he saith afore, How shall they heare without preachers?1. Thes. 2. And what is more common in the New Testament, then to call the preaching of Gods messengers, the worde of God? Euen as we to this day count it the worde of God, which we heare of the Church of God, either in her Councels, or in her Doctors, or any other way, for so said God to them, He that heareth you,Luc. 10. hea∣reth me. And so S. Paul said to the Galathians, If any man preach vn∣to  you any other Gospell,Gal. 1. then that which we haue preached vn∣to you, and which you haue receiued, holde him for accursed He speaketh of preaching, and you alleage it as spoken of writing, and of onely writing. For thus you say to vs: It vexeth you at the very harte,Pur. 449.163. that we require the authoritie of the holy Scrip∣tures, to confirme your doctrine, hauing a playne commaunde∣ment out of the word of God, that if any man teache otherwise then the word of God alloweth, he is to be accursed. No syr, it rather reioyceth vs at the heart, to see that this very same texte which you Falsification by chaunging. corrupte, is so playne a warrant to our brethren the Romaines accursing your masters Luther and Caluine, for preaching an other Gospell,Act. 28. then that which S. Paule preached to the saide Romaines, and which they receyued of him, the Scripture also testifying in other places,Mat. 28. Act. 20. Rom. 15. that S. Paule and the other Apostles taught the Romaines and other Churches, all things: but not likewise that he or they wrote all whiche they taught: neither againe, that in suche things as they wrote, the Churches alwayes should be required to bring forth their wri∣ting, & not otherwise to be credited, although they alleaged their preaching or tradition by worde of mouth. Whereby you perceiue that your conclusion foloweth not, though it were true that you bring out of another place, saying: All good workes are taught by the Scriptures:Pur. 410. it is S Paules 2. Tim. 3. the holy Scriptures are hable to make the man of God perfect and prepared to all good workes. Suppose this to be S. Paules saying: will you conclude therof, that Timothie himselfe
commending any thing for a good worke, and saying that he had it of S. Paules owne mouth, where he had all things, should not be credited, but néedes he must proue the same by Scripture? We say, all good works were taught the Church by the Apostles speaking, and that saying doth not take away the Apostles wri∣ting. Euen so, if all good workes were taught in the Apostles writing, that taketh not away suche argumentes as are made vpon their speaking. As agayne, if a certayne article be confes∣sed to be taught in S. Paules Epistles, or also if all Articles (for so your words pretende here in the last Chapter) will it not suf∣fice for all that, to proue any article out of some other booke of Scripture? What a fonde reasoning is this, that because one euidence proueth all, therfore I can not haue any other euidence but that onely? And this I say, supposing that S. Paule had said, as you make him, All good workes are taught by the Scriptures, &c. But nowe I say further, that he doth not say so: but being now at the point of martyrdome, he exhorteth his Disciple not to faynt, but to fulfill his office to the ende, as he had done, the office (I say) of an Euangelist or Preacher,2. Tim. 4. saying, that although he should nowe be depriued of his master, yet he had still the holy Scriptures with him, which be profitable, saith he, to teaching of truth,2. Tim. 3. to disprouing of falshood, to correcting of vices, to instru∣cting in righteousnes, that the man of God (that is, the Euange∣list, be perfite, that is to say, furnished to euery good worke, mea∣ning thereby those foresaid workes of an Euangelist, as he also there had said,1. Tim. 3. he that desireth a Bishops office, desireth a good worke. Now it is one thing, the Scripture to be profitable to this, and another thing, to be able, or sufficient vnto it. Agayne it is one thing, the Scripture to be profitable to euery parte of preaching, and another thing, the Scripture to teach (expresly) all good workes, in euery particular, as Oblations for the dead, (for of that you speake) and so forth. Pur. 434.Moreouer you alleage these two places, Search the Scriptures, and, Trie the spirites: and these you alleage for Only Scripture to be required both in all questions, and also in exposition of Scripture, declaring thereby, that you eyther know not or care not, what nor how you alleage. For where our Sauiour saith to the Iewes,Iohn. 5. Search the Scriptures, for they it are which beare wit∣nesse
of me, in the very same place he saith also vnto them, And Iohn did beare witnesse to the trueth. And againe, My workes,VVho euer al∣leaged Scrip∣ture more blindly. or Miracles, do beare witnesse of me, that my Father sent me, and that, a greater witnesse then Iohn. And againe, Also my Father who sent me, he hath giuen witnesse of me. Likewise vpon your other place, Trie the Spirites, you say, And the Spirites are not tried but by the Scriptures. So you say,1. Iohn. 4. Ar. 4. but your text doth not so say: yea the Apostle S. Iohn saith there straight after, By this we know a spirite (or Prophet, or teacher) of trueth, and a spirite of error. Looke in the text, man, & sée what is that whereof he saith, by this, whether it be by Onely Scrip∣ture, or by some thing els. Briefly, Beleeue not euery spirit (saith he, but trie the spirites whether they be of God, for then you may be bolde to beléeue them. By this is knowen a spirite of God first in one particular, which I passe ouer, then in generall, after this maner: You my children (you Romanes and other Catholikes) be of God. We (Apostles and other Catholike teachers) be of God. And therefore, He that knoweth God, heareth vs: and he that is not of God, doth not heare vs. By this we know a spirite of trueth, and a spirite of error, or a false Prophet: to wit, by considering whether he agrée with them that are of God, with them that receiued and kéepe the vnction or spirite of truth which was sent to the Church for euer, with them that depart not after any Seducers, but continue in that which they heard in the be∣ginning, as the Romanes do most manifestly, no Antichrist nor Heretike being able to name the time, the noueltie, the Seducer, that euer they went after, so as Wittenberge, Geneua, England and all other that we charge with it, haue done most notoriously. This is the effect (in generall) of S. Iohns Epistles. Agayne you alleage, and say: The word of the Lorde is a light  vnto our steppes, and a lanterne vnto our féete,Pur. 285.364. Psal. 118.18. Therfore we will not walke in the darknes of mens traditions. Item▪ The faithful testimonie of Gods word onely giueth true light vnto the eyes, as the Prophet saith. And by and by after you call it, The onely au∣thoritie of Gods word written. But the Prophet neither hath the word onely, neither saith, that Gods word is not but in writing, but rather most euidently by Gods worde there he meaneth the preaching of his Apostles,Rom. 10. S. Paule also him selfe referring that
verse of the same Psalme vnto them accordingly, Into all the earth their sound is gone forth, and their words to the ends of the world. And so you may see, the light of Gods word to be not on∣ly in writing, but also in tradition by mouth. Pur. 210.Last of all you alleage and say against Iudas Machabeus: In the Law not so much as one pinne of the Tabernacle was omit∣ted, lest any thing might be left to the will of man, to deuise in the worship of God.Deut. 12. ver. 8. & 32. You shall not do (saith the Lord) what séemeth good in your owne eyes, but that which I commaunde you, that only shal you do, without adding any thing to it, or taking away any thing from it. You are very dayntie of your quotations, in maner none at all in your margin, because you alleage so fewe places, and commonly omitted in your texte also, because you alleage your places without booke. This is my coniecture, let the Reader loke in the places, as I doe quote them, because for bre∣uitie sake I omitte many thinges that were worth the noting. Wel in this place, Moises saith not, That only which I do write, but, That only which I commaund you. And so our Sauiour said long after to the Iewes accordingly:Mat. 23. The Scribes and Pharises sit in Moises chaire: and therefore whatsoeuer they commaund you, obserue it and doe it. As for the Pinnes of the Tabernacle, they are so mentioned for other causes, as you may sée in the Doctors Commentaries, and not for the cause that you imagin, that is, to leaue nothing to any man afterwarde in the worship of God, for how say you then by Dauid and Salamon, who chaunged not only a pinne yea all the pinnes, but also that whole Tabernacle, building in stéed of it, a Temple in Hierusalem, and there ordei∣ning musicall instrumentes, and many other things, for the wor∣ship of God, that the law did not mention. You alwayes erre, be∣cause you do not distinguish betwene men that haue onely their owne humane spirite, and men that haue the spirite of God, as Moyses, the Prophets, the Apostles, and the Catholike Church. And so hauing answered al your places, I would your Vnlear∣ned Brother to know of it, him that euery yere sendeth out the Newyeres giftes, and what els I know not, and to tell me now, why I might not in my last Motiue call this your Castle of Onely Scripture,Onely Scrip∣ture. Your weake and false Castle: Weake, be∣cause you haue no defence at all for it, neither of Srripture,
as I haue here declared, neither of Doctor, as in the nexte chapter I will declare. False, because not so much as one worde of Scripture, from the beginning of Genesis to the ende of the Apocalipse, maketh for you in any thing, nor against vs in any thing, as in this Chapter I doe ynough to persuade therein any reasonable man, and therefore it is but a false sleight of you Heretikes, and a mere deception of the simple, when you be ouerthrowen by Apostolike traditions, by auncient Fathers, and so by many other our weapons in Christe, as in the laste Chapter your selfe haue confessed, to sette a bolde face vpon it, and vaunte, that yet for all that the Scriptures be plainelye for you, and plainely against vs. In which boldnes your im∣pudencie cryeth euen to heauen, when you dare yet vaunt there∣of so farre, to saye, that the Church of God is faine therefore, to blaspheme the holye Scriptures, seeing them to make so plainely for you. When you here in the laste Chapter, and your Masters and Scholefelowes commonly in their writinges feare not to open your mouthes thus against Gods holy Ta∣bernacle in earth: I that am nothing, and in very deede no∣thing, and lesse then nothing, may not disdaine the like opening at me by the foresaide Vnlearned, but contenting me with mine owne conscience, and the conscience of God him selfe and his Angels, and all his Seruauntes that knowe me by my person, or by my writings, beeing moste certaine how alwayes in heart and worde I haue honored the most holy Scriptures, euen as gods owne liuely and infallible worde, I submit my selfe with Dauid in an humble and contrite heart, to all that Semei hath or shall vtter against me, if peraduenture my Lorde God most mercifull will accept it to forgeuenes of my manifold and heynous sinnes: desiring of him no other reuenge, but the par∣ties conuersion and reconciliation to him and his swéete spouse my lieue Mother the Catholike Church. And so muche in this place to that man. In which place you also, Fellow Fulke,Arg. ab au∣thoritate negatiuè. may be admonished to looke better to your Logicke, concerning your argument ab authoritate negatiuè, that you oppose it no more to our so ma∣ny argumentes ab authoritate affirmatiuè. I gaue you a litle before two causes thereof: consider them well I pray you.
All knowledge that Christian men haue of heauenly things (you say,Pur. 449. to mainteine your argument) is grounded vpon the autho∣ritie of Gods word, meaning the Scripture. Therefore as it is no good Logicke, to conclude negatiuely of one place or booke of Scripture, This is not conteined in it, therefore it is not true: So of the whole doctrine of God, wherein all trueth necessary to sal∣uation is conteined, the argument is most inuincible that conclu∣deth negatiuely thus: All true doctrine is taught in the Scripture, Purgatory is not taught in the Scripture, therefore Purgatory is no true doctrine. Letting Purgatory alone till anone, there are two faultes, I say, in this reasoning. One, because the Maior is false, as to all your textes alleaged for it, I haue answered. The other, because although the Maior were true, yet can not the ar∣gument be opposed to our argumentes, as you oppose it in the last Chapter. You might, if the Maior were true, labour to the purpose (I graunt) in prouing the Minor. But you might not, I say, for all that, make of it an opposition or exception, when we make argumentes out of Traditions, Councels, Fathers, &c. as in the like I shew vnto you: I proue a doctrine vnto you out of the Old Testament, you oppose therevnto your negatiue argu∣ment, and say to me: All true doctrine is taught in the New Te∣stament (for so you do holde, and must holde) that doctrine is not taught in the New Testament: therfore that doctrine is no true doctrine. Is this well opposed of you? May not I say to you not∣withstanding, Yea syr, but for all that, what say you to my place alleaged out of the Old Testament? vnlesse you haue any thing against the Old Testament it selfe. Euen so, vnles you haue any thing directly against Traditions them selues, Councels, Fa∣thers, and suche others, our argumentes do preuayle, and you in vayne do flée to Only Scripture, although all true doctrine were taught in Scripture. Now to the second question concerning the Church. ¶The second part. Concerning the question of the Church. About the Church, his contradictions are very many and very palpable, as I will declare in the eleuenth Chapter. Here I haue to examine, what he alleageth first indefinitely, That the Church
may erre, That it may be diuorced, That it is a base and con∣temptible companie, That it may, and also should become inui∣sible: and then by name, That the Protestantes haue the true Church, or, That the Papistes haue it not. j Of the Church indefinitely. That the whole Church may erre, he alleageth and saith, Ac∣cording  to the saying of the Scripture, Euery man is a lyer.Ar. 86. Wher∣fore the whole Church militant consisting of men, which are all lyers, may erre altogether. Why do you say, The church militant? Doth not the Church triumphant also consist of men? If there∣fore all men be lyers, why may not they also erre? No doubt, be∣cause although all men are lyers of them selues, yet some men may notwithstanding by the gifte of God be veraces, true. And so where you conclude thus vpon vs: God onely is not true,Pur. 451. for the Pope can not erre, you might conclude aswell, God onely is not true, for the Apostles can not erre. Againe you alleage and say: The true and only Church of God  hath no such priuiledge graunted,Ar. 88. but that she may be deceiued in some things. For her knowledge is vnperfect, & her prophecying is vnperfect. 1. Cor. 13. Where you, her, S. Paule saith, our, in∣cluding him selfe also in that speache: Ex parte enim cognosci∣mus, &c. For our knowledge is vnperfect, and our prophecying is vnperfect, so long as we be in this life, whether we speake or write. And yet you will not say, I trow, that S. Paule therefore might be deceiued in his writings and Epistles. So then, the Churches priuiledge, knowledge, prophecying may be vnperfect, and yet she withall so frée from erring, that she may be bolde in her determinations to say, Visum est spiritui sancto & nobis,Act. 15. It hath bene thought good of the holy Ghost, and of vs. Againe you say, And it is true that S. Augustine saith: Euen the  whole Church is taught to say euery day,Ar 88. Pur. 393. Aug. Retra. li. 2. ca. 18. Forgeue vs our trespas∣ses. But why so? because the whole Church doth erre in her de∣terminations euery day? It were ridiculous so to say. Why thē? Propter quasdam ignorantias & infirmitates membrorum suo∣rum, Because of certayne veniall sinnes of her members, procée∣ding of ignorance & frayltie, saith S. Augustine. In which mem∣bers the Apostles also in their time were, and therefore they also accordingly were taught to say euery day, Forgeue vs our tres∣passes,
and did say accordingly,Iac 3. 1. Io. 1. We do all offend in many things. And yet (I trow) they did not erre, nor could erre in their Cano∣nicall writinges, and determinations. This is all that you bring to proue, the whole Churche of Christ may erre. Though you alleage one other place, that the whole Synagogue did erre, and yet that also onely in a fact, not in a doctrine, yea neither the whole Synagogue, but a piece onely. So that there bee, as you see, no lesse then three walles, as it were, betwene the Church and this shotte of yours. These are your wordes:Pur. 224.456. Dauid transgressed the law of God, to carry the Arke vpon a new chariotte, which should haue bene borne vpon mens shoulders,y blind∣nesse. 1. Chron. 13. wherin not onely Dauid but so many priests and Leuites, so good a Bishop, and the whole Generall Councell of Israel did erre. So say you: but so saith not the texte, yea it vtterly confoundeth both you, and all these pro∣phane innouations made by your ley heades and Parliamentes. Dauid tooke counsaile (saith the texte) with his Tribunes and Centurions,1. Par. 13. & 1. and all his Nobles.He did not so much as consulte, no not with the inferiour sorte of the Priestes: but onelie, If you please (quoth he to his temporall Lordes) and if the mo∣tion be of God, let vs sende to the rest of our brethern in all the lande of Israel, and to the priestes and Leuites in their Suburbes (as you woulde saie, the hedge Priestes) that they gather vn∣to vs, and we fetche agayne to vs the Arke of God. And so they beganne in suche maner as you reporte, vntill God kil∣led Oza the Leuite, in the procession, and so made Dauid a∣fraide to carrie it any further. But three monethes after hauing found his error, he gathered not onelie, all Israel into Ierusalem, but also filios Aaron, Sadoc et Abiathar Sacerdotes, The Succes∣sors of Aaron, Sadoc and Abiathar the (high) priestes, & Leuitas, and the Leuites, with the heades of them, being these six, Vriel, A∣saias, Ioel, Semeias, Eliel, and Aminadab: These two Bishops and these sixe Archedeacons (that I may so tearme them) he called, and saide vnto them: You that are the heades of the Leui∣ticall families, prepare your selues together with your bre∣thren, and bring the Arke of our Lorde God of Israel to the place whiche is dressed for it: least that, as before, because you were not present, our Lorde did smite vs, so nowe also it
happen, for our vnlawfull doing. A notable ensample for all Princes and for al nobles, to remember how they haue offended, and to amende it accordingly, and all A maiori, in euery respect, aboue the highest degree. One more of your places I thinke good here to examine, though  you bring it not to proue that the Church may erre, but onely to answere a place that we bring for the contrary.Ar. 86. The true and onely Church of Christ (you say) can neuer be voide of Gods spirite, and yet she may erre from the trueth, and be deceaued, in some thinges: euen as there is no true Christian man, that is voyde of Gods spirite, for he that hath not the spirite of Christ, is none of his, Rom. 8. yet may euery true Christian erre, and be deceaued in some thinges. This your sophisme consisteth in speaking confusely of Gods spirite, as though the gifte of it were alwayes but one, whereas it is one in the whole Church, and another in euery particular true Christian man. For neither do we argue simply of Gods spirite, but of Gods spirite so as it is the spirite of trueth, and of all trueth.Ioan. 14. My Father (sayth our Comforter, at the instante of his departure) will giue you another Comforter, to remayne with you for euer, the Spirite of trueth. And after in the same Sermon: I haue yet many thinges to saye vnto you, but you can not now carry them: but when the Spirite of trueth commeth, he will teache you all trueth. This place (we saye) must néedes be vnderstoode of the whole Churche,1. Tim. 3. and of a gifte conuenient to make her (as she is saide to be) the Piller of trueth: because it is euident, that euery one member of the Churche by him selfe may erre, and in that case néedeth no more but the Spi∣rite of obedience, to heare her whiche hath suche a Spirite or gifte that she can not erre. And this is ynough to make that no damnation be by erring to them that are in Iesus Christ, that is, which haue his spirite,Rom. 8. so that (sayth he) they walke not after the fleshe, but after the spirite, and namely, in this case, after this spirite of obedience, as I haue said. Thus muche by occasion, though my purpose is not here neither to al∣leage places, nor to defende the alleaged, but onely to answere the enemies allegations.
Now that the Church may be diuorced, his allegation is this: The visible Church,Ar 79. by Idolatrie and superstition may seperate her selfe from Christ, and be refused of him, as God speaketh by Esay to the Church of Ierusalem. Cap. 1. How is the faythfull Citie become an harlot? It was full of iudgement, and iustice lodged therein, but now they are murtherers. Thy siluer is be∣come drosse, and thy wine is mixed with water. Thy princes are rebellious and companions of théeues, &c. Euen so may he say to the Church of Rome. May he, forsooth? but whether doth he say so vnto it? or doth the Prophet say that he may? you are too too ignorant in the Scriptures, if you know not the difference here∣in betwene the Synagoge of the Iewes, & the Church of Christ: to wit, that the Synagoge with her Ierusalem might be & should be diuorced: but that the Church of Christ with her Ierusalem (which is Rome, if you haue any sight in the Actes of the Apo∣stles) should neuer, nor neuer might, nor may be diuorced, but contrariwise should beginne in the faythfull Iewes, being a ve∣ry small number in respect, and so call in all nations, euen Ple∣nitudinem gentium,Rom. 11. Mat. 13. The fulnes of al nations, fishing for that pur∣pose in the wide Sea of this world continually without any in∣termission, in so much that immediatly after that all Nations or Gentiles be entred in, Omnis Israel saluus fiet, All the Iewes, euen their fulnes also, shall be Christned in the end of the world. To this place pertaineth this strange imagination of his and his fellowes, that euen the Church of Christ it selfe, should pre∣pare the way to Antichrist, inuenting forsooth or receyuing of o∣thers inuention, all the superstitions, all the errors, all the here∣sies that haue bene or may be, euen vnto playne defection & Apo∣stasie: Whereas the cleane contrarie is most euident and noto∣rious, that the Church should and hath (as the piller of trueth) from time to time accursed and commaunded vs to accurse all the heresies that haue bene, yea, and with due animaduersion no∣ted vnto vs al errors whatsoeuer of her owne Doctors also, who them selues sometime and in some things, some of them haue er∣red as men. Therfore against this most certayne & cleare truth, what alleageth these Heretikes for their most fonde and most ab∣surde imagination aforesaid?Diuinitie vvithout Scripture. It is the totall summe of all their newe Diuinitie: yet no warrant at all haue they for it out of
Scripture.Ar. 35. Many abuses and corruptions (saith Fulke) were entred into the Church of Christ, immediatly after the Apostles time, which the diuel planted as a preparatiue for his eldest sonne Antichrist. But let vs heare your Scripture for it:Ar. 38. The Scrip∣ture telleth vs (sayth he) that the mysterie of iniquitie preparing for the Generall, is your vvrd, no S. Paules.Generall defection, & Reuelation of Antichrist, wrought euen in S. Paules time. 2. Thes. 2. But doth the Scripture tell you that it wrought in the Church of Christ? No word so. It wrought in the Persecutors of the Church of Christ, and in the sundry Seducers that arose agaynst the doctrine of Christes Church: as now it worketh in your Heresie, béeing (as it shall appeare a∣none) the very next and vltima, or at the least penultima, Mysti∣call working, before the Reuelation it selfe. Next of all, what haue you for this, that the Church of Christ  is always a contemptible companie? D. Allens Demaund was:Ar. 8. [Let the aduersarie shew, that Christes onely kingdome should become so contemptible.] You alleage certayne places for an∣swere, and conclude vpon them, saying: So that the Church in the sight of the world hath alwayes bene most base and contempti∣ble, though in the sight of God and his Saintes,1. Cor. 1. Gal. 6. Rom. 1. most glorious and honorable. Alwayes you say: but your places import not al∣wayes. Some of them conteine, that her Crosse, and her Cruci∣fixus, are condemned of the world, that is, of the Infidels. But that may be, and yet the Church not be in their sight a contemp∣tible companie. Euen as we Christians contemne the Turkes Mahometane Religion, and the old Romaines Pagane religion, (for one of their goddes was a goose) yet no man, I trow, will say, they were, or these are now a base and contemptible cōpanie. An other of your places is this: You shall be hated of all men for my names sake.Mat. 10. As though it must néedes be alwayes a base & contemptible companie, which is hated of all sorts of men: or euen then also, when it is so hated. Doth it séeme vnto you, that it was of contempt, that the Romane tyrantes so persecuted the Romane Bishops and their Christian flocke so vehemently all the first 300. yeres?Cyp. epist. 52. n. 3. Haue you not read what S. Cyprian wri∣teth of Decius the Emperour, Multo patientius & tolerabilius audiebat, leuari aduersus se aemulum principem, quàm constitui Romae Dei Sacerdotem, To heare that an Emperour was set vp
against him, that sought his Crowne, he was much more patient, then that (in Fabianus place whom he had martyred) another should be ordeined at Rome as the Priest of God. And therefore, Infestus Sacerdotibus Dei fanda atque infanda comminabatur, The Tyrant being mad at the Priests of God for that fact, threat∣ned as the Diuell. Which he speaketh in excéeding prayse of Cor∣nelius, qui sedit intrepidus Romae, &c. Because he sate boldly at Rome in the priestly Chaire euen at that time. Whereby you sée in what dread the tyrantes stoode of the Church, though they so hated, and so persecuted it. Who euer more hated the same Priest and the Church with him, then you your selues, who at euery worde do blaspheme and call him Antichrist? and yet, I thinke, you will not say, that they are, & haue bene these thousand yeres, a base and a contemptible companie. Another place you alleage blindly against your selfe, saying: And S. Paul biddeth vs looke on our calling,1. Cor. 1. not many wise men according to the flesh, not many mighty men, & not many noble men: but God hath chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the weake of this world to confound the strōg. So was the beginning of the Church: What? ergo always? Doth not your text say, that the wise also thē selues, & the strong, at length were confounded, that is to say, conuerted? Do you not sée, how it foloweth against you, If the Church were then a base and contemptible company (as you say) because it had not many wise, mightie, noble: ergo afterward it was otherwise, when it had gotten in also the Princes, Kings, & Emperours of ye world, and as Esay speaketh,Esai. 60. The multitude of the Sea, the fortitude of the Gentiles? Was it then also a contemptible company? yea or shall it, according to the Scriptures, euer after be? no verily, not so much as in the time or reuelation of Antichrist, wherof I shall say more anone. In so much that in another place your selfe also, alleaging to the cleane contrarie,Ar. 73. do say: And Esay declareth, when the people should be almost all destroyed, yet a remnant should be saued, which though it semed to be small, yet it should ouerflow and fill all the world with righteousnes, Esay. 10. But this I must reserue to the Chapter of your grosse contradictions. Last of all, as concerning the Inuisiblenes of the Church, you alleage so as,Pur. 450. I thinke, no sober man would: One while, that the
vniuersall Church is not seene at all of men: So we beleue (you say) because it is in heauen. Gal. 4. Why do you say, The vniuer∣sall Church? Is not also euery good member of it in heauen, as the Apostle saith, Our conuersation is in heauen?Philip 3. And yet you be∣léeue not, I trow, that the Apostle was not séene at all of men. Another while you say,Ar. 80. It sufficeth that the Church be knowē to Christ the head, As he saith, My shepe heare my voyce, & I know them, Iohn. 10. Adding for all that text, immediatly, And to them that be of the members of the same body. If your text import, that it sufficeth to be knowen to the head, why do you iumble in the members afterward? Chrestes knowing of his shéepe, is his louing of them, as contrariwise to the goates he will say,Mat. 25. I know you not: Wherevpon if it folow not necessarily, forsooth, that the Church may be inuisible, I report me to you. Another while you alleage, that although not alwais, yet at one certaine time it should become inuisible, to wit, at the cōming of Antichrist. And what Scriptures haue you for that? thus you say: It was prophecied that the Church should flye into the wildernes,Ar. 27. that is, be driuen out of the sight & knowledge of the wicked. So you expound that text of your owne head. Againe,Ar. 77. If the Church should stand always in the sight of the world, then the defection which S. Paule speaketh of, could not haue come, neither should the Church flye into the wildernes, as was declared to S. Iohn. Substantial arguments. That defection is your heresie, as I shal straightway declare, & yet notwithstāding, the Pope & the church standeth at this time in the sight of the world,The Church in the time of An∣tichrist, both visible and vniuersall. as it hath alwayes done. Yea in the time that is to come, when your great lord Anti∣christ shal appeare in person, euen then also the Church shal stand stil in the sight of the world, as it did in al the former persecutiōs in the first 300. yeres. For there shal be preaching al ye time of the persecution, euen 1260. days,Apoc. 11. as the persecution shal last 42. mo∣neths, which both cōmeth to three yeres & a halfe, & the preaching shal be as general as the persecutiō, to thē that sit vpon the earth,Apo.. 14. and vpon euery nation, & tribe, & language, & people, exhorting thē mightily, that they feare not ye Beast, nor adore him, but that they feare the Lord, & giue honor to him, because the honor of his iudgemēt is come. As when it is said againe, that the persecutors beeing in number as the sand of the sea,Apoc. 2 shall flow ouer the wide
world, super latitudinem terrae, and so compasse the campe of the faithfull, and the beloued Citie: is it not therby playnly signified, that the Church shal at the same time together with her enemies be vniuersall and super latitudinem terrae? And therefore her fly∣ing then into the wildernes, cannot be vnderstood, as you expound it, that she shal be driuen out of the sight and knowledge of the wicked, but the meaning of it is this, that she shall then abandon, more then euer before, all worldly pleasures, being content to be turned out of all she hath, and neuerthelesse sustayned by Gods prouision, and fedde both in body and soule, during all the time of that straite necessitie,Apoc. 12. to wit, 1260. dayes. ij Namely of their Church, and of ours: by conference of places that are about Antichrist. And so hauing answered all that you alleage about the Church indefinitely, I am now come to that you alleage of your Church, and of our Church by name. Which is nothing in effect, but only your owne fonde and voluntary applying of the two textes laste rehearsed, whither the spirite of your error moued you. That neither Antichrist, nor the Apostasie agreeth to Bonifacius the third. Of the Chur∣ches fleing into the vvildernes.For so you said in the second Chapter, that the Religion of the Papistes came in, and preuayled An. Dom. 607. when Boniface the third, for a great summe of money, first obteined of Phocas the Emperour, his Antichristian exaltation, that the Bishop of Rome should be called and counted the head of all the Churche. And now we shall heare what Scripture warranteth you so to say:Ar 16. When Antichrist the Pope, in the West, seduced the worlde with most detestable heresie, then was fulfilled that which was reuealed to S. Iohn in the twelfth of the Apocalipse, The woman clothed with the sunne, which you your selfe confesse to be the Church, was so persecuted by the Dragon, that she fledde into the wildernesse, there to remayne Idem etiam, Ar. xxvij. nar∣rovvly persecu¦ted of the Ro∣mish Antichrist for a long sea∣son. a long season. So farre printed by you in the letter of the Scripture. A world to sée your bolde blindnes. You do so apply this pro∣phecie onely because of the Popes Primacie, which yet is a truth of the Gospell, practised also notoriously in all ages as well afore Bonifacius the third as after him, (which two poyntes the Rea∣der
may sée euidently in the Seuenth booke of M. D. Saunders Monarchie: yea by your selfe also confessed before the said Boni∣facius, and the Church the true Church notwithstanding (your wordes I reported in the 3. Chapter:Supra. pag.) yea moreouer your owne selfe do say Articulorum pagina 38, that All nations neuer con∣sented to the doctrine of the Papistes, for the Greeke Church, and other orientall Churches, neuer receiued the Popish Religion, in many chiefe pointes, and especially in acknowledging the Popes authoritie, cleane contrarie to that which both the Scripture and also your selfe do hold of Antichrist and of his vniuersall exalta∣tion, as I shall lay your wordes together in the 11. Chapter a∣mongest your other grosse contradictions. And therefore you can not, for the Popes authoritie, so expound this prophecie. As for that Summe of money, you tell vs not what author you followe therein, neither is the thing material, vnlesse you wil condemne your owne side also of Antichristianisme, for their infinite con∣tributions to mainteine these Rebellions euery where, whiche you call your Gospell. But O Syr, I pray you, I thought, séeing your goodly promi∣ses in the last Chapter, that to finde out the meaning of a text of Scripture, you would haue brought vs nothing but Scripture, and so cleare Scripture, that by no suttletie it might be auoyded. Howe is it then, that nowe you bring nothing but your owne conceites. Yea furthermore, how is it, that to make a shewe of a texte, which you saw, not to be with you, but playne against you, you corrupt the text? For by your opinion, Antichrist raigned in the world, and the Church continued in the wildernes,Ar. 36.79. The time of the Churches being in the vvilder∣nesse. the space of 807. yeres, from the yere .607. the time of Bonifacius the third, to the yere 1414. béeing the time of the Constance Councell, and of Iohn Hus your supposed great Grandfather. All this while (you say) Christ hath preserued her now to bring her out of her secret place in the wildernesse, into the open sight of the world a∣gayne. And therefore you make the text to say here before, that being persecuted by the Dragon, she fled into the wildernes,Falsification most detestable. there to remayne a long season. But the text hath the cleane contrary, a very short season, to wit, but thrée yeres and a halfe. These are the words truely reported, as Catholikes are wout to do: And
the woman fugiebat,Apoc. 12. fled into the wildernes, where she had a place prepared of God, that they may there feede her 1260. dayes. And the same againe a litle after: And to the woman were geuen two wings of a great Eagle, Vt volaret, that she might flye (whe∣ther this be flying in body, as you say, or in mind, as I say) into the wildernes vnto her place, where she is fedde one time, and two times, and halfe a time, from the face of the Serpent. Where is now your long season, your 807. yeres? VVhether An∣tichrist should come An. 607. Apoc. 12.Your folly will agayne be manifest, if I report the truth of the Dragons persecution, because you make it to haue bene in the time of Bonifacius An. 607. But what saith the Scripture? First that great Dragon is the olde Serpent, called the Diuel and Satan, the Seducer of the whole world. But Christ in considera∣tion of his passion then at hande, and the conuersion of the world immediatly ensuing therevpon, saide of him: Now is the iudgement of the world:Ioan. 12. Mat. 12. now shall the prince of this worlde be expelled. And the same in the Apocalypse in these moste eui∣dent wordes:Apoc. 12. And he tooke the Dragon, and he bounde him the space of a thousande yeres, and he cast him into the bottomlesse pitte, and he shutte and sealed vpon him, that he should no more deceiue the Nations, or the Gentiles, vntill the thousande yeres were consummate. So expresly to confounde you vtterly with your impious Gospell of Caluenisme (who set the loosing of the Dragon, the comming of Antichrist, his persecution, and the Churches desolation, (which all do go together) at the yere 607. The time of Antichristes raigning.It followeth as expresly: And after this he must be loosed, modico tempore, for a litle season. And the same agayne: And when the thousande yeres be consummate, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and he shall goe foorth, and shall seduce the Nations which are vpon the foure corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, and shall gather them vnto battayle, whose number is as the sande of the sea. And they ascended vpon the latitude of the earth, and compassed rounde the campe of the Holy ones, and the Citie beloued. But all in vayne, and to their owne de∣struction: for Fire descended from God out of heauen, and de∣uoured them: and the diuell who seduced them, was caste into the lake of fire and brimstone, where also the Beast, (that is, An∣tichrist) and his notable falseprophet shal be tormented day and
night for euer and euer. That which the Apocalypse here calleth,Consummation. The consummation of the thousand yeres, the Gospell (that no man be deceiued) cal∣leth it, Consummationē seculi, The consummation of the world,Mat. 24. Mar. 13. and meaneth thereby that Modicum tempus, litle season afore∣said. For so the Apostles asking our Sauiour, What signe shall there be of thy comming, and the consummation of the world? He answereth and telleth them of sundry things which must be, Sed nondum est finis, but the consummation notwithstanding is not yet. What then? Mary, This Gospell of the kingdome shall be preached in the vniuersall world, for witnesse to all Nations. Et tunc veniet consummatio, and then shal come the consumma∣tion. And in the short season of the consummation, what shal be? Tribulatio magna, and, Seductio magna: So great a persecu∣tion, and so great a Seducing, that the Elect also would not be saued, but that for their sakes Breuiabuntur dies illi, Those dayes shall be shorter, then any man would thinke it possible, séeing the Persecutors greatnes: onely thrée yeres and a halfe. Statim autem post tribulationem dierum illorum, And straight after the persecution of those (short) dayes, there shall be mar∣uailous alterations in the heauens, and they shall see the sonne of man comming in the cloudes of heauen with passing power and maiestie. He exhorteth also there to the flight spoken of in the Apocalipse: Cum ergo videritis Abominationem desolationis, quae dicta est a Daniele propheta, stantē in loco sancto, The con∣summation being now come, you shall see the Abomination of desolation which was spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place, vbi non debet, where (alas) it should not:Mar. 13. And afore that time, Videte ne turbemini, Looke that you be not dis∣quieted. But when you sée this, tunc qui in Iudaea sunt, fugeant ad montes, Then to preuent the horrible persecution imminent, let all sortes of good people flee, and with all hast flée, not standing to consult, but renouncing at once all that they haue, and commit∣ting them selues roundly and wholly to the helpe of God from aboue. Which the Elect then shall do with all alacritie, euen as willing to be martyred, as the Dragon and Antichrist shall be to martyr thē. And that is it that ye Apocalypse hath in these words: And the earth (the elect ouer al the world) did helpe the woman,
when the Serpent did poure out of his mouth, after her now fle∣ing into the wildernes, water like a flood, and the earth opened his mouth, and supped vp the flood. Abhomination.The Abhomination of Desolation standing in the Holy place, and that to be séene so vniuersally, whiche is here giuen for the watchworde to the woman to flée in suche maner, the same of S. Paule is said to be Antichrist him selfe, so proude aboue all mea∣sure,2. Thes. 2. Ita vt in templo Dei sedeat, That he will sitte in the temple of God, setting out him selfe as if he were God. To know what Daniel meaneth by Desolation of the Temple,Desolation. we must looke in him,Pa. 11. & 12. what occupied the temple dayly before: and we finde it to be called of him Inge Sacrificium, The continuall Sacrifice. By the which S. Paule also prophecied,1. Cor. 11. that we should announce our Lordes death,Hippo. Martyr. rat. de Antich. & Consumma. mundi. Hier in Da. xij. Donec veniat, Vntill his comming. And the aun∣cient Fathers do say therevpon accordingly, The preciouse bo∣dy and bloud of Christ, non extabit, shall not be extant, to be openly séene, in those dayes of Antichrist, The Liturgie, or Masse, shall be extinguished, The Psalmodie of the Canonicall houres shall cease. So then, the taking away of this dayly Sacrifice out of all Churches, is the Desolation: And the Abhomination sette there in steade thereof, is that man of Sinne, that sonne of per∣dition, Antichrist him selfe, partly in his owne person, partly in his Image whereof the Apocalypse speaketh,Apo. 13.14.16.19. as it doth also of his Characters or Markes both in mens handes, and in their fore∣heades. And for the time when this shall be, Daniel agréeth with the Gospell and Apocalypse. for he saith: And from the time when the dayly Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the Abhomination set vp for Desolation: dayes 1290. Blessed is he that exspecteth and commeth to dayes 1335. Likewise S. Paule agréeth vpon the same time.Mat. 24. For as the Apostles would learne of our Lorde a signe of his comming, and of the consummation of the world, so the Thessalonians likewise being troubled,2. Thes. 2. quasi instet dies Do∣mini, As though the day of our Lorde had then bene instant, the Apostle teacheth them the contrarie, and saith, Nequis vos sedu∣cat vllo modo, Let not any seduce you in any case: for Antichrist must first be reuealed, and then in déede the day of our Lorde is instant, for our Lorde Iesus will kill him with the breath of his mouth, so easily him that séemeth so mightie, and will make fru∣strate
all his procéedings by the manifestation of his owne com∣ming. Another thing also he there nameth,Defection. which must be afore our Lords cōming be instant, saying, Nisi venerit discessio primum, That same Apostasie must come before. Which thing he so di∣stinguisheth from the other thing, that is, from the reuelation of Antichrist, that for this he remembreth them of a certaine token thereof, which he had more playnly tolde them, as also al the rest, by word of mouth, and it is commonly taken to be the vtter abo∣lishing of the Romane Emperour, Donec de medio fiat qui tenet nunc: & tunc, And then shall be reuealed that impious man. But to the comming of the Apostasie he giueth not that token: signi∣fying that although it also shall be at the instant of our Lordes comming, yet neuerthelesse while the Romaine Emperour is in a sorte remayning. Whether Antichrist or the Apostasie agree to the Protestantes. So that by the time it is euident, that neither Antichrist,Antichrist and the Protestante nor the Apostasie agréeth to Bonifacius the third, neither do I saye, that Antichrist agréeth to Luther, or Caluin, or any other of you: He shall be another maner of felow, Iwis: also the time of his raigne in persecution, iumpe thrée yeres and a halfe, according to the foresaid Scriptures. Howbeit this is certayne, that you a∣mongst you haue done Antichrist most notable and worthy ser∣uice, to make the fooles that heare you, not think of his comming, nor to thinke that he shall be One certayne person,Si patrem f. Beelzebub vo∣cauerunt, quan∣to magis dome∣mesticos eius? as the Scrip∣ture is euident: but rather take Christes Vicar, and so many his Vicares, to be the man: that so when he cōmeth, he may go away withall more smoothly. Yet the Elect will be, we know, better aduised. But this I will boldly say,The Apostasie and the Prote∣stantes. that your Heresie is so like to the foresaid Apostasie, that but for one place in ye Apocalipse I would boldly pronounce (with my Mother and Mystresse the Churches leaue) that it is euen the selfe same. The place is in the first Vae,Apoc. 8.9.10.11. vnder the first Angell trumpeter. For the second Vae, vnder the sixt Angel, is playnly of Antichrist. And ye third or last Vae, vnder the seuenth and last Angell, is playnly of Domesday. Therefore the first vae must be the next thing immediatly before Antichrist:
And it is of marueilous Locustes by a certayne falling starre let out of hell:Apo. .9. Locusies. Their king is the Angell of hell, called in Hebrew, Abaddon, in Greeke Apollyon, in Latin Exterminans, in Eng∣lish Destroyer. Their power is not to kill the faithful, but to tor∣ment them fiue monethes, yet that in so miserable a maner, that they shall desire rather to be killed. All this, & more in that place. Now the time of their persecution commeth to short of yours: Also the vniuersalitie, item, the vehemencie thereof ouerreacheth yours, though your will be as good as theirs, as by Elmers Rackes some Catholikes haue had experience. But otherwise manifold & passing similitude betwene you & them, in the smoke, in the horses, in the whole Anatomie of the Locustes, and aboue all, in the like destroying and sacrilegious wast of Gods Chur∣ches and their sacred vessell and holy ornamentes, which they shall make in all places, as vnto you is permitted of God onely in some places. The desolation.The like is séene in the Desolation made by you, & to be made hereafter by Antichrist him selfe: it is euen al one and the same: but that he shall do vniuersally, that which you may not doe but here & there: he in all the Churches of the world, casting out the holy Sacrifice of the Masse, with all diuine seruice therevnto be∣longing, as you haue done in all the Churches of Englande, and wheresoeuer els you are permitted to set Sedem Satanae, your Sa∣tanicall seate. As he also shall in place of the foresaid dayly Sa∣crifice bring in his Abomination,Abhomination. euen him selfe and his Image to be in all Churches adored aboue all Diuinitie, (O most abho∣minable desolation.) So haue you likewise not only made deso∣lation of the Sacrifice, but also in stead therof set vp euery where your abhomination of Luthers & Caluines inuention, the Ima∣ges also of kings armes in the very place of the most swéete and most glorious Roode, yea the Image of a vile Grashopper in a Church that is well knowen, in the very place where afore did stande Gods Crucifixe. I say not that this is the very selfe Abo∣mination of Antichrist: but I say, and I say boldly, that none o∣ther of the olde figures thereof was euer more liuely, more nigh, more like vnto it, not the Idols or Statuees of Iupiter set vp in the Temple by Antiochus in the vmbraticall desolation of that time béeing ye time of the Machabées, nor the like of certaine
Romane Emperours in the vmbratical desolation of their time, nor any thing in the sundry vmbraticall desolations by diuerse heresies, which S. Basil and other of the holy Fathers, haue, as it were Ieremies lamentation again, pitifully recorded. You haue I say, in this your vmbraticall desolation pricked beyonde them al, approching in the very kind of desolation so much nearer then any to the desolation of Antichrist, as you do in time, so ioyntly, so identically, that you haue represented vnto vs a plaine exam∣ple, how a thing it selfe may be a shadow or a figure of the same thing it selfe, onely differing in some maner. And therefore séeing it hath bene Prophecied, that one certayne heresie, and that to∣wards the end, should so farre pricke beyond all other heresies,Apoc. 8. according also to the fourth Trumpet béeing compared with the third, that it should be not onely an heresie, but also a playne A∣postasie: whether the same be not this present heresie of yours, let the world iudge. I do not charge you, as you do vs, by bare wordes, vayne crakes, yea and falsifications of the text, but I alleage playne Scriptures, and I alleage them truly, and I con∣ferre diuers places together that one may expoūd another, which you are wont to talke so much of, but you in talke onely, and we in déede. Besides much more that I haue (if I were the opponent here, and not the answerer) to proue your Apostasie, and that in all the thrée species of Apostasie, béeing these, Apostasie from Re∣ligion Monasticall, Apostasie from holy Orders, Apostasie from our Christian faith: Chalenging you otherwise to ioyne with me vpon my last Demaund (in my booke of 51. Demaundes, which concerneth your said Apostasie. Therfore such being your Newinuented Gospell, in this time of the fourth Trumpet, no doubt they that embrace the same,A Gospell pae∣dagogue to Antichrist. wil as readily embrace the next in the time of the fifth Trumpet, and againe as readily, & much more readily embrace Antichrist him selfe in the time of the Churches sixth Trumpet Angelicall. For, whom, and what will not they beléeue, which without all proofe, yea against so euident Scriptures, onely vpon your bold and im∣pudent asseuerations, being men so impotent, so vnlearned, euen in the Scriptures also, and so notorious and confessed wicked li∣uers, haue beleued that Christes Vicar, and therfore in effect that Christ himselfe is Antichrist, & that Christes Church, the woman
clothed with the sunne, the new and glorious citie of Hierusalem cōming downe from heauen is the Fulke Ar. 33.38.57.100.102.106. and Pur. 287.298.336.391.409.460. Synagogue of Antichrist, the great whore, and citie of Babylon? No, my masters, no, it wil neuer be: Gods elect do to wel know the piller that alwais hath, and still must hold them vp in truth, euen agaynst the mightie se∣ductions of Antichrist himself, of his Apo. 13.16. singular falseprophet, and of his thrée lesser, and all his other inferiour falseprophetes, much more against you. And therefore it is not your ignorant and ab∣surd detorting & deprauing (as the 2. Pet. 3. first of Christes Vicars did tearme it, when he gaue vs warning of such felowes) of the wo∣mans gorgeous garments, nor of the seuen hills, that can deceiue them, no more then the false deprauing of the womans flight, whereof I haue already spoken: for they know to distinguish the Gorgeous garments vsed always in Gods diuine seruice, which your king Abaddon maketh wast and hauocke of,The gorgeous garments. from the gor∣geous prophane garmentes and infinite vayne pompe that the world of the wicked triumpheth in.Infra. ca. 10 Dema. 21. They know also by the com∣mentarie which the Scripture it selfe maketh, what are both the Seuen heades,Apo. .17. or Seuen hilles, and also the Tenne hornes, to wit, that they all be kings (not the Catholike kings which haue and do so humbly adore our Sion, and licke the very dust of her feete, knowing that the nation & kingdom, which serueth not her, shal surely perish. Esay 49. and 60. but) the kings that are with the world against the said Church and people of God. So saith the Scripture:The seuen heades and hilles. The Seauen heades, are seuen hilles, vpon which the woman sitteth, and they are seuen Kings. And marke the diuision of them: quinque ceciderunt, Fiue of them are fallen: Who there∣fore are all the persecuting kings in the time of the Olde Testa∣ment, before the comming of Christ, before the time when this was spoken. Vnus est, One presently is. Who therfore is meant of the Romaine Emperours and al other kings persecuting with them. Alius nondum venit, &c. The other is not yet come: and when he commeth he must remayne (not a long season, as ye fiue, and as the one, but) a short season, onely thrée yeres and a halfe: Who euidently is Antichrist in proper person. There haue you playnly the Seuen. Now touching the other Tenne, this saith the Scripture:The ten hornes And the tenne hornes, are tenne kings, which, like as hath bene said of Antichrist, haue not yet taken kingdome, but
they shal take power as kings, vna hora post Bestiam, euen with∣in one houre after the Beast, that is, together with Antichrist,The vvhore Babylon. to serue him as his féede knightes. And so you sée euidently by these Seuen hills thus expounded, that the woman which sitteth vpon them, is not so litle a one, as you do make her, but that she is Mundus impiorum, the whole multitude of the wicked, euen frō the first beginning of the world, to the last end thereof, euen al in effect that at the later day shal be drowned in hel, either for being of her,Apo. 14.15▪ 16.17.18. 2. Pet. 2. or conforming them selues vnto her (which in the Apoca∣lypse is most manifest) as the world of the wicked it was, which was in the time of Noe drowned in the vmbraticall deluge. So that Rome with the Emperour of it, while it was against the Church, was a member, yet but a member of that woman: As England contrariwise, which was before, so long together, a no∣table member of the woman clothed with the Sunne, is now be∣come a member most miserable of the contrarie woman, and for rewarde of her mutation and Apostasie thus plagued of God, that now she must heare the Scriptures so perniciously detorted in all pulpits at large, and may not heare them, truely, sincerely, healthfully reported, so muche as in poore papers: which if she might fréely, and much more in pulpits, downe, downe, god wot, full soone, would this lying and absurd new Gospell come, as by this litle which hath bene here saide, any man of reason will not denie. And now to our third question, which is of Purgatory. The third part. Concerning the question of Purgatory. D. Allen in the end of his booke of Purgatory, made two chap∣ters of answere to their Scriptures: yet saith Fulke at the first of the two: This Chapter is but, Pro forma tantum,Pur. 437. To make a shew of a confutation, where the tenth part of our arguments are not rehearsed: notwithstanding, there, and other where vp and downe he said inough to answere all. But I shal endeuour there∣fore to satisfie the man better in this behalfe, collecting together not only the tenth part, but euen al his scriptures, not omitting as much as one, by my will, though such collecting and disposing of things so dispersed, cost me in euery Chapter of this booke, as much or more labour, then to answere the same afterward.
Well syr then, you reason against Purgatorie by authoritie of Scripture, in part negatiuely, in part affirmatiuely. And your negatiue reasoning, is sometimes of a piece onely, sometimes of the whole Scripture. Againe, when it is out of a piece onely, it is partly out of some one place, partly out of some one booke. j Ab authoritate Scripturae, negatiuè. First therfore, whatsoeuer you say negatiuely out of a piece, whether it be one place, or one booke, you haue your selfe answe∣red it for me,Pur. 449. whatsoeuer it be, in these words: It is no good Lo∣gike, to conclude negatiuely of one place or booke of Scripture, This is not conteined in it, therefore it is not true. These be your owne words, euen also speaking there of this selfe same matter, euen of Purgatory. Neuerthelesse (to deale more substantially) I will not sticke to rehearse those places also, and to answere them particulerly. One of them is 1. Thes. 4. vpon which in your negatiue diui∣nitie you demaund and say:Pur. 236. How hapneth it, that in so necessary a place S. Paule findeth no other comfort to moderate the mour∣ning of the faithfull, but only the quiet rest of thē that are asleepe in the Lord, and the hope of their glorious resurrection? Sruely if S. Paule had bene of Chrysostomes mind, he would haue prescri∣bed other maner of comfortes,Against the Fathers also. as Chrysostome doth, to wit, ex∣horting them to prayers and almes for their friendes departed, rather then to mourne so immoderatly. Séeing you so reason out of this place, I pray you let me aske you: Haue you, when∣soeuer in Sermon or otherwise you would moderate the mour∣ning of the faithfull, no other comfort but onely these two? yea I say more, If you haue no mo comforts in that case, and if there be no moe then S. Paule there prescribeth, surely there is but onely one, to wit, the hope of resurrection. For although he name them that are asleepe in the Lorde, yet of their quiet rest after that sléeping, that is to say, after their death, he saith nothing, it is but your owne addition. Another place, with your negatiue Logikes demaund, is, where hauing graunted,Pur. 362. that Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Ieronym, and many more, are witnesse that the solemne prayer for the dead in celebration of the Sacrament, is the tradition of the
Apostles: you pose the Papistes notwithstanding, and aske, Why then the same is not set foorth by Matthew, Marke, Luke, or Paule, where they set foorth the institution of the Sacrament? Your wordes at large, and my aunswere, go afore in the laste Chapter, pag. . sauing that piece of your wordes, which con∣teineth your negatiue reason most clearely, and most boldly, say∣ing: But agaynst this faigned tradition S. Paule cryeth with open mouth 1. Corin. 11. That which I deliuered vnto you, I receyued of the Lorde, &c. This is the onely true substance of the Sacra∣ment, and onely right order of ministration, and onely right vse and proper end thereof. So you make as though the Apostle there prescribeth the whole order of ministration, in so muche that it onely and no other may be the right order thereof: con∣trarie to that whiche followeth in the same place,Infra. ca. 11. contr. 44. The rest I will set in order when I come. You declare your great skill in the Scripture, when here so farre you misse of the Apostles pur∣pose, which was onely agaynst vnworthy receauing. The great∣nesse of that sinne he sheweth, because of the Reall presence of Christ, yea and that in the same maner as he was in his death. Looke better vpon the place, and sée whether it be not as I saye, or rather as S. Augustine sayth:Au. ep. 118. ad Ian. ca. 3 Inde enim & Aposto∣lus indignè dicit acceptum ab eis, qui non discernebant a cete∣ris cibis veneratione singulariter debita. quod satis toto ipso lo∣co in Epistola ad Corinthios prima, si diligenter attendatur, ap∣paret: For that respect the Apostle also doth say, that they receaue it vnworthily, who doe not by due and singularlye due worshippe discerne it from the rest of meates: as sufficient∣ly appeareth through that same whole place in the firste Epi∣stle to the Corinthians, if it be diligently considered. So then, where the Apostle intended no more but to correct the sinne of vnworthye receyuing, there to require of vs to shewe that he prescribeth it to be offered for the dead, yea and the whole order of ministration, haue not you forsooth great reason? And euen as great you haue, where you argue out of particu∣lar  places of the Old Law, saying:Pur. 455. What law was appoynted touching lamenting for the dead, you may reade Leuit. 21. how the Priest was forbidden to lament for any, but speciall persons.
Also Num. 19. Diuerse ordinances concerning the dead. yet neuer any sacrifice or prayer for the dead. With like reason you might conclude vpon the same places, that the dead should not be buried, because in these places no mention is made thereof: and againe of sundrie other places,Leuit. 15. where the people are bidde to keepe them selues warily from diuerse contaminations of them selues by towching certaine persons aliue, that therefore in the same places they are forbidden to pray for the saide persons aliue, and namely during the cause of such contamination, as for a man or woman whose séede or flowers runneth. You suppose ignorantly that in those places orders are giuen what shall be done for the dead, but it is not so: onely it is decréed, that whosoeuer entreth the tabernacle or house of him that is there departed, shal be con∣taminate or vncleane after the Mosaicall maner: and that the high priest shall not enter to any such at all, nor other priests but to certayne. What maketh this agaynst doing ought for the soule of the dead, in other places, and specially in the holy place? As when againe you say:Pur. 456. When Nadab and Abihu were slayne, their father and brethren were forbidden to mourne for them, the peo∣ple were permitted. By all which it appeareth that no Sacrifice for the dead was offered. As though holy Sacrificing were as vnfit for the Priest as prophane mourning: And as though this speciall case were a generall rule, whereas Leuit. 21. it is expre∣sly said to the Priestes, that they may be contaminated (which with you is mourning) vpon their brother, notwithstanding that for the plague of their two brethren Nadab and Abihu they might not in some maner mourne. From the particuler places of the Law, I come now with you to the whole Law thus, according to your good Logike, you con∣clude negatiuely therevpon:Pur. 455. All lawfull sacrifices were prescri∣bed by the Law: Sacrifice for the dead was not prescribed by the Law, Therfore it was no lawfull Sacrifice. A séely argument was made by Grindall, which D. Allen there returneth vpon him, and in this fourme here rehearsed you go about to better it. The answere still is,Infra ca. 12. num. as it was before, by returning it vpon your selfe: All lawfull Sacrifices, to wit, these foure in generall, Ho∣locaustum, pro peccato, hostia, oblatio (as the Psalmist and the Apostle do gather the summe) were prescribed by the Law: Sacri∣fice
for the dead is one of those foure, to wit, pro peccato, for sinne: Therfore Sacrifice for the dead was prescribed by the law. To this you would make a reply, and therefore you correct your Maior with an addition, and say, that not onely all lawfull Sa∣crifices were prescribed by the law, but also with peculiar men∣tioning and playne rehearsing of all such persons for whom Sa∣crifice was to be offered, both men & women, the princes and the priuate persons, the priest and the whole congregation, yea and speciall regard of the oblations of the poore, as may be seene Le∣uit. 4.5.12.15. But because all these persons are founde in the dead, as well as in the liuing, your addition reacheth yet farther, saying, And in the peculiar rehearsing of diuers kind of persons, and the fourme of the Sacrifice, named according to euery parti∣cular state, it is so farre off that the dead shall be reckned, that such things are enioyned euery of these particular persons to do, as it is playne that none but the liuing could offer, or haue Sacri∣fice offered for them. And in confidence of this addition, Iesu, how you befoole D. Allen: And yet it conteineth this grosse ab∣surditie, which you saw not, that none could offer or haue Sacri∣fice offered for them, but onely such as were both liuing and also present in the place, yea also able to do by thē selues those things enioyned, and moreouer that none might offer for their friendes, or for any other, but for them selues only. And what place is then left for offering for their children, for the sicke at home, for their brethren in other countreys captiue or pilgrimes, for the kings and cities of the world, vncircumcised, & for diuers other sortes, for which there was offering, as partly in other places is expres∣sed, partly may easily be proued? And therefore all this adoe con∣cludeth nothing against Sacrifice for the dead, although it coulde not be proued: much lesse, considering that it is in an other place so playnly expressed. For the fact of Iudas Machabeus putteth all out of doubt, say we: though you say that he therein transgressed the law. But your proofe thereof is yet to be made, vnlesse this proue it that you say, It is like, that Iudas Machabeus,Pur. 456. if he deui∣sed not that Sacrifice of his owne head, yet tooke by imitation of the Gentiles, whose studies and practises, the Author of that Sto∣rie confesseth were more frequented in those dayes among the Iewes, then the preaching or keeping of the Law. Why syr, doth
the Storie say that Iudas Macabeus was one of those gentilicall Iewes, or that he ioyned with those Apostaticall priestes: Yea doth it not plainely say, that all his fighting was against the gen∣tiles and against gentilizing, and that he made his reformation by no Priestes but such as were Vnspotted in the law? But of your ignorance in that Storie (if no worse) I must speake more in another place.Infra ca. 12. Now to ende this part, Let vs heare how you conclude of the whole Scripture:Pur. 449. As it is no good Logike (you say) to conclude negatiuely of one place or booke of Scripture, this is not contei∣ned in it, therefore it is not true, (as you haue hithervnto con∣cluded:) So of the whole, the argument is most inuincible that concludeth negatiuely thus: All true doctrine is taught in the Scripture: Purgatory is not taught in the Scripture, therefore Purgatory is no true doctrine. O inuincible argument. The Maior is false, and to all your textes for it, I haue answered a∣boue.Ca. isto. p. 1 The Minor likewise is false. for Purgatory is taught in the Machabees, which is in the Canon of the true Church which you also confesse to be the true Church (you knowe the Infra pag. third Councell of Carthage:) and therefore it is Canonicall, if any other Scripture be Canonicall. It is taught likewise 1. Iohn. 5. so playnely, that you could not auoyde the place but by falling into this horrible absurditie, That we may not pray for all men liuing, as anone I shall report your wordes. It is also taught, specially agaynst you Syr, Ioan. 11. for you say after your maner passing confidently,Pur. 236. that Martha and Mary (as the Scrip∣ture is manifest) did not hope for any restitution of their brother Lazarus to his body before the generall Resurrection. If that be so manifest, what els was it then, but the rest of his soule, that Martha would haue Christ to pray for, when she saide thus vnto him: But also now I know, that whatsoeuer things thou shalt aske of God, God will graunt thee. To whiche purpose also some auncient writers expound that place. But to alleage places is not my intent here, it is onely to answere your allega∣tions. And now hauing done with all your negatiues, we are come to your affirmatiues.
ij Ab authoritate Scripturae, affirmatiue. First, about certayne foundations of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead. For breuitie, to speake ioyntly of Purgatory, and of relie∣uing ye soules that be there: your affirmatiue allegations against both, are leuied by you, partly at the foundation of them, partly at the two them selues. And the foundations béeing diuerse, you haue both seuerall shot agaynst the seuerals, and also one com∣mon shot against all or many of them in common. To eche sorte I shall with the helpe of God, whose cause it is, make answere most easily and most truely. The distinction of Veniall and Mortall sinne. And first, D. Allen declareth out of ye Doctors,Pur. 126.127.128. what sinnes may be purged in Purgatory, to wit, not onely such as are Veniall of their owne nature, but also suche as are mortall of their owne nature, so that they were in Gods Church remitted afore. Fulke sayth, that This is manifestly ouerthrowen by the worde of God, euen from the foundations. For the foundation of this do∣ctrine, is the distinction of veniall and mortall sinnes. Not so syr: the doctrine is, that mortall sinnes by the Churches remission become as veniall: and you graunt it your self, saying, All sinnes (except certayne, of which your good exceptions I shall say more anone) by Gods mercy are pardonable or veniall. Thus you graunt the doctrine, and yet you graunt not the foresaid distincti∣on, therfore the distinction is not the foundation of that doctrine, but the doctrine may stand well without it. But yet for other causes we must be content to sée what you alleage against the distinction: The worde of God playnely de∣termineth, that euery sinne is mortall & deserueth eternall death, seeme it neuer so small. So you say, and you alleage thrée places for it. The first: Cursed is euery one that abideth not in all thinges that are written in the Lawe to fulfill them, Deut. 27. I syr, but find you in the Scripture no other Curse, that is to say, payne for sinne, but eternall death? Is it not written, Cursed is euery one that hangeth on tree? yet hāging on trée, or crucifying,Deut. 21. Gal. 3. is not eternall death. Agayne euery one in that saying, is meant (by the Apostles exposition) not of Christians, but of them onely whiche trust in the lawe for it selfe, who in déede can neuer
attayne to no remission neither of their mortall nor of their ve∣niall sinnes. But we that holde of Christ, and of his spirite, are in case alwayes to receiue remission whensoeuer we sinne ve∣nially:1. Ioan. 1.3. for so we can. But we can not sinne mortally, holding (I say) Christ and his spirite. And therefore if we do sinne mortally at any time, depriuing our selues thereby of Christes spirite, the remedie is to séeke for the same agayne by the Sacrament of pe∣naunce, and then are we in good case agayne as before. Your other two places are these: The soule that sinneth shall dye, Ezech. 18. and, The rewarde of sinne, is death. Rom. 6. S. Iames giueth vs the meaning of these & suche like places, where he saith, Peccatum verò cum consummatum fuerit, generat mor∣tem,Iac. 1. Sinne, when it is consummate, gendreth death: But not so soone as it is gendred, and yet it is sinne as soone as it is gendred. Therefore some sinne there is, which yet gendreth not death. Marke the order: Deinde concupiscentia cum conceperit, parit peccatum: peccatum verò cum consummatū fuerit, generat mor∣tem: First commeth the temptation of our concupiscence, as it were of a lewde woman: Secondly, concupiscence when she hath conceiued (by obteining some light consent) beareth sinne, venial sinne. Mary thirdly, Sinne, when it is consummate (by our full and perfect consent yéelded vnto it) gendreth or bringeth foorth death, if the matter be of weight accordingly. For els that the lightnes of the matter, as an idle worde, bringeth not death, he sufficiently signifieth, in saying, that in a weightie matter the lightnes or imperfection of consent doth it not. Whether after sinne remitted, payne may remayne. Now to another foundation, to wit, That culpa, the fault, both in Venial and in Mortal sinne, may be forgiuen of God and of his Church, and yet some payne (though not eternall) be owing for it sometime, so that the same must in such case be in this life eyther payde or pardoned, or els in Purgatory it wil be exacted. Pur. 45.This is against Ezechiel, saith Fulke, What time soeuer a man doth truely repent, the Lord doth put al his sinnes out of his remembraunce. You might haue done well to quote the place where Ezechiel so saith ad verbum. The trueth is, that in a mo∣ment the repentaunce may be so great, that there is no more re∣membraunce
at all. But Ezechiel (if you meane the 18. Chapter) speaketh of a longer time, so that The wicked man must repent him of all his sinnes, and keepe all Gods commaundementes, and do right and iustice, and then vita viuit, & non morietur, when the day commeth to rewarde euery one according to his workes here, He shall liue, & not dye. All his iniquities that he worked, I will not remember (saith God:) for his iustice that he wrought, he shall liue. For otherwise, who knoweth not those voyces,Psal. 24.78 Lord remember not the sinnes of my youth: and, Lord remember not our old sinnes? Are they not the words of men which had already repented them? acknowledging neuerthelesse that God may yet remember them. Againe you say, It is against Dauid,Pur. 45.46 Psal. 102. The Lord hath remoued our sinnes from vs as farre as the east is from the west. Who may not say this, for béeing remoued frō eternall damnation, although he haue yet to abide neuer so much temporall punishment? How∣beit those words, as the whole Psalme, are not spokē of the time of our first receiuing againe into the fauour of God by absoluti∣on, but to magnifie his mercy in our finall restitution which shal be at the later day. For which cause the Church very aptly sin∣geth that Psalme vpon the feast of Christes Ascention. Also out of the New Testament you say: The Publicane,Pur. 43. the Prodigall childe, the Debters, all clearely remitted, do playnely proue, that God frely forgiueth, iustifieth, rewardeth, the penitent sinners, without exacting any punishment of them for answering of the debt, satisfying for the sinnes, abusing his fatherly clemēcie, Luk. 7.15.18. You speake here very indefinitely, as though God neuer exacteth no punishment neither aforehand. Which to be always (specially in adultis) cleane contrary, any may perceiue, that considereth this punishment whereof we speake, to be the worke of penaunce, cheefly the internall works, and secondarily the externall also. But to let go this vantage, and howsoeuer you speake to take it, yet that you meane not but of the punishment which we now intreate of, to wit, which is owing somtime after forgiuenes: what make those ensamples against the same? Of the Publicane no more is said, but that he went home from the Temple iustified more then ye Pharisée. How proue you now,Luk. 18. that he which is iustified, may not withall be in some debt? Is it
not the iustified or children of God that are taught to say vnto the Father, Forgeue vs our debtes? Debt not onely of temporall pu∣nishment, but also of the fault it selfe béeing veniall, may stande well ynough with iustification. Luc. 15.The prodigall childe, is the Gentile receiued by Baptisme, as the Elder sonne, is the Iew that will not now come in. In Bap∣tisme we holde the forgiuenes to be such, that neither any tempo∣rall punishment is owing afterwarde: But if he play the prodi∣gall child agayne after that most ample grace, then, returning yet agayne, and to be now receiued no more by the Sacrament of Baptisme (for we are not Anabaptistes) but by the Sacrament of Penance (for we are not Nouatians,Infra ca. 12.) that then also we must deale with him like liberally in his person whose ministers we are, and inioyne him no more then at the other receiuing, that you haue not yet proued. Luc. 7.The two debters are in the texts Mary Magdalen owing 500. pence, and Simon the Pharisée, owing 50. pence. And they not hauing to pay, as no sinner of himself hath, donauit vtris{que}, Christ forgaue both. And yet they both had to be forgiuen after, accor∣ding to the proportion of their loue: in so much that both of Mary Magdalen he saith, Much sinnes are forgiuen her, bicause she hath loued much, as he there reckneth vp the works of her loue, farre aboue the works of Simons loue: and also to her he saith, so long after her hartes conuersion, & therfore after her first forgiuenes, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. Againe of Simon and to Simon he saith, But to whom lesse is forgiuen, he loueth lesse: giuing him to vnderstand, that he owed more yet thē he was ware of, wher∣fore that he had to imitate her whom he did set so light by, and to increase, as she did, in penitentiall loue. Whether Purgatory folow vpon this last foundation. Vpon this second foundation is set the third foundation by D. Allen,Pur. 44.46. in these words: If any debt or recompence remayne to be discharged by the offender after his reconcilement, it must of ne∣cessitie be induced, because euery man can not haue time (either for the hugenes of his sinnes past, or his late repētance, or his care∣lesse negligence) to repay all in his life, that there is all, or some part answerable in the world to come. Against this Fulke allea∣geth, that otherwise saith the spirite of God in the person of the
faithfull: He hath not delt with vs according to our sinnes,Psal. 103. or 102. nei∣ther rewarded vs after our iniquities. But as heauen is aboue the earth, so great is his mercy: as a father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lorde compassion on them that feare him. I said afore, these words to be spoken in the person of the faith∣full in déede, but for the time of the finall most mercifull reward, and not for the time when they dye, whereof nowe we speake. And therefore they make nothing (as you pretend they doe) a∣gainst the necessitie of the foresaid conclusion. Againe you say against it, that It riseth of diuelish enuy,Pur. 51. that God should be more liberall to them that repent at the houre of death, then to them that were but small offenders, conuerted long before. And therefore (M. Allen) I will answere you, as the hous∣holder answerd those murmurers, which grudged that they which wrought but an houre, were made equall in rewarde with those that had borne the burden and heate of the day. Is thy eye euill, because God is good? Is it not lawfull for him to do what he will with his owne? Mat. 20. But this is that which alwayes deceiueth the Papistes, because they measure the reward by iustice, and not by mercy. Nay it is this that deceiueth you, that you can not sée any iustice in mercy. And therefore vpon your ground, the Ori∣genistes might as well haue said to our Catholike forefathers, that it rose of enuy that God should be more liberall to them that repent, then to them that repent not at all: and might vrge them therevpon, and say: Is thy eye euill, because God is good? Is it not lawfull for him to do what he wil with his owne? But the Catholike might answere the Origenist, saying: I syr: but howe proue you that mercy, that God (I say) is good to them that repent not? that he will giue his owne so fréely to them, to whom was not applyed at all the Satisfaction of his iustice made by Christ? Euen so we answere you, and say: I syr, but howe proue you, that God is alike good to all, that he hath once shewed mercy vnto for Christ, that is to say, to all the baptized, although they in their workes afterwarde which they worke through Christ, be not like? The spirite of God saith otherwise to the baptized: And all Churches shall know,Apoc. 2. that I am a sear∣cher of the very raynes and heartes: and will giue to euery one of you according to his workes.
The meaning of the Parable then is this: The Iewes did murmure at the promotiō of the Gentiles, because to their owne works as their owne, they ascribed their saluation, thinking that they néeded not any mercy at al. But we must not do so, we must ascribe all to Gods mercy: it is his mercy that he calleth vs bée∣ing ydle afore, yea sinfully occupied, into the vineyard of his Ca∣tholike Church, there to worke for the peny of euerlasting life: it is his mercy, whatsoeuer we do worke in the said vineyard, one more and in short time, as Mary Magdalen, another lesse, though in longer time, as Simon the Pharisée, but all is of his mercy, of his grace, according to the measure as Christ (he also béeing his Christ) by his merites requireth for euery one, of his iustice: and therfore both the workes with all their varietie, and the pence in the end with all their varietie, are both of Gods giuing, though the pence be the merces, wages for the working, and that also by bargayne. Séeing therfore that the mercy of God, euen within his vine∣yard, within his Churches, is with such varietie, and with such iustice, you haue not to accuse vs of enuy, for holding that (ceteris paribus) he is not so liberal where penance is vnperfect, as where it is full. Nor yet to say as you do in the same place, I thinke M. Allen is angry with Christ, that he did not send the penitent thefe into Purgatory, but euen that day promised to be with him in Paradise. You rather might be angry with that penitēt, for thin∣king it inough, if he might be remembred when Christ should come in his kingdome, though in the meane time he did among such as he, abide for his sinnes in another place. But to thinke that D. Allen would be angry with Christ our high priest, for ge∣uing a pardon, and that a plenary, how could you, knowing that the Vicar of Christ guing a plenary, offendeth him not? for the mercifull iustice of God in which he gouerneth vs that are his fa∣mily, is as throughly answered by Christ our Lord, when by him selfe or by his Ministers he giueth vs full pardon, as when he gi∣ueth vs full penance. And in this I haue at once answered your like obiecting to D. Allen in another place,Pur. 64. that He will not suffer God to shewe mercy vpon whom he will shew mercy, Rom. 9. without his blas∣phemous and enuious murmuring. I haue tolde you where God
will shew full mercy, comparing his elect and iust together (how∣beit that sentence is not in comparison of them among them selues, but comparing them with the reprobate) to witte, where he séeth full penance, or full pardon by Christ. If you can proue that he will shew as full mercy also where he findeth not that fulnes of Christes grace, then call vs hardly enemies for not suf∣fering God to shew mercy vpon whom he will. Whether in Christ, the workes of one may helpe another? The fourth and last foundation concerneth the reliefe of them in Purgatory, and it is this, that within the Church or body of Christ one member may helpe another by vertue of the Commu∣nion of Saintes. Against this Fulke saith:Pur. 198. Infra ca. 12. I haue learned in the Scripture, that ther is no name giuen vnder heauen, by which they may be helped, which are not helped by Christes death. Act. 4. Who doubteth of that? But syr haue you learned in the Scrip∣ture, that they which are helped by the death of Christ, can not through his grace helpe and be holpen, one of another? Surely I learne in the Scripture, that, as the rich of this world may helpe the poore with their substance, so the rich in good works may spi∣ritually helpe the poore of that kinde.2. Cor. 8. Let your abundance in this present time (saith the Apostle to the wealthy Corinthians) sup∣ply their (the poore Hebrews) lacke,Act. 2.4. that also their abundance (spirituall (as in the Actes it is passing singular) may supplye your lacke. But at the least,Pur. 199. It is not possible that other mens works aliue shoulde profit them that are dead, you say. And why so? For as much as without Faith it is not possible to please God, Heb. 13. That is most true, as you and all other Heretikes shall one day finde it. Therfore without faith it is not possible that they should profite them. Be it so? What then? We aliue, and our brethren in Purgatory, both haue faith. Yea, but D. Allen graunteth, that they which are in Purgatory, can not by any motion of mind, at∣tayne more mercy, then their life past deserued. That is true. Therfore their faith profiteth them nothing, for that is a notable motion of the mind. And what more? Then the merites of other men must profite without faith. Two yron cōclusions. Although by their faith they can not attayne mercy, or profite them selues,
yet by their faith they are in case to be profited by the prayers & works of their fellow members aliue. And so are these two yron barres at once broken with so little a doe. Example of a childe new borne: without life it were not possible to féede him, nor to baptize him: and though he be aliue, he can not procure himselfe foode, nor baptisme: yet because he is aliue, he is in case to be hol∣pen by others thervnto. Fulkes common argument of the omnisufficiencie of Christes Passion. Infra ca. 12.Now remaineth in this parte, but onely your common argu∣ment of Christes Passion, by it you thinke to ouerthrowe the foundations that stand euen vpon it, such is your folly. D. Allen in his booke reported the said argument of yours, in these words: [Their extreme and onely refuge is, that the payne of Christes passion,Pur. 152. and his sufficient payment for our sinnes, standeth not with our satisfaction or penance in this life, nor with payne or Purgatory in the next.] Wherevnto he there answereth, as the Reader may sée. the effect is, that an Origenist, or one worse then an Origenist, might likewise say, The passion of Christ, because it is omnisufficient, standeth not with hell neither. But a Catho∣like would answere him, and the Protestantes at once, that we must not consider only the omnisufficiencie of it, but rather the wil of Christ that suffered it, whether he would haue it to work vpon all and euery where, because it is omnisufficient, or onely vpon his members within his Church: and vpon them also whe∣ther alwayes and straightwayes to the very full, and without all working of any thing or person with it, or rather by degrées and proportions, by meanes and instrumentes. Which being considered, all Fulkes allegations will be quickly answered. And first whether it folow, because it is so sufficient, that therefore it worketh alwayes at full. If any man sinne af∣ter baptisme (saith he,Pur. 45. 1. Ioh. 2. alleaging S. Iohn) Iesus Christ is our ad∣uocate with the father, and propitiation for our sinnes. That is true. But that in playing the aduocate for sinnes after baptisme, he requesteth the like and equall grace, as he did in baptisme for sinnes afore baptisme, where haue you that? Pur. 95. 1. Io. 1.In another place you alleage, yt the bloud of Christ doth purge vs from all our sinnes. It is taken out of the same place, and hath
the same answere, to wit, that his bloud doth worke more graci∣ously in the Sacrament of baptisme, then in the Sacrament of penance. And being washed by him, we are throughly cleane, Ioh. 13. So you alleage immediatly in the same place, adding also: So that although our sinnes were as redde as skarlet, they are made as white as snowe, Esay. 1. These two places are euident of bap∣tisme (reade the text) and therefore wée admitte willingly that which you infer there, saying, Then being throughly purged wa∣shed and clensed as white as snow, we are made capable (without delay) of the heauenly inheritance & the fruitiō of eternal glory. Neuerthelesse I must put you in minde that your former place Iohn. 13. truely alleaged, were thus: He that is washed (in bap∣tisme,) nedeth not but to wash his fete (that is, his venial sinnes, which he committeth afterwarde, although he continue withall in the cleannes of his baptisme) but he is all cleane. I aske you then, what if hée dye before he wash his féete? He is cleane, and therefore he shall not to hell, as the vncleane Iudas. Yet he is not so cleane, but that he néeded more washing: shall that then be quite omitted which so néeded, and he to heauen before he be all cleane? Well, by al this you haue not yet proued, that Christes bloud whensoeuer it washeth, washeth continuallie and at once to the full. Yea the saying of Dauid is manifest for the contrarie: Hée was washed from his sinne by Christ, and yet he prayeth for the same sinne, saying, Amplius laua me, wash me more from my iniquitie, & clense me from my sinne. In answering vnto it,Psal. 50. Pur. 97.78 you haue nothing to say, but that it was at Gods handes, and by the meanes of Christes bloud, that he prayed to be clensed. Yea syr, but the place teacheth vs, that God and that bloud do not at eue∣ry time wash one so fully, but that they reserue yet to wash him more, when it is thought good. Now let vs heare also whether it folow that in suche washing nothing worketh with the bloud of Christ, because the bloud is of it selfe omnisufficient. The sufficiencie of Christes Passion (saith he) is counted a light argument to M. Allen.Pur. 154. Too light in déede, to beare downe anye doctrine of Christ. But (sayth he) thus wee reason: Christe hath payde the full price of
our sinnes, hath fully satisfied for them, therefore there is no parte of the price left to be paide by vs, there remaineth no satisfaction for vs. And yet saith he againe, We neither exclude repentance, nor good works. For Christ hath paide the price of their sinnes, that repent and beleeue in him, that folow his steppes, that walke in his precepts. So then, he misliketh not, that our workes should be with the passion of Christ, but that they should worke with the passion of Christ: and therefore he saith, the absurditie of our do∣ctrine is this, that we say: [Christ by his suffering is become a cause of saluation to all that beleeue in him, yet euery man by good works must procure his owne saluation.] These (he saith) are the enemies of the Crosse of Christ. And yet it is ye Scripture that saith,Philip. 2. Worke your owne saluation. Neither will he, I trow, cal the Apostle an enemie of God, because he there saith, It is God that worketh in you, and yet worke your owne saluation. Much lesse will he reason thus: God is sufficient and able to work our saluation, therefore there is no part of our saluation lefte to be wrought by the Passion of Christ. For he séeth, the reason to be a false reason: and his reason is euen of the same fashion, as both he and euery body besyde may sée. Therfore to agrée al these Scriptures and Truethes together, what could be more apte, then (as we be taught in the Schooles) that there be thrée sortes of working causes, Agens principale, Instrumentum coniunctum, Instrumentum separatum, as in one writing, I do write as the principall, my hande doth write as the instrument vnited vnto my person, and my penne doth write as the instrument separated from my person: Eche of these working the whole worke, and not parting it betweene them. It is so in the working of our Saluation: The Godhead worketh it principally: The Manhoode of Christ, and the wor∣kes of it, namely his Passion, worketh it, as the arme of God: The Sacramentes worke it, as his instrumentes diuided from his person: And so likewise his mysticall members, the faithfull, with their works, do worke it, as it were meanes and agents personally separated from him, though mystically vnited vnto him. And they part it not betwéene them, but eche after his maner worketh the whole. And that is it which the Scripture meaneth by helping,Pur. 241. (the word that your ignorance so much ab∣horreth,
when it so often saith, yt God helpeth both Christ, Psa. 17. and vs, 2. Cor. 2. Heb. 13. And also that Christ helpeth vs. Heb. 2. But yet there is a difference in this similitude. For God were sufficient to saue without the passion of Christ, and that by bap∣tisme, yea and without baptisme also and other such instrumēts. Likewise the passion of Christ were sufficient to saue, though not without God, yet without baptime and all other like. But I can not write without my hande, nor without a penne. If then the Godhead, (or to vse your words, the infinite and on∣ly cause of our saluation, the meere mercy of God) although it be so singularly omnisufficient, doth not exclude neither Christes passion, nor the working of it, or merites of that man: how doth the omnisufficiencie of Christes passion enforce you to exclude either his baptisme and his good workes in his members, or also the working of his baptisme and the working or efficacy of those good works? specially considering the Scripture is playne for al. For as it is written,Pur. 97. That he hath washed vs from our sinnes by his bloud, Apoc. 1. So likewise, that he hath saued vs by the la∣uer of Regeneration, Tit. 3. He clenseth his Church by the lauer of water, Ephe. 5. Baptisme doth saue you. 1. Pet. 3. So againe, He hath made vs kings and priests to God, Apoc. 1. If (spiritual) priestes, ergo to offer our spirituall Sacrifices, (as our mortifi∣cation, Rom. 12. our almesdéedes, Hebr. 13.) both for our owne sinnes, and for the sinnes of other: because the externall Priest is ordeined to offer externall Sacrifices for sinnes, both for him selfe, and for the people, Heb. 5. Which places I alleage rather then other as playne or playner, because you were so blinde to alleage the selfe same for the con∣trarie, to proue, that Christ saueth vs by his blood alone, as thogh the grace therof might not worke in his Sacraments, and in his members workes. Wherevpon also, vpon the Angells saying, Apo. 7. These are they that came out of great affliction,Pur. 95. and haue washed their stoles and made them white in the bloud of the Lambe: therefore they are in the presence of the throne of God: you make this clarkly note, and saye: Marke here, that they which came out of this great affliction, were not purged thereby, but that they washed and made white their garmentes, in the bloud of the Lambe: by whose righteousnes being clothed, they
may appeare in innocencie before the throne of God. The text saith plainly, that therefore they are before the throne, to witte, because they came out of such affliction, & so whited their stoles: and yet this gloser taketh it awaye from the affliction, whereas that whiting was nothing else but that affliction. He forgate to do himselfe that which he so loftily would seacute;eme to teache vs, To conferre other places when there is a doubt. for in another place of that booke it is expresly written thus: Who so ouercommeth, shal be clothed with white garmēts. Apoc. 3. And if you yet doubt, by what they ouercome, whether by the Lambes bloud alone, or also by theyr owne patient confession or affliction vnto death, it is written there agayne: And they ouercame the diuell by the bloud of the Lambe, and by their owne martirdome (dia on logo es martyris auon,) and loued not their life euen vnto death, Apoc. 12. And S. Paule accordingly calleth it,2. Cor. 4. the mortification of Iesus, when the Apostles were mortified for Iesus: and saith, they carri∣ed the same about continually in their bodies, that also the life of Iesus might be manifested in their selfe same bodies at the latter day, which is ye same thing, that the Apocalipse calleth to appeare before the throne in white stoles. Wherby you sée, that as ye bloud of Christ, so by it martyrdome also, worketh such glory. For so it foloweth there again: This our affliction, although it is but short and light, operatur, worketh vs euerlasting weight of glory exce∣ding measure aboue measure. Because affliction here for Iesus doth so wash our stoles or bodies, therefore it procureth that they shalbe so glorious in the Resurrection. this say these Scriptures. And so much of the foundations, and by occasion of them. Now to Purgatorie it selfe, and prayer for the dead. Secondly: directly of Purgatorie it selfe and praier for the dead. whether all the elect goe straight to Heauen: Afore Christes comming. Limbus patrum. Directly against Purgatory, & prayer for the dead, you shoote diuers arrowes, or rather cockshotles, so deadly are the woundes that your shot doth make. First you will proue by many and eui∣dent Scriptures, that all the Elect do go, yea and alwayes from the beginning of the world haue gone straight to heauen, & there∣fore
neuer no Purgatory, neuer no Limbus Patrum. Whiche if you can do, your skill in the Scripture no doubt farre passeth all the auncient Doctors, were they neuer so wel studied therin. For they all could not finde so muche as one text, that all or any one also went to heauen before Christ: yea and not many textes,Vide San∣der. monar. li. 7. pag. 518.520. Pur. 57. that any one after him also, goeth thither before the generall Resur∣rection, but rather very many textes, that vntill ye Church with∣in these 300. yeres defined the contrarie, made it very probable, that none are there till then. Well thus you begin, That the Fathers of the Old law before Christ, were not in hell, it is to be proued with manifest argumen∣tes, and authorities out of holy Scriptures. But first you thinke necessary to answere one text that stoode in your way, saying: Although they were not, nor yet are in perfect blessednesse, God prouiding a better thing for vs, that they without vs should not be made perfect. Heb. 11. By that they of the old Testament wer not made perfect or consummate, without vs of the new Testa∣ment, S. Paule there doth meane euidently that their Soules were not yet admitted into heauen: As in that whole Epistle he sheweth, that the Old Testament did consummate nothing, but contrariwise,Heb. 7. Heb. 10. Heb. 9. that it made continually euery yere a commemo∣ration of their sinnes, because they remayned still and were not perfectly remitted, and therefore that Christe dyed In Re∣demptionem earum praeuaricationum quae erant sub priore Te∣stamento, To buye out the preuarications that were all that while, that so at length the heires might attayne the euerlasting inheritance which was promised.Heb. 9. Nondum enim propalatam esse Sanctorum viam, adhuc priore tabernaculo habente statum, For the way into Sancta or heauen, was not yet opened, vntill the high Priest Iesus entred first thereinto:Heb. 10. qui initiauit no∣bis viam nouam, It was he that beganne this newe waye vn∣to vs, who nowe therefore haue fiduciam in introitu San∣ctorum, Confidence to enter in after him béeing our fore∣runner, into the same Sancta. And all this is spoken of our Soules: As for our bodies, neither yet is the way open, vn∣lesse Sancta were open when onely the High priest entred into them. This was the prouidence of God for vs that we should not thinke we come to late, if the Fathers soules had beene
admitted in before vs. Confer the end of your owne text with the beginning of it,Heb. 11. vt non consummarentur, and, non acceperunt re∣promissionem. Sée how plainly he expoundeth, their not consum∣mating to be their not attayning of the promise. And what pro∣mise?Heb. 9. Confer this other place, vt repromissionē accipiant aeternae haereditatis, That the heires might attayne the promise of euer∣lasting inheritance. I might at large declare ye same by the whole course of Scripture, as D. Allen saith very well, but that I am not here to alleage,Pur. 439. but only to answere. Well then against these most manifest Scriptures let vs heare the manifest authorities of Scripture which you pretend. Pur. 57.58.For you say, Seeing they all beleeued in Christ, they had euer∣lasting life, and entred not into condemnation, but passed from death to life, Io. 5. To what life, but ye life or resurrection of their bodies? for vntill the last day, all the dead are in death, but then some shall come forth into resurrection of life, some others into resurrection of damnation, but he that beleeueth in me, hath (that is, most certainly shall then haue, Iohn. 11.) life euerlasting, and commeth not into damnation, but passeth from death, (wherein he hath so long bene) to life. This is the playne text of that place: As likewise in all the New Testament, lightly euery where, life after corporall death, signifieth the resurrection of the bodies, where the soules be in the meane time, here is neuer a word: no nor of the Saintes of the old Testament afore the institution of Baptisme: wherevnto beliefe in him giueth now accesse, Ioa. 1. and 3, that belieuing in him, they may haue life, Io. 20. But their state we must gather out of other places of holy Scripture. And to what end (againe you say) was Christ called the Lamb that was slayne from the beginning of the world, but that the be∣nefite of his passion extendeth vnto the godly of all ages alike? This is your expounding of Scripture by Scripture: you are a true man of your word. The place is Apo. 13. Whose names were not written in the booke of life of the Lambes that was slaine frō the beginning of the world. Cōferring it with this place, Apo. 17. Whose names were not written in the booke of life from the be∣ginning of the world, you perceiue the error of your cōstruction. It is not said, that the Lambe was slayne from the beginning of the world, but that all the reprobate shall adore Antichrist when
he commeth, as the Gospell also saith,Mat. 24. that the Elect also should be then deceiued, if it were possible. Neuerthelesse, that ye Lambe was slayne from the beginning of the world, is true, though not in your fond sense, but because his death was so long before pre∣ordeined of God and prefigured, as the Apostles do often say to stop the mouthes of them that obiected newnesse to our Religion of saluation by a dead man. As the like would be a iustification of your new Gospell, if you could shew out of Scripture, that Luther was preordeined for that purpose. Againe in the same place you alleage, that Esay speaking of the righteous that are departed out of this life, saith that ther is peace, and that they shall rest in their beds, Esa. 57. Like as he affirmeth that Tophoth, which is Gehinnone or hell, is prepared of old for the wicked, Esai. 30. Esai speaketh not of his owne time, but (as a Prophet) of the time now since the comming of Christ who is our peace. There is peace, say you: but he saith, There shal come peace, or as the Churches translation hath no lesse agreably to the Hebrew, Let peace come I pray. Moreouer if it were graun∣ted, that then also they did rest in their beds, because the death of the Iust is but a sléepe, for the assurāce of their resurrection, what were this to their soules? Also if their soules did rest, must euery rest néedes be the blisse of heauen? We say not that Limbus pa∣trum was Purgatory, but yt it was a place of rest, because with∣out poena sensus, though not without poena damni for the time. Suppose a kings sonne and heire, that by some crime deserued disheriting, but the king his father of grace will let him inhirite, mary not at the time he otherwise should, but certayne yeres af∣ter, yet during those yeres also he shall be well and honorably prouided for: may we not say that this man is at ease, conside∣ring his prouision, and yet in punishment also, considering his losse for the time? Such was their case in Limbo. It was not hell, you say, because it was not Tophet or Gehenna. Why? our Créede and the Scripture saith, that Christes Soule was in hell,Infra ca. 12. and yet no man so wicked except it were Caluine him selfe (I thinke) to say, it was in Gehenna. Therefore Gehenna or To∣phet, the place for the wicked, was not the onely hell. As vaynly, and more falsely you argue that it was not hell, be∣cause Luc. 16. Lazarus was caried by Angels not downe to hell,
but vp to Abrahams bosome. Caried vp? is that portari, or, ape∣nechthinai? But the riche man is in hell, you say, and he looketh vp, and seeth a farre of Lazarus in the bosome of Abraham. The same wise argument againe: In this place this is called hel, ther∣fore no other may be called hell, although the Scripture it selfe els where nameth to vs another hell. The places might in situa∣tion (at least in respect of the heauenly mantions being so far di∣stant from them both) be nigh together, although one were vp∣ward, and also farr of both in state & situation (purgatorie perad∣uenture being betwéene them.) Againe if it were graunted that they were no way nigh together, yet it would not follow, that A∣brahams bosome was heauen. As neyther, if Lazarus were ca∣ried vpward.4. Reg 2. For so was Elias: who yet was not caried into hea¦uen that now we speake of. Another of your manifest argumentes, being the last in that place: If righteousnes belongeth to Abrahams children, the re∣ward of righteousnes also pertaineth vnto them. Therefore A∣brahams bosome was open to receiue all the children of Abrahā, euen as Ioan. 1.the bosome of God was ready to receiue Abraham, be∣cause he was his sonne through faith. Nay you should haue said, because he was That vvhich is proper to vni∣genitus, he ma∣keth common to Abraham. vnigenitus qui est in sinu patris, The onely be∣gotten sonne, who is in the bosome of the Father, and then you had saide somewhat. But these your grosse ignorances in the scripture, I must reserue to their own proper Chapter. To your argument I say,Infra ca. 12. that the reward of righteousnes may belong to one, and yet not paide him as soone as he dyeth. S. Paule naming both Abraham him selfe and many children of his, saith expresly: According to faith all these departed,Heb. 11. not receiuing the promi∣ses, but beholding them a farre of. And againe, And all these re∣nowned by faith, receiued not the promise, that is, the inheri∣tance, the reward of righteousnes. Pur. 441.451.In two other places also you prate against Limbus, but you alleage no other Scripture against it. Well then, you haue not proued, that afore Christes comming any one went to heauen: nor that all went straight to Limbus, and therefore none to Purgatorie. Now whether since Christes comming they all goe straight to heauen, and therefore none to Purgatorie, let vs likewise examine.
Whether since Christ all go straight to heauen. There is no prayer for the dead nor Purgatory after this life (you say) because they that liue vnto Christ, dye vnto him,Pur. 451. and being dissolued are with him. Ioa. 17. And in another place more distinctly,Pur. 276. We beleue that the soules of the faithful & the repentāt are where Christ is, as he prayeth, Ioa. 17. Father I will that those whom thou hast giuen me, where I am they also may be with me, that they may see my glory. And euen so he saith to the Theefe no perfect iust man, but a sinner repentant: This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Luc. 23. And S. Paul desireth to be dissol∣ued and to be with Christ. Philip. 1. That to be with Christ, is to sée his Godheades glory, and not onely his manheades glory, would hardly be proued out of the Scripture. Yet because it ma∣keth with the foresaid definition of the Church, I graunt it. So then, the example of the Apostle S. Paule declareth, that a perfect iust man goeth straight to Christ: The example of the Theefe de∣clareth, that likewise a penitent sinner, goeth straight to Christ, if either his penance be full and perfect, or his pardon, which is a remission of his penance, be a plenary. And the saying, Ioan. 17. specially béeing illustrate with these two examples, declareth as much: howbeit by it self alone it declareth no more, but that they which are Christes, may and shall be with Christ, but when, it sayth not. You allude there to one place more, which is Rom. 14. We liue to our Lord, and we dye to our Lord. Whereby he mea∣neth not, that we be with our Lorde when we dye, no more then he meaneth that we be with our Lorde when we liue: but that both in our life and at our death, from the beginning to the end, we be not our owne men, but seruantes to another, and that he therefore is my Iudge if I do not well, and not thou: also to him I my selfe must make my count, and not thou for me. This béeing the sense of that place, you had forsooth great reason to con∣ferre it with Apoc. 14. to controll S. Augustines sense,Pur. 436.446. who ex∣poundeth it of Martyrs, which is there saide, Blessed are the dead that dye in our Lord: now after that the spirite saieth that they shall rest from their labours. You reply, saying, that D. Allen vn∣derstanding it onely of Martyrs,Aug. ca. 9. li. 20. de Ci. calleth Augustine to witnesse thereof: but that it is spoken of all the faithfull, and there∣fore ouerthroweth Purgatorie, witnesse hereof I will not
take of flesh and bloud, say you, (sée what he maketh of S. Au∣gustine,) but of the holy Ghost. Rom. 14. wee all dye vnto the Lorde. Your skill in the Scripture is great, that make it all one, to dye in the Lorde, and, to dye to the Lorde. All that dye to the Lorde, haue (as the Apostle there sayth) to make their accompt to him, which may and will to some fall out to their damnation. but blessed are al they that dye in the Lord. Wherefore these two are not all one. True it is, that all, whiche dye well and in the Churches peace, dye in our Lord, as they are called also dormi∣entes in Christo. 1. Cor. 15. and mortui in Christo. 1. Thes. 14. they that slepe in Christ, the dead in Christ, wheresoeuer their Soules be after that sléeping and dying, in heauen or in purgatorie. But yet the place Apoc. 14. is verie well sayd of D. Allen to be spoken not of all that so dye, but onely of martirs, neither of al martirs, but of them onely that shall suffer in the time and rage of Anti∣christ, for so the circumstance of the letter playnlye geueth. You therfore that wil haue one place always conferred with another, consider the circumstance, sée what goeth afore, what commeth after, and you shall finde, that he speaketh of the last time, exhor∣ting the faithfull then not for any feare to adore the beast, but to dye constantly in our Lorde, for now the Resurrection is euen at hand, and therefore their labours all at an end. Feare the Lord (saieth one Angel, preaching to all the world at that time) and geue honour to him: because the very houre of his Iudgement is come: and adore him, adore not Antichrist. And another Angell foloweth, saying: Cecidit, cecidit, downe downe is fallen Babilon. And another Angell: If any adore the beast, he shalbe tormented in fire and brimstone for euer and euer. Then a voyce from hea∣uen: Blessed are the dead that (will not adore the beast, but) dye in the Lord. Now after this the Spirite sayth, that they shall rest from their labours. For their workes (that is, their rewarde) do folow them now at hand. And immediatly there after commeth forth the Iudge vpon a white cloude, and the Siethes, and downe goeth al the world. Lo this is the circumstance. Wherby you sée, the place saith not so much as those Martyrs to be at rest so soone as they dye, but onely within a very short time after. This is the place that quite ouerthroweth Purgatory. And so I haue examined all that you alleage for going straight
to heauen. Another way you procéede against Purgatory and prayer for the dead, by the Iudgement which is after this life. Whether the Iudgement may stand with Purgatory. The tree, whether it fall to the South or the North,Pur. 436.439.441. it lieth euer where it lighteth. Eccl. 11. Your cōmentary vpon this place is, that the fall of the tree to the south or to the north, is the iudgement of God concerning euery man, either of rewarde or of punish∣ment, which can not be altered after a mans death: and therefore by this place prayers be not profitable. Why? who saith that prayers shall so alter their iudgement? Some be iudged to hea∣uen, but differred, as they in Limbo at the very same time when this was written, and others not so good both then and nowe in Purgatory. To bring these to heauen wherevnto they be so iud∣ged, prayers do serue. And this differring is signified by ye Wise∣man euen in the same place, quia post tempora multa inuenies illum. He exhorteth them to doe almesdéedes and all other good workes that they can, because a great while after thou shalt finde it. The trée that fell in the South, it may be a good while after be∣fore he be all trimmed. For not the soule onely, but also the body falleth to be rewarded or punished. And who séeth not how long after the fall it is, before the body haue accordingly? Only before his fall let euery one looke to his workes: for after the fall,Luc. 16. he shal find Chaos magnum, a huge distance betwene the north and the south, and therefore no possibilitie of remouing from the one to the other. This is the sense of that place, as D. Allen told you before, and your reply against it is tootoo friuolous. For you say, that then they should alwayes lye in Purgatorie, because the cer∣teintie of their saluation, is as great before they were borne, as af∣ter they be dead. Certaintie of their saluation, that by him the Wiseman speaketh of, riseth after their dying in grace, of the vnalterable iudgement, that by your self the Wiseman speaketh of, and it is the impossibility of remouing to the north or to dam∣nation. What maketh this against remouing out of Purgatory into heauē, which is not remouing out of the south into ye north, but onely further into the south, euen into the finall place that straight after his fall both his soule and body were iudged vnto. You argue againe of the Iudgement, saying,Pur. 281. Immediatly after death foloweth Iudgement, but prayers either neede not or boote
not when the party is eyther acquited or condemned by the sen∣tence of the Iudge, which (as S. Augustine saith) can not be indif∣ferent betwene reward and punishment, De lib. arb. li. 3. cap. 23. S. Augustine saith there the contrarie rather, as you shall sée if you reade the place. And to your argument I say: In that iudge∣ment, some be condemned to hell, for whom prayers boote not. Others be acquited from hel: and of these, some straight rewar∣ded in their soules, and so prayers néede not, but not yet rewar∣ded in their bodies, and for that therfore they pray, Apoc. 6. vntill they be heard, Apoc. 11. Others not straight rewarded neither in their soules. And of these againe, some, without poena sensus, pu∣nishment of sense, only differred, as they in Limbo, who prayed accordingly, no lesse then the foresaid for the redemption of their bodies. Others first to be punished temporally, according to their debtes,Mat. 5. to wit, for being angry, or saying Raca, and them to be not onely let out of their prison, because it is not Gehenna ignis, for they said not Fatue, but also rewarded for their merites. And for these againe, while they be in prison, prayers, as they néede, so al∣so they boote, because the Iudge is mercifull. And so you sée no lesse then thrée sortes, which your diuision lacketh. Pur. 436.444.And therby at once is answered your other obiectiō of the wide way, and the narrow way, Mat. 7. If there be but two wayes in this life (you say) there are but two abiding places after this life. In the wide way of breaking Gods commaundementes, some go wider then some, with infinite varietie, yet al in the wide way: and these after death go to damnation, namely their soules, and straight to damnation, because they haue nothing to stay thē out of it, so much as a minute of an houre. In the narrow way of ke∣ping Gods cōmaundements, some go narrower then some, with infinite varietie likewise, yet all in the narrow way: and these after death go to life, though not straight in body, none of them, neither in soule also many of them, because they haue somewhat to stay them out of it for a time, to wit, temporall debt of veniall sinne, & also of mortal sinne forgiuen but the due penance not ful∣ly payed nor fully pardoned. And so you sée, that the two wayes of this life stande well ynough with Purgatorie. Pur. 436.444.Againe you alleage that it is written of ye Iudgement, 2. Cor. 5. we shall all stand before the Iudgement seate of Christ, to receiue
ech of vs the own of his body, according as he did, either good or euill. Not D. Allen, but (as he alleageth) S. Augustine,Aug. Ench. cap. 100. Dion, Ec. Hier. ca. 7. as also S. Dionisius Areopagita, answereth, that the Churches praying for the dead, is nothing repugnant herevnto, because the dead in our Lord, in his life deserued, that these workes after his death might be profitable vnto him. And to this answer you haue no reply, to mainteine that Scripture against such prayer. Onely you oppose a saying of S. Hierom, very fondly, as in ye next chap. I wil shew. Once againe you reason of the Iudgement: If Purgatory be so necessary to satisfie Gods iustice by temporall paynes of sinners,Pur. 85. according to the time, &c. and Purgatory shal cease at the day of Iudgement, as you affirme out of Augustine: how shall the same be satisfied in such as dye immediatly before the day of Iudge∣ment, so that they haue not had time inough ther to be sufficient∣ly purged? The like may be demaunded of all them which in a moment shal be changed from mortalitie to immortalitie, at the very comming of Iesus Christ to Iudgement. These questions, M. Allen, will trouble your head to answere and retayne your for∣mer principles. Two doughtie questions. Where did D. Allen set downe that principle, that Purgatory is necessary to satisfie according to the time? I finde where he saith,Pur. 44. [If any debt or re∣compence remayne to be discharged by the offender after his re∣concilement, it must needes rise by proportion, weight, continu∣ance, number, and quantitie of the faultes cōmitted before. Wher∣by it must of necessity be induced, that bicause euery man can not haue time to repay all in his life, that there is all, or some parte, answerable in the world to come.] Here we haue continuannce of the faultes, and time of his life: but time of Purgatory, that you haue to tell vs where you had it. The truth is, that a shorte time in Purgatorie will so pay the sinner, that it had bene bet∣ter for him to spende much longer time in penance, as in this life also a litle while in fire passeth, I trow, the payne of longer time, in fasting, &c. Neither is it hard for god to punish one in the shor∣test time, as gréeuously as an other in 1000. yeres. Nor again re∣pugnant to his mercy, to remit suche punishment at the request of his glorious Saints (which is S. Augustines answere to your obiection) as he nowe doth to the like, for the Churches prayers.Aug. de Ci. li. 21. ca. 24.27 Lo what a hard thing it was to answere your Demaundes.
Whether Faith, Hope, and Gods Will, may stande with Purgatory. After these two assaylings of Purgatory, by going straight to heauen, and by the iudgement, there remayneth your third & last assault,Pur. 421. wherein you say to vs: We learne by Scripture, that your doctrine is contrary to the faith, and hope of Christians. And how shew you that?Pur. 382. If it be against the hope of Christians to mourne for the dead, much more it is against the faith and hope of Chri∣stians to pray for them. For by our prayer we suppose them to be in miserie whom the word of God doth testifie to be in happi∣nes, to be at rest, to be with Christ, Io. 17. Apoc. 14. Neither those Scriptures, nor any other by you alleaged, as I haue shewed, do testifie, that all straight after death be so, and therefore to suppose some of them to be in miserie, and so to pray for them, is not pro∣ued to be against the worde of God. Neither to mourne for some, yea and for all, is saide to be against Hope. I would haue you knowe that they shal rise againe, saith the Apostle, to the end that you mourne not for them,1. Thes. 4. sicut et ceteri qui spem non habent, in such sorte as others that haue not hope of their Resurrection. So then, there is one maner of mourning without hope, and there is another maner of mourning with hope, and such is our mourne∣ing with prayer. When Christ praied for his own Resurrection, Psal. 15. Act. 2. did that argue him to be voide of hope, or rather to haue hope? When also we all pray for the generall Resurrection, Thy kingdome come, and mourne and grone for the dilation, do we against hope, doe we not rather most manifestly declare oure hope thereby? Moreouer you saye there: To that which is required of the ex∣presse worde of God, forbidding prayers for the dead, we answere that all places of the Scripture that forbid prayers without faith, forbid prayers for the dead. For faith is not euery mans vayne perswasion, but an assurance out of the word of God. Which be∣cause we can not haue in praying for the dead, therefore we are forbidden to pray for them This argument supposeth,Cap. eodē, part. 1. that the word of God is onely Scripture, which you can not proue, as in the one place here aboue I haue declared. Againe it supposeth, that prayer for the dead is not assured by Scripture, which be∣sides the most expresse place of the Machabées, and diuers others,
now shall another euident place control euen the same place that you alleage against vs. Thus you say:Pur. 281. We learne out of Gods word, that whatsoeuer we do pray for according to Gods wil, we shal obteine. 1. Io. 5. Therefore this one Hatchet shall cut a sun∣der al: Prayers for the dead are not according to the wil of God, and therefore they are not heard at all. I denie the Minor: you haue not, nor can not proue it. Yea I say further, It is agaynst that which the Apostle there both intēdeth and expresseth, to wit, that we should pray for our brethren after they be dead, if they ended not their life in sinne, because that praying is according to Gods will. For it foloweth there immediatly: Who so knoweth his brother to sinne (he vseth the present tense, and not the pre∣terfect tense, to haue sinned, because his intent is to exhort also the sinner to leaue by time) a sinne not to death, (as one that li∣ued in Schisme, but yet was reconciled before he dyed) let him (after his death) request of Christ, and life shall be giuen vnto him, to one, I say, sinning not vnto death. Sinne there is vnto death: I say not that any pray for that, (because it is not accor∣ding to Christes will to pray for them that be in hell.) All ini∣quitie is sinne, and therefore to be diligently auoyded, and not so much as one moment to be incurred: And there is sinne vnto death: As if he would say, if you auoyde not that, no hope after your death, your brethren can not helpe you by praying for you. This is the playne and smooth sense of that whole place: and so must néedes be, because there is no man nor no sinne in this life, but we may pray for him and it, as neither the Nouatians (as bad as they were) did denie. Onely the Protestantes denie it, because they haue no other shift to auoyde this place: And ther∣by let any indifferent, any Christian man iudge, whether this be not a playne place for praying for the dead. Fulkes wordes of sinnes in this life, and men in this life not to be prayed for, and that to be this sinne, and sinner vnto death, I shall recite in the twelfth Chapter amongst his grossest errors and absurdities. Thus I haue answered (thanks be to God) al his Scriptures against Purgatory, and all his arguments made out of the Au∣thoritie thereof, both negatiuely and affirmatiuely.Cap. 7. part. 4. Wherby ap∣peareth to the full the vanitie of his bragges in the last Chapter against the church of God, that he could & would produce against
the doctrine thereof, such plaine testimonies of Scripture, such Scripture also for the meaning of ech place, as by no meanes might be auoyded. Whereas amongst all his testimonies, you sée there is not one, but it hath bene cléerely answered. As now in this fourth & last part shall be answered likewise, with the like helpe of god, all other Scriptures that in these two most insolent Libelles in any place vp and downe he alleageth against any o∣ther point of the Churches doctrine. The fourth part. Concerning all other questions that he mentioneth. And first to put all the same in some order, for the more vtilitie of the Reader: I conceaue all the differences that are betwéene vs and the Protestants in this diuision: Some are about the wit∣nesses of Gods word, the principles of Diuinitie, or groundes of all truth: which by them is onely Scripture, by vs not onely Scripture but also the Church, and certain others: whervpon we frame our Motiues to all men, to beléeue vs & not the Heretikes, shewing them, that such and such are the principles which they must beléeue, and withall, that the said principles, euery one of them, stand for vs, and not for the Protestantes. Some are about other particular or priuate controuersies: Which may be redu∣ced vnto these two heades, Good-workes, and the Sacramentes, the doctrine of which both, they corrupt with their new inuētion of Onely faith,Only Scripture▪ and Only Faith as they do the foresaid with their toye of Onely Scripture. What Scripture he alleageth about the first sort, I haue in the two first partes of this chapter reported them al, & answered thē, sauing a very few, which I reserue to ye tenth chapter which shall be of euery Motiue or Demaund apart by it selfe. There in these fiue Motiues, of Churches, Seruice, Priesthood with Sacrifice, Monkes and Pope, I will answere his few Scriptures thervnto belonging. Now then, concerning the second sort, and first Good-workes, what he alleageth about them, concerneth them partly in gene∣rall, partly in speciall, that is to say, prayer, fasting, or almes. About Good-works in generall. Iustification.Good works in generall it concerneth, that he saith, They do not
iustifie: wherevnto he alleageth two places, one of S. Paule,Pur. 450. the other of Esay, We beleue (saith he) that a man is not iustified by workes, but by faith onely, Rom. 3. And yet we beleue that good workes are necessary to be in euery man that is iustified,A fasarie. Iac. 5. The wordes of S. Iames be not as he saieth, but expressely a∣gainst him: A man is iustified by workes, and not by faith onely. Where you sée also, that it is in all one sense, that works do iusti∣fie and faith. The words of S. Paule likewise be not as he saith, but thus: A man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the law. That is to say, although he haue not euermore done the works which the law commaundeth, to wit, good works, yea al∣though he haue sometimes, yea and alwayes done the cleane con∣trarie, to wit, all euill works: yet let him come to the Catholike faith, and he shall there finde a remedie for all, and of a wicked and so wicked a man be made iuste, all his sinnes and wickednes béeing remitted him. This sayth S Paule, and the same say we. But after he is so iustified, he must not do the like agayne, he must then kéepe the commaundementes of the Law, béeing now by Christ made a new man, and able therevnto, and by so doing he shall be more iustified, as S. Iames saith. Conferre these two places of S. Paules also. The iustice that is of the Law, qui fe∣cerit homo, the man that hath done it, shall liue by it, Rom. 10. ex Leuit. 18. Which is in effect that no man shall liue by it, be∣cause no man hath done it, but all men haue done against it, all being borne in sinne, & therfore not by the works of iustice which we had done, but according to his owne great mercy he saued vs by baptisme. Tit. 3. Do you marke the tense? He speaketh of works before faith, where you should haue alleaged of works af∣ter faith. And so withall is answered your other place,Ar. 102. where you say, that the Popish Church is not content to be clothed in the white shining silke, which is the iustification of Saintes, made white in the bloud of the Lambe, but with the filthy ragges of mans righteousnes, Esai. 64. If God conuert your heart, that you may returne to your mother the Catholike Churche, you shall finde that she will make nothing of all the good workes which you do nowe in Heresie, because it is but mans righ∣teousnesse. But the good workes whiche afterwarde in the Churche you shoulde haue of her husbande the Lambe,
where learned you to call them The filthy ragges of mans righ∣teousnes?Apoc. 19. He that doubteth whether those Iustifications of the faithfull in the Apocalipse, be (as I say) iust workes, the same Apostle (if he will conferre places) in his first Epistle telleth him:1. Ioh. 3. O my children let no man deceiue you: he that worketh iustice, is iust. Free-vvill.You alleage also two places against Frée-will, which againe concerneth Good works in generall:Pur. 450. We beleeue that man after his fall hath not Free-will, no not aptnes of will to thinke any thing that is good, 2. Cor. 3. S. Paules words are these: We are not sufficient of our selues to thinke any thing, as of our selues, but our sufficiencie is of God. This doth not take away from vs naturall fréewill, nor naturall aptnes of will, as it doth not take away our selues from vs; but onely it sheweth, from whence we haue power to do as we do in matters of saluation, to witte, of Gods gift, and not of our selues. If your scholler should vpon iust cause commend him selfe for writing (as S. Paule there cōmen∣mendeth him selfe for conuerting hartes to God,) and then to a∣uoyde arrogancie should say, that it is not of him selfe, but of his Masters instruction, that he can write so well, the scholler, for all this (I trow) had vnderstanding and aptnes to vnderstand. For els howe could he haue bene taught to write? You know, the Scripture likeneth the holy Ghost to a teacher,Ioan. 6. Heb. 10. Psa. 118. and the grace of God to teaching, and to teaching of our hartes or wills. Your o∣ther place I finde, Pur. 35. How shall Free-will be mainteined, if Gods Spirite haue any place, that distributeth to euery one ac∣cording to the good pleasure of his owne will. 1. Cor. 12. You do not denie, but Man afore his fall had Fréewill, and yet Gods spi∣rite then also did distribute to euery one according to the good pleasure of his owne will. And now likewise after the fall, doth not S. Paule in the very same Chapter giue some place to mens willes in the giftes of Gods spirite? saying to the Corinthians: Couet after the better giftes, but specially after charitie, because that passeth all those giftes,1. Cor. 12.13 14. yea and faith and hope also: therefore Sectamini, Labour al that you can for Charitie: mary couet also after those giftes, to speake with tongues, and to prophecie, but of the two, rather for to prophecie. Againe: He that speaketh with a tongue, let him pray to interprete. Sée how playnely he
stirreth their mindes or willes to séeke for the giftes that God giueth to euery one according to his owne will. This deceiueth you, that you do not consider, that God can worke his owne will vpon our willes: and therefore you imagine that he is not omni∣potent, if we haue willes of our owne. Yes syr, be our willes ne∣uer so vnwilling, he can (as you may sée by the conuersion of S. Paule, turne them to his owne will, and to the very bende of his owne will, more or lesse, euen as much as he wil. Howbeit I am not ignorant, that S. Paule there treateth specially of the giftes called Gratiae gratis datae, and not gratum facientes: in the distri∣bution whereof, Gods will maye and did commonly worke, without cooperation of mans will, although mans will may in such also, and did sometimes concurre, as in them that prayed for the gifte to interprete tongues. About Good-workes, in speciall. I come with you now to the species of Good-workes,Prayer to Saintes. and first to prayer. And of prayer for the dead I haue already dispatched. Then against prayer to Saintes, what haue you?Pur. 451. We call not vpon Saintes, because we beleeue not in them, for how should we call vpon them, in whom we beleeue not? Rom. 10. Againe:Pur. 310. Touching Ambrose, and some other also about his time, their Inuocation of Saintes, was not agreable to the doctrine of S. Paule, who sheweth that we can inuocate none but him in whom we beleue, which to al true Christians is God only And yet if you remember since the second Chapter) S. Ambrose and his felowes of that time, were true Christiās. But I must kéepe that to your contradictions in the eleuenth Chapter.Heb. 13. Eph. 6. And againe S. Paul him selfe was (I trow) agreable to his owne doctrine: who yet so of∣ten inuocateth and calleth vpon the faithfull, beséeching them to pray for him. Well then, to your obiection: where is your scrip∣ture (for you will not, if you be a man of your worde, runne to Doctors) that we must beléeue in God onely, and that we may not beléeueExo. 14. in Heb. 2. Par. 20. in Heb. Philem. in his Saintes also? The Scripture in your own place and in sundry other places teacheth me to beléeue alsoIohn. 14 Rom. 3. in Christ according to his humanitie, and namely in his bloud. Also the Créede of the first Nicene Councell teacheth me to beléeue Ar. 83. Epi. in fine Aucorat. In the one holy Catholike and Apostolike Church, as you may sée also in the end of the New Testament set foorth by your
owne master,Hier contr. Lucif. Infra ca. 10 dem. 34. Beza. And S. Hierome saith, that it was solenne, the custome in Baptisme, after confession of the Trinitie, to aske, Credis in Sanctam Ecclesiam? Doest thou beleue in holy Church? And immediatly he addeth: In what Church beleeued the Ar∣rian? In the Arrians Church? But they haue not the Church. In our Church? sed extra hanc baptizatus, but beeing baptized out of her, he could not beleeue in her that he knew not. Euen as S. Paule saith of Christ in the place that you alleage, How shall they beleue (in him) whom they haue not heard of?His intent ther is, that the Apo¦stles preaching to the Gentiles is of God. Whereby you perceiue, that S. Hierome remembred the place well inough. Briefly therefore, we beléeue not in the Arrians Church, nor in the Arrians Saintes, nor in your Church, nor in your Saintes: but we beléeue in the Catholike Church, and in her Saintes, be∣cause it is God and Christ his Church, God & Christ his Saints. And so we do not inuocate Arius, nor Hus, nor Luther, nor Caluine, nor any other falsenamed Saintes of Heretikes, but after God we inuocate Christ the man our Lorde, and his moste glorious mother our Lady, and S. Peter, S. Paule, with the rest of the Catholike Saintes: both beléeuing in God, in Christ, in his Saintes, and also inuocating God, and Christ, and his Saintes, not all alike, but euery one in his degrée, the degrée of the Saintes being so farre different from the degrée of God, as it is incomparable. You deceiued your selfe with this distinction, Credo in deum, Credo deo, Credo deum, I beleeue in God, I be∣leue (to) God,Aug. in Io. tr. 29. Theoph. in Io. 12. I beleue God, hauing heard that some Authors do (in a certayne sense) make it be God alone in whom we beléeue: and not knowing, that other authors, & also the Scriptures will (in another sense) haue vs to beléeue in such as be of God. As of a stone falling from an high, although it be most properly said, ten∣dit in centrum terrae, yet is it well said also, tendit in superficiem terrae, as in order to the center, wherevpon in saying it tendeth to the superficies, we do in déede say, it tendeth to the center. I know some Catholikes in answering to this obiection, do say, that the Apostle meaneth such inuocation as tendeth immediatly to ye last end, that is, to god, & so do graunt accordingly, yt it is beleuing in God alone, wherof he speaketh, which is a sufficiēt answer to the obiection. But I cōsidering that he speketh of Christ as mediator, & therfore as mā▪ haue said what I think most agreable to ye text.
As for your iangling there without allegations, that if Saints be inuocated, then God alone knoweth not the hearts of al men,Pur. 451. and God only is not to be worshipped (and serued,) and Christ is not our only Mediator and aduocate: Where you say this to vs now whom you denie to be the true Church, and to S. Ambrose with others of old whō you confesse to haue bene ye true Church notwithstāding: so you must say it likewise to S. Iohn, for inuo∣cating the holy Angels, Apoc. 1. and to God himself for making an Angell to be worshipped, Apo. 3. (as more at large I told you in the 6. chapter, to the Angell also that in his golden censer offereth our prayers, making suche a perfume of them before God,Supra pag. 42. by meanes of his incense mingled with them Apo. 8. To the 24. Se∣niors also, which semblably haue phialas adoramentorum quae sunt orationes Sanctorū, swéete odours, that is to say, our praiers in boules for the purpose, singing accordingly praises to Christ in the person of all tribes, & tongues, & people, & nations. Apoc. 5. Finally to all which in the holy Scripturs recommend others to God, or desire to be recōmended of others. If you wil not quarrel with these likewise, you must let fall your suite against the for∣mer, and confesse that it is nothing against one mediator to god, thogh we are & haue neuer so many mediators, so yt al make suite to God by him. Nothing also against god alone to be worshipped, so yt we worship none but for him. Nothing finally against God alone to know our hearts, so that all others know them by him. For otherwise your argumēt procedeth aswel against Chirst the man, that neither he is to be worshipped,1.Tim. 2. nor knoweth the hartes of men. For as he hath it by the gift of God, so his Saintes like∣wise by gifte haue it in their degrée. So much of praier: now to fasting.Fasting. About which you haue again two textes. Thus you say to D. Allen: You are they that attend to spirites of error & doctrines of diuels, forbidding to marry,Pur. 391.20 22. Ar. 20.93. and absteining (or, cōmanding to absteine) frō meates which God hath created to be receiued with thanks giuing. 1. Tim. 4. There is the brande marke of Romish religion, that all the water in Tiberis, nor in the Ocean sea, shal not be able to wash out. Well & lustily crowed. But soft a little, & you shall sée me straight draw inough and inough againe, euen out of your owne puddle, to wash al suf∣ficiently. In the third chapter I haue recorded your own words,Supra pag. 10.
how Aerius taught that Fasting-daies are not to be obserued. And how Iouinian taught that fasting and abstinence from certayne meates profite litle or nothing at all.Ar. 45.46 And that for this cause S. Epiphanius and S. Augustine counted Aerius for an Heretike, as S. Augustine counteth Iouinian likewise for no better, for that he said,Au. Her. 82 & de Ec. dog. ca. 68. Nec aliquid prodesse, That fastes and abstinence from certaine meates do not profite any thing: or as we haue in another place, for that he did beléeue, nil meriti accrescere, That it is no increase of merite, to them, that for loue to chastise their bo∣dies, do absteine from wine or flesh. Of that iudgment were these Fathers, and yet they were (if you remember your owne confes∣sion since the second Chapter) of the true Church, and in high fa∣uour with God. And therfore this is not such a marke in Romish religion, but that it may be currant inough. How much more, considering that you confesse further,Pur. 75. 1. Cor. 9. and say: In deede S. Paule cōmaundeth, and by his example commendeth christian chastise∣mēt of mens bodies, by abstinence and fasting, and that for daun∣ger of eternall damnation. Is not here then gret néed of all Tibe∣ris, yea and of all the Occean sea: Well then, whom & what doth S. Paule meane there? The Manichées, the Tacianistes, & other such Heretikes (of whō I noted more in the sixt Chapter) which said, that certayne meates were the creatures of the diuell. Mark the words, and conferre them together: To absteine from the meates, which God hath created: And why is that an error and a doctrine of the diuels? because euery creature of God is good, and nothing is to be reiected. And therfore S. Augustine answering the Manichées, (as I do now the Protestants) noted in like ma∣ner vpon the very words,Aug. cōtra Faust. li. 30 ca. 6. that there is much difference betwene them that abstein from meates for a sacred signification (as they in the old Testament,) or for chastising of the body (as now the Catholikes:) and them that absteine from meates which God hath created, dicendo quod eos deus non creauit, saying, that God did not create them. Therefore the former is the doctrine of the Prophetes and of the Apostles, the later, of the lying diuels. Your other text is for Iouinian, agaynst the merite of fasting: If Iouinian taught,Ar. 46. that fasting, abstinence from certayne meates, and other bodily exercise, of them selues profite litle, his doctrine agreeth with S. Paule. 1. Tim. 4. but if he taught (as he is charged)
that such things profite nothing at all, we agree not with him in that opinion. You would fayne wipe your hands of Iouinians heresie, but it will not be, the brandmarke is imprinted to déepe, it wil not out. For his heresie was (as you heard euen now) that Fasting & abstinence is not more meritorious, then eating with thanks giuing. So S. Augustine meaneth,Merites. when he chargeth him to haue taught, Nec aliquid prodesse, That they profite nothing, as by another place I haue told you more playnly: And as in the same place, in the very next article of his heresy, he chargeth him, that Meritis adaequabat, To the merites of chast and faythfull matrimonies he made equall (and not more meritorious, as the Catholikes did, and do) the virginitie of Nunnes, and the conti∣nence of the mansexe in holy persons that choose the single life. S. Paules wordes to Timothée, are these: Exercise thy selfe vnto Religion, or godlines. For bodily exercise is profitable vnto litle: but religion is profitable vnto all things, hauing promise of this present life, and of the life to come. Now what Scripture con∣ferre you, to shew that by bodily exercise he meaneth fasting and abstinence from wine or flesh? The thing is playne, if we marke and conferre no more but the words of this place it selfe: that bo∣dily exercise is that, which is done for the body, to preserue it in health, & in this present life. to the which most men, yea priestes and bishops sometimes are too much giuen, mispēding much time in walking, riding, hunting, hawking, and such like, for the pre∣seruation of their bodies: and litle or no time at all in spirituall exercise, that is to say, for the preseruation and increase of their soules in godlines & religion, wheras the same notwithstanding is (as we know by Gods promise in diuers places of holy Scrip∣ture) profitable both to that litle, which they séeke for by such bo∣dily exercise, that is, to this present life (in so muche that many holy Ermites & Monks, liuing continually in such exercise, haue passed the age of a hundred yeres) and also which is incōparable to the life to come. And therefore S. Paule absteined and fasted him selfe, to auoyde eternall damnation, as your selfe confessed a litle afore, Ne reprobus efficiar, least I become a reprobate,1. Cor. 9. saith he, and not onely that, but also to get coronam incorruptam, a crowne incorruptible. And the place is much to be noted for con∣ference with this place which we haue in hande, because he there
calleth it his running, and fighting, that he did so sharply vse his owne body, saying that he did therein imitate the schollers of bo∣dily exercise, to wit, the runners in gole, and fighters at barriers, who, to make them selues more nimble & actiue, absteine from all things, and yet no more but to winne a corruptible crowne, being as litle a thing as that litle that he speketh of to Timothie, or ra∣ther much lesse, though of some estéemed much more, such present glory (I say) compared with this present life and health thereof. Thus you sée by conference most manifestly, what is bodily exer∣cise, and that you cleane contrary, not knowing white frō blacke, take it for fasting & abstinence, for that exercise (I say) which the Apostle there opposeth to it, and counteth spirituall, or exercise vnto Godward. Which spiritual exercise, as S. Paule, so his dis∣ciple also S. Timothie vsed in like champion maner: Amongest other poyntes of it, to kéepe him selfe chast, he absteined wholly from wine, & drunk nothing but water, though being maruelous weake of body. Whervpon the Apostle, like a tender father, wri∣teth vnto him:1. Tim. 5. Kepe thy selfe chast, by other exercise: but do not yet drinke water: but vse a litle wine for thy stomake & thy often sicknings. Which place againe you depraue, & say, that the Apostle writeth this vnto him, assuring him that such bodily exercise pro¦fiteth but a litle.Pur. 76. No syr, I haue shewed you what the Apostle cal∣leth bodily exercise, and that he counteth this to be exercise vnto godlines, and that it profiteth so much as importeth, besides this life, which is but litle, the auoyding of damnation, & the winning of a crowne in heauen. Howbeit for al that, they which are weak of body, must runne & wrestle as they may: Timothie must consi∣der that he is excéeding féeble, and therfore not alwayes to drinke water onely, and yet withal, that he is young, and therfore not to be very bold of wine, but vse a litle only. The measure of al is, as S. Paule hath taught vs,1. Cor. 9. to tame the pride of the body, to subdue it, to bring it vnder, that it be not our maister, that it be our ser∣uaunt, neither rebelling against our commaundement, nor fain∣ting in our necessary worke. Which measure is set & prescribed, so as it might in generall, by his Spirite, and by his Spouse, who prophecied of such prescript fasting, like to ye fastes prescribed by S. Iohn to his disciples,Mat. 9. as also of the Pharisées, and Filij sponsi, the children of the Bridegrome, do fast them, howsoeuer the chil∣dren
of Aerius & of Iouinianus, do breake them, contemne them, blaspheme them. So much of Good-works: now to the Sacra∣mentes. About the Sacramentes, in generall. Of the Sacramentes in generall, first you say:Pur. 450. We beleue that there are but two Sacramentes of the New Testament, Baptisme and the Lords Supper, instituted by Christ. 1. Cor. 10. You meane belike the beginning of that chapter, wher it is said that ye Israe∣lites were in Moyses baptized in the Cloude and in the Sea, and did eate and drinke of Manna & of the Rocke. Are those the sacra∣ments of the new Testament instituted by Christ? Again suppose they are: what a reason is this, In that place we reade of two,Supra pag. er∣go there are but two? It is no good Logike (you sayd your self in this chapter aboue) to conclude negatiuely of one place of Scrip∣ture, This is not conteined in it, therefore it is not true. For we reade as playnly, yea more playnly, of the other fiue sacramentes in other places, as of Confirmation, Ioa. 7. of Penance, Io. 20. of Extreme vnction, Iac. 5. of Orders, Mat. 26. of Matrimony, Mat. 19, and of most of them, in many other places also. That they be Sacraments I cōfesse we reade not there: no more do we 1. Cor. 10. or any where els reade that the other two be Sacramentes, but that we gather of that which we reade, and as wel in the fiue as in the two. This is inough: yet for further satisfaction, the stu∣dious may cōsider that S. Paule, 1. Cor. 10. had iust cause to men∣tion those two or three figures onely. For his purpose there is,1. Cor. 9.10 to warne vs, that it is not inough that we be entred within the barres, but that we must afterward runne and fight coragiously, to winne ye prise. Therfore he nameth these Mosaical mysteries, that were figures of the Sacramentes which we began withall, to witte, Baptisme and the complement of Baptisme which is Confirmation, & the Eucharist: which thrée were then common∣ly, and yet be at once ministred adultis, at their first entring into the Church, as it is manifest in antiquitie,Infra ca. .12 and may be gathered Heb. 6. Now then what reason is it to trie the number of the Sacramentes by that place: as though because those be at the first▪ entrance, therefore there be no more in the whole course, nor in the end, nor to gouerne the knights, nor to encrease them, nor to saulue them.
Pur. 450.Moreouer you say of the Sacraments in generall: We beleeue that they giue not grace (ex opere operato) of the work wrought, but after the faith of the receiuer, and according to the election of God. 1 Cor. 10. Againe, And how should the Sacrament giue grace of the worke wrought, if faith were requisite in them that receiue them? You quote for this also 1. Cor. 10. but you haue no such thing there. And touching your argument, it holdeth aswell against the working of Christes passion. For how should that worke of his geue grace, if faith be requisite in vs? Is not this a witty demaund, trowe you? I haue aboue alleaged manifest Scripture,Cap. eodē. pag. that Christ washeth vs both by his bloud, and also by baptisme. Those are the instrumentes which his mercy (Tit. 3.) vseth in this worke. As for our faith & all other actions, they are not instrumentes, they are not workers, they are onely dispositi∣ons, though necessarie dispositions: as the drines of the wood is a disposition, but it is the fire that worketh. True it is, and the Scripture saith it, that by beléeuing and by other good actions we worke our owne saluation. Philip. 2. as by way of meriting: but it saith not, that we worke the effect of any Sacrament, as our regeneration when we are baptized, our Corroboration whē we are confirmed, our cibation when we are housled: though our faith and other vertues be necessary therein, that by our indispo∣sition we do not put obicem. Christes passion as it did both me∣rite and worke all, so to our déedes it giueth vertue to merite, to the Sacraments it geueth vertue to worke. Thus the Scripture teacheth, and thus the Catholike Church beléeueth, what soeuer you meane by your Church,Pur. 241. when being told by D. Allen, that the bloud of Christ maketh mens works meritorious, you tell him agayne, that the Church of Christ abhorreth that blasphemy. By al which is reuealed your manyfold ignorance, in that you say,Pu. 35.155 The meane on Gods behalfe, by which we are made parta∣kers of the fruites of Christes passion, and so grafted into his bo∣dy, is his holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest and assurance of our inheritance: who worketh in vs faith, as the onely meane by which the righteousnes of Christ is applyed vnto vs. Ephe. 1. And as for the Sacramentes (which you seeme to make the onely condites of Gods mercy) we are taught in the holy Scriptures, that they are the Seales of Gods promises, giuen for the confirmation
of our faith, as was Circumcision to Abraham, when he was iu∣stified before through faith. Rom. 4. Here are diuers poyntes of Caluinisme boldly affirmed, & two places of Scripture quoted for them, but how falsely and fondly, I shall easily declare. S. Paule Rom. 4. declareth, that it was a seale or cōfirmation on Gods part, that also the vncircūcised, shall be iustified by faith, because with Abraham béeing so iustified Gen. 15. he entred af∣terwarde, Gen. 17. such a bargayne. As we may likewise say,Mat. 16. that it was a Seale, that we are blessed by cōfessing, Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God, because S. Peter being for the same confession blessed, had also the keyes of heauen geuen him in re∣ward. And as this would serue vs well, if they which haue the keies after Peter, should say that none are blessed but they: so the other serued well, when they which were Circumcised in flesh after Abraham, did say, that none were iustified but they. Is this to say, that all men are iustified before they come to the Sacra∣mentes, and that all Sacramentes be Seales of such a matter? yea or so much, as that all Iewes were iustified before they came to Circumcision, and that Circumcision it selfe was to them a Seale of such a matter? This is your euident Scripture, this is your necessary concluding vpon it. Goodly geare forsooth, that for it we must leaue the Catholike Church and her guyde the holy Ghost, and go to schole to Caluine. Other poyntes of your ignorance are about the Holy spirite of promise. You saye, it is the meane to make vs partakers of the frutes of Christes passion, Item, the meane to graffe vs into his body, Item, that it worketh in vs faith. By all which you declare that you know not what the Spirite of promise is, and that you are no conferrer of Scriptures together, how muche soeuer you bragge thereof. Varietie of matter bréedeth prolixitie against my wil, though of euery one I say neuer so litle: which I beséech the gentle Reader to consider. Otherwise in this matter I might lay together so many Scriptures as would fill the most gréedy that is. Briefly, Christ the day he ascēded (as often afore both he,The Spirite of promise. Sac. of Confir∣mation. and S. Iohn Baptist, and the Prophetes, namely Ioel) said: And I sende the promise of my Father vpon you. Luc. 24. And he com∣maunded them not to returne home into Galilée, but to exspect in Ierusalem his fathers promise, which you haue hard (quoth he)
of my mouth: for Iohn baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the holy Ghost, not many dayes hence, to wit, the tenth day off, béeing Whitsonday. They had faith afore, and they were baptized afore, and therefore graffed into his body afore, (though not fully baptized, not fully graffed:) and yet they were to receiue this spirite, this promise, as being (not the meane, &c. but) the very greatest fruite of Christes passion, the complement of baptisme, the full ingraffing into his body which is his church, yea the very inheritance it selfe. For the inheritance is the Fa∣thers promise, Rom. 4. and so in Genesis, and in all the Olde Testament: And this spirite is) as you heare) the Fathers pro∣mise, called therefore of S. Paule, the earnest of our inheritance, because it is the full first fruites thereof. And therefore so farre as the Gospell goeth, so farre alwayes goeth this spirite together with it: to the Iewes, Act. 2. to the Samaritanes, Act. 8. to the Gentiles, Act. 10. As to this day in the Catholike Church, where the same Gospell continueth, it is still giuen to all the bapti¦zed, by imposition of the Bishoppes handes. Marke it well: it quite ouerthroweth your new inuented Gospell, wherein after faith, and after baptisme, you giue not this spirite: euen also your owne place to the Ephesians Cap. 1. condemneth you: for there it is said to the Ephesians, that first they heard the word of trueth, the Gospell of their saluation, then that they beleeued in Christ,, and then after beleeuing, you were sealed with the holy spirite of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. If this be not playne ynough, conferre Acts. 19. where the very storie of it is reported, concerning twelue Ephesians, who were baptized with Iohns Baptisme, afore S. Paule came vnto them: and then were taught by S. Paule, that they must beleeue in Iesus. Which when they heard, they were baptized (by some minister of S. Paules) in the name of our Lord Iesus. Et cum imposuisset, &c. And after that Paule him selfe laying his hands ouer them, the holy spirite came vpon them. By this litle the Reader may iudge who findeth out in déede the meaning of Scripture by plaine con∣ference of other Scriptures, & who onely talketh therof. And also how far the Protestants erre,Note their ig∣norance. when they hold, this spirite promi∣sed to be nothing els but the gift of tongues: that is to say, Chri∣stes greatest gift (for so it is cleare by these places) to be his least
gift of al, for so were tongues, witnesse S. Paule 1. Cor. 14. Your last error in that place, is, that faith is the onely meane to applie Christ vnto vs. Whereof I said inough before. Neither is it the only meane, nor any meane at all, in this sense, as ye Sa∣cramentes are meanes, that is to say, instruments.VVhy faith so much in the Scriptures. It is a dispo∣sition to receiuing of the Sacramentes, and otherwise also a me∣rite of saluation, yea the first of all dispositions, and the first of al merites, and that is the cause why it is so much spoken of in the Scriptures. They then had to do with vnbeléeuers, that is, with Iewes and Gentiles, as we now likewise haue to do with vnbe∣leuers, that is, with Heretikes. Therefore both they and we are euermore in commending of faith, of the Catholike faith, (for o∣ther faith there is not) and namely of these articles therof which ech time and place requireth, because they which are without, must first of all be gotten in, if we can, for vntill then, although we be neuer so rich within, yet we haue nothing to relieue their néede. About the Sacramentes, in special. The necessitie, and effect of Baptisme. After the Sacramentes in generall,Baptisme. Pur. 450. as touching particular Sacramentes, thus you say: Baptisme is necessarie for all Chri∣stians to receiue▪ that are not by necessity excluded from it. 1. Pe. 3. For all Christians? Baptisme maketh Christians, béeing there∣fore called Christening, and it is necessarie for all men to receiue it. But when it can not be actually had, the effectuall desire of it supplieth the want. Which desire Infantes haue not, and ther∣fore onely the actuall hauing of Baptisme,Rom. 5. doth quicken them in Christ, being dead in Adam. I know your master Caluine tea∣cheth you otherwise, to wit, that some infants be saued, although they be not baptized (wherein he is a Pelagian,) and againe, that some others bee not saued, although they bee baptised,Supra. pag. wherevpon you sayde erewhile (for I did marke it well inough) that the Sacramentes giue grace according to the election of God: as though all Infantes baptized, and so dying, be not of Gods electe. What Scripture haue you for this geare? Surely 1. Peter 3. hath no suche thing, but rather the con∣trarie. For he sayth playnely, that Baptisme saueth vs now, vs that bee baptized. And you saye, that it saueth not some
of vs, some (I say) which most certaynly depart hence with it, euen so as they receiued it. Againe he doth liken it to the water which saued them in the Arke of Noe. Were any of them saued or borne vp from drowning, without the water? How then find you there some saued without Baptisme? Real presence. Eucharist. Pur. 450.Touching another Sacrament, thus you say: Christ is present at his Supper, but not after a grosse and a Capernaical maner, but as he was present in Manna to the Fathers, 1. Cor. 10. S. Paules purpose there is (as I said also before) to warne vs,Supra pag. that we be not secure and carelesse, leaning vpon this onely, that we haue begon well, as with Faith, and with Baptisme, Confirmation, and Eucharist. For (saith he) our fathers, all of them, were vn∣der the cloude, and all of them went through the sea, yea & it was a spirituall or mysticall thing, that béeing (I say) in the Cloude and in the sea, it was a figure of Baptisme, It was baptizing in Moyses. Moreouer all of them did eate of the same Manna, and all of them did drinke of the same water, yea and it was a mysti∣call, a spirituall meate, a spirituall drinke, for it signified Christ. All of them were partakers of all these mysticall benefites. But what followed for all that? All of them did not afterward so as they should do, but some of them sinned, and offended God, and therefore they were laide along in the desert, they came not into the lande of promise. So you therfore (saith the Apostle) must be∣ware all sinne hereafter, beware of falling, and not thinke it e∣nough that you are now in the race, yea and running in the race, but runne so that you may catch the garland. This is the effect of that place. No word of that you say. For it is one thing, that they all, aswell they that sinned afterwarde, as they that sinned not, did eate one & the same meate: and another thing, that they and we eate one and the same meate. As likewise they al had one baptisme, but not they and we haue one baptisme. As for the Capharnaites, you vnderstand not the Chapter: their grosnesse was, that they did not beléeue him to haue descended frō heauen,Ioan. 6. to be the sonne of God, & able therefore to do that he said, to giue his flesh in déede for meate. But he proueth that he des∣cended from thence, and that he was there afore, because they shal sée him ascende thither againe: graunting them in déede, that flesh
(that is to say, man) is not able so to doe, but that he is spirite, that is to say, God, and therefore the wordes that he speaketh, to be effectuall. And so they departing like Apostates, the true disci∣ples do there cōfesse the foundation, saying: Thou hast the words of euerlasting life, and we beleeue and know that thou art Christ the sonne of God. And so the whole drift of that chapter (consi∣dering that most euidently it is, to buyld in this maner vpon his omnipotencie, his Real presence in the Sacrament, and diuine vertue therof to rayse the dead) proueth most clearely, you, my masters, to be no better then ye Capharnaites,Protestantes be Caphernaites. who will no more then they, beléeue his omnipotencie to that effect, but rather de∣part from him, that is, from his Church, saying as they said: Du∣rus est hic sermo, et quis potest eū audire: This doctrine is against all reason, and who can endure to heare it. Transubstantiation. Againe you say of the same Sacrament:Pur. 295. But of all follies this is the greatest, that when the Papistes haue prated neuer so long of the Sacrifice of (Melchisedeches) bread and wine, at the last they will haue no bread nor wine at all in their Sacrifice. That Melchi∣sedeches Sacrifice consisted in bread and wine,Dem. 24. I shall declare in the 10. chapter, for those of the old writers that you confesse so to haue said. Now only to your wise argument, that proueth the Papistes and their Fathers the olde writers to be suche fooles. Your selfe confesse (as afore it is manifest) and the trueth it is, that the drinke of the water of the Rocke was a figure of our drink in Christes Chalice, although that were water, and this is no water, no nor made of water: How much more then might Melchisedeches bread and wine be a figure of it, although there be no bread nor wine in it, cōsidering that yet of bread and wine it is made, yea and so reteineth still the same formes of bread and wine, that he could say vnto vs, Take eate it, and drinke it. O most swéete Iesus, in déede thou hast ye words of life euerlasting, omnipotent sonne of God omnipotent. Whosoeuer go to Cal∣uine, it is good for vs to sticke to thée who giuest vs such a meate, and in so vsuall, so naturall, so swéete a maner. Mariage of Votaries: of Bishops, Priests, & Deacons. One Sacrament more, and then an end of this long Chapter.Mariage. For mariage of Votaries, as Friar Luther and Catharine his
Nunne, with such like, because we say it is sinne, and no Ma∣riage,Pur. 391. & 20.22. he sayeth, that we are the forbidders of Mariage that S. Paule speaketh of 1. Tim. 4. You are they (sayth he) that attend to spirites of error, and doctrines of diuels, forbidding to marrie, and absteining from meates, and so forth, as I recited a litle afore about Abstinence: where I shewed, that the Apostle there noteth the Eucratites, Manichées, and such other heretikes, that taught, fleshmeat and wine to come of the diuel, and not of God. And lik∣wise, that they condemned Marriage in it selfe, for they sayd that our bodies also are of the diuel, and therefore the propagation of them by Mariage to be his seruice. And yet they durst (such is the impudency of Heretiks) charge the Catholiks for their Nunnes, to be prohibentes nubere, those forbidders of Mariage that S. Paule speaketh of.Aug. cont. Faustum Manich. li. 30. ca. 6.4 But S. Augustine answereth them, & Fulke at once, saying: Ille prohibet nubere, qui hoc malum esse dicit, He forbiddeth to marry that saith it is a naughtie thing (as did those Heretikes) non qui huic bono aliud melius anteponit, and not he which to this good thing preferreth another better thing, that is, virginitie to Mariage, as the Catholikes now do, and also then did, and that so peremptorily, that they counted Iouinian an he∣retike (as we do the Protestants) for the contrarie. A Iouiniano quodam Monacho ista haeresis orta est,Aug Haer. 82. & Retr. li. 2. ca. 22. sayth S. Augustine, This heresie did spring of one Iouinian being a Monke. Virginitatem Sanctimonialium, the virginitie of Nunnes, and the continence of the mansex in holy persons choosing the single life, he said, to be no more meritorious, then chast and faithfull Matrimonies. In so much that certayne sacred Virgins, of good yeres, in the Citie of Rome, where he taught this geare, hearing him, are said to haue married, but no Priest could he deceiue. For the holy Churche which is there, did most faithfully & most manly withstande this monster, and quickly oppressed and extincted his heresie. Yet commeth Fulke so long after, raketh the ashes, thinketh he hath found a sparkle,Ar. 45. and saith: If Iouinian taught that suche as could not conteine, though they had vowed virginitie, should neuerthelesse be maried, this was the doctrine of S. Paule, It is better to marrie then to burne.Pur. 22.32. Am. ad Vir Laps. ca. 5. Agayne, where D. Allen sayth, [How can they for sinne and shame honour that with the name of holy mariage, that S. Ambrose termeth Aduoutrie, S. Au∣gustine
worse then Aduoutry, and they with all the residue of Doctours, horrible incest?] He replyeth,Aug. de bo¦no vid. c. 8. The holy Ghost hath taught vs to call mariage honorable in all men, and the bed vn∣defiled, whatsoeuer any man hath said to the contrarie, and to al∣low mariage in them that cannot conteine, although they haue vowed virginitie, because It is better to mary then to burn. Thus he alleageth Scriptures for heretikes against Gods Church (as he confesseth it was) and against the fathers thereof. But howe doth he proue his interpretations of those Scriptures: out of o∣ther Scriptures as he promised? No I warrant you, he is alwais like him selfe, a clowde without water. Let vs then (following our fathers steppes) confer a litle to finde the true sense. First, what is to burne? To be troubled with the pricking of the flesh, say the heretikes. Not so, saye we: for S. Paule him selfe was troubled much with such pricking, 2. Cor. 12. and yet he was not bidde to marry, when he prayed so instantly agaynst it, but it was sayde vnto him by Christ: My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is perfited in infirmitie, that is, where one acknowlegeth his infirmitie, and séeketh to me for strength, there do I most strongly worke. A notable ensample thereof is S. Au∣gustine, reade his confessions, how impossible he thought it afore to liue without a woman,Aug. conf. li. 6. ca. 15. &. li. 8. c. 12 and how perfitly he was afterwarde chaunged by grace. As also millions of millions in the Catholike Church haue experience in them selues, néeding therfore no other argument against you al, but their own conscience, to condemne your brutish assertion of such impossibilitie. What is it then to burne, or to be burned? we néede not to séeke farre, S. Paule him∣selfe telleth vs, it is non continere, not to conteyne. Marke the wordes: If they do not conteine them, let them marry, for (of the two) it is better to marry, then (not to conteine, or) to be burned. And the same as plain in your other place Heb. 13. Mariage is ho∣norable in all, and the bed (that is matrimoniall copulation) vn∣defiled, for fornicators and aduowters God will iudge. Con∣ferre all this, and what saith he else, but, Let the married olke vse their owne bedde, haue their owne wiues, rather then defile another mans bed, commit aduowtrie with another mans wife. And let the vnmarried folke enter into mariage, rather then not to conteine, to burne, to commit fornication.
Now to what vnmaried folke he saith this, let vs also trye by conference, as the Fathers haue done before vs. To them also which haue vowed virginitie, say the Heretikes. Not so, saith S. Augustine,Aug. de bo∣no vid. ca. 8 De aedul. con. li. 1. ca. 15. 1. Tim. 5. but, quae se non continent. &c. They which do not conteine them, let them marry before they professe continencie, before they vowe it to God, for after they haue vowed, vnles they performe it, they be iustly damned. And what other place doth he cōferre, to proue this? Alio quippe, &c. For in another place he saith of such, Cum enim in delitijs egerint in Christo, When the young widowes haue liued delicately in (or against) Christ, vpon the Churches charges, they will marry, hauing (therof) damna∣tion, quoniam primam fidem irritam fecerunt, Because they haue made frustrate their first faith, or troth: that is (saith S. Austine) from the purpose of continencie they haue deflected their will to mariage. For frustrate they made that faith, and troth, wherwith they had vowed afore the thing which they would not fulfil with perseuerance. So smoothly and gently doth the text folow this cō∣struction: as yet also more playnly you shall sée, if you conferre nubere volunt, with this that followeth, Iam enim quaedam con∣uerae sunt retro satanam. As if he had said: but what do I say, They will marry, They will play the Apostates: Yea already some are turned backe after Satan. Therfore I say of these yong widowes, admit them not to vow. Doth he not hereby euidently expound him selfe, that in suche widowes, to marry, he calleth to turne backe after Satan. Agayne in saying, Let a widowe be admitted no lesse then three score yere olde, and refuse the yon∣ger ones, I will that they marry: Doth he not playnely signifie, that the admitted may not marry, and therefore the young ones, bicause they will marry after their admission, do incurre damna∣tion? This is our conference of the text it selfe with it selfe. But in commeth Fulke, and will néedes for all that haue it meante of the faith of Baptisme and Christianitie,Pur. 147. because S. Paule in the same Chapter saith of another matter, that, who so neglecteth to prouide for his owne familie, hath denyed the faith, meaning ye faith of a Christian man. Specially because he calleth this that we speake of, the first faith. Neither is pists in the Scrip∣ture vsed for a vow o promise. Why? do not you say your selfe, that both there, and once afore in the same Chapter it is vsed for
the vow or promise made in Baptisme? And can you remember neuer a place, where the faith of God is the promise of God? looke Rom. 3. Who hath not heard of the thrée good thinges in maria∣ge, that S. Augustine talketh so much of, Fides, Proles, Sacramen∣tum, faith or troth, yssue, and Sacrament? And where you triumph in your owne conceite against S. Augustines most naturall and most certaine exposition, as though by it the first faith is expoun∣ded for the last vow: now sir, thus the text rūneth, They wil mar∣ry (that is, fidem dare, make promise, betroth them selues to a∣nother husband, to a mortall man) and therefore to be damned, because in so doing they haue broken their first faith, that is, the promise that they made, the troth that they plighted afore to their husband Christ, in their admission among these widowes. What absurditie, what inconsequence is in this? let any man iudge, whether hangeth better together, it, or the exposition of your companions, that D. Allen chargeth them with, to wit, She that breaketh her faith of Baptisme, shall be damned for mariage, which you say, is a cauill, and not worth a rush. What then is your exposition? That belike hangeth exactly. Thus you say: S. Paule saith not she shall be damned for mariage, but because she hath reiected the first faith: that is, suche wanton young huswifes proceede so farre, that at length they forsake widowhood, Chri∣tianitie, and all. Lo,Fulke it goeth hard vvith you. your selfe are compelled to graunt that which you denied, to wit, that they shall be damned because they forsake widowhood? and how forsake they widowhood, but by marrying? Ergo S. Paule saith, they shall be damned for marrying. So vn∣uincible is the texte in our exposition. One texte more you alleage about mariage,Pur. 17.25. to salue your Bi∣shops ytching lust, who, as though it were annexum ordini (saith D. Allen very aptely) must out of hand, for the most parte, haue a wife: whereas yet neuer from the Apostles time to this day,Not one. Mark it vvell. any one Bishop or priest, that is confessed to haue bene a good one, did marry afterwards, neither for all Iouinians plausible argumen∣tes: no not Iouinian him selfe. What haue you then to defend yours withall, that are so cōtrarie to all others?A Bishop is not perfect vvith Fulke vnlesse he haue a vvie Belike (say you) S. Paule taketh mariage to be so annexed to the order of an Eccle∣siasticall minister, that he neuer descrbeth the perfect paterne of a Bishop or Deacon, but one of the first pointes is, that he be the
husband of one wife. Belike you know not, nor care not what you say, for you should haue gathered the cleane contrarie, if you had looked what he meneth by the husband of one wife. A Bishop (saith he) must be the husband of one wife, 1. Tim. 3. A Priest, the husband of one wife. 1. Tim. 3. The meaning thereof you might haue learned, 1. Tim. 5. where he cōmaundeth about the choosing of a professed widow, and saith, quae fuit vnius viri vxor, Let her be such a one, as hath bene the wife of one husband. So then he requireth in a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon to be made, that he haue had onely one wife: How much better then if he haue had none, but is a virgin? This you should haue gathered of his words, and you gather the cleane contrarie, that néedes he must haue had a wife, or els if he be a virgin, he swarueth from the perfect pa∣terne: yea more absurdly, not that he must haue had one, but that he must presently haue one, for of that D. Allen did speake, and to that you alleage S. Paule. And thus (gentle Reader) I haue with Gods assistance gone through all ye Scriptures (reseruing onely a few to other places) which this Heretike alleageth in his two bookes for any matter against the Catholike Church: and answered euery one of them so clearly, that I trust thou art fully satisfied, and doest perceiue playnely, that he had no cause to bragge of Scripture, as in the last Chapter he did most insolently, saying still an end, that he cared not what was against him, séeing Scripture was so expres∣ly with him. But he may (and it please God who is most merci∣full) by this occasion better bethinke him selfe, and leaue his kic∣king agaynst the pricke, that is, against our Lorde Iesus in his Church. Act. 9. specially vnderstanding by this litle (as he may sufficiently) that much more, either he or any other of his side should be throughly satisfied in all & euery thing, if he were pre∣sent here with vs, to sée and heare our dayly conference in the Scriptures: as very many of his side, yea and Ministers aboue a dosen, diuers of them being also of no vulgar wittes, haue come already, haue heard our examining of the Bible (specially of the New Testament) ouer and ouer, haue asked, obiected, replied, whatsoeuer they liste, & haue to euery thing bene so well answe∣red (the prayse is Gods and his Catholike truthes) and on the o∣ther side so hardly posed, all (I say) out of the holy Scripture it
selfe, that euer after a few dayes they haue had more list to heare then to speake, specially seacute;eing vs at euery text to alleage sincere∣ly for their side whatsoeuer they could, and more then they could them selues: and now are, euerie one of them, become so firme, so sure, so perfitte Catholikes, as none can be more, and some of their suffering in Englande for the Catholike faith, in prison, in yrons, and that after the most terrible and most cruell man∣ner, doth most gloriously declare. ¶The ninth Chapter. To defend, that the Doctors, as they be confessed to be ours in very many pointes, so they be ours in all pointes, and the Protestantes in no point: All the Doctors sayings that he aleageth are examined & answered. The first parte. Of his Doctours, generally. j His chalenging words. THat out of the old Doctours Church is no saluation, & that they make with vs in many things against ye Protestants, I declared in the thrée first Chapters by Fulkes owne con∣fession. Now to declare further, that they be wholly ours, with the Aug. sic inuocat Cy¦prianum, de Bapt. con. Don. lib. 5. ca. 17. &. li. 7. cap. 1. Pur. 432. Pur. 383.helpe of their prayers I will defende, that in nothing they make for the Protestants against vs: because he saith vnto D. Allen, speaking of the auncient Doctors and Councels: A∣mong whom as we will not denie, but you haue some patrons of some of your errors, so will we affirme, that you haue more ene∣mies in the greatest. Againe, The Papistes offer to stand to their iudgement in all thinges: and yet in most thinges, yea in the chie∣fest pointes of religion, they are contrarie to the Doctors and old Councels. Againe, Brag of them as much as thou wilt,Pur. 406. thou shalt neuer be able to proue, that of 20. errours which thou defendest,Rusticus es Cor∣ridon. they did hold one. If they haue spoken otherwise then trueth in any matter, they must be In the zeale of the Scribes a∣gainst Christ. told of it as well as other men. But thou must not think, that for one error common with them, thou must hold an hundred cōtrarie to them. He saith, in most things,
and,Pur. 238. in an hundred for one. Yea more then that, in another place: It may be a shame to you Papists (saith he) to leaue & condemne for heresy, all that is true in those mens writings, and agreable to the Scripture: and to make such vaunt for a few superstitious ce∣remonies,Pur. 407. and vncincere opinions. And againe: Nay M. Allen, though those Doctors buyld some hay or stouble, vpon the only foundation Christ, their case is ten thousande times better then yours, which buyld nothing but dirt and dung tempered with hay and stuble, vpon no foundation at all, and seeke by all meanes to digge vp the onely true foundation of our faith Iesus Christ, ma∣king him nothing better then a common person, except his bare name.Ar. 60. And once againe more particularly, The other writers of later yeres (he spoke before of Iustinus Martyr and Ireneus) we are not afraide to confesse that they haue some corruption, wher∣by you may seeme to haue colour of defence for inuocation of Saintes, prayer for the dead, and diuers superstitious and superflu∣ous Ceremonies. But for the chiefe poyntes of Christian religion, and the foundation of our faith, that is, for the honor of God, the offices of Christ, Redemption, iustification, satisfaction, the fruites of Christ his passion, Grace, faith, workes, authoritie of Gods word, authoritie of the Pope, Real presence, Transubstantiation, Communion in both kinds, Images, &c. the most approued wri∣ters, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origen, Epiphanius, Hilarius, Chryso∣stomus, Ieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, &c. are vtterly a∣gainst you, and therefore can not be of your Church. Lo, this he saith of our differing from the Doctors. First touching the num∣ber of the poyntes, to wit, in most things, in many hundreds, yea in all that is true in their writings: and secondly, touching the weight of the poyntes, to wit, in the greatest and chiefest, euen a∣bout God, and Christ him selfe, with those other that he named. ij A generall answere to his chalenge, declaring that we neede not to answere his Doctors particularly. Wherein, I thinke (Reader whatsoeuer thou art) thou doest of thy selfe abhorre the mouth which so filthily runneth ouer: and therfore desirest not that I take ye payns which I haue promised, to ioyne with him in this Chapter vpon the Doctors. As also o∣ther good causes there are why I might spare that labour.Pur. 383 432. First, because speaking of the old Doctors, and old Councels, and the
most auncient primatiue Church, he saith:Pur. 383.432. For which cause (that is, because the Papistes do offer to stand to their iudgement in al things) and not for Confirmation of truth, we alleage the autho∣ritie of men, we stand for authoritie only to the iudgement of the holy Scriptures. In which saying as he agréeth well with himselfe aboue in the seuenth Chapter, where he did set at nought all but onely Scripture: so I hauing in the laste Chapter answeared all his Scriptures, haue by this his owne iudgement fully satisfied him, although I meddle not at all with his Doctors, vnlesse he re∣quire me to spende time, onely to mainteine their honor whiche make the forsaid offer, being otherwise (as he here saith) nothing to the matter which is the Confirmation of trueth. Againe, because he himselfe for me doth answere all his owne Doctors, if it be rightly considered,See cap. 5. in the end. in that he confesseth them to haue helde with vs the very same pointes, for the which we must be condemned (no remedie) as differing from the Doctors in the greatest pointes. For why doth he saye, that wée are against the honor of God, and against the Offices of Christ, but because wée hold Inuocation of Saintes, and worshipping of their Relikes? But the Doctors held the same, he confesseth both here,Sup. cap. 3. part. 2. Sup. cap. 7. par. 1. in Traditions and more amply in the 3. chapter. Why doth he say, that we are against the authoritie of Gods word, but because we hold with Traditions? But the Doctors held with the same, he confesseth in the 7. Chap∣ter. And so forth, in the residue of those great pointes, as may ea∣sily be deduced in like maner, or at the least so proued that he shal be faine to cōfesse as much. In somuch that of one of those points he saith thus expresly: I confesse with M. Allen,Pur. 156. that the old wri∣ters not onely knew, but also haue expressed the valew of our re∣demption by Christ in such wordes, as it is not possible that the Popish Satisfaction can stande with them. And yet on the other side, sée what followeth immediatly: Against the valew of which Redemption (saith he) if they haue vttered any thing, by the word of Satisfaction, or any thing els, we may lawfully reiecte their au∣thoritie, not only though they be Doctors of the Church, but also if they were Angels frō heauen. So that nowe, we no more néede to defend against him, that we are not contrarie to the Doctors in such great poyntes, then that the Doctors are not contrarie to them selues in the same, as also, that we are not contrarie to our
selues in the same. For in what words the Doctors speake ther∣of, the same do we. iij I ioyne with him neuerthelesse, particularly. For these causes, this Chapter might well perhaps be spared. Neuerthelesse for more euident clearing of all, I thinke better to examine euery particular of his allegatiōs, reseruing only a few to their more proper places in the next Chapter.Idē in my 33. Dem. Well then, I offer (as he sayth the Papistes do) to stand to the Doctors iudge∣ment in all things that are in question betwene vs and the Pro∣testantes.part. 2. Howbeit, as I said in the 6. Chapter, it is not euery one Doctor, but onely the vniforme consent of the Doctors, to the which we ascribe infallibility: to one, or two, or a few we ascribe no more but probabilitie, and that also no longer then the matter is vndefined of the Church. But yet I say, that the Protestantes haue not agaynst vs, for any one article at all, not onely the Do∣ctors consent (and there, I say, standeth the poynt) but neither so much as any one Doctor at all, and therefore they are destitute e∣uen of that probability also, which some old Heretikes could pre∣tend, as the Donatistes in the matter of S. Cyprians error. Let vs therefore heare what Doctors Fulke alleageth, and for what matters. And first whether they interprete any Scriptures a∣gainst vs, because the last Chapter was of Fulkes Scriptures. The second part. Of his Doctors particularly. First, whether they expound any Scripture against vs. I find that he alleageth the Interpretors about thrée matters, which are these, Antichrist, Onely faith, and Purgatory. j About Antichrist, and Babylon. Pur. 249.As touching Antichrist, he saith: The Seate of Antichrist was appoynted to be set vp in the Latin Church, according to the Re∣uelation of S. Iohn, & the exposition of Ireneus, who iudged that Lateinos was the number of the Beastes name spoken of Apo. 13. Sée I pray you, what ragged wares are these. First, these two conclusions how well they follow: Antichri was appoynted to be set vp in the Latin Church, Ergo, the Pope of Rome is Anti∣christ. Whereas it foloweth as well, that Luther or Caluine is Antichrist, for they are in the Latin Church in the same sense as
you count the Pope to sit in the Latin Church, that is, where the Latin Church was afore, but now is not. The other conclusion: Ireneus iudged that Lateinos should be the name of Antichrist, (as Iesus was and is the name of Christ) Ergo, he iudged that Antichrist was appoynted to be set vp in the Latine Churche. These are his necessarie conclusions. Besides that, it is false that he saith Ireneus iudged Lateinos to be the name. He saith,Iren. lib. 5. Valde verisimile est, It is very likely. But yet of all names that we find, Teitan (sayth he) magis fide dignum est, is most credible. Nos ta∣men non periclitabimur in eo, nec asseuerantes pronuntiabimus, But yet neither that name will I venture to affirme and pro∣nounce, that he shall haue it: knowing that if his name should be manifestly preached in this time, (to wit, afore his comming) no doubt it had bene vttered by him who also saw the Apocalypse. In so much that he there inueigheth agaynst such as Definierint, Will define the name that they inuent, to be the name of him that is to come. Considering also that there is no small daunger there∣in. For if they pardie thinke one name, and he come with ano∣ther name, they shall be easily seduced of him, quasi necdum ad∣sit ille quem caueri conuenit, As though he that they should be∣ware of is not yet come. In which respect, you my Masters of this new Religion, haue deserued a special reward of Antichrist, (as I noted also afore in ye last Chapter (for casting this straunge miste vpon Christes Vicar in the eyes of the blinde,Par. 2. diu. 2 that Anti∣christ when he commeth may walke more boldly. To that purpose you alleage S. Hierome also, and say:Pur. 373. He was not such a slaue to the Church of Rome, thatwhatsoeuer plea∣sed the Bishoppes of that Sea, he was ready to accept. For then he would not haue ben so bold to cal Rome the purple whore of Babylon. Praef. ad Paulin. in lib. Didym. As though when he cal∣leth Rome so, or Pu. 409 Aug. de Ci. dei li. 16. ca. 17. li. 18. ca. 22.27. when S. Augustine calleth it the Westerne Babylon, they meane the Ar. 10. Church of Rome. No syr, S. Augu∣stine meaneth no more but the Empire which was to be there set vp, speaking of the beginning of Rome: and S. Hierom meaneth the Gentility or Paganisme of Rome, which was there as yet in his time against the Church of Rome: as it was muche more, when S. Peter also called Rome Babylon for ye same Paganes, and yet saide of that Church for all that,1. Pet. 5. Ecclesia electa quae
est in Babylone, The elect Church which is in Babylon. In which maner S. Hierome him selfe distinguisheth in another place,Hiero. ad Marcel. ep. 16. tom. 1. hauing called Rome Babylon there also, and saith: Est quidem ibi Sancta Ecclesia, I graunt, there is the holy Church, there are the Triumphes of the Apostles and Martyrs, there is the true confes∣sion of Christ,Rom. 1. there is the faith commended of S. Paule: & Genti∣litate calcata, in sublime se quotidie erigens vocabulum Christia∣num, And treading gentilitie vnder foote, the name of Christians dayly erecting it selfe a loft. So, that within two ages after S. Hieromes time, there were no Gentiles leaft in Rome, but all conuerted into Christians, and so Babylon fully and throughly become Hierusalem. And you know, I thinke, if you reade his preface that you alleage, that he there doth say, that what time he was in Babylon, Damasus was the Bishop. Remember then, what he writeth to the same Damasus, by occasion of certaine suspected felowes in the East,Hier. tom. 2 ep. ad Dam. which would néedes haue him to confesse three Hypostases, not content with three persons, and to communicate with them. I folowing none first but Christ (wher∣as the Arrians followed Arrius, &c.) am ioyned in Communi∣on to thy beatitude, that is to saye (by reason of Damasus his lawfull succeding) to the Chaire of Peter.Mat. 16. Exod. 12. Gen. 7. Vpon that Rocke I know the Church to be builded. Whosoeuer eateth the Lambe without this house, he is a prophane man. If any man be not in Noes Arke, he shall perish when the Deluge ouerfloweth: desy∣ring him in the end most instantly, and saying, That by your let∣ters authoritie may be geuen me, whether it be to refuse, or to vse this worde Hypostases, and withall to signifie, with whom I shall cōmunicate at Antioch, because of the Schisme which was there at that time betwéene Paulinus and others. By this you sée, that in doubt both of faith in time of Heresie, and also of com∣munion in time of Schisme, S. Hierome was readie to be ruled by the B. of Rome, and that all others (by his iudgement and expositiō of Scripture) must likewise do, in so muche that he saith further to Damasus in the same Epistle: Whosoeuer gathereth not with thee, he scattereth: hoc est, that is to say, Qui Christi non est,Leo Epist. 89. ad Epis. vien. proui. Antichristi est, Whoso is not Christes, he is Antichristes, be∣cause (as S. Leo the great saith) Petrum in consortium indiuiduae vnitatis assumpsit Christus, Christ tooke Peter into the participa∣tion
of vndiuided vnitie, so that it should be all one, to be Peters and to be Christes, to be in vnitie with Peter and his Successor, and to be in vnitie with Christ. One more expositor yet, you alleage saying:Pur. 320. Which of your Pre¦lates will folow Ambrose in his Commentary vpon the Apoca∣lypse, where he interpreteth the whore of Babylon to be the citie of Rome? I will recite his wordes for you:Amdro. in Apoc. 17. This whore doth be∣token, in some places, Rome in speciall, quae tunc ecclesiam Dei persequebatur, which then, (in S. Iohns time) did persecute the Church of God: In some places, in generall, the citie of the Diuell, that is to say, the whole bodie of the Reprobate. Is not this now a perilous point with our Prelates, so to touch the citie of Rome in S. Iohns time, which did persecute the Church of Rome, that is, the Clargie and other Christians of Rome? But of the Church of Rome, the vndoubted Ambrose saith if you remember:Ambro. de Sacramen. lib. 3. ca. 1. In all thinges I couet to folow the Romane Church, so protesting, be∣cause he had occasion there to defende a certaine custome of his owne Church at Millaine, which the Romane Church had not, cuius typum in omnibus sequimur et formam, whose paterne and samplar we follw in all thinges, which notwithstanding, he there declareth, that other Churches may vpon good cause haue some ceremonie that the Church of Rome hath not. Likewise he cal∣leth Peter primum and fundamentum, the first and the foundati∣on, in ye very same place, where (say you) he affirmeth,Pur. 320. Ambro. de Inc. d. c. 4.5. that Peter is not the foūdation. So faithfully you deale with your Reader. He doth there excellently cōfute by Peters confession, the Here∣sies that were against Christes Diuinitie & Incarnation. While other mens opinions were in rehearsing, Peter, though alwaies most forward, held his peace. But when he once heard, Vos autē, now what do your selues say of me? statim loci non immemor sui, Primatum egit, Immediately being not vnmindefull of his place, he exercised the Primacie. The Primacie of confession pardie, not of (worldly) honor: the Primacie of faith, non ordinis, not of (worldly) degree And beneath: Faith is the foundation of the Church. Non enim de carne Petri, sed de fide dictum est: For it was not said of Peters flesh, but of his faith,Mat. 16. that the gates of death shal not preuaile against it, his confession ouercommeth hel. Al which we say in the same maner: Heretikes and other ministers of the
diuel may preuaile against the flesh of a Pope: but his faith, but his confession (aswell in the articles that be now in controuersie, as in those at that time) will stand when they shall all be sunke downe into their due place. The rest of the Popes Supre∣macie. Ar. 36.37. Pur. 287.373.374.And here by the waye (because the place is most conuenient, and because it is sone done) to answer vnto that you say, Ireneus, Polycrates, Dionysius Alexandrinus, Cyprianus, the Councell of Africa, and Socrates the Historiographer, did preach or write a∣gainst the Popes authoritie, when it first began to aduance it selfe in Victor, Cornelius, Stephanus, Anastasius, Innocētius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus. I say, first, that all those Popes were of the true Church by your owne confession here cap. 2. and there∣fore you are contrarie to your selfe in making other Popes to be Antichrist, for claiming suche authoritie as these did. Secondly, that all those writers did communicate with those Popes. And therefore your Schismaticall separation hath no helpe of them. Thirdly, that no one of them wrot against the Popes authoritie, as you pretend. What did they then? of Ireneus, Polycrates, and Dionysius, touching S. Victor, and of Cyprianus touching S. Stephanus, I report the trueth here ca. 10. in the 28. demaund. Cyp. ep. 55 68. seu. li. 1. Ep. 3.4.The same S. Cyprian doth exhort S. Cornelius to be as stout in not loosing certaine Africane heretikes vnder the degrée of Bi∣shops, as their owne Bishop had bene in binding them. He al∣so noteth in S. Stephanus some litle negligence, but much more, wilfull obreption in those two lapsed Bishops of Spaine, Basi∣lides and Martialis, who had cōcealed from him the truth that in their supplication they should haue expressed, which because they did not, he sayth wel, that their restitution by the Pope, could not stand them in stéede against their former deposition by the Bi∣shops of their owne prouince. This which so plainely maketh for the Popes authoritie, you are so blinde to bring against it. As concerning the Councels of Africa & Milenis: the question betwene them & those other fiue Popes was not about ye matters of the vniuersal Church, as for example, matters of the faith, quo∣ties fidei ratio ventilatur, (for such matters they also them selues did referre to the Apostolike iudgement of those Popes, antiquae scilicet regulae (et traditionis) formam secuti, quam toto semper
ab orbe mecum nostis esse seruatam,Apud Aug Epi. 94.93. Innocē. ad Con. Cart. & Milenit. Aug. e. 106. Con. Iul. li. 1. cap. 2. De pec. ori. con. Pelag. cap. 8. following the forme of the old (tradition and) Canon, which (saith Pope Innocentius vnto them in those Epistles which S. Augustin being one of them doth often commend most highly as very answerable to the Sea Apo∣stolike) you as well as I do know to haue bene kept alwaies of all the world) but about matters of perticuler persons, as Appeales of Bishops. And that question also was not about the Popes authoritie therin, but what order the Nicene Councel (which first was con∣firmed, and always afterward most exactly obserued of S. Peters Sée, as Municipall lawes are of good kings) had taken therein. And of the inferior Cleargie there was no such question, but they should holde them selues quiet with the iudgement of theyr owne prouince, if not of their owne Bishop, without appealing further, according to Con. Aphric. cap. 92. which you alleage, and according to Concil. Sardicen. Can. 17. which is alleaged Concil. Carthag. 6· cap. 6. & 7. But that Bishops might so appeale, ye Popes auouched both by the old continual custome, Con. Cart. 6. ca. 2. (wherof no man can denie but there are exāples of such appeales out of all prouinces, & namely of the Patriarks of Alexandria & Constantinople, & S. Austine himself Epi. 162. in ye cause of Cecilianus. B. of Carthage deposed by the bishops that began the Schisme of Donatus, vseth it as a plea ye Cecilianus was readie causam dicere apud caeteras ecclesias extra Africam, To be iudged by the other Churches out of Affrike. Ne{que} enim de presbyteris, aut diaconis, aut inferioris gradus clericis agebatur, For the matter was not about any prie∣stes, or Deacons, or inferiors of the Cleargie, but about Bishops, qui possunt aliorum Collegarum iudicio, praesertim Apostolica∣rum Ecclesiarum, causam suam integram reseruare, Who may re∣serue their cause whole to the iudgement of their felowbishops, specially of the Apostolike Churches, where also he saith, In Ro∣mana Ecclesia semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit principatus, The Princedome of the Chayre Apostolike hath alwayes flori∣shed in the Romane Church. Also by the Councel Sardicēse ca. 7. (in the same Carthage Councel, cap. 3. whose authoritie none of those African Bishops did denie, for the same Bishops were of it that were of the Nicen, & S. Austine (ca. 7.) did expresly admit in
the cannon of the Inferiors appealing from theyr owne Bishop. Thirdly by the Nicen Councell also, wherevpon you say, ve∣ry insolently trusting ouermuche your lying Lutherane friendes the Magdeburgians in their Centuries, that S. Augustine and his fellowes tooke those Popes with plaine forgerie and falsi∣fication of the Canons of the Councell of Nice, and fetched them meetly well ouer the Coles for it. You imagine that their Catho∣like grauities were as maleperte with the Popes of their time, as you and such other skipiacks be at this time. Cleane contrarie to the whole storye of that time, and the very wordes and déedes of those Affrike Councels them selues, where we reade no other∣wise of those Popes, then of such as were honored of all for their holines both in their liues, and also after their death euen to this day. And if you of your heades will call all forgerers and falsifiers which aleaged for Canons of the Nicene Councel, more then are conteined in those twentie, how many of the Auntients shal you spare, yea or S. Augustine also himself? How often doth he aleage the Nicen Councel against the Donatists about baptisme? How often do all aleage it about Easter day? and against the Arrians? & for many other matters not once mentioned in those Canons? And therfore as you had no cause to inuent this forgerie, so al∣so the African fathers had small cause (as any man may perceaue by this) to stand so much with the Popes in those Appeales of Bishops from prouinciall Councels: by which their doing for all that, can not be inferred any thing against the Popes authoritie aboue prouinciall Councells, no more then against a generall Councels authoritie aboue a prouincial. For at this day also Ca∣tholike Kinges and Bishops stand with the Popes by the Coun∣cell of Trent, by his owne grauntes, pragmatical compositions, &c. in the right of geuing benefices, of Appealles, &c. with his owne good leaue, without any preiudice to his Superioritie: vn∣les you thinke ye good kings be preiudicial to their own Crowns, when they are content to trie by lawe with their Nobles clay∣ming some priuiledge in the kings royalties. Ar. 37. Soc. l. 7. c. 11 So. li. 6. c. 10But most ridiculous of all you be, where you alleage Socra∣tes the Nouatian speaking against P. and S. Celestinus for ta∣king awaye the Nouatians Churches in Rome, (as before hée touched S. Chrysostome also for the like in Asia) and counting it
a point of foreine Lordship, not of Priesthood. Nouatians,Secularem is not foreie,  you transa, but vvorldly spe∣cially in their owne cause, may not depose: Neither yet doth hée denie the Popes Supremacie ouer all, in carping that facte, no more then he denieth S. Chrysostomes Superioritie in the com∣passe of his Patriarkship of Constantinople. As litle is it to your purpose,Ar. 37. that the forsaid Aphrican Coun∣cell, cap. 6. decréeth, that any Primate of Afrike shall not be called princeps Sacerdotum, aut Summus Sacerdos, prince of priestes, or highest Priest, but onely thus, Primae sedis Episcopus, the Bishop of such or such a first See. What perteinech this to the titles, and much lesse to the Primacie (beeing the thing) of the Bishop of Rome? whom the Africans them selues (as appeareth in S. Au∣gustines works) neuer called Primae sedis Episcopum, but,Aug. e. 157 Apo∣stolicae Sedis Episcopum, the Bishop of the See Apostolike. ij. About onely faith. For only faith thus you say:Pu. 320. Which of your Prelates will fo∣lowe Ambrose in his commentarie vpon the Epistle to the Ro∣manes: where he so often affirmeth, that a man is iustified before God by faith onely. And againe: Cyprian taught,Pur. 287. that faith onely doth profit to saluation. To. 2. ad Quirin. ca. 42. And that he bele∣ueth not in God at all, which placeth not the trust of all his felici∣tie in him onely, de duplici martyrio. And once againe:Pur. 81. What O∣rigens iudgement was concerning Satisfaction for sinnes, he decla∣reth sufficiently in his 3. booke vpon the Epist. to the Rom. cap. 3. where often times he repeateth, that a man is iustified before God by faith onely: affirming that in forgiuenes of sinnes, God respec∣teth no worke but faith onely, as he proueth by the parable that our Sauiour vsed to Simon the Pharisee. Luke. 7. and answereth also those obiections, which euen the Papistes at this day make against vs for teaching that faith only doth iustifie vs in the sight of God. The same which in the last chapter I declared to be S. Paules meaning, to wit, that a man may be iustified by faith,Ca. 8. pa. 4 although before his faith, that is, before he was a Christian, before he was a Catholike, he did not good workes, but euill workes, the same (I saye) doth S. Ambrose and also Origen expresly declare to be their meaning also, and it is false that you say, Origen to answer our obiections which we make against you for teaching that the
good workes which after faith Christ worketh in vs, doo not aug∣ment our iustification. He that onely beleeueth (saith Origen) is iustified, etiamsi nihil ab eo operis fuerit expletum, although no whit of works haue bene done by him. S. Cyprians woordes in Latine are but these thrée, Fidem tantum prodesse, faith onely to profit:Cyp. Test. ad Quir. lib. 31.42. meaning that faith profiteth, and, without faith nothing profiteth, alleaging his Testimonies for it accordingly, that A∣braham beleued God, & it was reputed to him vnto iustice. Gen. 15. and, If you will not beleue, you shall not vnderstand. Esay. 7. according to the Septuaginta. The booke de duplici Martyrio is thought to be supposition, coyned by Erasmus: though that saying which you alleage, is of it selfe Catholike inough. For, to trust in Gods giftes, as in the Catholike faith, and good workes that hée worketh in vs, also to trust in his Sainctes: to trust in these, I say, as they be his, is to trust in him onely. iij. About Purgatorie. Touchin Scripture expounded against it. Pur. 380.383.Concerning the lt of the thrée: where D. Allen hauing allea∣ged for his part the consent of all auncient Doctors, said boldly to his Reader: [Aske your new teachers, whether they haue any ex∣presse words in Scripture that denie prayers to be profitable for the dead, or at least (which is libertie enough) expounded for that meaning by any one man of all the antiquitie.] Fulke answering therevnto, saith: As for a place so expounded by an auncient wri∣ter, I will seeke no further, then the place of Hieronym euen nowe alleaged out of your owne Canon lawe, vppon 2. Cor. 5. referring the Reader to many other places alleaged in this aun∣swere, as out of Cyprian, Origen, and others: by whiche, the intollerable lying, and bragging, and rayling of this miscreant, shalbe better confuted, then by any contradiction of woordes. So hotte hée taketh that which D. Allen with all mildnes and swéetenes speaketh for saluation of Soules, [to suche as maye for theyr simplicitie be soone deceaued by following other mens errors, with whome the names of Doctors, or the onelye bare bragge of Scriptures, are as good as the alleagation of places.] And sée whether he did not worthily so say: for I assure thée Rea∣der,Fulke taken in a vayne brag. it is yet bare names of Doctors, that this Answerer also saith, out of Ciprian, Origen, & others▪ He cānot shew, that in his
whole booke, neither afore this place nor also after, he alleaged any exposition of a text by Cyprian, or Origen, for that purpose, no nor by any other at all (as thou shalt here perceaue) excepting onely S. Hierome. And touching him also, what a coosining is it of the Reader, to pretend that Hierome expoundeth Scripture against prayer for the dead, considering that you confesse your selfe, that Hierome allowed prayer for the dead, as in the third chapter I noted:Cap. 3. pa.  diui. 1. As if you would beare the simple in hand, that we also who now al∣low prayer for the dead, do expound Scripture against prayer for the dead? Is this to shew that the Doctors be of your side in déede, or onely to abuse their bare names? The place of S. Hierome is not vpon the 2. Cor. 5. but vpon Gal. 6. And in the Canon lawe (if Gratians booke be Canon law) you haue the meaning of it: Verum hoc de impaenitentibus accipiēdum est, saith Gratian, But this is to be vnderstood of the vnpenitent: de mortuis damnatis, of the dead that are damned, saith the Summe ouer the head. Neither do the wordes enforce ought els, alleage you them ne∣uer so often. These they are:Pur. 382.383.445. In this present worlde we knowe that one of vs may be helped of another, either by prayers or by counselles, but when we shall come before the iudgement seate of Christ, neither Iob, nor Daniell, nor Noe, can intreate for any man, but euery man must beare his owne burden. For any man (you sée) whose burden weigheth contrarie to all intreatie of others, because he dyed impenitent. But otherwise who so dyeth penitent, deserueth thereby that the intreatie of others maye helpe him (as you heard S. Augustine saye in the laste Chapter, answering the texte, (2. Corinth. 5.Cap. 8. par. 3. diui.) and so he beareth his owne burden, and yet may be holpen by others. For suche is the poise of his burden, that it weigheth this way, and not the other way. In an other place D. Allen rehearseth foure textes that they alleage agaynst Purgatorie,Pur. 436.437.438. Eccle. 11. Mat. 7. 2. Cor. 5. Apoc. 14. (the aunsweres I haue put downe in the last Chapter) and then saith, [I aske them sincerely, and desire them to tel me faith∣fully, what Doctor or wise learned man of the whole antiquitie, euer expounded these textes, or any one of them agaynst Pur∣gatorie or practise for the dead.] Herevnto Fulke answereth:
Before the heresie of purgatorie was planted in the world, how could the old Doctors interpret these places by name against that which they neuer heard named?Cap. 3. pa. 2 diui. 1. Infra ca. 11. contra. 45. this poore shift he falleth vnto, not considering that it is contrarie to his bragges here a litle before, of Cyprian, Origen, and others, nor remembring that in the third Chapter he confessed, the old Doctors both heard & allowed, both the name & the thing, both of purgatory and prayer for the dead. Yet haue they (he saith) so interpreted some of them, that their interpretation can not stande with Purgatorie or prayer for the dead, as I will shew in their particuler answers. So he promiseth: and yet wheras they are foure texts, only at one of them be brin∣geth the Doctors interpretation, and that also none but S. Hie∣romes, whom also he confesseth (as I haue said) to allow prayer for the dead. Let vs sée thē how you shew that his interpretation is against his owne beliefe. And because you crake of the expo∣sition of the Fathers (you say to D. Allen) Hieronym in his com∣mentarie vpon this place, Eccle. 11. expoundeth the north and the south not for the states of grace and wrath (as diuers of the aun∣cient Fathers do, saith D. Allen) but for the places of rewarde or punishment of them that dye. Why? what repugnance is be∣twéene those two expositions? They agrée both so well, that S. Hierome hath them both. First, the two states of them that dye: Whersoeuer thou doest fall, there shalt thou alwayes remayne, Siue te rigidum, &c. Whether thy last time find thee rigorous and cruell to the poore, or milde and mercifull. Then the two places of payment: The tree either did sinne before while it was stan∣ding, and then it is put afterwardes in the North coste: or if it did beare fruites worthy of the South, it shall lye in the South coste. And immediatly: Neither is there any tree, but it is either in the North, or in the South. Vnderstanding by the North any place of punishment, not onely eternall, but also temporall, in so much that he there sheweth out of Esay, that the North may bring to the South. These are his two last expositions of that place: his first is this: Keepe the foresaid commaundementes. For where∣soeuer thou preparest thee a place, futuram{que} sedem, and a seate for hereafter, whether it be in the South or in the North, there when thou art dead thou shalt continue. This exposition with D. Allen I followed in ye last chapter, for it is nothing els to say,
but that no man after death can merite, either to change altoge∣ther, or so much as to better his state. Touching Scriptures for Purgatorie, and prayer for the dead. And touching Scriptures expounded by the Doctors agaynst Purgatorie and prayer for the dead, these two places of S. Hie∣romes are all that he alleageth. Now touching Scriptures that we alleage for Purgatorie and prayer for the dead: it is good, al∣though it be not necessary, vnlesse he can fortify his new castellet of Onely Scripture better then yet he hath done) to examine whether the Doctors do say (as he pretendeth) either generally that no Scripture at all maketh for Purgatory & prayer for the dead, or so much as namely this place or that place doth not. Whether the Doctors say, no Scripture to make for it. For the first: Tertullian speaking no more but of the Oblations for the dead which we make vpon their yeres mindday, saith,Tertul. de corona Mi¦litis. Hu∣ius disciplinae si legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam inuenies, For this discipline if thou require a lawe out of the Scriptures, thou shalt finde none. Traditio tibi praetendetur autrix, Consue∣tudo confirmatrix, & Fides obseruatrix, Tradition shal be decla∣red to be the author of it, Custome the corfirmer, & Faith the ob∣seruer. Nowe commeth Fulke (which also I noted in the third Chapter) and for this one particuler is bold to say generally,Par. 2. diu. 3 that all offering and all praying for the dead is confessed of Tertul∣lian to be beside the Scripture. As where he saith:Pur. 264. They (that is S. Chrysostome with some other old Doctors, as also nowe their Successors the Catholikes) labour to wrest the Scriptures to find that which Tertullian confesseth is not to be founde in them.Pur. 268. A∣gaine: Tertullian hath discharged you of authoritie of the Scrip∣ture already. Againe: Tertullian, as wise a man as M. Allen,Pur. 275. af∣firmeth (as we heard before) that prayer for the dead hath no foundation in the Scriptures. Againe:Pur. 286. Neuer once mentioned in the Scripture, and so confessed by Tertullian, one that leaned to some part of your cause. Againe:Pur. 393. He vtterly denieth that they came from the Scriptures. Therfore by Tertullians iudgemēt you do abuse the Scriptures. Agayne:Pur. 410. Praying and offering for the dead, as Tertullian himselfe confesseth, is not taught by the Scrip∣tures.
Yet soone after, to shew that Tertullian with Montanus had in all poyntes the opinion of the Papistes, amongest other poyntes of his opinion he noteth,Pur. 417. that all small offences must (as he thought) be punished after this life, where the prison is, and the vttermost farthing to be paide. Mat. 5. But reseruing that to the eleuenth chapter as one of his grosse contradictions, I will here note, how vpon the foresaid particular of only Tertullian, he is farre more bold then yet we haue heard.Pur. 363. For thus he saith: They them selues (that is, the old Doctors) for the most part confesse, that prayer & oblation for the dead, is not taken at all out of the Scriptures,Pur. 435. as Tertullian, Augustine, and other. Againe: Of them (amongst the auncient Fathers) that mainteined prayers for the dead, the most confessed they had it not out of the Scriptures, but of tradition of the Apostles, and custome of the Church. They denied it to be receiued of the scriptures. This he saith of S. Augu∣stine by name, and withall of the most part of the fathers, hauing in his whole booke no such saying of any other, neither euen that of Tertullians importing so much, but only as I haue declared. So then haue I shewed, that he fayleth in this that he brag∣geth of the Doctors confessing against them selues and vs, as though generally no Scripture at all doth make for Purgatory or prayer for the dead. Now let vs come to particuler Scrip∣tures. Thus he sayth: Of certayne particuler textes. Pu. 103.S. Augustine, although otherwise inclining to the error of Pur∣gatory, yet he is cleare, that this texte (1. Cor. 3. of him that shall be saued through fire) proueth it not, neither ought to be ex∣pounded of it, and that he sheweth by many reasons, Enchirid, ad Laur. ca 68. where he affirmeth, that by the fire is ment the triall of tribulation in this life. You say that he affirmeth it: but he saith, that it is an harde place, and with doubtfulnesse speaketh accordingly, Non absurdè accipi possunt, So may this and this be interpreted not absurdly. And where you say, he is cleare that this texte proueth not Purgatorie: and agayne, that it ought not to be expounded of it: and agayne, that he sheweth the same by many reasons. All is false: No such matter. Onely he sheweth, that it ought not to be expounded after the Heresie of the Orige∣nistes, of hell fyre, as though they that be in it may at the length
be saued, and that it may be expounded of the fyre of tribulation in this life. Yea moreouer he sayth expresly, that it may be ex∣pounded also of some other like fire after this life: cleane con∣trarie to that whiche you here reporte of him: though in other places you also your selfe contrarie to your selfe do reporte the same. Whereof I shall anone haue occasion to say more in the third diuision of this chapter. This is the onely place, of all that D. Allen doth alleage for Purgatorie and prayer for the dead, which Fulke pretendeth any Doctor to say that it ought not to be expounded thereof. But where he sayth thus, speaking of D. Allen:Pur. 145. For my part I will not refuse to satisfie his demaunde. He will knowe and haue vs aposed, from whence wee haue that newe meaning of our Sauiours wordes, that he whiche is caste into prison for neglecting of reconciliation while he is in the way,Mat. 5. is caste into hell, from whence he shall neuer come: and then allea∣geth for that sense Chrysostome, Augustine, Hierome, and Chromatius. This (I saye) is passing childishe, (althoughe it were true, as it is not, that all those Doctours haue that sense,) for D. Allen demaundeth no suche thing, reade his wordes whosoeuer will. Yea straight after reciting the Protestantes obiection, [That the places of the Olde and Newe Testament,Pur. 148.151. alleaged for Purgatorie, though they be thus expounded of the Doctors for Purgatorie, yet sometimes they be construed other∣wise by the Fathers them selues.] I answere to this (he sayth) [and freely confesse it.] For that is not the question betwéene vs, whether the Fathers haue expounded those textes of other poyntes of our Catholike faith (for if they haue, what maketh that agaynst vs?) but this, whether they haue expounded those textes for Purgatorie (which if they haue, that maketh with vs) and whether they haue expounded them or anye other agaynst Purgatorie (which if they haue, that maketh with you.) As for the diuersitie of true senses, the Churche hath euer gi∣uen roome (saith D. Allen) to the Expositors, according to eue∣ry ones gifte, onely prouided that no man of singularitie fa∣ther any falsehood vpon any text: Howbeit also euery ones true sense is not alwayes the very right and proper sense of that same text. Whereof I spoke more playnely in the sixt Chapter.
But Fulke replieth, to this and saith: Wheras M. Allen alloweth all the interpretations that the Fathers haue made of the text (1. Cor. 3.) by him alleaged, as true, so long as they affirmed no error: he may by the same reason affirme, that Contradictories are true. As in that saying (Mat. 5.) of him that shall not come out vntill he haue payd the vttermost farthing: some haue expounded that he shal be alwaies punished, some that he shall not be alwaies pu∣nished. How is it possible, that both these interpretations can be true? Mary, thus it is true: those He & He are not one He: but He that shalbe alwaies punished, is he that to the end of the way, that is, of this life, agréeth not with his aduersarie whom he had dead∣ly iniuried, as saying vnto him, Fatue, and thereby incurring the gilt of Gehenna ignis, which is the prison of the damned. He that shall not be alwaies punished, is he whose iniurie was but veni∣all,Cap. 8. par. 3. diui. 2. as Racha. And so both interpretations agrée wel not onely to∣gether, but also with the text it selfe: as likewise in the last chap∣ter I declared. And so much of the Doctors interpretations. Now to the other kind of their Testimonies, which he alleageth against vs about any of our Controuersies. Secondly whether the Doctors geue any other kinde of testimonie against vs. j About the Bookes of Machabees. And first (although it be but a by matter) whether the Macha∣bees be Canonicall Scripture, or no: because the last thing that I intreated of, was the Scriptures that be of purgatorie, and the Protestantes denie the Machabées for this expresse saying 2. Mac. 12. It is an holy and healthfull meaning, to pray for the dead, that they may be released of their sinnes. And touching this matter he alleageth no Doctor,Pur. 214. but onely S. Hierome in two places. The answere wherof D. Allen gaue before, and that rightly and truly, as we shall well perceaue if first we remember what he alleaged for the other part. Fulke briefly both reporteth it, & also replieth vnto it, in these wordes: M. Allen pretendeth to proue the booke of Machabees Canonicall by authoritie of the Church,See cap. 11. coad 35 when he can not by consent that it hath with the Scriptures of God. As though all bookes are Canonicall Scripture which haue consent with ye Scriptures. The Machabées in déed haue so (as also innu∣merable
bookes of Catholike writers, and Caluins Institutions too, I trow.) But the Churches authoritie, and not such Consent, it is, that proueth them Canonical.The Churches authoritie for the Machabes. And the Churches authoritie D. Allen bringeth out of the third Carthage Councell: whiche Fulke in his answere saith was a Prouinciall Councell: but he must remember, that in the 4. Chapter to proue the whole true Church to erre, he told vs, that this Prouinciall Synode hath the authoritie of a Generall Councell, because it was confirmed in the Sixt Generall Councell holden at Constantinople in Trullo. And therfore he cannot auoid it, but that the Machabées are Ca∣nonicall by authoritie of the whole true Church, and therfore in déede also Canonicall, if any Scripture at all (and specially such as was euer by any doubted of) be Canonicall: whether the true Church may erre, or no. And therfore againe, he doth but labour in vaine, to shew, that the Carthage Councell did erre in that Canon, because it nameth among the Canonicall Scriptures also fiue bookes of Salomon, whereas the Church (sayth Fulke, as though he had not confessed this Councell to be the Church as much as any other) alloweth but three, namely the Prouerbes, the Preacher, and the Canticles. Not knowing what S. Augustine, that was one of that Councell (as Fulke him selfe saith,) writeth as it were of purpose to geue vs the meaning of that Councell, and of others likewise speaking, where he also reconeth vp all the same Canonicall Scriptures, as the Councell doeth.Au. de doc. christ. lib. 2. cap. 8. And three bookes of Salomon (sayth hée) the Prouerbes, the Canticles of Canticles, and Ecclesiastes. For those two bookes, the one inti∣tuled Wisdome, the other Ecclesiasticus, de quadam similitudine Salomonis esse dicuntur, for a certaine likenes are saide to be Sa∣lomons, although in déede the be not his, but Ecclesiasticus is Iesus Siraches, and Sapientia is an incertaine authors,Aug. Retr. li. 2. ca. 4. as S. Augustine partely in the same place, partly in his Retractations doth say. Againe (saith Fulke,Pur. 215.457. Aug. con. 2 Gaudentij Ep. li. 2. c. 23 for an other answere to the Carthage Councell) in what sense they did call those bookes Canonicall, appeareth by Augustine, that was one of that Councell: And this Scripture of the Machabees non habent Iudaei sicut, &c. The Iewes compt not as the Law and the Prophetes and the Psalmes. What then? Here you see (saith Fulke) that Augustine howsoe∣uer
he alloweth those bookes, yet he alloweth them not in ful au∣thoritie with the law, Prophets, and Psalmes. That which S. Au∣gustine reporteth of the Iewes, he ascribeth to S. Augustine him selfe. Although also it follow in Augustine immediatly: Sed re∣cepta est ab Ecclesia. But it is receiued of the Church not vnprofi∣tably, if it be soberly read and heard. Which wordes also Fulke there alleageth, with this note, that S. Augustine alloweth not these bookes,If Fulke be so∣ber the Macha¦bees are Gods vvord. If he be not, vvhose fault is that? 2. Peter 2. without condition of sobrietie in the reader or hea∣rer. As though he allowed no booke of Scripture in ful authoritie, because both he & all other Catholikes with S. Péeter do require the same condition in the reader of the whole Scriptures, that he wrest them not like a madde man to his owne damnation, as all heretikes do, and as the Donatistes did, compting them selues Martyrs if they killed them selues, and mainteining it with the example of Razias out of the Machabées, to which S. Augustine there answereth. He that would in déede know, in what sense S. Augustine and his Councell call those bookes Canonicall, let him consider, that vnder one name of Canonicall, they recken at once these with all the other Holy bookes of both Testaments.Au. 2. doc. christ. 8. Totus Canon Scripturarum his libris continetur. The whole Canon of the Scriptures is conteined in these bookes: Fiue of Moises, that is,Conc. Cart. 3. Can. 47. Genesis, &c. sayth S. Augustine. And the Councell in like ma∣ner: Sunt autem canonicae Scripturae, and the Canonical Scriptures are these, Genesis, &c. Loe, they call them all Canonicall in one and the same sense, although S. Augustine there instructeth the student of diuinitie, whilest all were not yet generally receaued of the whole Church, to preferre some before others. Fulkes obiecti∣ons.Read the chapter afore, where S. Augustine requireth seauen conditions in the student of Scripture, before he be perfect: and you shall perceiue, that it is but for lacke of the second, which is Mitescere pietate, to be meeke by pietie, that you so presumptuou∣sly make obiections,Pur. 386.208. calling them in your pryde, vnauoidable re∣sons, against those bookes which by your own confession the whol true Church hath Canonized. And what be these vnauoidable re∣sons? First because the author of the (second) booke commendeth one Razis for killing himselfe,2. Mac. 7. Au. 2. Gau. 23. & ep. 61 which is contrary to the worde of God. S. Augustine answereth the Donatistes & you at once, say∣ing: Touching this his death, the Scripture hath told it, how it was done: it hath not commended it, as though it was to be done.
Secondly you say, he abridgeth the fiue bookes of Iason. But the Holy Ghost maketh no abridgementes of other mens writinges. The booke of the Kinges, in how many places it singnifieth, that it abridgeth stories, telling where they be written more at large in other bookes that were not Canonicall? And is not S. Marke commonly called Breuiator, the abridger of S. Mathew? Also eue∣ry Sermon, and letter in the Actes of the Apostles,Aug. de cō∣sen. Euang. li. 1. ca. 2.3. is it not an a∣bridgement? The Holy Ghost knoweth, to poure againe through his new vessels, both péeces of other mens writinges, as you see Act 17. Tit. 1. and also bookes, & much more of Iason the Hebrew. as also of Ethnike Poetes. Thirdly, He confesseth that he tooke this matter in hand, that men might haue pleasure in it, which could not away with the te∣dious long stories of Iason. But the Spirit of God serueth not such vaine delight of men. Is it vaine delight, to desire profitable bre∣uitie? In your preface to ye Reader, you say: I haue vsed great bre∣uitie, by a naturall inclination, whereby I loue to be shorte in any thing that I write. Do you compt your inclination a vaine incli∣nation? And who séeth not, that in al the bookes of holy Scripture, there is great obseruation of breuitie, & that (amongst other cau∣ses) also to auoide tediousnes? Fourthly, He sheweth what labour and sweat it was to him, to make this abridgement, ambitiously commendeth his trauill, and sheweth the difference betwene a story at large, & an abridgemēt: al which things sauour nothing of Gods Spirit. And specially that in ye end (for al this you carp in the preface 2. Mac. 2.) he cōfesseth his infirmitie, & desireth pardon if he haue spoken slenderly and barely. Wherby he testifieth sufficiently, that he was no scribe of the Holy Ghost. That he ambitiously commendeth his trauell, is but your blasphemie, without any occasion geuen by him. All the rest standeth wel ynough with the assistance of ye Holy Ghost, vn∣lesse you think that ye scribes of the Holy Ghost may not speak of themselues as of men, humano more, or ye they must alwayes be eloquent, & alwaies able to do al without swet & without labour. Doth not S. Paul asmuch cōfesse his like infirmitie, whē he saith 2. Cor. 11. Etsi imperitus sermone, though I be rude in speking? Yea doth he not excuse his bouldnes for writing to the Romanes, who were so full of all knowledge, and saith that he did it not but
onely to put them in remembrance of that which they knew well ynough before? Rom 15. did he not also in that Epistle for his ease vse Tertius his hand? Rom. 16. and the like commonly in wri∣ting all his other Epistles also, as appeareth 2. Thes. 3? That I speake nothing of his intollerable paines taken in Preachinge, wherein also he was the instrument of the Holy Ghost, and not onely in his Epistles. These are forsooth your vnauoideable rea∣sons. Now to S. Hierome. Hieromes testi∣monies. Pu. 214.M. Allen aleageth the authoritie of Hieronym in prol. Mach. But what he meaneth thereby or what place he noteth, I know not, quoth you, Who wil beléeue that you are so dul? In the vul∣gare Latin Bibles is a preface vpon the bookes of Machabées: in it are these wordes: The Bookes of Machabees although in the Canon of the Hebrewes they be not had, yet of the Church they are noted among the Stories of the diuine Scriptures. Those vsual Prefaces are taken commonly of S. Hierom, somtime for word, somtime for sense, and so is this, as will appeare by the two pla∣ces that you bring out of him. In his preface vpon the Booke of Kings (you say) he doth not onely omit it in rehersall of the Ca∣nonicall bookes, but also accompteth it plainly among the Apo∣cryphal. He there reporteh, how many letters are apud Hebraeos, with the Hebrewes, to wit, two and twentie: and that according∣ly (number for number) primus apud eos liber, the first booke with them is Genesis, and so forth to two & twentie. So expressy he sheweth that he rekoneth the bookes there after the Hebrewes, and therefore that he speaketh of their Canon, when he saith af∣terward, that all without these is to be put among the Apocry∣phall. Therfore Sapientia, which is commonly intituled Salo∣mons, and Iesus booke the sonne of Sirach, and Iudith, & Tobias and Pastor (for that booke also he mentioneth among the bookes of the old Testament, of which onely, and not of any of the new Testament, he there speaketh) non sunt in Canone, are not in the Canon. The first booke of the Machabes I found in Hebrew. The second is a Greeke. Now what maketh this for you or a∣gainst vs? doth any of vs affirme that these bookes were in the Hebrewes Canon? Pur. 215.But you haue another place out of S. Hierome, to proue that they were neither in the Churches Canon. In his Preface vpon
the booke of Prouerbes: Therfore euen as the Church readeth in deede the bookes of Iudith, Tobias, and Machabees, but yet recei∣ueth thē not among the Canonicall Scriptures: So also these two bookes (Ecclesiasticus, and Sapientia) let her reade (as she doth) for the peoples edification, but not to confirme the authoritie of the Churches doctrines: to wit, against the Iewes (that is the an∣swere,) because their Canon hath not these bookes in it. But a∣mong the Churches people they were also then read publikly and solemly in their course as well as the other bookes of Scripture: As S. Augustine also witnesseth of one of them by occasion, say∣ing:August. de Praed. San. cap. 14. The booke of Sapientia hath bene thought worthy to be recited at the deske in the church of Christ, tam longa annositate, so long a rew of yeres: and with worship belonging to a booke of diuine authoritie, to be harkened vnto of all Christian men, from Bishops, euen to the lowest sort, of laymen, faithfull, peni∣tentes, and Catechumenes. This was that reading of it to the peo∣ples edification. And euen so S. Hierome expoundeth him selfe in his Preface vpon the booke of Iudith, saying: With the Hebrues the booke of Iudith is read among the Hagiographal (not amōg the Hieron. prol. galea∣to in li. Re∣gum. nyne Hagiographal that be Canonical, but among others being Apocryphal.) Cuius authoritas, &c. The authoritie of which boke is thought lesse fit to confirme those things that come into contention (betwéene the Hebrewes, no doubt, and vs.) But (not∣withstanding the Hebrues counting it Apocryphal) the Nicene Councell (as we reade) hath reckned this booke in the number of the Holy Scriptures. As also S. Augustine distinguisheth, saying:Aug. de Ci. dei. li. 18. ca, 36 The supputation of the times after Esdras to Aristobulus, is not found in the holy Scriptures which are called Canonicall, but in others: among which (others) are also the bookes of the Ma∣chabees, which, though the Iewes do not, yet the Church counteth for Canonicall. By all which it is playne, that S. Hierome mea∣neth not as the Protestantes do, when he saith, that the Church receiueth not the bookes of Iudith, Tobias, and the Machabees, among the Canonicall Scriptures. (For him selfe saith, that the booke of Iudith is Canonicall by the Councell of Nice) but only as I haue saide, he instructeth the Christians béeing ignorant in the Hebrue tongue, what bookes they should vse against the Iewes (for which cause he also addressed his new Translation
of the olde Testament out of the Hebrew, as in many places he protesteth,Hie. Apol. ad Ruff.) and that the Church in Canonizing those other bookes, meant not for all that that they should be vsed agaynst the Iewes, who receiue them not, and therfore would but laugh at vs for our labour. Howbeit also, if S. Hierome did saye in the Protestantes sense, that the Churche then receyued not those bookes neither in her owne Canon, that maketh nothing for the Protestantes. For we graunt, the time was when the Church did not generally receiue some of those bookes. To make for the Protestantes he should haue saide, that the Church, (and not on∣ly any priuate person) neither did then, nor ought afterwardes to receiue them. Pur. 216.Where now is Fulke, that saith, Hieronym doth simply re∣fuse these bookes of the Machabées? Agayne: Hieronym saith, the Church receiueth them not for Canonicall.Pur. 386. Yea moreouer: I haue by the consent of the Catholike Church aunswered them. And agayne of Tobias booke:Pur. 215.230. I haue shewed by authoritie of Hieronym, which is proofe sufficient agaynst the Papist, that the Church receiueth not this booke of Tobias for Canonicall Scripture. All this you saye: but I haue shewed, that not so muche as Hierome him selfe maketh with you, though also if he did,Supra pa. 1. eodem cap. that is not proofe sufficient agaynst vs: as I haue tolde you playne inough before, that it is onely the consent of the Doctours to whiche we attribute infallibilitie, and the scope that of confidence of our cause we geue you, to bring one Doctour if you can, is not in these bymatters, but in our princi∣pall controuersies. And this much of the Canonicall Scriptures, though it be somwhat besides my limites. Whervnto yet I must néedes adde the place where you say thus:Pur. 218. If Martyn Luther and Illyricus haue sometimes doubted of S. Iames Epistle, they are not the first that doubted of it. Eusebius sayth playnely, it is a counterfeite Epistle, lib. 2. cap. 23. and yet he was not accounted an heretike. I say not this to excuse them that doubt of it: for I am perswaded they are more curious then wise in so doing. Do you make it but curiositie to doubt of that Scripture which your selfe also con∣fesse to be Canonicall? Howbeit Luther not onely doubted of it, but also vtterly reiected it, euen with as great courage as you
haue here reiected the second of the Machabées: and that also af∣ter the consent of the whole Church. Is this no worse then Eu∣sebius his fault, before the Churches declaration? O worthy e∣stimation of Canonicall Scripture. What matter will not you license them of your side to doubt of, without note of Heresie, when you dare so do in that which with you is the greatest? And yet also to shewe what a marchaunt you are,A falsarie. Eusebius saith not as you charge him, but the cleane contrarie.Eu. li. 2. c. 22 His wordes are these: Of Iames I reade so muche. By whom the first of the E∣pistles, which are named Catholicae, is saide to be written. But this one thing I maye not omit, that although of some it is taken for a counterfeite, because no suche number of the auncient wri∣ters maketh any mention at all of it (as neither of that which is saide to be the Epistle of Iude, which also is sette in the num∣ber of the seuen Epistles Catholicall.) Tamen nos istas cum re∣liquis, in quamplurimis Ecclesijs publicè receptas approbatas{que} cognouimus: Yet we haue founde these, with the residue to be publikely receiued and approued in very many Churches. ij About onely Scripture. Next vnto this I take in hande the question of Onely Scrip∣ture: thinking better to deferre the rest touching Purgatorie, to the end of the chapter, dispatching also all other questions be∣fore, because they be shorter. Howe he ascribed all authoritie to Onely Scripture, and no∣thing to ought els, we heard in the seuenth chapter.If the Doctors be not of their ovvn side, they be on ulks side Now he will beare the ignorant in hande, that the Doctors were of the same opinion, yet confessing withall that they helde the contrarie no lesse then we doo, as partly in that same chapter we saw, partly here agayne we shall sée. And therefore in this question agayne as in others afore, it is no more agaynst vs, then agaynst those Doctours them selues, whatsoeuer he wresteth oute of their writings. Cyprian would haue nothing done in the celebration of the Lords supper, & namely in ministring of the cup,Pur. 287. but that Christ him selfe did, li. 2. Epist. 3. I answere: he writeth there, contra A∣quarios, against them that offered in the Chalice water onely, whereas Christ offered wine. That he calleth, aliud quàm quod
pro nobis dominus prior fecit, An other thing then that which Christ did first for vs, as being cleane against Christes doing, and such a doing as he did for a tradition to vs. But otherwise, to mingle the wine with water S. Cyprian there requireth, and that also by Christes tradition: and therfore he buildeth not vp∣on onely Scripture, as you in alleaging him séeme to pretend. Pur. 303.Now for an other Doctor: where Chrysostome sayth, It was decreed by the Apostles that in the celebration of the holy My∣steries, a remembrance should be made of them that are departed: we will be bold to charge him with his owne saying. And there you alleage foure places out of him against him selfe, as it were for onely Scripture. Is not this pretie shewing of the Doctors to be of your side? And what are these places of S. Chrysostome? First,Idē Ar. 69. Hom. de Adam et Heua: Satis sufficere, &c. We thinke it suffiseth enough whatsoeuer the writinges of the Apostles haue taught vs, according to the foresayd rules: in so much that wee compt it not at all Catholike, whatsoeuer shall appeare contrarie to the rules appointed. You are a great reader of ye Doctors, I sée. Whosoeuer made that Homilie, he tooke those wordes out of that brief Instruction which in the first Tome of ye Councels foloweth the Epistle of Pope Celestinus to the Bishops of Fraunce con∣cerning the Semipelagians, which Bishops I thinke to be ye Au∣thors of the same Instruction. They take it (and so they say) out of the determinations of those Bishops of Rome in whose time Pelagius and Celestius beganne their Heresie, that is, P. Inno∣centius and P. Zozimus, and out of certein Aphrican Councels approued by those Popes. And after 8. or 9. such Canons or arti∣cles, they make an end, saying: As for certaine more suttle points, we are not bound to resolue vpon them. We thinke, all that suf∣ficeth enough, which the writinges of the See Apostolike haue taught vs, according to the foresayde rules (or Canons:) in no wise thinking it Catholike, that shal appeare to be contrarie, prae∣fixis sententijs, to the resolutions set here before. Againe, in Gen. Hom. 58. Thou seest into what great absur∣ditie they fal, qui diuinae Scripturae canonem sequi nolunt, Which will not follow the Canon of Holy Scripture, but permit all to their owne cogitations. Hée answereth the Heretikes, which said, that our Lord tooke not true flesh. Then (saith Chrysostome) he
neither was crucified, nor dyed, nor was buried, nor rose agayne. Into such absurditie they fall, because they will not followe the playne line of Scripture, but their owne imaginations of puta∣tiue flesh, such as was in the Apparitions of the old Testament. What is this for onely Scripture? But if we be further vrged, we will alleage that which he saith, In Euang. Ioan. Hom. 58. He that vseth not the holy Scripture, but climbeth another way, id est, non cōcessa via, that is, by a way not allowed, is a Theefe. O Christian spirite, if you be vrged, you will call S. Chrysostome a Theefe by his owne saying, for vsing Tradition. As though he vseth not Scripture, which vseth Tra∣dition: or that Scripture doth not warrant Tradition, as 2. The. 2. The thing which S. Chrysostome there speaketh of, is this: that Antichrist, and those pseudochristes, Iudas Galileus, Theu∣das, and such others, also heretikes & Schismatikes, as Luther, Caluine, &c. cannot shew any commission out of Scripture. But Christ, and his Apostles, with the other Catholike Pastors that succede them, come into their cure by good warrant of Scripture. These therfore are true Pastors, the other are théeues. We may be as bould with Chrysostome, as he sayd he would be with Paule himselfe, in 2. ad Tim. Hom. 2. Plus aliquid dicam, I will say somewhat more, we must not be ruled by Paule him∣selfe, if he speake any thing that is his owne, and any thing that is humane, but we must obey the Apostle when he carieth Christ speaking in him. And when is that? when he speaketh all only by Scripture? Will you not obey him then, when he sayth, Ego e∣nim accepi a domino, For I receiued it of our Lordes mouth. 1. Cor. 1. Sée in what a proper sense you vse Chrysostoms words. These are the foure places. One other you haue elsewhere, say∣ing: Chrysostome vpon Luke, cap. 16. saith,Ar. 12. Chrys. cō. 3. de Lazaro. that ignorance of the Scriptures hath bred heresies, and brought in corrupt life, yea it hath turned all things vpsidedowne. By which it appeareth by what means he would haue heresies kept away, namely by know∣ledge of the Scriptures. And who would not the same? It is ther∣fore our dayly studie, and we sée our selues, and shewe others thereby the abomination of your Heresies, and how you would face them out with a carde of tenne. But what maketh this for Onely Scripture to be of authoritie?
As S. Chrysostome, so in like maner S. Leo is of your side, you say, against vs, and against him selfe. For where D. Allen alleaged this saying of his:Pur. 387. Leo Ser. 2. de ieiunio Pentecost. It is not to be doubted, but whatsoe∣uer is in the Church by (generall) custome of deuotion kept and reteined, it came out of the Apostles tradition, and doctrine of the Holy Ghost? You answere that the saying of Leo the great, may be backed with the writing of Leo the great, Epist. 10. They fall into this folly, which when they be hindred by some obscuritie, to know the truth, haue not recourse to the words of the Prophets, nor to the writings of the Apostles, nor to the authorities of the Gospell, but to them selues. In these wordes, Leo as Great as you would haue him, maketh the Scriptures, and not Customes or Traditions, the rule of trueth. So you gather of those words: as also in another place, That the Church should ouerthrow here∣sies,Ar. 14. by the word of God onely, Leo the first, Bishop of Rome, in his Epist. 10. ad Flauianum contra Eutichen, playnely confes∣seth. He doth not saye that all truthes are expressed in the Scrip∣tures, though that be whereof he there intreateth, to witte, the Incarnation of Christ. Mary, when a trueth is expressed in the Scriptures, recourse muste be had to the Scriptures. So he sayth: but he sayth not, to the Scriptures onely: yea in the ve∣ry same tenth Epistle he blameth Eutiches the Heretike, much more, for not hauing recourse neither so muche as to our com∣mon Creede, whiche is not Scripture (you wotte well) but a Tradition. Ar. 15.Of the same iudgement (you say) was (not Leo onely, but) the whole Councell of Constantinople the sixt, Actione 18. con∣fessing that the Heretikes and Schismatikes growe so fast, because they were not beaten downe by preaching of the Gospel and au∣thoritie of the Scriptures. I confesse the same, howbeit the Coun∣cell doth not. But what is that for Onely Scripture? yea the place is playne for the other side. I maruell you could not espie as much euen by the piece that you alleage, althogh you saw not the whole circumstance. Béeing truely translated, this it is: If al men had simply and without calliditie from the beginning recei∣ued the Gospels preaching, and bene content with the Apostles institutions, the matters verily had bene well a fyne, and neither the authors of the heresies, nor the fautors of the Priests, had bene
put to the paines of conflictes. Who would rest here, as you do, and not imagine somewhat to follow, with a (but) necessary to be séene? Sed quia Satanas &c. But because the diuell not resting raiseth vp his squires, therfore Christ also in time conuenient hath raised vp his warriers against them, to wit, the Generall Coun∣cels that to this time haue ben holden by the dilligence of the Em∣perours and the Popes, being Sixe in number. So expresly they auouch the authoritie of the Councels, and you alleage them for Only Scripture, wheras also in the words that you alleage there is no mention at all of Scripture, but onely of preaching and teaching. Likewise S. Hillarius most expresly auoucheth euery where the authoritie of the Nicene Councell against the Arrians: and yet you pretend, that he would haue heresies against the Trinitie,Ar. 11. Hilar. li. 4. de Trin. to be confuted, not by mens iudgement, but by Gods word. You marke well what he doeth in that place. How heresies must be confuted, is not his purpose, but to answere the Scriptures, that the Heretikes abused and misconstrued, which he there had reci∣ted at large, therefore he saith: Cessent propriae hominum opiniones, neque se vltra diuinam constitutionem humana iu∣dicia extendant. Let mens proper opinions cease, neither let the iudgementes (or fancies) of men stretche them selues beyonde Gods limite. Therefore against these prophane and impious in∣stitutions (or Catechismes) of God, let vs followe the selfe-same authorities of Gods sayinges, which they alleage in their owne false sense, restoring euery one of them to his true mea∣ning. Which there consequently he doth. A goodly testimonie for your purpose. The saying of S. Basill is in euery mans mouth,Basi. de spi. Sanc. ca. 27 that the Doctrines preached in the Church, we haue them partely by writing, partely by the Apostles Tradition without writinge. And if we go about to reiect suche vnwritten customes, we shall vnawares condemne the Gospell also. Imo ipsam fidei predica∣tionem ad nudum nomen contrahemus, yea wee shall bring the verye preaching of our faith to a bare name. And you your selfe doe note it as a greate matter, that by his confes∣sion here,Pur. 380. the wordes of Inuocation when the Blessed Sacra∣ment is shewed, are not taughte by the Scripture, no more
then many other ceremonies that he rehearseth in the same place. And yet must he also beare you witnesse against himselfe for On∣ly Scripture.Ar. 11. Basi de ve∣ra side, in prooem. Moraliū. Well, what saith he? In his treatise of faith: We know, that we must now, and alwayes, auoyde euery worde and opinion that is differing from the doctrine of our Lord. I say the same. But it is not all one, to be differing from our Lords doc∣trine, and not to be expressed in Scripture. In so muche that he alloweth wel of those words, in speaking of the Trinitie, Quae a∣pud Sanctos viros in vsu fuisse reperirentur, Which had bene vsed of the holy fathers, although they were not in Scripture. Basi. in Re∣gulis breu. Interrog. 1.Two sayings more of his you alleage, In his short definitions to the first interrogation: Whether it be lawfull or profitable for a man to permit vnto him selfe, to do or say any thing which he thinketh to be good, without testimonie of the holy Scriptures? He answereth: For as much as our Sauiour Christ saith, that the Holy ghost shall not speake of him selfe: what madnes is it that any man should presume to beleue any thing, without the autho∣ritie of Gods word? If you saw the place, your malice passeth. The words are these Quis esse tanta vesania, &c. Who can be so madde, that he dare so much as to thinke any thing of himselfe? And it followeth: But because of those things and words that are in vse amongst vs, some are playnly taught in the holy Scripture, some are omitted: Concerning them that are written, they must precisely be so obserued: and, concerning them that are omitted, we haue this rule, To be subiect to other men for Gods com∣maundement, renouncing quite our owne willes. Which he saith, because he writeth there to Monkes, who vow obedience to their Superiours. Basil. Mor. Reg. 26. c. 1.Agayne, In his Morals, Dist. 26. Euery word or deede must be confirmed by the testimonie of holy Scripture, for the perswasion of good men, and the confusion of wicked men. He there admo∣nisheth his Monkes, béeing studentes of Diuinitie to be so per∣fect in the Scriptures, that they may haue a text ready at euery néede, so as Christ had to repel the diuels temptation, Mat. 4. and Peter to answere the Iewes scoffe, Act. 2. And we desire ye same: in so much as when you bid vs cast all away that is not written, we haue this text ready, where S. Paul biddeth vs the contrarie, To hold the Traditions which we haue learned, whether it be by
his Scripture, or by his word of mouth. 2. Thes. 2. Last of all we haue to sée what you alleage likewise out of S. Augustine for your onely Scripture.Augustine. For you play with his nose also, as you haue done with his fellowes the foresaid Doctors, confessing that he is for vnwritten Traditions and suche other authorities as we stand vpon, and yet alleaging him for Onely Scripture. Your confession I haue reported at large in the se∣uenth chapter: as for example, where you say, Augustine blindly defendeth (in his booke De cura pro mortuis agenda,Pur. 349. and else where) the cōmon error of his time, of prayer for the dead, which by holy Scripture he was not able to mainteine, contrarie to his owne rule of only Scripture, in beating downe the Schisme of the Donatistes, and the heresie of the Pelagians. Well then, how do you shew out of Augustine against Augustine him selfe, that this was his rule? You make your shew in thrée partes:Ar. 12. Pur. 383.405.368.451. First you quote onely without recitall of any words, eleuen or twelue places out of him, In which he preferreth the authoritie of the Canonicall Scripture, before all writings of Catholike Doctors, of Bishops, of Councels, before all customes and traditions. So you gather of those places. But that is not the question, Which is to be prefer∣red: but this, Whether nothing but Scripture be of authoritie. And touching the preferment also, recite the wordes when you will, and it will appeare playnly, that he neither preferreth the Scripture otherwise then we do. Your second part is about this one question,Ar. 12. Who haue the true Church: Of whiche question you saye, that S. Augustine would haue the Church fought only in the Scriptures. Reade my first Demaund, and you shall sée what S. Augustine would haue in that question, and that I would haue the same: to wit, that you answere the Scriptures that he alleageth for his Church and for ours together: and that you bring one text for the visible Churches perishing after a time, or vanishing out of sight: and one text, that one Luther, or one Caluine should after so many hundred yeres restore it againe. This is the summe of al. In dede he is content in that question to set aside all other authorities, so to draw the Donatists (who drew backe al that they could, stan∣ding vpon other things impertinent) to try it by the Scriptures.
But that nothing els is good authoritie in that question, that he neuer saith. You allenge him De  Ecclesia, cap. 2. where he saith, (and the like cap. 3.5.6. The question betwene vs and the Dostes is, Vbi sit ecclesia, where the Church is, whether with vs, or with them? What shall we do then? shall we seeke her in verbis nostris, in our owne wordes, or in the wordes of her head our Lorde Iesus Christ? I thinke we ought rather to seeke her in his wordes who is trueth, and beste knoweth his owne body. Where by our owne wordes you vnderstande all besides Onely Scripture. But S. Augustine doth not so. quicquid nobis inui∣cem obricimus, verba nostra sunt, Our wordes are whatsoeuer we obiect one to another, of deliuering the diuine bookes (in Dioclesians time) of burning frankinsence to the Idols, of per∣secuting▪ As all your declayming also at this time against vs, is for certayne crimes of certayne men: We hauing the like, yea and them more haynous; and that more truely, to charge you withall. But these words S. Augustine will, (and we with him) to be silent, when the Church is sought, and the words of Christ in the Scripture to sound. Againe you alleage him Epist. 48. ad Vincentium Rogatistā, where he aith, We are sure that no man could iustly separat him selfe (as Luther did) a communione omnium gentium, from the communion of all nations: because none of vs seeketh the Churche in his owne righteousnesse, but in the holy Scriptures. Wherevnto you adde your fiue gges▪ saying: So if the Pa∣pistes would not presume of their owne righteousnesse, but seeke he Churche of Christe in the Scriptures: they would not sepa∣ate them selues from the communion of Christes Church, now y Gods grace inlarged further then the Popish Church. There  no crooked gambrell bow that casteth so wide, as you do the octors wordes, these specially, from their scope. I maruell uche at you for it, and muche more if you sawe the place. By  Communion of all Nations, so often agaynst the Dona∣es, Saint Augustine meaneth the Societie of that visible urch, which as it beganne visibly at Hierusalem, so visibly grewe on afterwardes, and groweth on to this day, and to the worldes ende, ouer all nations. From whiche Societie or Companie,Epist. 48. fieri non potest, it is impossible, saith he, that any can
haue iuste cause to separate their companie. Because the Dona∣tistes saide that Cecilianus the Catholike Bishop of Carthage had yéelded in Dioclesians persecution, and that all the other Catholikes by communicating with him after that, whereas they should haue excommunicated him for euer, were also defiled thereby: and therefore that them selues who had not yéelded, did well to separate them selues from the Catholikes, as the iust from the vniust. Therevpon Saint Augustine saith notably:Iust separation impossible. If any may haue a iust cause to separate their companie from the companie of all Nations, and to call that, Ecclesiam Christi, the Church of Christ: Vnde scitis, How know you in all Christen∣dome beeing so wide and side, lest perhaps before you did sepa∣rate your selues, some did afore separate them selues for some iust cause in some so farre countreys, that the bruite of their iustice is not come to you? How can the Church (béeing but one) be in you rather then in them who before perhaps haue separated them selues? Ita fit, &c. So it remayneth, that seeing you know not this same, you be vncertayne of your selues. Which likewise must needes happen to all (others) who vse for their Societie the testimonie not of God, but of them selues (that is, of their owne iustice.) And then a litle after: Nos autem ideo certi su∣mus, But we (Catholikes) are certayne that none can haue iust∣ly separated himself from the companie of all Nations: quia non quisque nostram in iustitia sua, because any of vs doth not in his owne iustice, but in the diuine Scriptures seeke for the Church: Et vt promissa est, reddi conspicit, and seeth it to be represented euen as it was promised, to wit, from Hierusalem to Rome, from the Iewes, ouer all nations, being mixt both of good and bad, and the good (not consenting) no whit defiled by the companie of the bad. And therefore whether any of our Popes, any of our other Bi∣shops, any of our other fathers, any of our Catholike brethren, haue bene so yll as ye Protestants make them, or no: sure we are, that Luther possibly could not (as neither euer any could, or can) iustly separate him selfe, because by the holy most euident Scrip∣tures, that only is the true church, which beginning at Ierusalē, groweth ouer all Nations: in which by the same Scriptures, we sée that once the Romanes were, and from which the said Ro∣manes did neuer separate thē selues afterward: and with which
Romanes Luther first was, and afterwardes did Separate him∣selfe from them, and so therfore from the true Church. And yet come you, like a blinde beetle, and say that the Papistes did Se∣parate them selues from your Church: bragging as blindely of your inlarging. For once hauing made a separation, it is no in∣larging afterwardes, that can winne you the true Church from them that had it afore. Of whose largenes yet also aboue your largenes, read my 9.31.32.33.47. Demaundes, and ioyne with me if you list vpon them. Your third parte out of Augustine, is more generall, to wit, about all questions with any Heretikes whatsoeuer▪ thereof you say,Ar. 13. that he would haue heresies confuted only by Scriptures. For, writing against Maximinus the Arian, li. 3. ca. 14. (a place com∣monly and often cited) he saith: Sed nunc nec ego Nicenum, &c. Of which place your gathering is this: If Augustine would not oppresse the Arians by the authoritie of the Nicene Councell, which was the first and the best generall Councell that euer was, but only by the Scriptures: how much lesse would he charge them with other authorities▪ that the Papistes alleage: beside the autho∣ritie of holy Scriptures? It is for your owne vantage, or els you would not so play the proctor for Heretikes. S. Augustine would not oppresse the Arians, nor would not charge them, but onely with Scripture, you say. But doth he say, that he might not? (for there is the question.) You know, (I doubt not) how commonly he presseth the Donatistes with the authoritie of the sayd Nicen Councell,Aug. con. Ep. parm. li. 2. ca. 8. De bap. cō. Don. l. 1. c. 7 graunting that in S. Cyprians time it was a doubt∣full thing, whether Heretikes can baptize. But, nullo iam quaestio est, now it is out of all doubt: because in that same Councell it had bene discussed, considered, ended, and ratified. And euen so in your owne place, a litle before, hauing proued inuincibly by the Scriptures, that the Father & the Sonne are vnius eiusdem∣q́ue substātiae, of one and the same substance, he sayth immediat∣ly: This is that Homousion which against the Arrian heretikes was in the Nicene Councell ratified of the Catholike fathers, ve∣ritatis authoritate & authoritatis veritate, not onely by authoritie of truth (as your selfe do graunt) but also by truth of authoritie, (which you denie.) It followeth: Which Homousion afterwards in the Councell of Atiminum, hereticall impietie vnder the here∣ticall
Emperour Constantius endeuoured to infirme, But all in vaine, For soone after the libertie of the Catholike faith preuai∣ing, Homousion was defended vniuersally. Then come the words that you alleage: Sed nunc nec ego Nicenū, nec tu debes Ariminēse tanquam praeiudicaturus proferre cōcilium. But now (in this dis∣putation betwene vs two, being vpon the matter it selfe in it selfe) as it were to preiudicate, neither must I alleage the Councell of Nice, nor thou the Councell of Ariminum. For so that Arrian Bishop Maximinus being both to encounter with S. Augustine vpon the matter it selfe, sayd in the very beginning of the dispu∣tation: If thou demaund my faith, I hold that faith which at A∣riminum of three hundred and thirtie Bishops was not onely no∣tified, but also by their subscriptions ratified.Au. contra Max. li. 1. in principio. Therefore S. Au∣gustine said as before, and further as followeth. Nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Neither doth the authoritie of the one holde me, nor of the other holde thee. Where your false translation maketh him to say, that the Arrian was not bounden to the authoritie of the Nicene Councell, contrarie to that which he said afore, calling it veritatem authoritatis, the truth of autho∣ritie. Therefore they were bound to it, as you also now be bound to the Tridentine Councell: but they would not be holden with∣in their boundes, as neither you will. And therefore it was to no more purpose to alleage against them that of Nice, then it is to alleage against you this of Trent, specially they hauing that of Ariminum to pretend for them, such a one as you (being of all great Heresies, the beggerliest) haue none. Neither would we in the like altercations alleage against you the olde Councels, if you would plainely confesse them to be against you, so as you do confesse the Tridentine to be against you, and so as the Arrians did confesse the Nicene to be against them. Wherevpon S. Au∣gustine there sayth: By authorities of the Scriptures, being wit∣nesses not proper to one side, but common to both, let matter trie with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason. The like would we by his ensample in the like case say to you: in the meane time also not refusing to answere al that you can alleage, be it Scripture, be it Councell, or whatsoeuer els, as in this booke you finde: nor requiring you to answere any priuate wit∣nesses, but onely common, considering that not we onely, but
you also (whatsoeuer you say of onely Scripture) do make claime for all that and appeale to the first 600. yeares, namely your Iewell, in those two Goticall Sermons of his at Powles crosse Anno 1560. The other places also that you alleage out of Augustine for this generall parte, are but particular, and concerne no more but that one question of the Church, whereof your second parte was: as this former place cōcerned no more but ye question of the Tri∣nitie. And therefore your probation is not so large, as your affir∣mation, where you say, that although Augustine proue against the Pelagians by the prayers of the Church,Pur. 349. yet he doeth not meane to defend, that whatsoeuer the visible Church receiueth, is true: and therefore all other perswasions set aside, he prouoketh onely to the Scriptures, to trie the faith & doctrine of the Church. How true that is, appeareth by the very same booke De vnitate Ecclesiae, out of which you go about to shewe such prouoking of his. for there, when he hath proued against the Donatistes, the Church to be his, he sayth expresly, that to be ynough also for all other questions.Aug. de v∣nitate Eccl. cap. 18.19. Sufficit nobis. &c. It is ynough for vs, that we haue that Church, which is pointed to by most manifest testimo∣nies of the Holy and Canonicall Scriptures. And touching the very question it selfe of the Church againe, what doe you alleage out of him? what you gather of his saying, I sée,Ar. 13.14. for you say: By this Augustine declareth, first that Heretikes must be confuted onely by the Scriptures: and secondly, that nei∣ther Councels, Succession of Bishops, Vniuersalitie, Myracles, Visions, Dreames nor reuelations, are the notes to trie the Ca∣tholike Church, but onely the Scriptures. So you gather, but he sayth not so.Au. de vni. Eccl. ca. 16. Remoueantur omnes moratoriae tergiuersationes, sayth he: Away with all dilatorie drawinges backe: such as is Quicquid de peccatis hominum obijcitur, all that the Donatist Bishop obiecteth of certeine mens crimes. Also when he saith for his Church, Verum est, quia hoc ego dico. It is true, because I say this: or, because this said that felowbishop, or those felowbishops of mine, or, those Bishops (in their Councels) or Clarkes or Lay of oures: aut ideo verum est, or, therefore it is true, because such and such meruailes did Donatus, (who was as it were their Lu∣ther,) or Pontius, (as it were their Caluine,) or any other: or,
because men do pray at the memories of our departed & be hard, or, because this and that there doeth happen: or, because such a brother of ours or such a sister of ours, sawe such a vision walng, or dreamed such a dreame sleeping. Remoueantur ista, Awaye with these dilatories: and let them shew their Church in the Ca∣nonicall authoritie of the Holy books. Nec ta, vt ea colligant &c. Neither so as to gather & rehearse those places which are obscure or ambiguous or figuratiue, that euery man maye interpret them as he list after his owne sense. But bring you forth some place so manifest that it needeth no interpreter.Ar. 13. Pur. 333. Because neither we do say, that men ought to beleeue vs that we are in the Church, for that, that the Church which we holde hath bene commended by Optatus of Mileuis, or by Ambrose of Milayne (as now, by Fi∣sher of Rochester, or Hosius of Warmes) or by other inumerable Bishops of our communion: or because she hath ben set forth by Councelles of our fellowbishopps. For these were priuate to S. Augustines side, as those other Bishopps and Councelles were priuate to the Donatistes side. So are they not now, but both sides, we and you, do claime them. And therfore now better cause to alleage them, euen also in the question of the Church, then was in S. Augustines time: how be it then also he might well haue alleaged them, although in that booke he did not, and sayth he did not. For in them was veritas authoritatis, trueth of authoritie, as here aboue pag. (179.) he sayd to the Arrian, and no lesse also to the Donatistes. It followeth on further (as you also alleage) Aut quia per totum orbem,Moracles and visions. or Because ouer all the world in the Holy places that our communion doth frequent, so great Mira∣cles partely of exauditions, partely of curinges, are done, in so much that the bodies of (Geruasius and Protasius) Martyrs, which laye hidden so many yeares (they were Martyred in the Apostles time) were reuealed (as if they will aske, they may heare of many) vnto Ambrose, and that at the same bodyes, one that had bene many yeares blynde, very well knowen in the Citie of Millayne, receiued his eyes and eye sight. Or because such a man had a dreame, and such a man in Spirite heard a voyce, that he should not enter into the side of Donatus, or that he should goe out from the side of Donatus Where hee addeth of these mira∣cles and visions, saying: Whatsoeuer suche thinges are done
in the Catholike Church, therefore they are to be allowed, be∣cause they are done in the Catholike Church, (otherwise not, be they done in Donates side, or in Luthers, or in Caluines.) Non ideo ipsa manifestatur Catholica, quia haec in ea siunt, But not therby is the Catholik church made manifest, because these things are done in her. You translate it, that she is not proued therby, as though S. Augustine said, that also true allowed Miracles & vi∣sions (wherby in the Scripture also it selfe we sée Christ him self and so many other things purposely proued) lacke weight and fashion of iust probation. Whereas in deede he saith no more of thē, then he saith of Scripture which is obscure: not that it wan∣teth authoritie to proue the Church, but that it doth not make the Church manifest, requiring therfore the Donatistes to bring such Scripture, as needeth no interpreter, Sicut non eget inter∣prete. Which we alleage (saith he) out of so many most manifest places for the Church beginning at Hierusalem, and thence gro∣wing on continually ouer al Nations euen till Domesday. Such Scriptures do make the Church manifest: but so do not obscure Scriptures, vntill the interpretation be allowed: Neither Mi∣racles and visions, vntill they be allowed. Now the Donatistes would none of the Catholike Church in their time: but both we and you confesse it. And therefore when we alleage the Miracles done in it, you haue not to except agaynst vs by this place of S. Augustine. And that againe, because we also do apeale with him to such & the same Scriptures for manifest triall of the Church, so that my vry first demaund is therof: though we vse also other probations, to shew that Scripture and all is for vs, and nothing for you. As he also doth, where he saith to the Manichees vpō the same matter:Aug. cō. ep. Fund. ca. 4. In Catholicae Ecclesiae, &c. Many things there be, which in the Catholike Churches lappe most worthily do keepe me. There keepeth me, Consensio, Consent of peoples and Na∣tions: There keepeth me, Authoritas, Authoritie, by Myracles be∣gon, nourished by Hope, by Charitie encreased, by Antiquitie made firme and sure: There keepeth me Successio Sacerdotum, Succession of Priestes from the very See of Peter the Apostle, (to whom our Lord after his Resurrection committed the feeding of his sheepe) euen to the Bishop that now is: There keepeth me fi∣nally,Iohn. 21. ipsum Catholicae nomen, the very name Catholike, which
not without cause among so many Heresies this Churche alone hath obteined, Ista ergo tot, &c. These then so many & so great most deare bonds of Christian calling, do wel keepe the man that beleueth in the Catholike Church, although as yet he vnderstand not the truth which he beleeueth. To which place of S. Augustine you pretend to answere, say∣ing vnto vs: All this, you will say, maketh exceding much for vs:Ar. 69.70. yea but heare that which followeth: Apud vos autem, &c. But with you (Manichées and Protestantes) where there is none of these to allure me and keepe me, sola personat veritatis pollici∣tatio, there ringeth onely a promising of trueth. Then to your purpose as you think: quae quidē si tam manifesta mōstratur, &c. Which trueth if it be shewed so manifest, that it can not come in doubt, is to be preferred (I graunt) before all those things, by which I am holden in the Catholike Church. And what of this? By this you may playnly see (quoth you) that though Consent, (and vniuersalitie) Antiquitie, Succession, and the name Catho∣like, be good confirmation, when they are ioyned with the truth: yet when a truth is seuered from them, it is more to be regarded then they all. As though S. Augustine graunted, that the trueth might be seuered from them. Where he playnly saith, also moste sincere wisdome, syncerissimam sapientiam, that is, truth and vn∣derstanding of it without all corruption, to be in the said Catho∣like Church, though the Heretikes will not beléeue so muche, but thinke that the Catholikes are grosse heades, and blind folowers of mens commaundements. But them selues, though destitute of all that should moue any man to be of their side, yet to haue the truth most manifestly and without all doubt. For that cause S. Augustine ioyneth with them in that booke, and answereth their foundations, as I do yours in this booke, shewing that all this glorious talking of trueth, is but winde of vayne words. One such place more you alleage twise to the same purpose.Ar. 14. Pur. 203. De pastoribus, cap. 14. To a strayshepe seeking the Church what say you, Syr Donatist? Partis Donati est Ecclesia. The peece of Donatus hath the Church. Reade me that out of the Scriptures, out of the Shepeheards voyce. For out of them do I recite Eccle∣siam toto orbe diffusam, The Church which is not any mans piece, but (beginning at Hierusalē) spreadeth ouer al the world.
Sed illi codices tradiderunt, But (thou sayst) such men trayterously deliuered the holy bookes to Dioclesians ministers, and suche men offered incense to the Idols, such a one and such a one. Quid ad me de illo & de illo? What is that to me of such a one & such a one? quia nec de illis vocem pastoris annuntias, For it is thy selfe that accusest them. But tell me the Shepheards voyce, if that voyce accuse one, I beleeue it, alijs non credo, other accusers I do not beleeue. Sed acta proferes, But thou wilt bring foorth Court rolles, wherein their crimes are registred. Acta profero, And I also bring foorth Court rolles, wherein the same mens innocen∣cie is registred. Credamus tuis? crede & tu meis, Shall we beleeue thine? beleeue thou mine also. Non credo tuis: noli credere meis. I do not beleeue thine: and I geue thee leaue also not to beleeue mine. Auferantur chartae humanae: sonent voces diuinae. Let mens Court papers be remoued: and let Gods sayings be rehearsed. E∣de mihi vnam Scripturam pro parte Donati, Geue me one place of Scripture for the piece of Donatus, or of Luther, or of Cal∣uine, or of any other broken piece. Audi innumerabiles pro orbe terrarum, But for the Church of the whole world, I am ready to rehearse innumerable places. Nowe what maketh all this for Fulke? vnlesse he thinke he hath any vauntage in his owne false translation of Acta, turning it Decrees. Yea doth it not make a∣gainst him most inuincibly, as all the rest also that S. Augustine hath written against the Donatistes for his Church & ours? that is, for the Church beginning at Hierusalem, and thence spreding ouer all Nations to the very last time, euen in the same maner altogether as it had done to S. Augustines time? iij About certaine Traditions. Vpon this question of Onely Scripture I haue stood long, be∣cause Onely Scripture & Onely faith are with the Protestantes all in all, howbeit they haue neither Scripture nor Faith. Now to dispatche other questions very briefly, agaynst certayne Tra∣ditions Fulke alleageth, saying: Beatus Rhenanus a Papist, and a great Antiquarie, affirmeth, that by the Canons of the Ni∣cene Councell and other Councels, which he hath seene in Libra∣ries, those oblations pro Natalitijs, with other superstitions that Tertullian fathereth vpon Tradition of the Apostles, were
abrogated. As touching oblations pro Natalitijs, I haue answe∣red in the sixt Chapter.Cap. 6. par. 1. v. But as for abrogation of any other Tra∣ditions, Rhenanus hath neuer a word. iiij About the mariage of Votaries. For the mariage of such as haue vowed virginitie,Ar. 45. Pur. 22.23. you alleage one place of Epiphanius thrise, & another of S. Hieromes twise, and all about a matter that we hold euen as they did. Thus you saye: Epiphanius,Hpiph. li. 2 Haer. 61. although he count it an offence to marrie af∣ter their vowe (therein he is with vs you know) yet he saith, (speaking of such as secretly liue in fornication sub specie soli∣tudinis aut continentiae) vnder the colour of vowed singlenes or continencie) It is better to marrie then to burne (that first is not in Epiphanius). Melius est itaque vnum peccatum habere, & non plura, It is better to haue one sinne rather then many. It is better for him that is fallen from his course (wherein he beganne to runne for the Crowne of Virginitie) openly to take a wyfe according to the lawe, & a virginitate multo tempore poeni∣tentiam agere, and a long time to repent (to do penaunce for breaking) that vowe of his virginitie, and so (hauing done his full penaunce) to be brought agayne into the Churche (out of the which he was caste as an excommunicate person for brea∣king his vow) as one that hath done amisse, as one that is fal∣len, and broken, and hauing neede to be bound: rather then to be wounded dayly with priuie dartes, of that wickednesse whiche the diuell putteth into him. So knoweth the Church to preach: Haec sunt sanationis medicamenta, These are the medicines of healing. Whereof you gather, and say, that Epiphanius calleth marriage of suche men, an holsome medicine, contrarie to that you confesse your selfe that he calleth it a sinne, (for so doth the Apostles Tradition, saith he) vnlesse perhaps you thinke Sinne to be an holsome medicine. No syr, the holsome medicins are his long penance, and his reconcilement to the Church againe. But at the least (say you) Epiphanius alloweth marriage in them, whereas the Popish Church did separate them from their wiues in queene Maries time. After a solemne vow, (which is made but only two ways, by taking holy orders, & by professing some com∣mon
approued rule of Religion) to marrie, is Chry. ep. 6 ad Theod. Monachū lapsum. Basil. lib. de virginitate.no mariage, and therevpon it is that no Doctor can be alleaged which alloweth it for mariage, if Priests or such professed Monkes and Nunnes do marrie. But the sole vow of virginitie, and of widowhood, is none of those two, and therfore but a simple vow: and therefore to marrie after it, although it be a great mortall sinne, yet the mariage holdeth. So saith Epiphanius, and so say we, as some widowes in England hauing taken the mantle and the ring, and marrying afterwards, can beare vs witnesse, whose mariage we haue allowed of (though they may not vse it so fréely without iust dispensation, as other maried Folke, and as their husbandes may, because of their vow) and cured them by penance & reconci∣liation, altogether as Epiphanius here witnesseth of the Church in his time. Hie. ad De∣metriad. tom. 1.So is it likewise of the simple vow of virginitie, that S. Hie∣rome speaketh, saying: The name of certayne virgins, which be∣haue them selues not well, doth slaunder the holy purpose of vir∣gins, and the glory of the heauenly and angelike familie. To whō must be playnly said, vt aut nubant, that either they marrie, if they can not conteine, or els conteine, (suing to God to giue them strength) if they will not marrie. We say the same to the same, and generally to all others, which of two sinnes wil nedes com∣mit one, counsayling them rather to commit the lesser then the greater: As for example, to say that they will come to your schis∣matical and Heretical seruice, when the Commissioners require no more, rather then to come vnto it in déede: not omitting to tell them withal, that they should neither so much as say they wil come, because that also is a sinne, and a mortall sinne: as Epi∣phanius told those virgins, that their mariage also is sinne. v. About the Real presence, and Transubstantiation. About the blessed viuificall Sacrament of the Altar you al∣leage one Doctor against the Real presence, and thrée others a∣gaynst Transubstantiation. Pur. 326.It was not the beleefe of S. Augustine, nor of any other in that time (you say) that the Sacrament is the naturall body and bloud of Christ. As though it were the mysticall body of Christ, which is his Church: Vnlesse you finde more then these two, his natu∣rall body, and his mysticall body. Or, as though it were not his
naturall body which was the morow after his Supper to dye for vs, and his naturall bloud which was to be shedde for vs. When will you euer admit any text for plaine and euident Scripture, standing so obstinately against these most cléere woords of Christ, This is my Body, that is geuen (and broken) for you, Luc. 22.1. Cor 11. This is my bloud (Mat. 26. Mar. 14.) that is shedde for you (and for many. (Luc. 22. Mat. 26. Mar. 14. And what a grosse blindnes is this, considering the infinit difference betwene bread and Christ, to thinke, that being in S. Augustines time taken for bread, it could afterward in all Christendome be taken for Christ himselfe, and that without all contradiction? wheras also at this time you the Sacramentaries, could not chaunge the doctrine of it from Christ to bread, but heauen and earth cryeth out against you for it, not the Catholikes alone, but also the Lu∣therans. But S. Augustine forsooth saith:Pur. 38. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis &c. I will recite the whole circumstance, that the world may sée your dealing.Aug. in Ps. 98. I finde (saieth he) how without Idolatrie earth may be adored, without Idolatrie Christes foote∣stoole may be adored. For he tooke earth of earth: because flesh is of earth, and of Maries flesh he tooke flesh. Et quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit, et ipsam carnem nobis manducandam, &c. And because he walked here in the same flesh, and gaue to vs the same flesh to eate for our saluation, and no man eateth that flesh but first he adoreth (it:) we haue found, how such a footestoole of our Lordes may be adored, and not onely we sinne not in adoring (it) but we sinne in not adoring (it.) Sée now how properly Fulk answereth hereunto: Augustine in deede alloweth the adoration of the body of Christ whereof that is a Sacrament, but neither can you proue out of that place, that he would haue the Sacrament honored, nor that the Sacrament is the very body of Christ. As though the same flesh which he tooke of the Virgin Marie, and in which he walked, is not his very body, for, the same (saith he) we eate, and we adore it before we eate, bowing and prostrating our selues euen to euerie particulare holy hoste, as now in the Ca∣tholike Churches you know, and as S. Augustine witnesseth of his time. For it foloweth in most manifest wordes: Et ad terram quamlibet cum te inclinas atque prosternis, non quasi terram in∣tuearis,
And when thou doest bow and prostrate thy selfe vnto any earth, do not consider as it were (bare) earth: Sed illū Sanctū, but that holye one whose footestoole it is that thou adorest. Et cum adoras illum, ne cogitatione remaneas in carne, Also when thou adorest him, let not thy thought rest in flesh: So as they that thought the same an hard saying, Vnles a man eate my flesh,Ioan. 6. he shall not haue euerlasting life. Acceperunt illud stultè, they tooke it folishly, they thought it carnally, and imagined that our Lord would cut off certaine pieces from his body, and geue to them. Whereas they should haue said to them selues, Non sine causa dicit hoc, &c. He saith not this without cause, but because some hidden Sacrament is therein. For so he instructed the twelue that did sticke vnto him, when the other had for misliking that saying, plaide the Apostates: Vnderstand spiritually that which I spoke. You shall not eate this Body which you see, and drinke that bloud which they shal shedde that shall crucifie me: that is, you shall not eate it & drinke it in such forme (so as these others imagined.) I commended vnto you (in those words) some Sa∣crament, that is, such a thing as beeing spiritually vnderstoode, will giue you life. Although needes it must be visibly celebrated (by the visible formes of bread and wine,) yet it must be inuisibly vnderstood, to be not the thing which is séene in the celebration, but which is not séene, to wit, my very body and bloud, my very flesh taken of the Virgin. In so much that yong children (Infants) in S. Augustines time at celebrations of the Sacramentes,August. de Trin. lib. 3. ca. 10. beeing tolde with most graue authoritie, whose body and bloud it is, will thinke nothing els, but our Lord verily to haue appeared in that forme to the eyes of men: and that liquor verily to haue flowed out of suche a side beeing striken: if they neuer learne by their owne or others experience (as striking it, and yet no bloud flowe out of it) and neuer see that forme of things but at Celebrations of the Sacramentes when it is offered (to God) and ministred (to the receauers:) because they know not that which is sette on the Altar, and after the holy Canon is consumed, whence or howe it is made (by consecration: like as no man knoweth, howe the Angels made or assumpted those cloudes and fires to signifie that which they did announce, though the Lorde or the holy Ghost was shewed by those corporal formes.)
And therefore those children would imagine that Christ appea∣red here, and suffered in no other forme, hearing that this in the Sacrament is his body, and his bloud which was shedde for vs. Nowe commeth Fulke, and gathereth cleane contrarie to D. Allen, as if S. Augustine saide,Pur. 309. that these children would ima∣gine nothing of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, where∣as he saith playnely, that hearing thus his presence in the Sacra∣ment, and that in such sort that it is his bloud whiche was shed, they would imagine of no other forme of his appearing & suffe∣ring: signifying as playnely that they néeded onely to be instru∣cted of his other forme, and not of any difference at all otherwise betwéene him selfe in his appearing and suffering, and him selfe in this Sacrament. The next Doctor may be Iustinus Martyr, of whose wordes you gather agaynst Transubstantiation, thus:Ar. 60. Here he playne∣ly affirmeth, that the substance of he Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of our bodies. Therefore it remayneth still af∣ter consecration. That will appeare by his owne words, which béeing truely translated are these (in his seconde Apologie for the Christians, to the Heathen Emperour Antonius Pius:) This meate with vs is called Eucharistia. To the which none is admitted, but suche as beleeueth our doctrine to be true, and is washed with the Lauer for remission of sinnes and to regenera∣ration, and so beleeueth as Christ hath taught. And why suche reuerence? For we take not these as the common bread and a common cuppe: but euen as our Sauiour Iesus Christ beeing through Gods worde incarnate, had fleshe and bloud for our saluation: Sic etiam per verbum precationis quod ab ipso est sacratam alimoniam quae mutata nutrit nostras carnes & sanguinem, illius incarnati Iesu carnem & sanguinem esse di∣dicimus: So we haue learned in the Gospelles, that the meate which beeing chaunged nourisheth our fleshes and bloud, being consecrated through his worde of prayer, is the flesh and bloud of that Iesus incarnate. He saith not here that the substance of the Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of our bodies, as you pretend: but cleane against you he sheweth, that it is not absurd, bread and wine to be turned into the flesh & bloud of Christ, seing
that euery day vsually they be turned by nature into oure fleshe and bloud, when we take them at diner and supper for our nou∣rishment: and that to be done by the diuine worde, séeing that by Gods worde hée tooke the same fleshe and bloud of the Virgine Marie. Ar. 59.You gather likewise of Ireneus his wordes, and say: Here you see plainely that Ireneus affirmeth, the Sacrament after the Consecration to consist of the earthly substance of bread. He doth not so affirme. Hée there treateth against the olde Heretikes, who said,Iren. li. 4. cap. 34. all these bodilie creatures, yea and our owne bodies al∣so, not to be of Gods making, who is the Father of Christ oure Lord, but of another God whome they call the Creator, & coun∣ted him an yll one, and so likewise all his workes to be euil, and our bodies not to ryse againe. But this cannot stande with the Eucharist (sayth Ireneus:Et li. 4. c. 32 & li. 5.) séeing there, to make an oblation to the father, the Creators creatures, (that is, bread and wine,) are taken and made the body and bloud of Christ, and our fleshe is nourished to incorruption of the same body and bloud. But oure doctrine (sayth he) is consonant to the Eucharist in the oblation. (Offerimus enim ei quae sunt eius, for, holding Christes father to be the Creator, we offer to him the thinges that are his, whereas the Heretikes cupidum alieni ostendunt eum, doe make him gre∣dy of anothers, for that he hath commaunded an oblation to bée made to him of the Creators Creatures, him selfe not béeing the Creator:) Et Eucharistia rursus confirmat nostram sententiam, and againe the Eucharist in the receiuing cōfirmeth our doctrine of the resurrection, congruenter communicationem & vnitatem praedicantes carnis & spiritus, considering that agreable to it wee teach ioyning and vnion of flesh and spirite. quemadmodum e∣nim qui est a terra panis, praecipiens vocationem dei am non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena & caelesti: sic & corpora nostra, percipientia Eucharisti∣am, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis habentia. For like as the bread which is of earth, receiuing Gods inuocation (that is, the wordes of Consecration,) now is not common bread as in substance also it was before,) but Eucharistia consisting of two thinges, one earthly (which before he called carnem, the flesh of Christ vnder the forme of earthly bread, as also S. Augustine
aboue page calleth it earth, both in that forme, and also in his owne forme) the other heauenly, (which before he called spiritum because it is the Godhead: so also our bodies receiuing the Eu∣charist, now are not corruptible, hauing hope of resurrection, and therfore now consisting as it were of two things, so as the Eucharist doth, earthly and heauenly, flesh and spirite. Which his comparison is very excellent, yet as all comparisons and simili∣tules, vnlike in some things: because the heauenly thing is in the Eucharist in re, in déede, in our bodies onely in spe, in hope. And there it is a substance, to wit, the Godhead: here but a qualitie, to wit, the glory of the resurrection. Againe the earthly thing there, to wit, Christes flesh, is vnder the forme of the former cō∣mon bread, without the substance of the same: here the earthly thing, to wit, our flesh after receiuing, is vnder the forme of the former corruptible bodies with the substance, yea and also with the corruptibilitie of the same bodies. The likenes, for which he made the comparison, is betwéene the two receiuings, and the o∣perations of the two things receiued: For the bread receiueth, and our bodies receiue, though againe differently. And the words of consecration which the bread receiueth, worketh marueilou∣sly, and the Eucharist which our bodies receiue, worketh mar∣ueilously, though againe differently, as I haue said. Your last Doctor is Theodoret, Whose words (you say) be directly against Transubstantiation. If they were so,Pur. 307. Theod. in poly. mor. dial. 2. it were no∣thing to the matter in it selfe, as I tolde you in the beginning of this Chapter, and specially this béeing suche a matter, as some auncient Father (all yet agréeing vniuersally vpon the Reall presence) might be ignorant of, considering that some late schole∣men, also after the Church had declared for transubstantiation of the bread, thought notwithstanding, that they might holde some part of the breads substance to remayne, either the matter (as it doth in all substantiall transmutations of nature) or els the sub∣stantiall forme, vntill this last Councel at Trent declared ther∣fore further, that the Church meaneth by Transubstantiation, the turning of the whole substance of the bread into the substance of the body, and the whole substance of the wine into the substāce of the bloud of Christ. Sess. 13. ca. 4. But because I there saide, that your Apostasie hath no patron at all among the old Doctors
in no article, (so inexcusable it is both of you, and of your folow∣ers,) and that remembring well at the same time this place of Theodoret: you shall heare what I can say thereunto: although the Lutherans might better alleage it then you First the Catholike asketh: Mystica Symbola, quae deo a dei Sacerdotibus offeruntur, quorumnam dicis esse Symbola? The mysticall likenesses, which Gods Pristes do offer to God (that is, the body and bloud of Christ vnder the formes of bread and wine) Whose likenesses be they? The Eutychian Heretike answereth: The likenesses of the bodie and bloud of our Lord in their owne formes. Thereupon the Catholike inferreth, Ergo our Lords bo∣die in his owne forme, is yet also a true bodie, and not turned in∣to the nature of Diuinitie, though filled with Diuine glorie: O∣portet enim imaginis esse exemplar archetypum, for an image must haue a paterne that is. The Heretike there thinketh that the example of these miste∣ries maketh rather for him, and saieth: Nay rather, As these like∣nesses of our Lordes body and bloud, Alia quidem sunt, are one thing before the Priestes Inuocation, to wit, bread and wine, but after the Inuocation are turned, and be made other things, to wit, Christes bodie and Christes bloud: So also our Lordes body after his assumption is turned into the diuine substance, being therefore extant no more in his owne forme. The Catholike answereth saying: Nay, you are caught in your owne nette. Neque enim signa, &c. For the mysticall signes do not after consecration de∣part (to sense, as you teach of Christes body after his ascention) from their nature. For they abide (to sense) in their former sub∣stance, and figure, and forme, and may be seene and felt as before. Intelligūtur autem ea esse quae facta sunt, & creduntur: But to vn∣derstanding (though not to sense) and to faith, they be the things which they are made: & adorantur vt quae illa sint quae credun∣tur, and they be adored (by inclination and prostration, as we heard afore out of S. Augustine, because Fulke sayth here, Not by any knocking or kneeling) as being in deede the things which they are beleued. Thus it is in the Mysteries, béeing liknesses or an image. Therefore the veritie in like maner (saith he) that is, our Lords body in heauen, habet priorem quidem formam, &c. Hath pardie the former forme, and figure, and circumscription,
and (to say all at once) the bodies substance: though it be after the Resurrection made immortall and incorruptible, and sitting at Gods right hande, and adored of all creatures. Meaning (as you sée) by substance of the bread and substance of the body, all that is externall, as figure, forme, circumscription, &c. Which we in Englishe do by a like terme call the boulke of a thing. As for the interior substance, that question belonged to his Incarna∣tion, not to his assumption, whereof nowe they talke. Neither may any Logician thinke it straunge for the worde Substantia to be so vsed, if he consider well, howe the worde Corpus is vsed in the predicament of Quantitie, though it be otherwise a species of Substantia. But the mysticall likenes (saith the Heretike) chaungeth at the least his former calling. For it is no more named, that which it was tearmed before, but it is called Body. Therefore also the veritie in heauen must be called God, and not Body. Not so, saith the Catholike: It is named not onely Corpus, Body, but also panis vitae, Bread of life. And so likewise the body in hea∣uen, we name it Diuinum corpus, & viuisicum, & dominicum, docentes non esse commune alicuius hominis, &c. The diuine and viuificall, and Dominicall body, teaching that it is not a com∣mon one of some mans, but our Lordes Iesus Christ, who is God and man. Where you sée, that suche a difference as he put∣teth betwene our common bodies and our Lord Gods body, the like he putteth betwene common bread and this bread of life, which therefore with him is Christes body vnder the forme of bread (béeing thereby become as properly bread, as cōmon bread is bread) and not the common substance of common bread, which no man can say to be bread of life. vj. About the Sacrament of Penance. Now to approche nearer to Purgatorie, about the Sacrament of Penance the Church of God saith foure things. First, that by the Priestes absolution the guilt of sinne is remitted, and so the penitent reconciled to God, and therefore pardoned the eternall payne of hell. Secondly, that after this remission: for all that, he may yet be in debt of some temporall payne. Thirdly, that he may and must pay the same temporall debt by workes of
Satisfaction. Fourthly, that vpon good cause a Bishop may par∣don it in parte, and the Pope wholly. Against these foure points Fulke alleageth, saying: Absolution. Pur, 168.But what auayleth this submission (to Gods ministers) when the Priest doth not by his Absolution take away one houres tor∣mentes in Purgatorie, as both M. Allen him selfe in effect confes∣seth, and the master of Sentences also teacheth. It auayleth to take away the eternall torments of hell. Is that nothing with you? When you be in them, your saucie tong would giue all the world for the least touch of the fingers ende of Gods Priestes, whom now in your hereticall pride you despise farre more then the riche Iewe did poore Lazarus. Temporall debt remayning after Absolution. Agaynst the second you alleage Augustine and Chrysostome, euen against themselues, for in the third chapter pag. 16. you con∣fessed them both to stand for Purgatorie, which implieth debt of payne after remission of sinnes. But go to, what saith Austine? He saith (quoth you) of the deaths of Moises & Aaron,Pur. 42. Aug. in vet. Test. lib. 4. ca. 53 that they were signes of things to come, not punishments of Gods displea∣sure. This is your sinceritie. His wordes immediatly afore be these: When it is said to them, Vt apponantur ad populum suū, that they should be gathered to their people: It is manifest, that they be not in the wrath of god, which separateth from the peace of the holy eternall societie. And thereby it is manifest, that also their deathes were signes of things to come, which things he there declareth) and not punishments of Gods indignation. You sée how precisely he speaketh, to wit, of Gods wrath & indignation which punisheth by death to separate from his people for euer: least he should haue spoken contrarie to the most manifest texte, and to him selfe a litle before, where he said, that God foretolde them both, quod ideo non intrarent, that therefore they should not enter into the lande, quia non eum sanctificauerunt, because they doubted of his gifte that water could flowe of a Rocke. And so is the text it selfe moste euidently:Nu. 20.27. Deut. 32. You shall not bring this people into the lande, but you shall dye, because you did not beleeue me, because you offended me, because you trespassed against me. And yet you will not graunt, that for their sinne, the
fault béeing remitted: they were punished by death. These are they that will not stand agaynst euident Scripture. Likewise about the example of Dauid you say:Pur. 43. I would wish no better authoritie of the auntient Fathers, then euen that which M. Allen him selfe alleageth out of Augustine contra Faustum li. 22. cap. 67. that the punishment of Dauid was, flagelli paterni disciplina, the chastisement of Gods fatherly scourge: as he doth moste playnely declare the same in his booke De pec. mer. ac rem. li. 2. ca. 23. Is suche authoritie so good to proue that after the fault is forgiuen, that is, after the sonne is receiued againe into fauour, no payne is owing? Belike then you scourge your chil∣dren that offend not, aswel as them that haue offended, and them also that haue offended, you scourge not only after that you haue receiued them agayne into fauour, but also after that you haue pardoned them all punishment. Then surely are you as wise a father, as a diuine. No reasonable man, but hearing of a fathers scourge, would by & by gather of it, punishment for some offence, where you gather the contrarie, A fathers scourge, ergo no pu∣nishmēt. But your author S. Augustine doth not so. In the chap∣ter before commending his humility sub flagello dei,2. Reg. 16. vnder Gods scourge, when Semei so diuelishly reuiled him, he reporteth how Dauid said, Meritis suis hoc redditum superno iudicio, That this was executed vpon him by Gods iudgement for his desertes, that is, for the same matters of Vrias, wherof he speketh in the place by you alleaged out of the Chapter following, and saith, that the Prophet Nathan told him, quòd acceperit veniam, that he had forgiuenes, ad sempiternam quidem salutem, as to euerlasting sal∣uation But notwithstanding, as God had threatened him, fla∣gelli paterni disciplina non est praetermissa, The fatherly scourges chastisement was not omitted: to the end, that both for his con∣fession of his sinne, he might be deliuered euerlastingly, and by such affliction he might be tried temporally. Where also he com∣mendeth him for not murmuring agaynst God, as if he had sent him a false pardon of his sinnes. Intelligebat enim, &c. For by his profound wisedome he vnderstood, but that God was gratious to him confessing and repenting, how worthy his sinnes were of euerlasting paynes, for the which (sinnes) being beaten with tem∣poral corrections, he saw that vnto him continued the forgiuenes,
and Phisicke withall not neglected. So expresly he saith that he was beaten for his sinnes, for his deserts, although withall it was Phisicke for him and prbation. Neither in the other place De pec. mer. doth he say the contrarie. For these be his wordes: That forgiuenes of his sinnes was graunted, that he might not be stopped from receiuing life euerlasting: and yet the effect of that same threatening followed, that his godlines mighte in that hu∣militie be exercised and proued: not onely, but also (as he saide in another place) that he might thereby be beaten temporally for his deserts: though he expresse not this cause also in this place, for that he had here to answere the Pelagians, and shewe some cause, why death, if it came onely by sinne (by originall sinne,) remaineth still vpon all men, euen them also whose originall sinnes are so fully forgiuen in Baptisme, that they owe nothing, neither eternally, neither temporally, for them. Pur. 43.But for a slat conclusion contradictory to M. Allens assertion, I will vse (you say) the very words of Chrysostome in the 8. Hom. vpon the Epistle to the Rom. Vbi veni, ibi nulla erit poena, Where there is forgiuenes, there is no punishment, One may sée by this, that you would vse the Doctors words as couragiously as we do, if they were on your side, as they be on ours▪ But it coo∣leth your courage, because you are faine to cōfesse them in many things to be playne against you: and not able neither to main∣teine that they be with you, when you pretende they be. As here S. Chrysostome speaketh of the forgiuenes geuen in Baptisme to the Iew passing from the wrath of the Lawe to the grace of Christ. But our assertion speketh of the forgiuenes geuen in the Sacrament of penance, to the Christian that hath shamefully dis∣honored the grace of Christ. If such be contradictories with you, then as your Diuinitie is new, so is your Logicke also new. Satisfaction. Pur. 87.Against the third you alleage Chrysostome & Ambrose: but how fondly, the very words that you alleage, though we seeke no fur∣ther,Chryso. de compun. cordis. li. 1. in fine. will declare.Non requirit Deus ciliciorum pondus, &c. God requireth not the burden of shirtes of heare, (saith Chrysostome) nor to be shut vp in the straites of a litle Cell, neque iubet, neither doth he commaunde vs to sit in obscure & darke Caues: this only
it is which is required of vs, that we alwayes remember and ∣count our sinnes, &c. He there reproueth them▪ that  ∣rie mourning for their owne soules, quasi quidum  labor sit, as if it were a labour intolerable. Therefore he saith, that God doth not commaund as necessarie that  take him selfe to the straite mourning of Monkes. And  for∣sooth do tell vs therupon, that Chrysostome f any man had  ∣ther beleeue him, speaking of such kind of wo  his fellowes count to be the chiefe works of pn,  that they serue not for satisfaction for our sinnes vnto God  againe: Therfore by Chrysostomes iudgement, that  satisfaction of Gods righteousnes, nor any obedience of Gods commaundement, hath banished the Heremites,  Anachoretes, and cloyed the world with cloysterers: but the su∣perstitious and slauish feare of Purgatorie, and the blasphemous presumptuous pride of mens merites. Thus you take on as it were vpon S. Chrysostomes saying, not considering that Deme∣trius was a Monke, to whom he there writeth, commending  singulerly for the very same works of penance: nor that Chryso∣stome also him selfe was a Monke (and that by your owne cōfes∣sion, and wrote a booke which is extant, Aduersus vituperatores vitae Monasticae, Against the dispraysers of the Monasticall life, that is, euen against you also for saying as you do in this place. Againe you say:Pur. 8. A. in  22. li. 1. What S. Ambrose thinketh of that kind of sa∣tisfaction, whereof M. Allen speaketh, is plaine by those words which he vttereth of Peter: Lachrymas eius lego, satisfactionem non lego. I reade of his teares, I reade not of his satisfaction. He vttereth these words also there immediatly before: Non inuenio quid dixerit, inuenio quod fleuerit: I find not what he said, I find that he wept. Whatsoeuer you gather hereof, he that readeth the place, must néedes gather the contrarie, so wit, that he thinketh Confession necessarie, and satisfaction necessarie: but that teares are both a special kind of cōfession, for Lachrymae crimen sine of∣fensione verecundiae cōtentur, Teares confesse the crime without touch of shamfastnes, quod voce pudor est consiter▪ that to con∣fesse with voyce is a shamefast thing: and also a speciall kind of Satisfaction, forLachrymae veniam, Teares though they do not aske pardon, they obteine it. Which yet againe he saith not as
though onely teares woulde serue, but, Pete opened not his mouth, least so quicke requesting of pardon might more offend. First we must weepe, and then request. But a playne place to know what S. Ambrose thought of Penance and Satisfaction, is his whole booke To the Virgin that had broken her vow, and namely these words,Ambro. ad virg. lapsā. ca. 8. Pur. 84. Grande selus grandem habet necessariam satisfactionem, For a passing great crime, is necessarie a passing great satisfaction. Which words import none other thing (you say) but that an haynous offence must be earnestly bewayled, if repentance be not counterfaited. As though he there doubted lest her repentance were counterfaite, and not earnest: saying yet vnto her, Tu quae iam ingressa es agonem poenitentiae, Thou who art already entred into the or, exercisefield of penance, with muche more to the same effect: declaring (I say) that he tooke her penance to be vnfaigned, as béeing well begon, but yet besides, that her whole life is litle enough to make iust satisfaction vnto God. Pardons. Wherein he is so vehement, that you come agayne on the o∣ther side (touching our fourth Article) and pretende by the same word of his, that the Church can not pardon the penance or satis∣faction which sinners do owe. Where I say nothing how you o∣uerthrow your owne ignorant imagination, that the old Cano∣nicall satisfaction was onely to satisfie the Church,ur. 8 5. and not to sa∣tisfie Gods iustice. As though not only the Church, but also euery priuate man may not pardon such kind of satisfaction as the sin∣ner oweth to him, and hold himselfe contented with as litle as he list. Therfore to omit this: He assureth her (you say) as Cyprian in his Sermon de Lapsis, doth the fallen men of his time, that for∣giuenes of sinnes is proper vnto God onely, and followeth not of necessitie the sentence of men, but the sentence of men ought to follow the iudgement of God.Pur. 73. Alluding belike to the place where somewhat afore you alleaged Cyprian, & gathered of his words, that not onely he plainly denieth that absolute & soueraigne au∣thority of men, which M. Allen affirmeth, but also declareth what he meaneth by satisfaction of God, to wit, inwarde and hartie conuersion. The two places in déede are like (although the fall of that Vir∣gine
was breaking of her vow, and the fall of those men was de∣nying of Christ in persecution.) but they make not against Par∣dons, no neither of those most heinous sinnes, vnlesse you thinke that the Churches binding is preiudicial to her lowsing, both be∣ing giuen her of Christ. For what els doth S. Ambrose there, but bind that virgine (as béeing her Bishop) to do penance al her life? Inhaere poenitentiae vsque ad extremam vitae, &c. Sticke to pe∣nance euen to the end of thy life, and presume not that pardon may be giuen thee of mans day, for he deceiueth thee that so pro∣miseth thee. For thou that hast in special sinned against the Lord (because she was his vowed spouse) it is meete that of him onely thou looke for remedie in day of Iudgement. So that all her life he bindeth her to penance, bidding her not to hope for any pardon at his hands. The Emperour Theodosius he bound also,Theo. hist. li. 5. ca. 17. though indefinitely: but after eight monethes penance loused him again with a pardon. Who séeth not that all this maketh playnely for pardons, and not against them? Likewise S. Cyprian in that Sermon, and in twenty Epistles at the least, maketh playnly for Pardons, in that he doth no more but reproue them that be giuen partly of such as had not authori∣tie to louse, at least those deniers, as of Lay martyrs, & of méere Priestes: partly of suche as had authoritie, but without cause, without moderation, and to vnpenitent persons: partly & moste of al, both these defects concurring. But otherwise, although (be∣ing Primate of all Affrike) he reprehended a certaine Bishop for geuing pacem, peace to a certaine Priest,Cyp. ep. 59 before he had done poe∣nitentiam plenam, full penance, (which manifestly was a Par∣don) contra decretum de Lapsis, contrarie to the Councels decrée touching such deniers: Pacem tamen quomodocunque à Sacer∣dote dei, &c. Yet (saith he) being once giuen by a Bishop.the Priest of God, in what maner soeuer, we will not reuoke it: and therefore we permit Victor to enioy the leaue to communicate which hath bene graunted him. Notwithstāding that, to those Impenitents, trusting also but in lay mens pardons, he crieth as you alleage: Nemo se fallat, &c. Let no man deceiue him selfe,Cyp. sermo de Lapsis. let no man be∣guile him selfe, onely our Lord can giue mercy: onely he can graunt pardon to sinnes as beeing cōmitted agaynst him. Homo Deo esse non potest maior, nec remittere aut donare indulgentia
sua seruns potest, quod in dominum delicto grauiore commissum est: ne adhuc lapso, & hoc accedat ad crimen, si nesciat esse prae∣dictum,Iere. 17. maledictus homo, qui spem habet in homine. Man can not be greater then God (to louse the impenitent whom God bindeth) neither can the seruaunt (who hath no commission) re∣mit, in part, or forgeue, in the whole, with his indulgence, that which by so great a fault was committed against the Lord: least furthermore to the fallen person be added this cryme also, if he be ignoraunt that it was forespoken, Cursed is the man that hath his trust in man.Mat. 10. Dominus orandus est. Dominus nostra satis∣factione placandus, qui negantem negare se dixit: Our Lorde must be prayed vnto, our Lorde must by our satisfaction be pa∣cified, who hath saide, that he will denie his denier. His seconde Epistle is to those Martyrs in prison, instructing them not to giue pardons them selues, nor to appoynt the Bishops so or so to pardon him and his, and him and his, but to make their suite for those whose Poenitentia est Satisfactioni proxima, pe∣naunce is very nighe to satisfaction, that is almost all fulfilled, and to remitte the matter to the Bishoppes power,Note the anti∣quitie of par∣dons. sicut in prae∣teritum semper sub Antecessoribus nostris factum est, As in time past alwayes it was done vnder our predecessors. And yet Epistle 54. the Councell giueth a plenarie to all the Deniers at once that were doing their penaunce, because of another perse∣cution at hande. Epistle 52. he sheweth Clerus Romanus, Se∣de vacante, appoynted that the like pardon should be geuen to euery one in extreme sicknes. But I forget my selfe, to alleage so much, béeing here onely to answere. vij. Of Purgatorie. This Chapter is growen to such length, and yet is Purgato∣rie behinde. But the gentle Reader will consider, I trust, howe lightly any beast may trouble the pure water, but that it is not so soone cleared agayne: not doubting also but the varietie pas∣seth away his wearinesse. As I am likewise studious of method, to put all in conuenient order, for the same cause. And the order that in this part I thinke good to follow, is, to speake first of the Churches practise, and then of particular Doctors.
Of the Canonicall memento of Oblations, and of Sacrifice for the dead practised by the Church. First then, to proue that for a certayne space after the Apo∣stles, there was no praying for the dead, at least in some Chur∣ches, this Companion reasoneth ab authoritate negatiu, nega∣tiuely of the authoritie of Iustinus Martyr, and of Tertullian, (to which I must ioyne Origen, Epiphanius, and a Councell of Spayne) though him selfe, vnmindfull in one place what he saith in another, playnly  Pu. affirmeth, that such an argument euen of all mens authoritie, is false. Therefore thus he saith: Seeing it is certayne by testimonie of Iustinus Martyr, that there was no mention of the dead in the ce∣lebration of the Lords Supper, for more then an hundred yeres after Christ: we must not beleeue Chrysostome without Scrip∣ture affirming that it was ordeined so by the Apostles. Wel then, Chrysostome your elder ones, affirmeth it as more at large you confessed the same in the 3. and 7. Chapters.) but you and certain of the contrarie by his elder Iustinus. What be Iustinus his words? Where you recite them, you say agayne:Pur. 259. By which it is manifest, that in those first and purer days there was o mention at all of Sacrifice for the dead. But no word so in Iustinus: Yea in reporting there the order of ye  ist, he saith expresly, that the Bishop is long about it,Iust. Apol. 2. in fine. you also after he is com o Conse∣cration. And when he hath ended Those prayers and the Con∣secration, all do answer Amen, as also at this day we sée at the later Eleuation, where the Consecration is concluded. In that long space you can find no time for memento domine defuncto∣rum. But certayne it is, and manifest (say you) that there was none, and that Chrysostome and al his felowes must not be bele∣ued. You might as wel say, that in S. Augustines time also there was no mention of the dead,Aug. epist. 59. q. 5. because he also reporteth sometimes the summe of the Canon without naming ye dead: yea & that your owne next witnesse Tertullian must not be beléeued, because he expresseth certaine prayers, which Iustinus doth not. And yet be∣twéene them two you find no repugnance, but set vpon D. Allen, as afore vpon S. Chrysostome, with them both at once, saying: And where he saith, there was euer found in the celebration of the Sacrament, a solemne prayer for all the departed in Christ:
To reproue his vanitie, the order of prayers and administration of the Holy mysteries,Tert. in A∣polog. ad∣uersus Gen¦tes. described by Iustinus, and of Tertullian al∣so, do sufficiently declare, what was the vsage of the Chrystians in those purer times. Because there it is expressed for whom and what they prayed. Oramus etiam (saith Tertullian) pro Impe∣ratoribus, pro ministris eorum, & potestatibus seculi, pro rerum quiete, pro mora finis. We pray also for the Emperours, for their officers, and powers of the world, for peace, for delay of the end. Do you not sée, that in saying, we pray also for these, he signifieth that these were some, but not all they prayed for? as if he should say, Among other things we pray for these. Which other things he had not cause to expresse there, as he had cause to expresse these, to wit, for that the Christians were charged of the Heathen thus: Deos non colitis, & pro Imperatoribus sacrificia non impenditis. First, you do not worship the goddes. Secondly, you do not be∣stow sacrifices (with the Heathen at certaine appoynted times) for the Emperours. Therfore making his Apologie, he expresseth the Emperours & suche persons & things as concerned their Ro∣maine Empire, as you may reade more amply somewhat afore. This is a cleare answere, and therfore inough. Howe muche more, considering that your selfe also confesse, that Tertullian is against you.Pur. 369. In so much that you are fayne to say: To leaue out of our Seruice, prayers and sacrifice for the dead, we haue sure warrant by example of the eldest Church, & nearest to the Apo∣stles times, as we haue shewed out of Iustinus Martyr, and Ter∣tullian before he became an Heretike, meaning a Montanist. To which your cauill I haue answered cap. 6. pag. 49. And therfore Tertullian standeth vpright against you with your owne con∣fession more at large cap. 3. pag. 15. How much more againe, considering that about the very same time Arnobius to the same purpose wrote thus: Cur immaniter nostra Conuenticula meruerunt dirui?Arnob. li. 4 cōtra Gen∣tes, sub finē. &c. Why deserued our Churches to be pulled downe barbarously? in which the highest God is prayed vnto, peace and pardon is asked for all men, for the Magistrates, for friends, for enemies, for the liuing, and for the dead? So expresly he sayth, to confound your arguing out of o∣thers ab authoritate negatiuè. You ioyned Tertullian to Iustinus. The matter ioyneth also
Epiphanius to them. Of him you saye:Pur. 370. It is easie to be gathe∣red by Epiphanius, that the olde forme of Liturgie was but to make mention of the dead, to haue them in remembraunce. And because they vsed to make memory of all sorts of men that were dead in Christ, he expoundeth it according to the error of his time. That this memory was a prayer for the sinners, for the iust, as Patriarkes, Prophets, &c. a signification that they were inferior to Christ. A simple cause why they should be remembred (so that neither the old forme of Liturgie liketh you in remembring the dead at al:VVil you see a pure Puritane. no more then the old oblatiōs for the dead thogh they were only oblations of thanksgiuing, for they were taken vp of the Church in Tertullian and Montanus time by peruerse emu∣lation of the Gentiles, so you said cap. 6. pag. 53.) But this shifte Epiphanius is driuen vnto, because he did not consider, that the memorie and oblation which the old Fathers made for al the de∣parted in Christ, was a sacrifice of thanks giuing, and not of pra∣yers for them. And againe: They had in deede in elder time,Pur. 356. as appeareth by Epiphanius, the name of oblation: but it was for the Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs. Which playnly she∣weth, that it was but an offering of thanks giuing. You are decei∣ued by thinking that it is but one memorie whereof Epiphanius speaketh. Looke in the Liturgie of S. Iames, as also of S. Basil, and of S. Chrysostome, & diuers places of S. Augustines, and you shall find two distinct memories. And therfore Epiphanius saith:Epip. Hier. 75. Aerij li. 3. tom. 1. Et pro iustis, & pro peccatoribus memoriā facimus, Both for the iust, and for the sinners we make memorie. And that by tradition of the Apostles, as he there saith against your friend Aerius. Pro peccatoribus quidem, misericordiam dei implorantes, For sinners pardie requesting Gods mercy. Which is not his exposition, as you pretend, but the very words of the Tradition, that is, of the memorie it selfe. Pro iustis verò, &c. For the iust both Fathers and Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles, Euangelistes, Martyrs, and Confessors, Bishops also, and Anchoretes, and for euery order: Vt D. I. Christum ab hominum ordine separemus, To the ende we may seperate our Lord Iesus Christ from mens order, ponde∣ring in our mind, that our Lord is not egalled to any mā, althogh a thousand times, & vpward, that man do liue in iustice. For how is it possible? for he is God, and the other is a man. Which reason
of his was to déepe for your diuinitie. He saw that the like me∣morie might be made also for our Lord him selfe, if it were but a thanks giuing. And therfore not being made for him likewise, he conceiued that the Apostles had another reason therin, so to sepa∣rate the iust from Christ, & not only the sinners from the iust. Al∣though otherwise when the iust & the sinners are not seperated, but ioyned both together in some one Collet of the Church, then (as S. Augustine said ca. 3. pag. 16.) the same one Collet is at once a propitiation for the sinners, and a thanks giuing for the iust. Now to the place of Origen, which is another of your trumpes that you trust so much in,Pur. 249.427. saying: This one testimonie of Origen shal testifie, what the iudgement of the Greeke Church was con∣cerning Purgatorie and prayers for the dead, from the Apostles time vnto his dayes. And yet you are fayne to confesse not onely thus in the same place, I wotte well superstition in the Latine Church was somewhat forwarder: but also of Origen him self in another place,Pur. 116. Orig. in Ie. Ho. 12. In Num. ho. 25. In psal. 36. ho. 3. Ori. in Iob. lib. 3. & to say: But howsoeuer he doteth about passage through fire, and purifications after this life: yet he affirmeth in another place, that the daye of Christian mens death is the de∣position of payne. Wherby it appeareth, that either he was not constant with him selfe, or els that Origens Purgatory was a paynlesse Purgatory. Why? speaketh he of any paynes, but the paynes of this life? Marke his words once again: We do not ce∣lebrate the day of Natiuity, cum sit dolorum at{que} tentationum in∣troitus, seing it is the entrance of sorowes and tentations: but we celebrate the day of death, vtpote omnium dolorū depositionem at{que} omniū tentationum effugationem, as that which is the doing off of all sorowes, and the driuing away of all tentations. Of all sorowes and of all tentations (you sée) which our day of Nati∣uitie is the entrance vnto. Therfore (saith he) we both celebrate the Memories of Saintes, and deuoutly keepe the Memories of our parents or friends dying in the faith. But it followeth, you say: Tam illorum refrigerio gaudentes, quam etiam nobis piam consummationem in fide postulantes, Partly reioysing for their ease, partly also requesting for our selues a godly finishing in the faith. Do you not see, that he expoundeth their ease to be their godly finishing in faith? for then they rest according to the body from all the sorowes & tentations of this bodily life, in hope also
to liue for euer after a while acording to ye same bodies. Which causeth vs also at this day to reioyce vnspeakeably when we heare that our friendes in Englande dye in the Church of God a∣mong so many tentations there to the contrarie, and to thanke God for it with all our heartes, though withall we say Masse of Requiem for their soules. For so it foloweth after in Origen,Oblations for the dead. touching their friendes soules: Celebramus nimirum, &c. And this we do in our celebration for our parentes or friendes: We call together the religious with the Priests, the faithfull with the Cleargie, (meaning by the Religious, the Monkes, which were the principall order of the faithfull or Layetie, as the Priestes were the principall order of the Cleargie: whiche I note by the way, because of your saucines with D. Allen here, procéeding of your ignorance in Antiquitie, neither vnderstanding so much as these very words of Origen) Inuiting moreouer the needie and poore, filling with foode the fatherlesse and widowes. That our solemnitie may be made to be a memorie of rest to the soules de∣parted whose memorie we celebrate, and maye to our selues be made to be a sauor of swetenes in the sight of God eternall. That is, a sacrifice of thankes giuing for them that were aliue, as you interprete it, shewing your great skill in the Scriptures. He al∣ludeth to Philip. 4. where S. Paule speaketh of the like charitie of the Philippians towards him, calling it odorem suauitatis, a sweete sauour, that is, as there it followeth, a sacrifice accepta∣ble and pleasing to God, signifying that such works are passing meritorious, as béeing in the morall sense meant by those burnt Sacrifices of the Lawe, whiche all (and not onely when they were for thankes giuing) were called sweete sauours to God.Pur. 427. The like ignorance you shew also in the former clause (which is more to our purpose) to thinke that memorie for one can not be a prayer for him:Col. 4. as though S. Paule in prison did not com∣mend him selfe to the Colossians prayers, in saying: Memores estote vinculorum meorum, Remember my gyues.Heb. 13. And to the He∣brues, Remember them that are in gyues, as if you were in gyues with them. And as S. Augustine writeth,Au. de Ciu. li. 21. ca. 27. Quod frequentatur ore Christiano, That which is common in Christian mouthes, eche humble person to commend him selfe to the deuout, and to say, Remember me, deseruing also at his hands, so to do. And so in our
Masse, when we make for our frid aliue memoriam patientiae, a memory of patience, for our friend departed memoriam requiei a memory of rest, it is a prayer to God to giue him patience, to giue him rest. And that Origen meaneth euen so, you may sée in S. Iames Masse, where be the very words that he alludeth vnto: Remember O Lord our God the soules of all fleshe of the right beleeuers, from Abel the iust euen to this day. Fac eos requiescere, make them to rest in the land of the liuing in thy kingdome, &c. Nostrae vero vitae fines, and direct in peace the finishing of our liues to be Christian, acceptable, and pure from sinne. Cyp. ep. 66And therefore againe, where S. Cyprian saith of one Victor be∣ing departed, Neque enim ad Altae dei meretur nominari in Sa∣cerdotum prece, For he is not worthy to be named at Gods altar in the prayer of the Priestes: what exposition is this of yours? By prayer he meaneth not prayer for deliuery of the dead out of Purgatory,Pur. 284. but as Origen saith, for the faithfull liuing, to haue the like godly departure as he had that was fallen asleepe. Origen helpeth you not, as I haue shewed: and S. Cyprians words be so playn, that you do nothing els but shew your obstinacy in wran∣gling vpon them, and your ignorance in Antiquity. Thrée things at Masse were (and are) vsually done for the dead: First, his friends offred for him, partly his owne bequest, partly their own charities,Pur. 244. out of Chrysost. to the sustenance of the Cleargie & reliefe of the poore. Secondly, the Priest offered the Sacrifice it selfe of our price for him. Thirdly, he named him after consecration in the memorie of the dead, to commend his soule to God among the rest. All these thrée S. Cyprian hath there expresly: Touching the first he saith, The Councell decréed, that if any do such a thing, Non offeretur pro eo, there should be no offering for him. And therfore there is no cause that any offering should be made there with you (he writeth to the Priests, Deacons, and Laity of the parish) for the sleeping of Victor. (so he calleth the offering at the day of ones death, because there are other offerings besides, as at the months minds day, and the twelue monthes mindday.) Touching the se∣cond he saith: The Councel decréed also, Ne sacrificium pro dor∣mitione eius celebraretur, That the Sacrifice should not be cele∣brated for the sleeping of such a one. And touching the third, He is not worthy to be named in the Priestes prayer at the Altar. Et
ideo non est, &c. And therfore there is no cause, that any praying should there with you be vsed in the Church in his name. For heede may be taken hereafter, that this be done no more, if this fact now, be punished. By which appeareth againe, that it is but méere cauilling, whē you distinguish betwene Oblations of the dead,Pur. 259. & Oblations for the dead: because oblations of the dead them selues, no lesse then of their friends, were oblations for the dead, as S. Cyprian here expresly calleth it, offerri pro eo, to offer for him. And therefore maketh against you not onely the second Tole∣tane Councell, as you also confesse,Pur. 426. which decréeth of such Peni∣tents as dye before reconciliation, saying: Placuit nobis, &c.2. Tole. c. 12 It pleaseth vs, that both the memory of suche may be commended (to God) in their Churches, (in the memento of the dead) and of∣ferings for their sinnes may be taken by the Priestes. Item thré others, which you neither would confesse, nor could denie, to wit, the fourth of Carthage (whervnto the Toletane doth allude) de∣créeing of the same Penitents,4. Carth. ca. 79. vt memoria eorum & orationibus & oblationibus commendetur, that their memory may be com∣mended both with prayers and with oblations (or offerings) of their owne and their friends almes, and of the Altar.1. Brac. c. 34 35.39. The first Bracarense, decréeing of such as kill them selues, vt nulla pro il∣lis in oblatione commemoratio fiat, neque cum Psalmis ad sepul∣turam eorum cadauera deducantur, That no memorie be made for them in the oblation of the Altar, nor their corpses brought with Psalmes to their buriall. Simili modo, In like maner, that vpon Catechumenes, dying without the redemptiō of Baptisme, (through their own fault,Dying vnrecon¦ciled passing dangerous. bicause they were not disposed to leaue as yet their yll liuing, for which cause many nowe also in Eng∣land do deferre reconciliation) neque oblationis sanctae comme∣moratio, neque Psallendi impendatur officium, should be besto∣wed neither the memorie of the holy oblation (which afore they called commemorationem in oblatione, the memorie in the time of the oblation: but you could not sée so much) neither the office of Psalmes. Appoynting moreouer, that if any thing by contri∣bution of the faithfull be offered eyther at the Feasts of Martyrs, or at the minddayes of the dead, the Hebdomadarie haue it not, but to auoyde inequalitie and discord, it be reserued of one of the
Cleargie, and once or twise a yere diuided betweene all of the Cleargie. Not onely these Councels (I say) do so clearely make against you, but also Vasense, and the saide fourth of Carthage, which you pretende to haue answered, in saying that they are flatly falsified by D. Allen, because you thinke that Oblations of the dead: and Oblations for the dead, are not with them, as with D. Allen, all one. But to sée your wrangling, let anye reasonable man conferre the two Canons as well of the fourth of Carthage, as also of Vasense, which D. Allen doth alleage. The one Canon,4. Car. c. 79 95. Vase. c. 2.4. béeing the 95. of Carthage, and the fourth of Vasense, excommunicateth the Executors, qui oblationes de∣functorum, aut negant Ecclesijs, aut cum difficultate reddunt, Who either denie to the Churches, or pay very hardly, the Obla∣tions of the dead: qui Oblationes defunctorum retinent, aut Ec∣clesijs tradere demorantur, Who keepe backe, or be slowe in de∣liuering to the Churches, the Oblations of the dead. The other Canon, béeing the 79 of Carthage, and the second of Vasense, decréeth of obedient Penitentes, dying by chaunce without re∣conciliation, Vt eorum memoria & orationibus, & oblationi∣bus cōmendetur, That their memorie be cōmended to God, both with prayers and with oblations, as also afore was alleaged: Ho∣rum oblationem recipiendam, & eorum funera, ac deinceps me∣moriam Ecclesiastico affectu prosequendam, &c. That their ob∣lation be receiued, and on the day of their buriall, and afterwards vpon their other minddays, the churches affection bestowed vpō them, because it is vnreasonable to exclude their cōmemorations out of the healthfull sacrings, to whom, for their passing prepara∣tion to the same mysteries, Fortasse nec absolutissimam reconci∣liationem Sacerdos denegandam putasset, The Priest peraduen∣ture would haue thought that neither the most absolute reconci∣liation should be denied. For though to all obedient Penitents at the point of death they gaue both reconciliation, and the fruite therof which is the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, yet they gaue not to all such full absolution from the residue of their penance, in case they recouered, as we sée Con. Cart. 4. Can. 76.78. So then these foure Councels are against you (besides the two General Councels of Florence and Trent, which your Caluini∣call spirite contemneth, like an Heathen and a Publicane.)
You promise D. Allen, saying,Pur. 187. Your Prouinciall Councels shal be answered by as good Prouinciall Councels as they are. But where be those good Prouinciall Councels of yours? I find where you promise agayne afterwarde, and say:Pur. 277. The Councell Bracharense (as afterward I shall more playnly shew) doth insi∣nuate, that no prayers were made at all for the soules of the de∣parted in their Churche at their burials: but onely a remem∣braunce of them in prayers, with thankes giuing and singing of Psalmes. For Purgatorie should seeme had not yet trauelled in∣to Spayne. But when you come to the place,Pur. 426.427. 3. Tol. c. 22. you playnely con∣fesse the contrarie, to wit, a memorie for the dead, in that Coun∣cell. Mary the third Toletan Councell you there produce, as for you, in that it decréeth, Religiosorum omniū corpora, cum Psal∣mis tantūmodo, & Psallentium vocibus debere ad sepulchra de∣ferri, That the Corpses of all Religious (at the least, if the Bishop can not prohibite it in all Christians,) be caried to their graues with Psalmes onely, (without that funebre carmen quod vulgo defunctis cantari solet) funerall heathen song which is wont to be song to the dead) and with the voyces of the Psalmessingers, (without that heathen beating themselues, or their neighbours, or their families, on the breastes.) And to make all sure against any reply, you adde: If you say, this doth not exclude prayers and oblations: they adde, that it must be thought sufficient, that in hope of the Resurrection, vpon the Corpses of Christians is bestowed Famulatus diuinorum canticorum, the office of the di∣uine Psalmes. For so ought Christian mens bodies throughout the whole world to be buried. So then, this is your argument: In carying the Corpses to their graues, they did sing Psalmes: Ergo in their Churches they had no prayers nor oblations for the Soules, namely in Spayne, whereas S. Augustine at the same time saide,Aug. de cu. pro mor. ca. 1. 2. Mac. 12. Vniuersae Ecclesiae authoritas in hac consue∣tudine claret, Although no where at all in the olde Scriptures it were read (as it is in the bookes of the Machabees) that Sacri∣fice was offered for the dead: yet greate is the authoritie of the whole Church, which in this custome is cleare: where in the prayers of the Priest, which are made to our Lorde God at his Altar, the commendation also of the dead hath his place. But to returne to your reason: you might with it proue as well
that now also we haue no prayers nor oblations for the dead, be∣cause we carie the Corpse with Psalmes: as also the whole dirige in effect is Psalmes: and namely De profundis for the dead, be∣cause it is a Psalme, is it not a prayer for thē, trow you? or was not Purgatorie trauelled into Affrike neither, when S. Augu∣stine wrote as aboue, because there also they caried their corpses with Psalmes? In so much that soone after S. Augustines death Victor bishop of Vtica reporting the lamentable deuastations of the Catholike Churches there by the Arrian king Gensericus,Victor de pers. Vand. li. 1. fol. 3. b. saith among other things: Quis vero sustineat sine Lachrymis, &c. And who can abide without teares, to remember, when he com∣maunded our deads corpses to be caryed vnto burying with sci∣lence without the solemnitie of Psalmes? Which lamentation you haue in England renewed to vs, with addition also, in that our Priests neither with scilence may burie the corpses of our Catholike brethren, but your Ministers (a Gods name) with whom they would not communicate in their life, must haue the laying vp of their bodies after their death: a disordered folly in you Heretikes, and the sinne of Schisme in suche Catholikes as geue consent vnto it. Pur. 327. from .323.To these memories, oblations, and sacrifice for the dead, doth belong also the place of Possidonius, whiche you saye, proueth plainly that it was the sacrifice of thanks giuing that was offered for the commendation of the godly, and quiet deposition or put∣ting off of his body. Where he writeth of S. Augustine thus: Nobis coram positis, &c. In our presence the sacrifice was offered vnto God,Possid. in vita Aug. cap. 31. for the cōmending of his bodies deposition, and so he was buried. Meaning by ye bodies deposition, not the putting off by death, but the laying downe of it in ye earth by burying: as by leuatio corporis, the taking vp againe of the bodies or Relikes of Saintes you might haue perceiued, if you had beene skilfull in Antiquitie. And by commending the deposition, he meaneth the commendation of his soule to God vpon that day, as I tolde you before. Both which you might haue playnly vnderstoode by that which D, Allen in the very same paragraph alleageth out of S. Augustine speaking of his mother:Aug. 9. cōf. ca. 12.14. Nam neque in eis precibus ego fleui, quas tibi fundimus, cum offeretur pro ea sacrificiū precij nostri, iam iuxta sepulchrū posito cadauere, priusquam depone∣retur:
For neither in those prayers did I weepe, which (according to her request vpon her deathbed, memoriam sui ad altare tuum fieri, that memory of her might be made at thy altar) we made vnto thee O God, when the sacrifice of our price was offered for her, the corpse nowe standing by the graue, before it was laide downe. Which place is so plaine, that your selfe are faine to con∣fesse, that in the celebration of the Sacramēt, the error of that time allowed prayers for the dead generally, and speciall remēbraunce of some in the prayers, (namely because S. Augustine ther more∣ouer desireth God, to inspire all his Priestes reading that booke, Vt meminerint, To remember at thy Altar Monica thy seruant, and Patrike once her husband, my Parents.) Repeating the same againe a litle after, in these words: In ministration of the Com∣munion, there was a speciall remembrance of her in the prayers, as there was of all dead in the faith a generall memorie. So that you vse indifferently these two, prayers for the dead generally, and, a generall memory of the dead, because you saw euidently, that S. Augustine by remembring of his father & mother at the Altar, meant praying for them. And yet such a cauiller you are,Fulke the an∣svverer: Fulke the re∣plier. that D. Allen in saying, memoriam sui, a memory of her, to be a memory for her, must be charged with pseudologia, & as though she would haue her sonne to be a chauntrie Priest to sing for her: not béeing able for all your gybing to deny, but that he did both himselfe pray for her at the Altar (if that be to be a Chauntrie Priest) and procure other Priests to do the same. Well, by this practise about S. Monica, the Reader percei∣ueth how properly you affirmed, that it was only thanks giuing which Possidonius reporteth was done for S. Augustine. But for al this (you say) although a memory or prayer was made for her in the celebration of the Sacrament, yet was it not offered for hir as a Sacrifice, and as a propitiation of hir sinnes. No syr? doth he not say expresly, The sacrifice of our price was offered for her? Yea, but he expounded before in plaine words,A friend of trust for Pro∣testants. August. de verb. Apo. Ser. 34. that he mea∣neth thereby nothing els but the foresaid memorie. Those plaine words neither you recite out of him, nor no man els can finde in him: as neither he nor any other reasonable man would vtter such a meaning in such words. But these most playne words I find in him in another place: Hoc a patribus traditum vniuersa
obseruat Ecclesia, vt pro eis qui in corporis & sanguinis Christi communione defuncti sunt, cum ad sacrificium salutare loco suo commemorantur, oretur: This as a Tradition of her Fathers, the whole Church obserueth, when they which are departed in the cōmunion of Christes body and bloud (for the excōmunicate so were not) be in their place mentioned at the healthfull sacrifice: to pray for them. What more? Ac pro illis quo{que} id offerri com∣memoretur, and to expresse that for thē also the sacrifice is offred. Of particular Doctors. Whether S. Augustine doubted of Purgatory. Notwithstanding all this: you will néedes haue fooles beléeue that S. Augustine was doubtfull in the matter of Purgatorie: notwithstanding also that he so playnly prayeth for his mother, Therefore O Lord God,Aug. 9. confes. 13. setting aside her good dedes for a while, for which with ioy I do giue thee thanks, Nunc pro peccatis ma∣tris meae deprecor te, now I beseeche thee for my mothers sinnes (for which at this day we also pray for ye most Pur. 328.perfect, excepting vndoubted Martyrs, vntill by Canonization they be knowen to be Saintes) Heare me for the medicine of our wounds that hung on the Crosse, and sitting at thy right hand, intreateth for vs, &c. So playnely,Pur. 327. I say, that you confesse, this place to proue prayer for the dead vsed by S. Augustine, and are fayne to saye, It was all but superstition or will worship in him, according to the cor∣rupt motion of his owne minde.Pur. 270.279.315. Au. ep. 64. Enchi. c. 110 de cur. c. 18. Pu. 54.110 121.161.187 382. In another place also, that he alloweth oblations for them that sleepe, to profite somewhat. Oblationes pro spiritibus dormientium vere aliquid adiuuare credendum est. And yet for all this Augustine was very vncer∣tayne (you saye very often) vnconstant▪ and doubting of it, so that Satan (whose instrument you make that blessed Doctor) was but then laying his foundations of Purgatory: though in o∣ther places contrarying your selfe after your maner, you say, It was somewhat risely budded vp in his time, yea and throughly finished. And to proue this his pretensed doubtfulnes, you al∣leage foure bookes of his, Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 69. Ad octo Dulc. quaest. q. 1. De fide & op. ca. 16. and De Ciui Dei. li. 21. ca. 26. In al which places he repeateth one saying, as D. Allen noted before you, answering it moste clearely, and shewing against this pre∣tensed vncertayntie of his, that not onely in other bookes, but in
all the same bookes also, and almost in the very same chapters,Pur. 118. he holdeth as a matter of faith, and to be beleeued of all Chri∣stian men, that the prayers of the liuing do release some of their paynes in the next life. And constantly, (as al other Catholikes euer did) cōfesseth, that the sinnes or vncleane works of the liuing not duely by penance wyped away in this world must be mended after our death. For De Ci Dei these words he hath,August. de Ciui li. 21. ca. 24. & 13 Ench c. 110. Ad Dulcit. q 2. Tales con∣stat, ante Iudicij diem per poenas temporales, quas eorum spiri∣tus patiuntur, purgatos, &c. It is certayne, that suche men beeing purged before domesday by temporall paynes, which their soules do suffer, shall not after the resurrection be committed to the tor∣ments of the euerlasting fire And a litle after: Temporali sup∣plicio ac sanctorum orationibus mundatos, being clensed by tem∣poral torment and prayers of the holy ones. Which declaration of D. Allens was so euident, that your selfe are compelled to say:Pur. 110.196. Aug. ciu. li. 20. c. 25. li. 21. c. 13.24. Pur. 121. Howbeit 21. booke. c. 13. of the same work De ci. dei, he cōcludeth very clerely (and that vpon the texts Mal. 3. Esa. 4. Mat. 12.) that some suffer tēporall payns after this life. This may not be denied. And yet that in the same bookes he was vncertaine, you haue so playne words, that you suppose D. Allen neuer read the places in Augustines owne bookes, but onely receiued his notes of some elder Papists, that had spēt more time in gathering them, but had not such audacitie to vtter them as M Allen. Who but you could or would for shame of heauen & earth set such a face vpō a matter so cleare of it selfe, and so confessed of your selfe. But which are those so playne words?Ench. c. 69.68. Nonnullos fideles per ignem quendam purgatorium, quanto magis minusue bona pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto tardius citius{que} saluari: Some of the faithful after this life to be saued so much later or sooner, by a certaine Purgatory fire, as the more or lesse they loued transitory goods, (but yet hauing Christ in their heart for the foundation, that is, so as they pre∣ferred nothing before him, but were ready to forsake all rather then him.) This to be so is not vncredible, Et vtrum ita sit, quaeri potest, & aut inueniri, aut latere, And whether it be so in deede, it may be searched, and (by search) either found, or not found. These are the plaine wordes, in which, to replye to D. Allens answere, you will néedes haue S. Augustine so often in one booke and almost in one Chapter, to be grossely contrary to him selfe,
one while certaine, another while vncertaine of one and the selfe same thing. But D. Allens answere (according to S. Augustines plaine wordes in these chapters also, as well as in the others is, as it was, that he speaketh not still of one thing, or of one Purgatorie fire, but of two diuerse. The one Purgatorie fire, is, to punish (& so to purge) by temporall paines, the soules for there sinnes, for their euill life, though not so euill, vt misericordia habeantur in∣digni, that they may be thought vnworthy of mercy. Of this Purgatory S. Augustine, with all the faithfull of all ages, holdeth him selfe o certaine. The other Purgatorie fire is, as the fire of Tribulation in this life, for the most perfit also to passe through, euen them whose life was talis in bono, vt ista non requirat, so good that they neede not to be releeued with the prayers of the Church: and therfore not to punish sinne (as now we speak of it) but only to weare out by litle and litle rerum secularium (quam∣uis licitè concessarum, &c. suche affections to worldly lawfull things, as to wife, &c. that without griefe of mind he can not part from them: so as the other can which builded golde, siluer, and pearles, whose worke therfore is not burned vp, quia non ea di∣lexit quorum amissione crucietur, because he did not loue those things, with the losse wherof to be tormented, And of this Pur∣gatorie S. Augustine was vncertaine, as it is in dede very doubt∣full (saith D. Allen) to this day also,Pur. 119. not onely because we know not whether such worldly lawfull affections do remayne in the Elect soules departed, but also because nothing but sinne, and the debt of sinne, séemeth to endaunger the soule to any payne, whe∣ther it be poena sensus, or onely poena damni. Whervpon (to say the truth) it séemeth to me more probable (although S. Augu∣stine inclined more to the other side) that there is not any suche Purgatory, but rather that after full penance for sinne, or full pardon of it, the soule goeth without all delay straight to heauen. And so I haue shewed plainly what S. Augustine was certain of, and what he was vncertaine of: thinking good withall to ad∣monish the Reader, that although for more perspicuitie I name two Purgatories out of S. Augustine, yet I meane but one pur∣gatory with two diuers operations, as it is but one fire of tribu∣lation in this life, though it haue those two operations, to purge
sinne with punishment, and to purge worldly lawfull affections with griefe of minde when we must in persecution depart from our beloued. That also Purgatorie fire after this life, is for the first of these operations, it is certayne. Whether it be also for the other, it is vncertayne. Hithervnto perteineth that also, where you say:Pur. 317. M. Allen af∣firmeth that S. Augustine De cura pro mortuis agenda, neuer doubteth, but intercession may be made vnto the Saintes for the dead: and oppose to his affirming cap. 5. of the same booke, Cum ergo mater fidelis, &c. Therfore when the faithful mother desired (of Paulinus Bishop of Nola) to haue her sonnes body laide in the Martyrs Church: Si quidem credidit, eius animam meritis Martyris adiuuari, hoc quod ita credidit, supplicatio quaedā fuit, If she thought his soule to be holpen with the Martyrs merites, this her thinking was a certaine supplication: & haec profuit, si∣quid prosuit, and this (supplication) profited, if any thing profi∣ted. Here Augustine, you say, doubteth whether supplications to the Martyr profit any thing, or no. You are a mā past al shame,Such are the enemies of the Church of Christ. and so shall the Reader well perceiue if he reade the place. S. Au∣gustine doth not doubt, whether supplications to that Martyr S. Felix, or to any other Martyr, profite: nor whether they profite the dead: (yea cleane contrary, he exhorteth there very earnestly to those and all other supplications for the dead, saying that Non inaniter siunt, they be not made in vayne, cap. 1. Prosunt quibus∣dam mortuis, They profite one sort of the dead, cap. vlt. Non sunt praetermittendae, they must not be omitted, cap. 4. Religiosus a∣micus nullo modo debet a supplicationibus necessarijs in eius cō∣mendatione cessare, They be necessary, & the deuout friend must in no case omit them, cap. 5. Fiunt recta fide ac pietate, They be made with right faith and pietie, cap. 4.) neither doth he doubt, whether Affectus matris locum eligens sanctum, The mothers af∣fection choosing an holy place to bury her sonne in, be a suppli∣cation to the Martyr of the place: but onely whether that mother had that cogitation. For that (saith he) is all the profite that cō∣meth to your friend departed, by your burying of him in suche a place (for of his owne deuotion therein more doth come) to wit, if you had aforehande suche cogitations of the Martyrs merites, that they should helpe him: and again, if afterwards by occasion
of the place when you thinke vpon it, you commend affectually eidem Martyri animam dilectam, the beloued Soule to the same Martyr, ca. 4.5. Whether S. Augustine denied Purgatory. Not content to say S. Augustine was doubtful of Purgatory, you say further, that also he denied it, de verbis Apost. Ser. 14. and Hypog. con. Pel. lib. 5.Pur. 110. where he acknowledgeth the kingdome of heauen for to receiue the godly, and hell fyre for the punishment of the wicked: but a third place (saith he) we are altogether ig∣norant of, neither do we finde it in the holy Scriptures. Nowe take the paynes to report also the answere your selfe: He wri∣teth against the Pelagians, that imagined a third place for the (euerlasting) rest of Infants, that were not baptised. And what can you reply therevnto? But the same reason serueth as well a∣gainst the Popish Purgatorie, because we finde it not in the holy Scriptures. But doth S. Augustine so reason against it? for him you pretended to bring as denying Purgatory. Or doth he saye, that he found it not in the Scriptures? Yea you confesse (though with muche wrangling) the contrarie, to wit, that he saith the Scriptures to make for it, some (I say) to suffer temporal payns after their death, Veruntamen ante illud nouissimum iudicium, but before that last iudgement, that is, before the Iudge hath said, Venite, and discedite: Come ye blessed, Away ye cursed. For vntil then Purgatory is not ended. As also in this same chapter, pag. he said:2. Mac. 12. In the books of the Machabees we reade, Sacrifice offered for the dead. And immediatly after against your reason also: Sed etsi nusquam in Scripturis veteribus omnino legeretur: non parua est vniuersae Ecclesiae, quae in hac consuetudine claret, auctoritas: But although it were not read any where at all in the auncient Scriptures, the whole Churches authoritie, which in this custome is euident, is not smal. So that you sée the said reason by S. Augu∣stines iudgement, not to be any whit preiudicial to such matters as stand vpon the whole Churches authority, although to al new inuentions of Heretikes against ye church, it be a plain preiudice. And now I must remember the Reader of that place where D. Allen biddeth him to require of these new Teachers, before hee beléeue them,Pur. 380.382. To alleage some place of any auncient writer, which doth expresly denie Purgatory or prayers for the dead: as
we (saith he) for the confirming thereof haue alleaged in playne termes very many. And heare what Fulke there answereth: If we be required to shew some place of any auncient writer, which denieth Purgatorie or prayers for the dead: we haue already she∣wed, that Augustine sometime doth doubt whether there be Pur∣gatorie: sometime affirmeth, there is no meane or third place, but heauen for the elect, and hell for the reprobate. Considering ther∣fore, that S. Augustine in those places maketh nothing for him, as I haue shewed, but expresly against him, as him selfe also con∣fesseth: thou séest, gentle Reader, that he hath no Doctor to bring which denieth Purgatory. Let vs come then to the other parte, whether any Doctor denie prayers for the dead. Other Doctors about praying for the dead. Likewise for praying or satisfying for the dead (you say) we haue alleaged Cyprian and others, your Canon law,Pur. 382. out of Hie∣ronym, &c. Yea Gelasius the Pope saith, that no man can be ab∣solued of the Pope after his death, 24. q. 2. cap. Legatur. Where∣fore serue the Popes pardons then? The place of S. Hierome is answered already, pag. Your great place of Gelasius is of certaine Heretiks in Constantinople, that said to the Popes Le∣gate there: Date veniā nobis, dum tamen nos in errore duremus: Giue vs absolution, notwithstanding we continue in our errour. Therefore he biddeth them shewe, euen from the beginning of Christian Religion, Veniam nisi se corrigentibus fuisse cōcessam, that absolution was euer giuen but to suche as did amend them∣selues. And because they would not onely them selues be absol∣ued, but also their felowes who were dead, that they might be named anong others in the Canonical memorie of the dead, ther∣vpon he saith againe, that it can not be shewed, our Sauiour, or any after him, In errore mortuos absoluisse, to haue absolued such as dyed in their error. Nam in ligatione defunctum nunquā dixit absoluendum: For he neuer saide, that we should absolue one that dyed in the bond of excommunication. It is a signe you lacked witnesses against praying and pardons for the dead that dyed in our communion, for whom onely all our suffrages are, when you were faine to alleage, and to make so muche of him that spoke onely of them that dye in excommunication.
Cyp. cōtra Demet. in fine. Pur. 140.Like stuffe it is that you bring out of S. Cyprian. For he spea∣keth it to the Idolatrous and persecuting Paganes, exhorting them, and saying: We exhort you, whilest you may, whilest as yet somewhat of this life remaineth, to satisfie God, and to rise out of the botome of darke superstition, into the shining light of true Religion. Quando isthinc excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus poe∣nitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur, aut tenetur,Clipping. (&c. you say, omitting that which foloweth, because it shewed playnly S. Cyprians purpose not to be your purpose.) Hic saluti aeternae cultu dei & fructu fidei prouidetur. When you are gone hence there is now no place of penance, no effect of sa∣tisfaction. Here life is either lost, or saued. Here euerlasting sal∣uation is procured by the worshipping of (one) God, and by the fruitfulnes of faith. This forsooth is that which can not stande with the Papists opinion of Purgatory. By this forsooth appereth what Cyprians iudgement was of Purgatory (and the effect of satisfaction) after this life. And againe because exhorting there Demetrianus him selfe (Proconsul of Africa) to repētance, which had bene (so you say deceitfully,Chaunging. as though he now were conuer∣ted, for that you should haue said, which presently was) a wicked man, and a persecutor of the Christians: he saith to him, Tu sub ipso licet exitu, & vitae temporalis occasu, &c. Do thou, although it be but a litle before thy end, and setting of this temporall life, pray for thy sinnes to the God, which is the one and true God: Confessionem & fidem agnitionis eius implores, Do thou hum∣bly call for confession, and faith of acknowledging him (he allu∣deth to the ceremonie, quid petis? Fidem.) Venia cōfitenti datur, & credenti indulgentia salutaris de diuina pietate conceditur: Par∣don is giuen to him that confesseth, and healthfull forgiuenes is graunted by Gods goodnes to him that beleeueth: Et ad immor∣talitatem sub ipsa morte transitur, and euen at the poynt of death is passage to immortalitie. Because Christ doth quicken him that is mortall, by the heauenly regeneration, viuificat mortalem rege∣neratione coelesti. This which is so expresly written of the In∣fidels in hell, and of Baptisme, to pretend it (as you do) to be written of the faithfull in Purgatory, and of penance after Bap∣tisme, argueth playnly, that either you sawe not the place in S. Cyprian, or rather that séeing you would not sée.
Of the same sort it is, that,Pur. 82. Cyp. de Lapsis. where S. Cyprian speaketh of De∣niers of Christ in persecution, which would not afterward come to the Priestes to confession, and saith, Euery one, I beseeche you brethren, confesse his sinne, whilest yet he that sinned is in this world, whilest his confession may be receiued, whilest satisfaction and remission facta per Sacerdotes, made by the authoritie of the Priestes, is acceptable with our Lord: you gather therevpon, and say: If men can not satisfie, nor Priest remit, but whilest men are in this life, then farewell satisfaction for the dead, and Purgatory. As though we hold, that they which will not submit them selues to the Priestes in this life, may be holpen after their death: Or that confession may be made by the dead, and satisfaction enioy∣ned them, and that béeing done, absolution giuen them by the Priestes. Againe it is of the same sorte, which you alleage out of S. Chrysostome, where first you confesse that he holdeth expresly,Pur. 21. prayers to profite the dead, and alleageth Scripture for it (your words I recited in cap. 3. and that notwithstanding, say after∣ward: Otherwise when he iudged vprightly & according to the Scripture, his words sounde cleane contrarie to the opinion of Purgatory, and works of other men to be meritorious for the dead, as in the very next Homily, being the 42. in 1. Cor. Quapro∣pter oro, &c. What a worthy S. Chrysostome was euery kinde of way, I néede not to saye. I can admire him, I am not able to commend him sufficiently. But what a base opinion haue you of him (as also of so many others his peares) to think him so grosse,Caluins intole∣rable light hath marred Fulkes eyes. to speake cleane contrarie to him selfe, and that vpon one Epi∣stle, yea & in the very next Homily? You do herein nothing els, but iustifie my saying in the beginning of this chapter, that you can not in déede shew the Doctors to be for you against vs, but that in déede you cōfesse them to be with vs against you, and pre∣tend onely that they be agaynst vs in so much as they be preten∣siuely against them selues. But why did you not aswell say, that D. Allen him selfe is against vs, in that in the seuenth chapter of his second booke he sheweth,Pur. 271. That the benefite of prayer & almes apperteineth not to such as dye in mortall sinne? For what els doth S. Chrysostome say in that long allegation of yours, but that no friend, no iust, shall helpe him that dyeth in mortal sinne,
either committing euill that he ought to refrayne, or omitting good that he ought to atchieue: beséeching them therefore to con∣uert and amend, and to get agaynst they dye, good words of their owne to trust in before that Iudge. Pur. 112. Ambro. in Psal. 40.Likewise of S. Ambrose you confessed cap. 3. pag. 16. Ambrose in deede alloweth prayer for the dead. And yet because he saith: Bene addidit (in terra,) quia nisi hic mundatus fuerit, ibi mundus esse non poterit: The Prophet did well to adde (on earth) for if he be not clensed here, he can not be clensed, from his mortall sinnes. But the true translation is, he can not be cleane there, neither from his veniall sinnes, though from them he maye be clensed there, as also from the temporall debte of his remitted mortall sinnes: yet, I saye, by these words it is playne inough with you, that Ambrose allowed no purging after this life. One place more, or two, you alleage more out of the same Doctor,Pur. 106. with this note therevpon: Thus saith Ambrose playnely in this place, whatsoeuer he speaketh allegorically of the Fyerie sworde in other places, as in Psal. 118. Ser. 20. and in Psal. 65. by occasion of which two places you graunt not long after, that the Old writers opinion was,Pur. 132. that all men, were they neuer so iust, passed through that fire into Paradise, and were purified thereby: because they ascribed to Purgatory fire those two ope∣rations, the one whereof S. Augustine & we (as I said erewhile) do doubt of. All this notwithstanding, the same Ambrose (you say) vpon Rom. 5. ouerthroweth Purgatorie, in that it followeth of his words there,Pur. 105. that no man feeleth paine after this life, but he that shal feele it eternally. And surely to the same effect he spea∣keth in his booke De bono mortis, you say, onely because cap. 4. where he concludeth, that death in euery respect is good, (yea al∣though a man haue liued yll, and shall after death abye for it, for also in that case, non mors malum, sed vita, Not his death, but his life was euill) among others, this cause he rendreth: quia deterio∣rem statum non efficit, sed qualem in singulis inuenerit, talem iu∣dicio futoro reseruat: because it maketh not the (yll) state worse, but such state as it findeth in euery one, suche it reserueth to the iudgement to come. Now who saith, that Purgatory after death altereth the state of the euill to worse? yea or also that it promo∣teth the state of the good to better. Euery mans state (we saye)
both is at his death, and shal be at domesday, according to his me∣rites in his life. Neither he that is clensed in Purgatory, hath his merites either multiplied or amplified thereby, but onely his ve∣niall sinnes and temporall debtes taken away. In the former place his words are these: Although Abraham were in hell, (or in the inferior partes) yet he was seuered with a long space be∣tweene, so that there was an huge chaos inter iustos & peccatores, quanto magis impios? Betweene the iust and the (Catholike) sinners, how much more the impious (Heretikes?) Vt iustis esset refrigerium, & peccatoribus aestus, impijs vero ardor: That to the iust might be ease, and heate (as it were of the sunne) to the sin∣ners, but fierie heate to the impious: vt ante iudicium, quo vnus∣quisque dignus esset, non lateret: that which eche sort were wor∣thy of, might before the iudgement, be partly knowen. Now how you can inferre of these words, that no man feeleth payne after this life (although S. Ambrose him selfe say it expresly in other places) but he that shall feele it eternally, I sée not. Vnlesse per∣happes you would binde him to yéelde a reason of Purgatory paynes withall, when he yéelded a reason of Abrahams bosome, and of the damned Soules hell, or els haue him pronounced guil∣tie of contradiction, and Purgatorie by your argument ab au∣thoritate negatiuè quite subuerted. From this saying of S. Ambrose we might well passe to the sayings of other Doctors alleaged agaynst Limbus patrum a friend of Purgatories, but onely that we must stay a litle while for your pleasure,Pur. 142.143. Emis. ho. 3. de Epipha. Ber. in vita Humberti. with Eusebius Emissenus (though him you take for a counterfaite) and S. Bernard. Because these two set foorth very terribly, but truly, the paynes of Purgatorie, therfore with you the one sheweth him selfe an vtter enemie to the release of the same, and the other denieth the remedie or remission of them. As if you would say, that the holy Scripture also where it preacheth Gods iustice, denieth his mercy, though in other pla∣ces it preach his mercy no lesse. For sée you not S. Bernard as earnest also for the remedie of those paynes, where D. Allen al∣leageth him calling your friends the Apostolicie of his time,Pur. 420. Ber. Ser. 66 in Cantica. mis∣creants, and doggs, for laughing vs to skorne (saith Bernard) that we baptize infants, that we pray for the dead, that we require the helpe of the holy Saintes? In so much that your self also confesse
in another place, saying: Bernard is of opinion, that sinnes not re∣mitted in this world,Pur. 194. may be remitted in the world to come. Whether Purgatory be only for Veniall sinnes. One other litle stay we must make about S. Augustines iudge∣ment,Pur. 122.448. being this, as you say, That Purgatory serueth to purge none but very small and light offences: Wheras D. Allen saith, that it is for great faultes also, which by penance are made small, alleaging for it this playne place: Quaedam enim peccata sunt quae sunt mortalia,Pur. 128. August. de ver. & fal. Poen. ca. 18. & in paenitentia fiunt venialia, non tamen sta∣tim sanata: For there be certaine sinnes which be mortall, and in penance be made veniall, but not straight healed. As oftentimes certen sick persons would dye but for Phisick, yet are not straight healed. Lanquet victurus, qui prius erat moriturus: Feeble he is, though now to liue, and not to dye as before. And therefore although one truely conuerted at the poynt of death, from his wickednes (nequitia, &c.) shall be saued. Yet we do not promise him that he shall escape all payne. Nam prius purgandus est igne purgationis, qui in aliud seculum distulit fructum conuersionis: for he must first be purged with the fire of Purgatorie, (who in this world conuerted, but) deferred the fruite of conuersion to the other world. Studeat ergo quilibet sic delicta corrigere, vt post mortem non oporteat talem poenam tolerare: Therfore let euery one labour so to amend his sinnes (also after his conuer∣sion, because he is now as the sicke person past daunger of death, but not healed as yet) that after death he suffer not such passing grieuous payne. You tooke not the paynes to take the booke, and reade the place, and therefore blindly you say, that this Doctors words are playnly of light and smal offences, and not of heinous and great offences, euen also against your owne eyes that sawe the word Mortalia. And againe, that the manifest meaning of his words, is not of a mortall sinne forgiuen, as though he said, that it become a veniall trespasse, but that a mortall sinne may be par∣doned. Whereas he speaketh so manifestly of a mortall sinne af∣ter penance, as of a mortall disease after Phisicke: the daunger of soule death in the one, as of bodily death in the other, béeing now past, but the healing behinde, and therefore also daunger of Purgatory payne for it behind.
D. Allen alleageth for the same, also Enchir. cap. 71. where S. Augustine affirmeth, that, Et illa peccata a quibus vita Fidelium sceleratè etiam gesta, sed poenitendo in melius mutata discedit, Also those sinnes in the which the faithfull haue wickedly lyued, but nowe by penance lefte them, chaunging their liues to better, are after taken away by the same remedies, as minima & quoti∣diana peccata, breuia leuia{que} peccata, the least and daily, the short and light sinnes, to wit, among other remedies, by the Pater no∣ster, which is the dayly prayer of the faithfull. Which also in the next world he admitteth ca. 69. and 70. of the said Infanda cri∣mina, qualia qui agunt regnum dei non possidebunt,Gal. 5. heinous crimes which depriue the parties of Gods kingdome: Si conueni∣enter poenitentibus eadem crimina remittantur, If the same crimes be forgiuen them (in the Church) vpon their due penance: then he graunteth, I say, that such persons also may be saued by Pur∣gatory fire after this life, and not they onely that dye with Veni∣all sinnes. This D. Allen there alleageth briefly, and you say ne∣uer a word vnto it.Pur. 120. Onely you snatch those words (which he al∣leageth among others out of another place to another purpose) Illo enim transitorio igne, non capitalia,Au. Ser. 41. de Sanctis. 1. Cor. 3. sed minuta peccata pur∣gantur, By that transitorie fire, (whereof the Apostle saith, He shal be saued by fire) are purged not mortall, but light offences: neither considering that he speaketh of purging culpam, the fault it selfe, for he speaketh against them that continue still in cōmit∣ting mortall sinnes, and deceiue them selues with false securitie, while they think that peccate ipsa, those sinnes may be purged by the transitorie fire, & them selues afterwards come to euerlasting life. Nor knowing, that he there also very often, as aboue in his Enchiridion, graunteth, the same fire to be also for the said mor∣tall sinnes, if one haue left committing of them, but not yet fully redéemed them poenitentiae medicamentis, with the plaisters of penance. viij. Of Limbus patrum. And now we are come to your Doctors yt you alleage agaynst Limbus Patrum. The one is S. Augustine,Pur. 56.60 Au. ep. 99. of whose most cleare testimonie alleaged by D. Allen (Because the Act. 2.Scriptures make euident mention both of hell and of paynes, I see no other cause why our Sauiour came thither according as we beleeue, nisi vt ab eius
doloribus saluos facerit, But to ridde some of the paynes therof. Fuisse enim apud inferos, & in eorum doloribus constitutis hoc beneficium praestitisse non dubito: I am out of doubt that he was in hell, and that he bestowed that gratious benefite vpon some that were in the paynes therof. You are fayne to say, that it is but the authoritie of a man. But you haue another place, a Gods name, Where he semeth vtterly to deny, that he came in that pri∣son of hell. And to make all sure, you imagine what we will an∣swere to it, and then you make your reply. But all besides the text, like one that neuer saw ye booke. For he saith there as plain∣ly as in the other place: Fuit apud inferos Christi Anima, & diui∣nitas,Aug. in Fe∣licianū Ar∣rianū. ca. 17 18.15. Both the soule and the diuinitie of Christ was in hell. But for what cause? Vt anima animas reparet, That his soule might repayre our soules, and (as aboue he said) deliuer some soules out of their paynes there. But not to suffer any paines there it selfe, as the Arrians did blaspheme. For if (saith he in the words that you alleage) his, or the good théefes (for it may be vnderstoode of either) body being dead, his soule is immediatly called to Para∣dise: do we thinke any man yet so impious, that he dare say, our Sauiours soule, in that three dayes of his bodily death, apud infe∣ros custodiae mancipetur, is in hell committed to prison? Lo syr, what he vtterly denieth, to wit, that his soule was committed there to prison: not, that it came in that prison as to deliuer the prisoners. Your other Doctor is S. Ireneus, whom D. Allen first allea∣ged saying manifestly,Pur. 55.59 Iren. lib. 3. cap. 33. that Adam was Implens tempora eius cō∣demnationis, quae facta fuerat propter inobedientiam, Fulfilling the times of that condemnation, which came by disobedience, vn∣till our Lord came, and then solutus est condemnationis vinculis, he was released of the bonds of his condemnation. And you an∣swere, that the name of Adam seemeth to be takē in these words, rather for a name common (signifying all mankinde) then for a proper name. Iesu, how blindly? Do you not know, that he re∣porteth li. 1. ca. 31. that the proper Heresie of Tacianus was, Adae saluti contradictionem faciens,His ignorance. that he gainsaide the saluation of Adam: and after him S. Augustine Haer. 25. Saluti primi homi∣nis contradicunt, The Tacianistes gaynsay the saluation of the first man? And do you not sée that he disputeth against that He∣resie
in the said place, li. 3. euen from cap. 33. to 39. But you haue another place of his,Iren. lib. 5. in fine. where he plainly ouerthro∣weth our fantasie, in that he saith of the place where Christes soule was those thrée dayes, that it was suche a place as all his disciples shall rest in vntill the time of the generall Resurrection. He saith not so: he disputeth agaynst those old Heretikes, Who said that immediatly assoone as they were dead, they ascended a∣boue heauen, and aboue the Creator, and came to the mother, or to their fayned father, leauing their body for euer, neuer to rise againe, and therefore attayning al perfection and the highest pro∣motion at once. S. Irenée therfore auoucheth against them not only the Resurrection, but also the order of the Resurrection, and saith, that if this were so, then our Lorde giuing vp his Ghost vpon the Crosse, would straight haue gone vpwarde, leauing his body to the earth. But he did not so: Three dayes he conuersed where the dead were, in the inferior parts of the earth, in the mid∣dest of the shadow of death. And then after that he arose cor∣porally, and after his resurrection was assumpted. Séeing there∣fore no disciple is aboue his master, saith he, it is manifest by this, that also his disciples soules shall goe (he saith not, into the same place, but) in inuisibilem locum definitum eis a deo, into an inui∣sible place, appoynted for them by God, and there shall tarrie vntill the resurrection, abiding the resurrection: and afterwards receiuing agayne their bodies, and rising perfectly, that is, corpo∣rally, sic venient ad conspectum Dei, so shall come to the sight of God: to wit, the whole man both in soule and body. So he may well be vnderstood: because the Soule of Christ also had the sight of God before his Resurrection. Yet supposing that he thought, neither so muche as the Soules to sée God, before the Resurrection (as some other Doctors did thinke, vntill it was of late defined by the Church, as I noted afore in the eight chap∣ter, yet that doth not declare, as you pretende, that he thought of Limbus Patrum otherwise then we do. For you heard him saye afore, that Adam at our Lordes comming was released out of that place, béeing a place of captiuitie: and nowe, by him, his soule is in that other inuisible place. Whereof it follo∣weth manifestly, that by him the former place is not al one with the later.
And so, thankes be to God, I haue fully answered all that you alleage against Purgatorie, or any other Article of the Catholike faith, according to my promise in the beginning of this Chapter. Whereby the Reader may perceaue, perfect vnitie of faith to be betwixt the Fathers then, and vs now, notwithstanding all that you could bring. And that so euidently, that in most matters, & in most of the Fathers, you were faine to pretend no lesse, that one and the same man was not in vnitie with him selfe: so that this chapter néeded not so much for defense of our doctrine, as for the defense of the Doctors them selues against your childish and arrogant detractions. ¶The tenth Chapter. That notwithstanding all which Fulke hath said against D. Allens Articles, in his first booke beeing of that matter, or also in his other of Purgatorie: euery one of my 51. De∣maundes (and therefore also, euery one of my Motiues, and likewise euery one of those Articles) standeth still in his force. Euery one (I say) and much more al of them, to make any man to be a Catholike, and not a Protestant. BY the Summes or Argumentes of the chapters aforegoing, the Reader may perceaue, that being laide together, they make a manifolde euident demonstration to the condemna∣tion of the Protestantes side and iustification of our side, so that whosoeuer will be saued, must neither beleue them, nor communicate with them, as being Heretikes, and Schismatikes, but must be of our beliefe in all thinges, and of our Communion, as who haue both the trueth and the Church of Christ, euen the same that our Auncetors, to wit, the Apostles, and their Succes∣sors after them, had in their seuerall times. Which also was the totall summe of M.D. Allens Articles first, and after them, both of my Motiues, & Demaundes. Neuerthelesse I haue thought good, for the more manifest clering of all, to haue this chapter a∣parte, and folowing the order of my Demaundes, one by one, (which if Fulke had done, he had saued me some labour) to sifte all, in substance and effect, that he hath said to D. Allens Arti∣cles, in the former of his two bookes, answering withall these
few Scriptures and Doctors of his, which in the two last Chap∣ters I pretermitted, and reserued to this place. By this the Rea∣der shall sée euidently, the force of ech one Demaund (how much more of all?) to heare the Protestantes quite downe, considering that all is nothing, which this felow, in both his bookes, could ei∣ther answere vnto them, or obiecte against them. Specially, if he will first reade ouer euery Demaund, as it lyeth in my booke, and then, that which here is correspondent vnto it. 1. Collatio Carthaginensis touching the Church of the Scriptures. FIrst therefore, by reason of their triuiall position of Onely Scripture in all questions (for the which notwithstāding, they haue neither Scripture, nor Doctor, as I haue sufficiently decla∣red cap. 8 pag. 110. and cap. 9. pag. 171. to 183.) and because the ques∣tion of the Church is of all other the principall, as one which be∣ing agréed vpon, and so the House of saluation found, all brable is at an end, also by Fulkes owne confession here cap. j. Whether it can not erre, as we say, or may erre, as they say: Herevpon in my very first Demaunde, on the one side I aske them (as S. Au∣gustine did the Donatistes) some euident Scripture for their Church, that is to say, for Luthers piece, or for Caluines piece of Luthers piece: on the other side I point them to very many most euident Scriptures for our Church (in S. Augustines two books against the Donatistes, de Collatione Carthaginensi, and de vni∣tate Ecclesiae) that is to say, for the Church beginning at Hieru∣salem, Act. 1. like the litle musterdseede, Mat. 13. and growing and spreading thence ouer all Nations, ouer S. Augustine and his felowes in the Christian Nations of their time, and ouer vs and our felowes in the Christian Nations of our time, and so forth to the end of the world. Now Fulke, wheresoeuer he maketh mention of the saide Carthage Conference, &c. What doth he? doth he reply, and shew, that the same most euident Scriptures make for his Church: or, that they make not for S. Augustines Church, and our Church, that is, for the visible Church of all Christian Nations? yea like a blind buzzard, he there ouerthroweth quite his owne Church, and plainely confirmeth ours, as I haue noted cap. 9. pag. 176. to 183.
in the question of Only Scripture, vpon the places of S. Augustine (which he there alleageth) requiring and bringing Scriptures for the Church. And as I offer cap. 7. pag. 106. to shew more copi∣ously, if he dare ioyne with me vpon this Demaund: and stand to S. Augustines Disputation at Carthage, &c. and to the euident Scriptures there recited as cōcerning this questiō of the Church. And as towching certaine darke and obscure Scriptures, such as S. Augustine would haue to be set aside in this question: the Do∣natistes in déede alleaged some suche for their Church, that is, for Donates piece cut of from the Church of all Nations. But for Luther or Caluines piece, Fulke hath alleaged neither so much as any such. Howbeit against our Church he hath aleaged some such. But I haue cap. 8. pag. 124. to 133. most cléerely shewed, that nei∣ther they make any whit at all against our Church (as neither certaine expositions of some Fathers cap. 9 pag. 155) and that they make vnauoideably against the Protestantes. Being readie to shew the like, in those more euident Scriptures also, which the Donatistes alleaged against our Church, if Fulke list to repeate them, and in any other likewise that he can alleage. 2. Building of the Church amid persecution. In the 2. Demaund I reporte S. Chrysostomes argument (which is not his onely, yea it is the Scriptures) against the Iewes and Paynimes, to proue, that Christ is God, because no Persecution of theirs or any others could, or can suppresse Christes Church, though in the first beginning of it, it were so poore and smal, and they so mightie and cruell against it: but that it hath, and shall continually stand in the sight of the world, mau∣ger all the Gates of Hell. Now Fulke to this argument hath answered nothing, nor to the Doctors, and Scriptures that make it. The Iewes and Pay∣nimes are not yet so much beholding vnto him. Marie an obiectiō against it, I graunt, may be made of the texte of the Apocalypse here cap. 8. pag. 124. as you alleage it, and vnderstand it, to wit, that the Persecution of Antichrist shall driue the Church into the Wildernes, that is (you say) into a secrete place, out of the open sight of the world,Fulk a falsarie. there to remaine for a long season. But I haue there declared manifestly, by the text it selfe, that both in
your alleaging you play the falsarie, putting a long season, for a very short season, and in your vnderstanding a deprauer of Scripture to your owne damnation, expounding that which is ment of fleeing in heart to God in time of worldly desolation, to be meant, of becomming corporally inuisible. 3. Going out.Motiue 18. Thirdly I demaunde of them, to shew when we went out of the foresaid Church of al Christian Nations, séeing they denie vs to be still within it. As we say, and the world seeth, and Fulke him selfe confesseth here cap. 7. pag. 103. that they are departed from our Church, and goeth about to yéelde a cause for their so doing: Whereas by S. Augustine (whom him selfe alleageth here cap. 9. pag. 177. as it were agaynst our separating of our selues from them, which is one of his grosse contradictions: and this also no better,Ar. 66. that we Catholikes are departed from the Gretians) it is impossible for any to haue a iust cause to Sepa∣rate them selues from the said Church. In so much, that no com∣panie can be named, from the very beginning of ye same Church, which so did, and obstinately stoode in it (as they do,) but it was Schismaticall. Yea and against his imagined Church in the wil∣dernes here cap. 8. pag. 124. we are expresly warned, If they saye vnto you, Ecce in deserto est, Beholde Christ is in the wildernes, nolite exire, do not goe out, Matth. 24. but kéepe still in the visi∣ble euerlasting Church that visibly commeth of me, beginning at Hierusalem. 4. Rising after.Motiue 19. Article. 11. Fourthly I require them, to shewe any beginning of our Church, other then the beginning of Christes Church at Hierusa∣lem, Act. 2. As we shew, and the world séeth the beginning of their companie now of late by Luther, who afore was one of vs, nor he onely, but all that he drew away after him. So that no man can say, they were afore that, inuisible Protestants, because it is so euident, that they were visible Papists. And to these two, or either of them, Fulke answereth nothing. I require them moreouer in the same Demaund, to shewe so much as any first beginner of any one Article of our doctrin, so as
he receiued it not at the handes of his Predecessors, and they of theirs, and so forth, euen vp to the Apostles. As we shew that Lu∣ther began his new Articles of him selfe, and receiued them not at any mans hands. And also, if any of the same Articles had in old time any patrone, (as Aerius agaynst praying for the dead) that he likewise in his time was the first beginner of it, and re∣ceiued it not of his Elders, but that his Elders held the contrary of his Article, so that his Article euidently was of him selfe, and not of the Apostles.Hovv this iiij. and xxxviij. Demaund doe differ. I do not here charge them with such Articles as they were of the Church then condemned for heresies (for that is enough of it selfe against them, whether they were then first begon, or afore: and therfore I haue of that a seueral Demaund num. 38.) but as they were then first begunne, which of it selfe is enough to shew that they were not receiued from the Apostles, whether they were condemned of the Church then for Heresies, or no. Now of these matters there are two long Treatises be∣twene D. Allen and Fulke, first in the booke of Articles, Art. 11. pag. 35. to 47. Secondly, in the booke of Purgatorie lib. 2. ca. 13. and 14. pag. 387. to 424. In which places the olde Heresies that they charge one another withall, I reserue to their proper place in the Demaund aforesaide: as also the chaunges that he sayth some Popes to haue made, to the 45. Demaund. What then be∣longeth to this Demaund? First touching the argumentes or consequences: secondly touching the antecedents. The 1. Arg.The one argument is this: Our first Authors can not be na∣med: Ergo, they were none other but the Apostles. His first an∣swere is, that it followeth not. And one while he doth nothing but chafe at vs for it, saying, Must we finde out the authors of Heresies?Pur. 391. Nay iustifie them your selues by the worde of God if you can, &c, as I noted here cap. 7. pag. 79. Another while he will answere it with a witty example of the common wealth, say∣ing: Must the Magistrate either iustifie a theefes possession, or els bring out the author where he had it? Nay the theefe must bring out good proofe, how and by whō he came by such goods, or els he is worthy to be serued like suche a one. If that would serue, we bring so good proofe for the Article of praying for ye dead wherof you there intreat, that your selfe confesse we stole it not, but that we receiued it from hand to hand of our Auncetors, ca. 3.
whom your selfe confesse to haue bene the true Church of Christ cap. 2. Will you then quit vs, & with your witty example charge Christes Church to be a théefe? But you confesse, cap. 3. pag. 19.20.21. that she telleth you how she came by it, to wit, by ye Scrip∣ture and Tradition of the Apostles. And moreouer, howe your friend Aerius would haue stolen it from hir, as now your grand∣sire Luther would steale it from hir heire. What Magistrate af∣ter al this wil admit the théefe to pleade against the lawfull heire in such childish maner as you do, hauing nothing neither to dis∣proue the possession, or the Euidēces of the heire, nor to bring as Euidence for your selfe: as by my answers in the chapters afore∣going it is most manifest.Pur. 388. Againe (you say) the first author of euery heresie can not be named. Where you recken ten, and say: These and a hundred more heresies, shal they be thought to haue their heresie from Tradition of the Apostles, if the first author of them can not be named? For example: There was one heresie of them that were called Acephali, because there was no head kno∣wen of them. Where haue you that cause? I Nicenū 2. con. pa. 62. tomo. 3, Nicep. li. 16 ca. 27.finde that Seue∣rus B. of Antioch was their head, whose name was Seuerus A∣cephalus. And againe, that they were but a piece of the Eutichi∣ans, whose head was Eutyches: as the Puritanes, whose special head we be not certayne of, are a piece of the Caluinists. In such sort to shew the author, is enough: or also to shew the beginning it selfe, for that is the cause why we séeke for the author, to shew the beginning. Which againe is shewed euē by this that the pri∣mitiue name of Christians would not serue them, but they must haue new names to be called by, that, I say, declareth that they began after the beginning. And so we can shew the authors also of the other nine Heresies that you name (which also your selfe do in naming of them) and of all other, if it were worth ye while, as partly you may sée noted in M. Rishons Table. And in no such sort can you shew our first authors. And so I am now come to your second answere, wherein you denie our Antecedent. For you say:Pur. 402.413. If any man or men were the authors of our faith, as it fareth with the Popish faith, we should be iniurious vnto them, if we did not acknowledge our founders, as they do some of theirs. Tute Lepus es, & pulpamentum quae∣ris. You make D. Allen to be that same non plus of Cambridge,Pur. 64.
who when he lacked an argument, said, he would dispute ex con∣cessis. You are he euen your selfe. Do we acknowledge any founders of our faith, but the Apostles of Christ? Ar. 47.Agayne you say: Thus we haue noted to you the names of di∣uers Heretikes, which first preached certayne Articles of your doctrine. Those notes you meane wherewith you noted here cap. 3. pag. 24. the confessed true Church, aswell as vs: which I haue cleane wyped out cap. 6. pag. 57.58. and will wype away the rest likewise here in the 38. Demaund. Ar. 39. Pur. 389.Againe for the first beginning of one particulare, you say: It can not be proued out of any authentical writer, or by any credi∣ble author, that any before Tertullian, who was almost two hun∣dred yeres after the incarnation of Christ, eyther named or allo∣wed prayer for the dead, or that it was vsed in the Church. Ter∣tullian him selfe flourishing within one hundred yeares after the Apostles, doth witnesse, that it was vsed before his time, and that it came to his time by Tradition of the Apostles. The same doth S. Chrysostome, S. Augustine, S. Epiphanius, and many mo, witnesse, by your owne cōfession here cap. 3. pag. 2.3.4. Are not these authenticall writers, nor credible authors nowe with you, who here cap. 2. pag. 11. to 22. were with you, the most approued writers, and the Doctors of Gods Churche? I thinke Gods Church may beléeue her Doctors better then you her rebels. Howbeit also any reasonable man will thinke it e∣nough for vs, to bring it vp to Tertullians time, and put you to proue that then it began, if you will not graunt that it came from the Apostles. Ar. 43.Of another particular you say: Transubstantiation, no small Article of your Religion, was not decreed vntill the yeare of God (of our Lorde you would saye) 1215. But you will not, I trow, inferre therevpon, that then it beganne. For by the same reason an Arrian maye say, that Homousion, no small Ar∣ticle of our Religion, beganne in the first Nicene Councell, be∣cause it was not decréed vntill then. Both wordes were then decréed, but the things meant by them, came euen from the A∣postles,Lanfrācus lib. contra Bereng. and was decréed also, the one of them 200. yeres afore that time, to witte, when the Heresie of Berengarius (super∣esse in Altari post consecrationem substantiam panis & vini, the
substance of the bread and wine to remayne after Consecration, and not only agaynst the Reall presence) was condemned in di∣uers Councels, and he glad to recant it: as by the writers of the same time we know. The other Argument is directly agaynst you (as this was directly for vs.The 2. Arg.) Your first Authors can be named after the be∣ginning of the Church, rising with their new opinions: Ergo, their opinions were Heresies, and they were Heretikes, and you be Heretikes, namely maynteining the same obstinatly. Here a∣gayne you denie both the consequence, and the antecedent: but how friuolously, I haue at large reported cap. 7. pag. 80. where you put in your poore and colde exception of Onely Scripture, hauing nothing els to stay agaynst the Auncient Fathers, who both made that consequence, and also noted your beginners, but that they muste proue all by Scripture, or els neither doth their argument holde, neither was Aerius (&c.) your first Au∣thor. As also in another place you say to D. Allen therevpon: Your rule is false. For you leaue out the chiefest condition,Pur. 413. which, js, that the opinion it selfe be contrarie to the trueth first preached by the Apostles, or els it is no Heresie, though it maye be truely fathered vpon any man, sooner or later. Full wisely. D. Allens rule is this: [Any opinion that maye be truely fa∣thered vpon any man, that was long after the trueth was firste preached by the Apostles, if it be vpon a poynt of Faith, and contentiously maynteined, it is an Heresie,] that is to say, con∣trarie to the trueth first preached by the Apostles. And you can by no exception, by no reason disproue it. Now your rule is this: Any opinion that maye be truely fathered vpon any man long after the Apostles, if it be vpon a poynt of Faith, &c, and contrarie to the trueth first preached by the Apostles, it is an Heresie, that is to say, contrarie, &c. Are not you then a proper rule giuer? Any opinion that is contrarie to the trueth first prea∣ched by the Apostles, is contrarie to the trueth first preached by the Apostles. No doubt but D. Allen should do wisely, to cor∣rect his rule, which is not his, but the Fathers rule, by suche learned aduise.
5. Contradicted. Motiue 20. Article. 11.Another rule of D. Allens is, according to my next Demaūd, Pur. 412.Whosoeuer was wondred at and withstand and in his first arising and preaching, by such as were in the vnitie of the Church, (as Aerius by S. Epiphanius, S. Augustine, &c. and now Luther and Caluine by the Romanes, &c.) he was (according to the matter) an Heretike, or a Schismatike, if he were obstinate. I aske them therefore, who so withstoode vs at any time, or what heresie was not so withstood, according to Gods promise to his Church: Vpon thy walles,Esa. 62. O Hierusalem, I haue set watchmen: all day, and al night, euen for euer, non tacebunt, they shal not be scilent. Whervpon S. Augustine saith confidently, by the warrant also of the Parable:Aug. ep. 119 cap. 19. Mat. 13. Ecclesia dei inter multā paleam, &c. The Church of God beset with much chaffe and with much cockle, although she tolerate many things, not béeing able to redresse them, yet such things as be agaynst faith or good life, she neither alloweth, nor is scilent, nor practiseth. And Fulke him selfe saith as much: The Church of Christ in suche places as she is (ioyne herevnto ca. 2.Ar. 92. where he confesseth the knowen Church of the first 600. yeres) suffereth no man damnably abusing her Religion, with∣out open reprehension. Now against this, and so against him selfe to, what hath he to say? One while he bringeth causes, why and how our Religion entred into the true Church with scilence. 1 For because it came not in sodenly,Ar. 43.39.35. Pur. 256. but entred by small degrees at the first: and there∣fore was lesse espied by the true Pastors, (where he addeth) espe∣cially being earnestly occupied against great Heresies, and open aduersaries, that sought to beate downe the chiefe foundations of Christian faith, as the Valentinians, Marcionistes, Manichees, Arrians,Pur. 419. Sabellians, and such like monsters. 2 Another meane or cause was this, that in those auncient times if the Gentiles or Heretikes had any thing that seemed to haue a shew of pietie, or charitie, they would draw it into vse, with such correction as they thought was sufficient. And this was a great corruption. Where he addeth, So they tooke of them, &c. eight or nyne things of ours he there nameth, his words are here cap. 3. pag. 9. Amongst the which prayer for the dead is one, 3. the causes and maner of the entring wherof he rendreth in like sort more at large. cap. eodem
pag. 14. to 20. as, because it had a pretence of Charitie,Ar. 39. Pur. 386.78. it deceiued simple men the sooner. And the ignorant peoples error first win∣ked at, because it had a shew of pietie, was allowed at length of Augustine, and others, who folowed the common errors of their time. To omit, that D. Allen foresaw and preuented these goodly causes (Pur. 384. &c.) I say it is a fond part, to tel why and how a thing was done, which thing was neuer done. For so the Scrip∣ture before alleaged promiseth, and S. Augustine affirmeth, that there should not be, nor was, any such silence in the true Pastors. In so much, that you can not name any confessed Heresie, but it was so contradicted, howsoeuer the Fathers were at the same time otherwise occupied. And we shew, that these supposed Here∣sies were not (as you blaspheme) taken into the Church by emu∣lation of Paganes or Heretikes, as here cap. 6. pag. 36. to pag. 56. In how many places doth S. Augustine say, that Origens he∣resie of the Damneds saluation after a while, was ioyned with a certaine humane pietie: And yet, who knoweth not, how the Ori∣genistes for all that, were most ernestly and continually resisted. And the like may be shewed in all the like, that as well the Here∣sies which had a shew of pietie and charitie, were faithfully resi∣sted, as the others, no Heresie at all lacking some shew for the time. And howsoeuer now you make a small matter of prayer for the dead,Cap. 11. cō∣tradict. 1. in the next Chapter (after your vsuall maner of con∣tradicting your selfe) you will make it equall to the greatest, most blasphemous against Christ and against God, and occasion of most licentious wickednes in all that belieue it, &c. Besides that the Fathers in déede withstood your friend Aerius, who would haue entred with the contrarie, and likewise all those other kno∣wen friends of yours, the old Heretikes. Had they, for all their being occupied against those horrible Heresies, leasure to with∣stand trueth, and had they not leasure to withstand corruptions of trueth? You thinke your folowers very béetles, if you hope to blind them with such grosse conueiance. But you haue also Scripture forsooth, to couer your iuggling.Ar. 8. 2. Thes. 2. For, when the Scripture telleth vs, that the Mysterie of iniquitie, preparing for the General defection, & Reuelation of Antichrist, wrought euen in S. Paules time: it is folly to aske, whether so∣denly and in one yere, (and consequently, with much preaching
against it, Ar. 43) all Religion was corrupted. Against your bla∣phemous vnderstanding of this texte, as if it said, that the Church of Christ wrought the mysterie or preparation of Antichrist, I haue replied cap. 8. pag. 121. But now, whosoeuer wrought it, doth your text say, that ther was then no preaching against it? No such word. Besides, what a mad imagination is this of yours, that if all Religion had bene corrupted in one yeare, then the Pastors would haue cryed out against it: but being wrought by litle and litle, they either could not espie it, or were content to winke at it? For who séeth not in the Ecclesiasticall Histories and other monumentes of Antiquitie, that they gaue warning vigilantly and faithfully, as well against those Heretikes that would haue corrupted but one or a few Articles, as against those others that sought to corrupt many or all? So haue they done all the time of the mysterie, against all the Heresies that from the beginning haue wrought it,1. Ioan. 2. couertly therein seruing Antichrist, them selues also therefore termed Antichristes. So they do now also, being the time of the defection or Apostasie, (though not Generall. S. Paule doth not so call it) of which Antichristian Mysterie you Protestants are the workers, as I haue declared cap. 8. pag. 124. to .133. And after all the mysterie, when his Reuelation cōmeth, shall that at least passe vncontrolled? You, according to the blas∣phemies of your Apostasie, do make, that Antichrist is long agoe reuealed (to the which I haue in the same place answered moste irrefragably by the Scriptures them selues that you abuse.) But now, whensoeuer his Reuelation be, doth any text say, that there is then no preaching agaynst him?Ar. 36. 2. Thes. 2. Mat. 24. Apoc. 12. For so you say: When the comming of Antichrist was in all power of lying signes and wonders, in so muche that (if it were possible) the very Elect should be deceiued: and a generall departing from the fayth was foreshewed: and the Church to be driuen into the wildernesse: What maruell were it, if none of our Church could preach a∣gainst it, as it first entred? As though the Scripture were not playne, that not onely as he shall enter, when the time of his Reuelation commeth, but also euen during the whole time of his raigne, there shall be open and stoute preaching against him ouer all the worlde, with moste mightie working of true Mi∣racles agaynst his lying wonders, and moste constant resisting
of him to bloud and to death, though his tormentes and tormen∣tors be neuer so horrible and Satanicall. As I haue partly no∣ted in the same 8. chapter, pag. 124. to 130. All this you haue said, to defend, that our Religion might be false and of a later entraunce,Ar. 36. although it were not gaynesaid at the first entring of it. As for that which you say of preaching and writing agaynst the Popes authoritie, when it first began, it is answered aboue cap. 9. pag. 157. Now on the other side, that your Religion is not false, though it were withstood by the true Pastors in Aerius, Iouinianus, &c. this you say:Pur. 413. They that defended that Heretikes should not be baptized, were withstood by Cyprian and all the Bishops of Af∣frica, who were in the vnitie of the Church: yet were they not he∣retikes, nor their opinion heresie. Much forsooth to the purpose. Were withstood (you should haue added) at their first arising and preaching. But then you had marred your example your selfe. For their opinion did not then first arise, but came by lineall tra∣dition from the Apostles. And the contrary opinion of Agrippi∣nus and his successor S. Cyprian did then first arise, and was withstoode by Pope Stephanus, &c. who Aug. de bap. cont. Don. li. 5. ca. 23. wrote and com∣maunded, Vincen. Lirin. ca. 9. apud Cyp. epist. 74. nihil nouandum, nisi quod traditum est, to make no innouation, but keepe the Tradition. And therfore it was an heresie, and they that helde it obstinately (as afterward the Do∣natistes and Luciferians) were Heretikes, and the Eus. li. 7. ca. 2.3.4. Niceph l. 6. ca. 7. Hier. cōtra Lucif. Bed. l. octo quest. q. 5. Aug. cōtra Cresc. li. 3. ca. 1.2.3. & de Bap. li. 2. ca. 4. & Ep. 48.Catholiks recanted it, both in Africa & in Phrygia, though S. Cyprian him selfe peraduenture was martyred in the meane time. But yet you haue in store one example about this rule, to dorre vs withall, and to shew, that Ar. 93. the Romish Church can well inough abide, the true Religion of Christ to be damnably a∣bused (by wicked men) not only without (open or priuie) repre∣hension, but also with allowing. Which is no worse thē you hold here of the true auncient Church which you cal your owne. But your example out of Matthaeus Paris. is cleane agaynst your selfe. For it sheweth manifestly, that neither those Friars prea∣chers, which attributed too much to Religion or life Monasticall, nor those Parisian Doctors, which detracted too muche from it, lacked their reprehenders among ye Catholikes, as they were all, vntill some of the Doctors afterwards proued obstinat heretiks.
And that when the matter was brought before the Pope, he tooke such blessed order with it, as was very méete for his Apostolike See, to wit, that the Friars new scandalous booke secreto com∣bureretur, should be priuily burned: for shaming their order, say you. And what fault was that, I pray you? Know you not, how S. Augustine vsed Pelagius and his disciples in the beginning of their new doctrine, when he first wrote against them? Tacen∣da adhuc arbitratus,Aug. Retr. li. 2. ca. 33. &c. I thought good not to expresse as yet their names, hoping that so they might more easily be amended. Imo Pelagij ipsius nomen non sine aliqua laude posui: quia vi∣ta eius a multis praedicabatur: Yea in my next writing expressing the name of Pelagius himselfe, I did it not without some prayse: because his life was commended of many. Thus did S. Augustin vse one Monke, and him the author of a most pestilent Heresie, as he proued afterwards. And your Christian spirite would haue all the order, all Monkes, the innocent also, shamed for the fault of a few. Such would haue bene your care to amend those few: and such your prouidence to saue the wheate, whereof these fewe might haue made as gret waste, if they had not bine wisely hand∣led, as Friar Luther now hath made, for lacke of a siluer spurre and a Cardinals hatte: and as Erasmus also might haue made, had he not bene made of by Catholike Bishops farre aboue his merites. Yet one shift more you may séeme to haue, where you say for your argument ab authoritate negatiuè, of the whole Scriptures authoritie negatiuely:Pur. 449. And this conclusion M. Allen him selfe made of mans authoritie, cap. 13. Purgatorie and prayers for the dead were not preached against at their first entry: Ergo they are true, or rather, there was no such entrie of them as you imagine, but they came lineally and quietly from the Apostles. But of all mens authoritie it is false, you say. Howsoeuer the argument of all mens authoritie negatiuely be, good or bad, who but you would call this such a one: All heresies (according to the Scriptures, Fathers, and Histories) haue bene preached against at their first entry. This was neuer preached against: Ergo this is no here∣sie, nor neuer since the Apostles time did enter. ¶Names. In the thrée next Demaundes I haue thrée easie and familiar
notes, by our bare names, to know which side is right,Ar. 66. and which is wrong. To that generally Fulke saith: He is a foolish sophi∣ster that reasoneth from names to the things. In what Logike he hath that axiome, I know not. But this I know, and you shal heare it In the 7. Dem. See cap. 11. his 37. cōtr. Aug. in Ps. cōt. partem Donat. Ar. 68. anone, that also him selfe so reasoneth. I know moreo∣uer, that S. Augustine so reasoneth: Dicitis, mecū vos esse (saith the Church to the Donatists) sed falsum videtis esse. Ego Catho∣lica dicor, & vos, de Donati parte: You say that you be with me. But you see it is false. For I am named Catholica, and you, Of Donates part. S. Augustine, I trow, he will not call a foolish so∣phister, nor him selfe a foolish sophister. Againe he saith generally: If the onely name of an honest man, of a learned man, of a good Christian, is enough to proue the thing: many a knaue, asse, hy∣pocrite, may proue himself an honest man, a learned man, a good Christian. As though we said, the argument to be good frō euery name to the thing. No syr, we say it no more but of thrée sort of names: of which the Fathers said it before vs, and experience teacheth it, and you can not disproue it by giuing any instance. For there are in it further reasons, then onely arguing from names to things. 6. Catholikes.Motiue 1. Article. 20. First then we say, that sith the Apostles did bid vs beléeue that church which is named The Catholike Church, euermore to this day they haue ben true Catholikes in déede, which were in times of Heresies and Schismes commonly called Catholikes, and ea∣sily knowen thereby. For this we alleage among others, S. Au∣gustine: wherof you take notice (which may be written, it is so rare a thing in this your booke against the Articles) and go about to answere him with his owne words: but very fondly, as I haue shewed cap. 9. pag. 182. The rest that you haue, is opposi∣tions after your custome. As where you oppose to this name, your stale exception (which here cap. 7.Ar. 69. you oppose to all things) of Onely Scripture, saying: Wherfore howhoeuer you boast of the honorable name of Catholike, except you proue that your opinions agree with the Scripture, they are not Catholike in dede, by Chrysostomes iudgement. Againe: By this you may see, that Chrysostome thought it not sufficient to haue the name of Ca∣tholike. Your folly in this allegation I detected cap. 9. pag. 172.
neither is it Chrysostomes, neither doth he speake of the name Catholike, nor of the Apostles writings, but of the Apostolike Sees writings. Ar. 66.Another opposition: You your selues will not account the Gre∣cians (now since their separation) for true Christians. And yet as many nations haue since then called them Catholikes, as you are able to shew on your side. Though they are not so called by you: for no more are you so called by them. Be bolde to say ynough, how litle soeuer you be able to proue. To saye, the Grecians be called Catholikes, is like as to say, the Latines be called Catho∣likes: which were forsooth a proper saying, considering that not only we but you also be Latines. But this I say, that as among the Latine or Westerne Christians, he that in common talke or writings heareth Catholikes named, vnderstandeth vs therin, & not you: so likewise if he heare the Catholike Gretians, or the Catholikes of the East, whether he be Latine or Gretian, he vn∣derstandeth them that be with the Pope, & beléeue the holy-Ghost to procéede of the sonne also, & not the Schismaticall & Heretical Gretians. And therfore in this example is nothing to the contra∣rie, but that they be true Catholikes, which are knowen by the name of Catholikes. And so much you say of the name and rule it selfe. Now which of vs two haue that name, whether we, or you? Ar. 66.The Heretike Gretians do not call vs Catholikes, you say. No more do you that be Heretike Latines. But yet both you and they mistake not the person, when common talke and bookes so calleth vs. Therfore (I say) we be true Catholikes. On the other side you say:Ar. 68. And we haue as many Nations, and more then you haue, that by publike authoritie call vs Catholikes, and you He∣retikes. Who be so called any where by publike authoritie, is not the question, but who be commonly called & knowen by that name. Howbeit also of any such publike authoritie no man kno∣weth but your selfe. But this all men know, that those also of your owne side, in Fraunce, Flaunders, &c. in their publike E∣dictes, call vs Catholikes, and them selues by other names. Now supposing that it is our name, yet you haue a shift, say∣ing,Ar. 67. that we boast and trust onely in these names, (Catholike) and (Church,) without the thinges them selues, as the wicked Iewes did, crying, The Temple of the Lorde, when they had no∣thing
lesse then the Temple of the Lorde,Iere. 7. Mat. 21. but rather a denne of theeues. Our Lord both in the Prophet, and in the Gospell, ac∣knowledgeth it to be his Temple, although they in it were thée∣ues and wicked persons. So is ours his Catholike Church, al∣though some of vs were so wicked as you make vs. Howbeit the wicked both then and now, trusting onely in the Temple and in the Church, and not amending their liues, deceiue them selues: how much more they that trust in the cōuenticles of Heretikes, which are the Synagogues of Satan. On the other side, supposing that it is not your name, you haue also your shift, saying:Ar. 68. If you haue no greater argument to con∣demne vs, thē that we are not called The Catholike Church, then you can no more condemne vs then Christ and his Apostles, that were not onely not called the true Church, but also were called Heretikes and deceiuers, by the Iewes, which were as rightly cal∣led Gods people, as they that giue you the name of Catholike Church, are called the Christian world. Nay, bate me an ace of that, I pray you: vnlesse you can likewise shew by predictions of the Prophets, and correspondence of Luther, the reprobation of the Christian world in these dayes, as we all sée the reprobation of the people of God the Iewes in those dayes. Besides that you haue great reason forsooth, to require that the Iewes should haue vsed those names which they neuer heard of, or els you not to be tryed now by them after their institution, receiuing, and vni∣uersall vsing. And yet againe you will néedes haue the name from vs.Ar. 95. For why might not our Church, when it was most hidden (you say) be as rightly called Catholike, as the Church of the Apostles, when it was so particular, that it was conteined in the narrow bondes of Iury? For (you say) it is not called Catholike, because it should be euery where (for that it neuer was, nor neuer shal be) But be∣cause that wheresoeuer it be in partes, it is one body of Christ. I reade of many old Heretikes, that gaue many interpretations of that name, to draw it to them selues: but you are the first, to my knowledge, that said, because it is vna, therefore it is called Catholica. The old fathers in their Créede were of another mea∣ning, when they said distinctly: I beleue One, Holy, Catholike, and Apostolike (that is, Romane) Church. No Sir, S. Augustine tel∣leth
you another interpretation:Aug. de vn. Eccl. ca. 2. Ecclesia vti{que} vna est, quam ma∣iores nostri Catholicam nominarunt, vt ex ipso nomine ostende∣rent, quia per totum est. Secundum totum enim, cath olun Grecè di∣citur. There is no doubt but onely one Church, euen that same, which our Auncetors named Catholica, to declare by the very name it selfe, that she is ouer all, to wit, beginning at Hierusalem, and from thence growing ouer all Nations, continually till the ende of the world, when hauing taken in the fulnesse of Nati∣ons, she shall be wholly assumpted in glorie. And therefore your Church, neither when it was hidden as you imagine, neither now that it is open as we all sée (God hide it againe) can be called Catholike,Au. Callat. 3. diei. nu. 2. post. Col∣lat. c. 27.28. Epist. 48. because (as S. Augustine so often resoneth against the Donatistes) you do not communicate with totius Orbis Ecclesia, the Church of the whole world, but haue seperated your selues from it, from the Church (I say) which beganne in Iurie, and groweth on to this day, and therefore as well then in the begin∣ning, as any time after, was the same and had the same name, as the trée of musterdséede is the trée of musterdséede, whether it be growen litle or mikle. Ar. 95. Pur. 14.But what a thing is this, that you speake with the spirite of the Donatist, and say? The Popish Church is not in euery part of the world: For Mahomets sect is in the greatest part: Many coun∣treys are Idolaters: and the most parte of them that professe the name of Christ, are not in the felowship of the Popish Church. It is iumpe the argument of Cresconius:Aug. cōtra Cresc. li. 3. ca. 63. Argumentaris, quod ideo nobis non totus Orbis communicet, &c. Thou makest this ar∣gument (saith S. Augustine) that therefore the whole world doth not communicate with vs, because as yet either many men there are of the Barbarous Nations which haue not yet beleued in Christ, or many Heresies vnder the name of Christ, abhorring from the communion of our felowship. The full answere therof you may reade ther in S. Augustine. Although I alleage almost nothing, but onely answere, my length groweth tedious to my selfe, and I feare, to the Reader also: not for any substance of your argumentes, but for the multitude of your trifles, to say the least and best of them. As againe wher you say (like non plus) that Most Papistes will confesse,Ar. 69. that many thinges in their Church haue neede of reformation, as not being vniuersally perfect, and
that it is halting in many thinges from the trueth of Gods word, neither yet dispersed ouer all the World, but conteyned in a cor∣ner of Europa. and therefore it is not by S. Augustines rule, the Catholike Church? Is yours then by that rule, the Catholike Church? As the Iewes care not, if none be Christ, so that Iesus be not Christ: euen so you reason like men, that care not if none be the Church, so that the Romane be not. O miserable People that must haue such Leaders. The Church now may vouchsaue to be so spoken of by you, when you speake no better (here cap. 3.) of the same Church also in S. Augustines time. But we tell you, with the wordes of S. Augustine (for we confesse no more then he also doth) by you alleaged, wher he repeateth the Créede:August. de Gē. ad . imperfect. ca. 1. Con∣stitutam ab illo Matrem Ecclesiam, That the Holy Ghost being geuen, founded the Church our Mother, quae Catholica dicitur, her that is called Catholike, ex eo quia vniuersaliter perfecta est, et in nullo claudicat, et per totum orbem diffusa est, of this, be∣cause she is vniuersally perfect, and halteth in nothing (though the Donatistes and other like Heretikes do neuer so much triumph in that interpretation) and is spredde ouer all the World, in ma∣ner aforesaide. Both interpretations agrée to our Mother, and we claime them accordingly, saith S. Augustine and we, where∣as the Heretikes are compelled to renounce the later, which is the more proper and playnly peremptorie, and to shrewde them selues in the former most vainly, saying, that the Church is cal∣led Catholike, non ex totius orbis communione,Epist. 48. sed ex obserua∣tione omnium Praeceptorum Diuinorum, atque omnium Sacra∣mentorum, Not of the whole worlds communion, but for the ke∣ping of all Gods commaundements and of all the Sacraments. By all this wrankling you winne nothing but this, that you declare thereby the name to be ours, and not yours: as also by this, that you defend your felowes, for saying Vniuersal in stéede of Catholike, and Congregation in stéede of Church:Ar. 67. because (say you) they are so in English, and are not els commonly vnderstan∣ded. You should haue said rather, that they are so in Latine, and then by your wise conceite, one should tel the people of the gathe∣ring ouer all, and they would vnderstand that better then the Ca∣tholike Church, because these be Gréeke words. Euen as if you would not name Baptisme vnto them, but rather Ablution or
washing:Apostasie the cause of chaun∣ging these vvords. nor Heretike, but a chuser: nor Schismatike, but a Cutter. No my masters, it was not for more perspicuitie, it was not, that you chaunged those knowen and worne names: it was be∣cause they were preoccupated by vs afore you were borne, and therefore were as a great blocke in your way, to be remoued a∣fore you could enter into the Christian hartes that you were to seduce. for which cause, your Apostasie hath gone about to chaūge & trāslate more Greke names also thē those as you know, Priest, Bishop, &c. though they were vnderstanded well enough before. Motiue 2. Article. 19.7. Heretikes. The second rule is of the name Heretikes, being the contrarie to the name Catholikes, and therefore we néede now stand lesse about it: That such as are of Christian men commonly called and knowen by the name of Heretikes, are alwayes Here∣tikes in very déede. To this Fulke agéeth not, but correcteth it, saying:Ar. 65. Those that by (true) Christians haue bene called and coun∣ted for Heretikes, haue proued so in deed, (and therefore say I, Aerius, Iouinianus, and Vigilantius, were Heretikes in déede, because you confesse here cap. 2. that they were true Christians, who called and counted them so. But this not being for your vauntage, you inferre otherwise.) And therefore the Papists, be∣ing called and counted Heretikes of true Christians, without doubt are Heretikes in dede Euen as vndoubtedly as you be true Christians, that so call them. That briefly is our answere to your rule, though you answere it your selfe also, where you say, The Diuell stirred vp Tyrants, Heretikes, Popes, Saracenes, and Turkes,Ar. 78. to destroy the Church, who that counteth Popes to be Heretikes, would so diuide? What is now your answere to our rule? Forsoth, The true Christians were of the Arrian people (who were people cōmon∣ly called Christians) called and taken for Heretikes. What is that to the purpose? but were they commonly called Heretikes, euen so much as of the Arrians? Euen as much as we now be cōmon∣ly called Heretikes of you. For you know pardie your selues, that if you should in your talke and writing say, Heretikes, sim∣pliciter as we do: you could not be vnderstanded to speake of vs, so as we be with all perspicuitie vnderstanded to speake of you. Yea, but although we be called Heretikes (you say here cap. 7. pa.
80.) yet in that our faith agreeth with the word of God, we proue our selues in dede to be no Heretikes. Witnesse here cap. 8. where al your deprauatiōs of Gods word are reuealed to your cōfusion. 8. Protestantes.Motiue 3. Article. 18. The third rule is vpon the name Protestantes, and such like: That they haue always bene Heretikes, who haue had such new names in respect of their seuerall faith and doctrine: and always Schismatikes, who haue had the like in respect of their seuerall cōmunion: namely, if they were obstinate therin. To this Fulke answereth: We desire most of all to be called Christians,Ar. 65.66. coūting it a most honorable name: although in reproch we be called of you, Caluinists and Lutherans. As the true Christians of old were of the Arrians called in reproch Homousians, and Athanasians. I told you in my Demaunds, that to be like rather to this that Luther inuented to call vs Papists. For we were, you know, be∣fore Luther began, as they were before the Arrians began. And neither they, nor we, then without a name. What other thē was our name, but the name of Christians? In vnitie of ye name were al together at that time. And when afterward Arius, and Luther began their partes, what offended the old Christians, I pray you, to léese their old name? And kéeping their old name, what néede had the Arians to call them Homousians and Athanasians, or Luther to call them Papistes? was it of necessitie, or of re∣proch? And therefore on the other side, the name Christians being preoccupated, how could men talke of Arrius his faction, or of Luthers factiō, without some new names, as Ariās & Lutherās? Therefore it was not of reproch, but of necessitie: in so much that your owne side also in theire talke, in theire Edictes, and in theire bookes, specially one against another, are constrained to vse those or other Names. But we are not constrained, nor do not call our selues Papistes: but we call our selues still, as before, Christians, or (for more distinction & perspicuitie,Pacia. Ep. 1. & 2. ad Sy. Habetur in Bibliothe∣ca edita Paris. 1575 when we deale with you) Catholike christiās. For (as S. Pacianus saith passing finely in his Epistle De Catholico Nomine, to Sympronianus a Nouatian, though he thē tooke him to be a Montanist) Christianus mihi nomē est, Catholicus vero cognomē. Christian is my name, but Catholike is my surname. And therefore you may lōg desire ye
name of Christians, before you get it. The great count that you make of it, is to our glory whose name it is. But this is notable, that howsoeuer you be ashamed of those names, you confesse two other names, (graunting withall that they which choose to themselues such new names,Ar. 87. are none of the Catholike Church) to wit, Gospellers and Protestants. Special∣ly where you say:Ar. 65. As for the name of Protestantes came first of them that made protestation against the decree of Spires in Ger∣manie, (Anno 1529. twelue yeres after Luther began) and from that time hath bene attributed to professers of the Gospell. Of whom soeuer it first came, it is within the compasse of our rule. And therfore you had good cause to adde and say: Which name they do not so much delight in, as you do in the name of Papists. We delight euen so much in the name of Papists, as in ye inuen∣tion of your Patriarke Luther. Howbeit we say not that a Ca∣tholike may to the Heretikes deny him selfe to be a Papist: no otherwise then to the Arrians, to be an Homousian. If you Sa∣cramentaries or Caluinistes delight not in the name of Prote∣stants, the Lutherans do, and stand as earnestly against you vp∣pon their senioritie for that name, as we do stand agaynst you both vpon our senioritie for the name of Christians & of Catho∣likes. But your confessing of the name, on the one side, and yet saying on the other side, that your true Christians delight not in it,Ar. 65. Infra ca. 11. cont. 50. Ar. 65. as also that they desire to be called Christians, without choo∣sing any other name, I reserue to the place of your cōtradictions. But of vs you say as much: They can not be content with the name of Christians, but choose vnto them selues new names af∣ter the calling of their Sect-masters: as Franciscanes, Domini∣canes, Benedictins, Gilbertins, Augustinians, Scotistes, Thomistes, Albertistes, &c. This is answered in my Demaunds & Motiues (as all the rest also in effect.) Yet I say againe to it: A Sect im∣porteth a diuision. Now what diuision is betwene those Catho∣likes, and vs the other Catholiks that haue none of those names? Be we not all of one faith, and of one communion? So easily is your accusation wyped away, and not onely from vs (I say) who haue none of those names, but also from our brethren who haue them. They be not of that sort as the name of Christians, and therefore (by Logike you know) not priuatiuely opposite there∣vnto.
But suche are these: Arrians, Pelagians, Lutherans, Cal∣uinistes, Protestantes. Because being before, of Christ, of his vnitie, of his communion, all called Christians: they for some matter, either of faith or other, diuiding themselues frō the same, follow the communion or felowship of Arius, of Pelagius, of Luther, of Caluin, of those Protesters. Why then are those our brethren so named, if S. Augustine, S. Benet, S. Frauncis, S. Dominike: if S. Thomas, and Scotus, were not Sect-masters? I answere: the first sort, because they professe to liue after ye rules of those principall Abbots: the other sort, because they hold cer∣taine Scholasticall questions (which either can not be matters of faith, or els as yet be not, because they be not yet defined by the Church) according to the opinions of those principall Schole Doctors. 9. Conuersion of Heathen Nations.Motiue 25. Article. 1. My nienth Demaund doth note, who are (after the Apostles) the Conuerters of all Nations from Paganisme, (whom the Scripture calleth, the witnesses of Christ to the extremes of the earth. Act. 1.) to wit, we, and not the Protestants. According to Tertullians most singular obseruation, speaking of Heretikes, and saying: As touching the ministerie of the word,Tertul. de Praesc. what should I speake? considering that this is their endeuour, non Ethnicos conuertendi, sed nostros euertendi: Not to conuert the Heathen, but to subuert our people. This glory they do more seeke after, Si stantibus ruinam, non si iacentibus eleuationem operentur, To work ruine to such as are standing, and not raysing to such as are lying. And so Fulke may glory, I do not denie, as he doth also, where he saith:Ar. 33. Ar. 95. The Land of Bohemia was conuerted by Iohn Hus, and Hieromyn of Prage. Againe in another place: And at this day the most part of Europe, is conuerted from Idolatry, He∣resie, and Antichristianitie (such he counteth the Catholike faith) vnto the same true faith that we mainteine: as in England, Scot∣land, Ireland, Fraunce, Germanie, Denmark, Suetia, Bohemia, Po∣lonia, by publike authoritie: in Spaine and Italie, a great number vnder persecution and tyrannie. That is your glory in déede, that you haue subuerted many in many Christian nations. We can not so glory, nor you can not shew that we haue done the like in any Nation, although you say with a brasen face,Ar. 3. It is certayne
that the Popish Church hath peruerted and corrupted al parts of the Latine or Westerne Church, with Idolatry and false religion. But that you haue conuerted any Nation from Paganisme, you do not, nor you can not boast. But the truth is, although you say that we haue not cōuerted the Nations to Christes faith,Pur. 460. but per∣uerted all nations from the faith of Christ, that our Church, that is to say, the Cōmunion of S. Peters Sée Apostolike, or ye church beginning visibly at Hierusalem, and visibly growing on to this day, is she that conuerteth al Pagane Nations to be Christians, not only at this present, so many nations of both the Indies, and in Afrike: item so many others that this last thousand yeres haue bene conuerted, thrée wherof you name, Liuonia, Prussia, Lith∣uania,Ar. 3.85. with this lying censure, that we conuerted them by force of armes, rather then by preaching and teaching: but also all them that were conuerted either in the 500. yeres afore that, or also in the Apostles time it selfe. Against this cleare trueth what mist haue you to cast? Forsooth, not we, but certaine Heretikes & Schismatikes conuerted some nations to the profession of Chri∣stes name,Ar. 2.3. though to false religion. Do you graunt that it was to false religion, & yet bring that for an instance? It is an euident argument that you had no instance in the nations that we cōfesse to haue bene conuerted to the true faith of Christ. Was not this scope inough for you, & reason inough for vs when we say, (as in my Demaund you may sée) that it was our Church, by which all Nations were conuerted or corrected to the true faith of Christ? And yet also for your said instancies, where you quote your Authors, they shall be answered. In the meane time I quote to you Eus. li. 2. ca. 1. reporting the conuersion of Ethiopia to haue bene of the right stampe, according to Psal. 67. and Act. 8. which two places he there doth cite:Ar. 2.3. because you to shew, that the true Church of Christ did not conuert all, do say, For in Aethiopia there are yet people conuerted by the False Apostles, whiche taught circumcision & obseruation of the Law: in which heresie they continue vnto this day. Who should tell that better then the Ethiopians themselues? whom we sée to haue their house at Rome, and to be Catholikes. And your selfe do saye in another place,Pur. 357. that their Liturgie doth sauour playnly the vsage of the Greke Church. Their Emperour did his obediēce to Paulus III,
and also an Ethiopian Abbot, which Abbot in his Epistle dedica∣torie before the rites of their Baptisme & Liturgie, doth expresly inueigh against them that did falsly report of them as not Ca∣tholikes and obedient subiects to the Sée Apostolike, much reioy∣sing therein, and desiering that they might be so taken. Howbeit I denie not, but there might be some corruption, though not of heresie peraduenture, but for lacke of frée conuersing (béeing in∣tercluded by the Turkes and Saracenes, and often oppressed by Tyrants and Infidels of their owne) with the Romane Church, In qua semper ab ijs qui sunt vndi{que},Ire. li. 3. ca. 3 conseruata est ea quae est ab Apostolis traditio, In which Church (saith S. Irenée, that is, by repayring to it) the faithfull that be all about, haue alwayes pre∣serued thē selues in the tradition that cōmeth from the Apostles. And where you say for another instance,Ar. 2.3. Pur. 337. It is manifest by al Hi∣stories, that the Nations of the Alanes, Gothes, & Vandales, were first conuerted by the Arrians: in so saying you declare that you neuer read the Ecclesiasticall Histories, presuming notwithstan∣ding to write against these Articles which are in maner nothing els but certayne obseruations therof. Reade Socrates li. 2. ca. 32. (and not onely li. 4. ca. 27. and Sozomenus li. 6. ca. 37. but speci∣ally Theodoret li. 4. ca. 32. who, as a Catholike Bishop, of pur∣pose to take from the Arrians that vayne bragge of theirs, she∣weth, that the Gothes were first Catholikes, and not (as you say) first conuerted by the Arrians: but, onely by false informations and to much trusting of their Bishop Vlphilas, béeing another Balaam, ledde out of the way. You talke also of the Nations that were cōuerted by the Dona∣tists & Nouatians.Pur. 337. But we shall know your Histories & authors hereafter. Againe you say: And it is also manifest by Histories,Ar. 3. that the Grecians (whō the Papists count no part of their church, but Schismatikes) conuerted the Moscouites first of all. Did the Grecians conuert them since their Schisme? O great Historian. The truth is, there was great emulation then in the Grecians a∣gainst the Latins, but not schisme nor heresie as yet, nor long af∣ter, and therefore of our Church they were then: Howbeit it is not the true faith, nor our religion (as you say truely) which the Moscouites haue, but such as they them selues did list to receiue, with many qualifications and modifications of their owne.
such was the fruite of the Grecians emulation, and such is the necessitie that S. Peter cast the nette. But if Histories fayle you, yet one demonstration ex per se notis you haue, to proue, that not we, but you conuerted all true Christian Nations.Ar. 2. And what is that? If the Papist can proue, that we hold not the same faith and trueth, vnto which the A∣postles conuerted the Nations, we refuse to be called the Church or Congregation of Christ. The Papist proueth (to omitte a 1000. others of his proufes) that you be Heretikes (and therefore hold not the same faith &c.) by the testimonie of that which your selfe confesse to be the true Church of Christ: here cap. 2. and cap. 3. Againe: We are members (witnesse your Separation, here Dem. 3.Ar. 2.3.) of that Church, which conuerted all Landes in the earth that are conuerted to the true Religion of Christ: and we affirme, that the Apostles taught none other faith in steed of true Christi∣anitie, but that which we hold, as we are readie to proue by the word of God. Witnesse here cap. 8. Where all your absurd De∣prauations of Gods word are answered, and not that onely, but also shewed by the expresse word of God among other thinges, that the Sacrament of Confirmation went euery whither toge∣ther with the Apostles Gospell, as the chiefest point of Christia∣nitie,Ar. 3. pag. 145. But no maruaile of your audacitie, to say, we are readie to proue it, considering that you are bold to conclude of this, saying thus: I haue shewed, that our church, holding the true Doctrine of the Apostles, is that which conuerted all Nations to true Religion. Then belike all those Nations were (and are) of your Religion, and you will be content to be tryed by them, as by Afrike (for example) whose Religion we know by Tertullian S. Cyprian, S. Optatus, S. Augustine, &c. Or if you haue better Monumentes of any other Nations Religion, name it, and let vs try it betwene vs. But whosoeuer séeth here cap. 3. how you are faine to charge the true Church, the Primatiue Church, with erring, may easily coniecture, what you dare doe. Motiue 17.11. Britannie. Well, we be English men, and therefore in a seuerall De∣maund I name our Countrie, England or Britannie, vnto you. Specially because the Prophetes (as you know) speake much of
the conuersion of Ilands expresly, and namely of such Ilands as were farthest of: As also because there are extāt such monumēts of our Ilands conuersion and religion, in Tertullian, Origen, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostome, S. Gregory the Pope, with many o∣ther like, and specially in the History of our owne countreyman S Bede. But here Fulke telleth such English men that list not to be deceiued,Pur. 346. but to see into what faith all Nations were conuerted that were turned by the Apostles, that they were better to consi∣der the word of God & the Historie of the Acts of the Apostles: and biddeth vs of so many Nations there recorded, to name one,Pur. 166.332. vnto which Purgatory, or praying and sacrificing for the dead, was taught. You are profoundly seene in the Scriptures, I per∣ceiue by this. Why? was the Actes of the Apostles written, to shew, into what faith all Nations were conuerted, that were turned by the Apostles? Nay, is there so much as any mention of the twelue Apostles preaching to any nation of the Gentiles? No syr, that booke was written to shew onely the beginning of the Church (according to the Prophets) to wit, at Hierusalem and among the Iewes, and the taking of it frō them for their deserts, and geuing of it to the Gentils, euen frō Hierusalem the head of the Iewes, to Rome the head of the Gentiles: And there S. Luke endeth it, not caring to tel so much as the fulfilling of that which our Lord had foretold Act. 27. to S. Paule (in whose person this trāslation was wrought, and not in S. Peters, nor any others of the Twelue, for causes to long to be here rendred) Caesari te o∣portet assistere, Thou must stand before the Emperour. Because his purpose was no more but to shew the new Hierusalem of the Christians, and so to leaue them to it, to know what are the par∣ticulars that the Apostles taught. And so withall, you haue one of those Nations named in the Actes, and that no common one, o wit, the Romanes, which receiued of the Apostles not only the Article that you require, but also all the rest which at this time it hath, neither you béeing able by Scripture or otherwise to proue the contrarie so muche as in any one, and we prouing it both a particulars and in the totall summe, partly by Scriptures, partly by other vnauoydable demonstrations. Well, for all this trigiuersation (by which you sée what you
haue wonne) you will yet be content to be tryed by our Britan∣nie.Ar. 49. For you confesse, that the Church of the Brytans, or Welch∣men, before Augustine came in to conuert the Englishmen An∣no 597. continued in the faith of Christ, euen from the Apostles time,Pur. 332. so that for sixe hundred yeres almost this land was neuer voyde of Christians. Go to then, and prescribe vs the forme of this tryall. Proue (you say) that Paule, or Simon, or Taddeus, or Ioseph, or whosoeuer first preached the Gospell in this Iland (in the reigne of Tyberius the Emperour, as Gildas testifieth) taught prayers or sacrifices for the dead: proue it I say, and the daye is yours for euer. In this briefe answere one probation may suf∣fice. If you require vs to proue it out of the Scripture, conside∣ring that the Scripture doth not tell of our Landes conuersion, you declare your selfe to be but a pratler. If other authors will content you, what greater ones can you aske, then those so ma∣ny, whom here cap. 3. pag. 20. you confesse to witnesse that the A∣postles, and namely S. Paule (cap. 7. pag. 86.) lefte that Tradi∣tion? Another probation thereof you feare, if the Brytaines re∣ceiued the faith from Rome of Pope Eleutherius (which is most certayne) as the Englishmen did afterwards, of Pope Grego∣rie. And therefore you talke so willingly of the Apostles prea∣ching there afore, not considering how that maketh more for vs, in that the Brytaines thereby could iudge the better of the mat∣ter,The Britons begun by the Apostles and Romanes, accō∣plished by E∣leutherius. and so would not haue receiued from Eleutherius (to whom they sent for their accomplishing) the contrarie of that which the Apostles so litle before had planted among them. Which proba∣tion procéedeth aswell, although not the Apostles (which yet I beléeue) but the Christian Romanes (to whom they were then subiect) began the matter, which agayne is most certayne. But you are so afrayde of Christ our great kings Citie, that is, of Rome,Pur. 371. the Christian Hierusalem, that yet againe you say: It were easie to proue by that controuersie which the Britaynes and the Scottes had against the Saxons about the celebration of Ea∣ster, that our Countrey first receiued their conuersion from the East Church, whose ceremonie they did then defende, euen as the East Church did long before against Victor Bishop of Rome. By which it appereth, that this land did neuer receiue the doctrine and ceremonies of the Latine Church, before the time of the
Saxons. But this your reason hath no other ground, but onely your owne ignorance in the Historie, as I haue noted ca. 2. pa. 4. Where also you haue an euident demonstration, that the faith of the Britons first, and of the Saxons after, was all one, because the greatest paynt wherein their Bishops differed from S. Au∣gustine, was that same about Easter Sonday: in so muche that S. Augustine was very earnest with them to ioyne with him and preach to the Saxons. Which according to your imagina∣tion, had bene as wisely done of him, as if we now should moue you (considering that you kéepe Easter when we do) to preache and teach as you do. All this considered, no man may maruell to sée you in suche a pecke of troubles about the Religion of the Saxons: one while allowing it, as it had bene yours: another while condemning it,Infra ca. 11. cōtrad. 50. because it was ours. Your allowance you vtter in the very same wordes, wherewith here cap. 5. you allow of them that you con∣fesse to haue bene the true Church of which all ought to be that would be saued. Thus you say:Pur. 335. All that was then taught the Saxons for Christianitie was not false. For the Bishoppes and Christian teachers of the Brytish nation, whose ayde they (that came from Rome) required, and at last obteined, to the conuer∣ting of the Saxons, reteined the foundation of faith Iesus Christ, and the only sacrifice of his death. Againe:Pur. 337. Many things and the principal were true, that were taught vnto the Saxons. Now for vs you confesse, and say:Pur. 346. You thinke it is the surest way to looke to that faith in all points, which this Land first receiued: If men should folow your coūsel, in some things they should folow your faith which you now teach. Namely,Pur.. 335 336. they receiued & vsed vnpro∣fitable prayers for the dead, & many other superstitious opiniōs. Neither doth it folow, that all that taught or beleeued those er∣rors, so long as they buylded vpon Christ the onely foundation, perished. If the Saxons receiued prayer for the dead, why do you say of the Britaynes (whom erewhile you confessed to haue taught them) that although Gildas accuse the Priests of his time for seldome Sacrificing,Pur. 332. and although the error of praying for the dead were receiued in other places, yet whether this Countrie were free from it, I am not able to say, nor you to proue, that it was infected with it?
Because of these poynts which you confesse, and many others that you can not denie:Ar. 49. therefore now the English Nation recei∣ued their Religion first from Rome, at such time as religion there was very corrupt: The Saxons were conuerted by superstitious Romanists:Pur. 337.348. Yea (as some thinke) they were not so much conuer∣ted from Gentilitie to Christ, as peruerted from pure Christianity to superstition. Sée I pray you, they were not onely Christians before, but so pure as no other Christian Nation in the world, if you remember what he said of all others here cap. 3. And yet againe on the other side, were their corruption by those Romanes neuer so great,Pur. 335.336.346. Ar. 49. yet such was the faith that was receiued euen of the Saxons, that you can shew vs if we will, playne and pithy confutations (at that time) of many poyntes of Popish do∣ctrine, and namely (that which we count the chiefe) the Real pre∣sence and transubstantiation, yea and direct inuectiues against the Pope and all Popish doctrine. Mary in dede that were worth the sight. Do you graunt, that in some things. and namely prayer for the dead, they receiued the faith which we now teach: & yet haue you cards of thē to shew not only against many points of Popish doctrine, but against all popish doctrine? And what be your cardes? Diuers monumentes of antiquitie, (as Prayers, Psalmes, Homilies, with diuers other smal Treatises and pamphlets) in the old English or Saxons tongue, in old English written hande, and namely that printed Saxon Homily, which was appoynted to be read at Easter. Belike they were of S. Bedes making (for so we reade in his life) that he compiled many godly things in the vul∣gar tongue, and not only in Latine, and his Homilies to this day are read in the Churches,) or rather of some his Elders, such as he in his Historie maketh mention of, because it was one hun∣dred yeres after our first conuersion, before Bede him selfe did florish. Is this possible, thinke you? No, no. Non sunt rectè diui∣sa temporibus tibi Daue haec. In S. Bedes story, and in all his works, and al other writers of his time, and before his time you find nothing against the Pope, nor against any one poynt of his doctrine. But cleane contrarie we finde so playnly for the Pope and for euery poynt of his doctrine, that you are faine to put the reuelation of Antichrist, and the disparition of the Church (here cap. 2.) at the very time of our conuersion. For which cause also
you refuse (as we saw before) to be tryed by Bedes historie,Pur. 333. tel∣ling our countreymen, that they were better to consider the Acts of the Apostles: and saying in another place, that you waye not worth a slye that which D. Allen telleth out of Beda. For who séeth not there our Religion most playnly, and namely for Beda hi. li. 1. ca. 24. Greg. li. 12. epist. 15. the Popes authoritie, and Beda li. 1. ca. 25.27.29. Masse, the very poynts that your Saxon Homilies do impugne? But what saye we then to those godly monuments? Who can not say and sée, that if they were such as you make them, they should not all this while be kept vnprinted, neither should that which was printed, so soone and so diligently haue bene called in againe: for why? either they conteine not suche matter as you report, or they be but of some of these late Wiclesistes making, such as (by your owne saying) are yet com∣mon to be seene. Disproue my coniecture if it be wrong,Ar. 34. and then you shall sée whether I can reply. 10. 12. Myracles and Visions. Unto these two Demaunds I couple two others, of Myracles,Motiue 5.6.7. and of Uisions, noting that the very Scriptures do by them com∣mend vnto vs Christ him selfe, his Apostles with their successors the conuerters of all Nations, and their doctrine: and saying ac∣cordingly, that the Miracles and visions of our Church, are infi∣nite,Pur. 166.331.333. Greg. Dial. li. 4. ca. 24. Et Epist. l. 7 ep. 30. li. 9. ep. 58. & mora. l. 27. c. 6. in Iob. 36. Damas. ser. de defūctis. Beda hist. li. 1. c. 31. l. 3. c. 13. li. 4. c. 21. li. 5. c. 13. alleaged also by the Doctors against the Iewes also & Pay∣nims, to conuert them to Christ: Wheras the Protestants haue not all this while bene able so much as to heale a lame horse, though Luther and Caluine (as we reade in their liues, namely set out in French) attempted wonders. Now what saith Fulke to this? The examples out of Gregorie, Damascene, Bede, you may spare for your frendes: there is none of vs that maketh great account of them. Againe: I force litle what Augustine (our A∣postle, of whose Miracles and holines S. Gregorie also, whose Monke he was, doth testify, as also of his learning, Hebrew psal∣ters written with his owne hand, which you count a high poynt, &c.) wrought to confirme his errors: neither do I waye worth a flye that long tale you tell out of Beda, of him that had his chey∣nes fallen of in Masse time: that credulous and superstitious age had many such fayned Myracles. Againe: You leape but 600. yeres from Christ, to Gregories Dialogues, from which time I wil
not deny but you may haue great store of such stuffe: as you haue miracles now in Flaūders of the honest woman of the old Bayly in London. Happy it were for you, and you were so honest. Nei∣ther when she was in Heresie, was she vnhonest for ought that I haue hard, and the Miracle euen as I tell it in my Motiues, is most gloriously knowen at Bruxelles. You should haue better played the Doctor of Diuinitie, if you could haue informed the simple how to know fained Miracles from vnfained: and why Miracles vnfained may not be after S. Gregories time aswell as before. You will tell them (as here cap. 2.) that straight after his time was the Reuelation of Antichrist,Pur. 336.338. and that these were and are his lying signes and wonders, 2. Thes. 2. such as errours had alwaies great plentie to establish them withall. This is the very bones and marrow of your new Gospell: and yet all worm-eaten and rotten. For first, what Scripture telleth you that after the Reuelation of Antichrist (supposing it at that time whiche you wold haue) there shal be none but fained Miracles? Apoc. 11. telleth me the cleane contrary. Secondly, why cannot you for the defence of Christ his true Miracles against the Infidels, discouer the fainednes of Antichrist his wonders, whereas we discouer the lying of all fond Miracles which sundry errours (though not in such great plentie) haue pretended? Thirdly, what Scripture telleth you, that the time of Antichrists reuelation was so long agoe? It telleth me the cleane contrary, as I haue most euident∣ly declared cap. 8. pag. 125. Discouering therewithall your grosse falsation of the Scripture to racke it to your blasphemous pur∣pose. A wise Reuelation, that was yet so many hundred yeres hidden, and the partie reueled, taken yet for Christ his owne Ui∣care?Consider their absurdnesse. No, no syr: you that be mysticall Antichristes, may of fooles be mistaken, and thought to be the Ministers of Christ Iesus: but your Lord in proper person shall shew himselfe openly ynough, and expressely against the onely Christ, our Lord and Sauiour Iesus, not so much as desiring to be thought of his side. Fourthly, what say you then at the least to our in∣finite Miracles afore S. Gregories time? as those, whiche S. Augustine De Ciuitate Dei. li. 22. ca. 8. reherseth to the Pa∣ganes, wrought by the Relikes of the first Martyr S. Steuen, af∣ter many particulars, euen six Resuscitations of the dead, saying
generally: Si enim Miracula sanitatum (vt alia taceam) modò velim scribere, quae per hunc Martyrem, id est, gloriosissimum Stephanum, facta sunt in colonia Calamensi, & in Nostra, plu∣rimi conficiendi sunt libri: For if I would write but the Myracles of healings (to omitte the others) which by this Martyr, that is, by the moste glorious S. Stephen, haue bene wrought, but in two Cities, Calama, and Hippo, (where his familiar friende Possidonius, and him selfe were Bishoppes) very many bookes were to be made. What Scripture haue you agaynst these My∣racles? Either you must remoue the comming of Antichrist so muche higher (which a litle thing would make you to do) or els you must bring your blind followers some text that testifieth his lying Myracles to go also so long before his comming, and the workers of them for him to be the very Martyrs and ministers and true Church of Christ him selfe. For els how will you nowe defend that our Church hath no true Myracles,Ar. 85. but the power of Antichrist in lying signes and wonders? As for your censure of Myracles and Uisions, that what soe∣uer is consonant to the word of God, is to be receiued,Pur. 163.333. that which is not agreable therewith, is to be detested, although an Angell from heauen were the bringer of it: as though these were a∣gaynst the trueth of God vttered in the holy Scriptures. All this hangeth but vpon the twyned thréede of your owne poore worde, though you say neuer so much, that it is briefly and playnely so set foorth in the worde of God, as I haue shewed in the eyght chapter, answering all the textes that you peruert for Onely Scripture, & namely that text of an Angel from heauen, pag. 110. And the place also of Saint Augustine, chapter 9. pag. 181.Pur. 333. In so much that where you say therevpon, He will not allowe (Myracles and Visions) for sufficient proofes, without the autho∣ritie of the Scriptures, you do shamefully abuse your Reader, for he saith expresly, that whatsoeuer such things are done in the Ca∣tholike Church (as he there also mentioneth many generally, and some particularly) therefore they are to be allowed, because they are done in the Catholike Church. And you graunt that these of S. Augustines reporting, were done in the Catholike Church: Ergo, by S. Augustine euen in that place, you must al∣low them, and so condemne your owne Religion.
Motiue 26. 13.15. Honour of Crosses and of Saintes. 14.16. Vertue of Crosses and of Saintes. 17. Exorcismes. 18. Destroying of Idolatrie. In the next fiue Demaundes I report certaine argumentes made of the old Doctors in their bookes, against the Paynims, to proue that Christ is God, and not their Idolles, by certaine pointes of our Religion, as the Soueraigne Honor both of his Crosse, and of his Saintes, and the miraculouse power not one∣ly of them two, but also of his Church in her ordinarie exorcis∣mes: requiring the Protestantes to helpe here the Paynims, if they be eyther able, or not ashamed, and also in the next De∣maund bidding them open their eyes at length, and beholde, that our Religion hath bene and is the bane of Idolatrie, yea and those very pointes of our Religion, which their peruerse blind∣nes counteth and calleth Idolatry it selfe. To all this Fulke had nothing, but like a Cuckow, You haue not (saith he) destroyed I∣dolatry,Pur. 460. but set vp Idolatrie. Not waying what I tell him accor∣ding to the prophets, that we haue so throughly conuerted al Na∣tions from Idolatrie, that we haue made them forget also the names of their Idolles. Motiue 41. Article 10.19 Kinges. My 19. Demaund is of the Christian Emperours and Kinges, of whose conuersion together the Scripture speaketh expresly, and of the conuersion of Nations. The chiefe of them Fulke na∣meth here cap. 2. and confesseth (with vs and for vs) that they were of the true Church in the first 600. yeares: yea and chalen∣geth them to haue bene of his Religion, no lesse then we doe. But what proufes doth he bring thereof? Not one. Neither doth he answere so much as any one of our proufes, no not that which D. Allen alleageth,Pur. 429. how Constantinus honored the Sentence of the Priestes Councell (at Nice) tanquam a deo prolatam, as pro∣nounced of God.Pur. 313. Ruff. li. 1. ca. 5. yea he is faine to confesse, that in the burial of Constantinus him selfe, the very first Christian Em∣perour,Eus. in vita Const. li. 4 c. 58.59.60.66.71. there was prayer for his soule, according to the errour of the time, being the time of the first Nicen Counsell. In Eusebius is much more, Sacrifice also for his soule, with the intercession of the Apostles, in whose honor it was offered at their Relikes,
in their Temple,Pur. 312. and all by the procurement of Constātinus him self. Again, That the Emperour Theodosius Iunior prayed for his fathers and mothers soules, Arcadius and Eudoria. But the storie saith not (quoth he) that he prayed to S. Chrysostome for them, as M. Allen thinketh. The storie is Theodorets, and his words are these:Hist. Trip. li. 10. c. 26. ex Theo. l. 5. c. 35.36 Pur. 222.226. Amb. super obitum Theod. And he setting his face and eyes vpon the shrine of that holy man, made supplications for his parentes, and prayed (him) vt veniam illis tribueret, that he would pardon them the iniuries which of ignorance they had done him in working his death. Againe, as touching Honorius of the west, brother to the said Arcadius of the East, wher S. Ambrose saith, Eius principis (The∣odosij Senioris) et proximè conclamauimus Obitum, et nunc quadragesimum diem celebramus, assistente sacris Altaribus Honorio Principe, We finished of late (vpon the seuenth day) this Princes Obite (Theodotius Senior their father) and now we ce∣lebrate his fourtyth day, our Prince Honorius standing by the sacred Altares. To this Fulke had nothing, but partly to repre∣hend the thing as superstitious both in the Bishop and in the Em∣perour, partely to inueigh blindly against D. Allens translation. For Ambrose speaketh not (he saith) of his fortyth dayes minde, but of the solemnitie of his funerall kept 40. dayes togeather. As though the fortyth day is not one of the fortie, and yet also how playnly he expresseth the singulare solemnitie of the fortyth day, as of the Obite before, saying, And now we celebrate his fortyth day, whereas others vse to kepe the Thirde day and the Thir∣tith, (which was and is the vse of the Romane Church:) But the Church of Millaine kept the seuenth day, and the fortyth. Al this considered, who seeth not, that aswel the Catholike Em∣perours within the first 600. yeres be against him, as the others of later tymes: and therefore that it is but a cast of his facing & deceiuing arte, that he saith:Ar. 33.51. Before the generall Defection (and Reuelation of Antichrist) it is an easye matter to name you the Emperours and Princes of our Church, as Constantine the great,See the impu∣dent Heretike, them vvhm he condemned be∣fore. Iouinianus, Valentinianus, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, Martianus, Iustinianus, Mauritius, & diuers other. But when the Kings of the earth had cōmitted fornicatiō with the great Whore of Babylō (as the holy ghost foresheweth Apo. 17. & 18.) it is no preiudice to our cause, if we cannot shew any of them, that haue
maintained our Religion. Your malicious and ignorāt setting of the Defection & Antichrists reuealing, at the yere 607, I haue cōfuted cap. 8. pag. 126. by the Scriptures most manifestly. But that you poynt the same time for the Kinges of the earth to haue fornicated with her, your ignorance and malice surmounteth it selfe, as it is euidēt by that which I say there pag. 126. that Ba∣bylon is this world frō the beginning to the ending thereof, and called a Whore for that it hath such alluremēts, wherevpon the same S. Iohn exhorteth vs in his Epistle,1. Ioan 2. and saith: Loue not the world nor the thinges that are in the world. The world is transi∣torie, and also the cōcupiscence of it. And therefore in his Apoca∣lipse, he maketh her to sit vpon all the earthly & worldly Kinges that euer tooke or shall take her parte against Gods Church. But your blindnes could finde no earthly Kinges in the world but within these last 900. yeares: yea none to be the Kinges of the Earth, but those that be the Kinges of the Church, and their for∣nicatiō to consist In humbly adoring her,Esa. 49.60. & licking the very dust of her feete, which they are cōmaunded by the Prophet to do vn∣der paine of Damnation.Ar. 17. Discipline. And thereupon D. Allen told you, that to be the true Church, Which exerciseth Discipline vpon offen∣ders in all degrees, And that al true the Christian Kings haue and doe obey her accordingly: which is an vnuincible argument for vs against you, in this Demaund. And yet you haue Kings on your side, also since the Reuelation of Antichrist:Ar. 33.34.32. The Grecian Emperours that were Image-brea∣kers: Charles the great, who wrote a booke against Images, and called Bertrame to declare his mind vpon the Real presence and transubstantiation: and those Princes that defended their maried Priests. But least we should obiect, that it was but in one or two poynts, that these did fauour you: Edward the third defended Wickleue. Also Zisca & Procopius defended the Bohemians: and George king of Bohemia was depriued of his kingdome by the Pope, for defending the Protestants An. 1466. Which is wel to∣wards an hundred yeres before ye name of Protestants (by your own confession here Dem. 8.) and much more before the religion of the Protestants, was coyned. For though you say, Wickleue, I wene, you will not deny but he was of our Church and Religion, yet you may sée in my 40. Dem. that in déede he was not, neither
also the Bohemians or Hussits. But that Edward the third was a Wickleuist, who euer heard? though I denie not, but that Ca∣tholike Princes are often times passing negligent in their office and othe, to extirpate Heresies, vntill by God and his Churches admonition on the one side, and by the wast (on thother side) that Heretikes in time doe make both spiritually and temporally of all Common wealthes, they be spurred therevnto. The like ab∣surd ignoraunce in stories, or rather malice, you and your bre∣thren declare, in saying that fonde booke against Images to be Charles the greates, who was cleane contrarie,Cop. Dial. 4. c. 18.19. Sander. de Imag. li. 2. ca. 5. an enimie of the Image-breakers, as is at large & learnedly declared in M. Copes Dialogues. Neither is it Carolus Magnus, but Carolus rex, brother to Lotharius the Emperor An. 840. (by Trithemius) to whō Bertrame wrote De corpore & sanguine Domini. Neither was that (as the learned thinke for good causes) this Hereticall booke which Oecolampadius set foorth vnder Bertrames name. And is not this a substantiall reason, He declared that he liked not the Real presence and Transubstantiation, in that he called Bertrame to declare his mind of that matter? How much better may I reason, that both the Emperour or King, and all Christen∣dome held the Real presence and transubstantiation, because this Bertrame durst not but so timerously & about the bush (after the maner of all heretikes in the beginning) go against it, as we sée in that booke? No no, syr: As I said before of Nations, so I say of Princes: If any were euerted, he might in some thing fall on your side. But those Princes in al countries that were cōuerted from Paganisme, & also their Successors, that continued in their steppes, were in no poynt yours, but ours in all things. 20 In all Persecutions.Motiue 15. Article. 7. My 20. Dem. is of the persecutions both before ye Emperours became Christians, & also afterwards whē some of thē were per∣uerted againe with Apostasie or Heresie: saying, that the Reli∣gion which we reade of in those times, béeing the Religion of all Martyrs, and (by Fulkes confession here cap. 2. pag. 4.Pur. 258.312. Ar. 23.24.25.) of ye true Church, is in al poynts ours, and in no one poynt ye Protestants. And to this he hath nothing, but only this, that all true saints held the foundation Iesus Christ, (which we do in his sense, & he doth not in the true sense, as I shewed cap. 5. and therefore forsooth
it is proued that they all were of his Church: notwithstanding he is fayne to say, that some of them buylded straw and stubble vpon the foundation, they were ours so playnly in many things, as he confesseth cap. 3. yea and in all things, as I shew cap. 9. In so much as they haue scraped most of their names out of the Cal∣lender, wherof I shall speake more Dem. 46. Motiue 33. Article. 14.21. Churches. In the 21. Demaund I chalenge for ours the auncient Chri∣stian churches with their furniture both afore and after the con∣uersion of the Romane Emperours: also in our country namely, as in all others. And Fulke no lesse chalengeth them to his side, here cap. 2. pag. 6. But before we come to the particulers, let vs see his answere to D. Allens argument: What if it were graunted that all Churches (that now remayne,Ar. 53. Pur. 339.340. that he addeth, whereas D. Allen speaketh generally) were buylded by Papists, and for Po∣pish vses: what haue you wonne thereby? As much as néedeth, I thinke. Why not? For the same chalenge might the Idolaters haue made to the Apostles: Shew vs a Temple in all the world, that was not buylded by Idolaters and to mainteine Idolatrie? Were that the same chalenge, I pray you? The Apostles re∣nounced both those Temples, and that Religion: you renounce Popish religion: but do you also renounce al Churches that now remayne? If you do, then you renounce also the Churches of the first 600. yeres, for innumerable of them (as at Rome, &c.) now also remaine. But because you may not leaue to vs the Churches of that time also, for feare of afterclaps: you thinke good to come to the matter, and to say: But for all your bragges, we are able to shew, that such Churches as were buylded by true Christians, were not buylded to such end as yours are. Constātinus Magnus was a true Christian with you also, and of him I told you erewhile in the 19. Dem. out of Eusebius, that he builded Apostolorum tem∣plum, A temple of the twelue Apostles, in his citie of Constanti∣nople, appoynting his owne body to lye in the midle of their 12. shrines, Vt defunctus que{que} precationum, quae ibidem essent ad Apostolorum gloriam offerendae, particeps efficeretur: That also after his death he might be partaker of the prayers, whiche there should be offered to the Apostles glory. And at his burial accor∣dingly,
Much people with the Priests, preces pro anima Impera∣toris Deo fundebant: made prayers to God for his soule. And likewise to this day we sée, saith Eusebius, that he enioyeth there the diuine Ceremonies, and the Mysticall Sacrifice & the societie of the holy prayers. This was his end (among others:) and the same was the end of al our Church founders, Pur. 338. to 347. saith D. Allen. Not so, saith Fulke: for Pur. 339. Ar. 52.57. Fulk is no babe you may see, our Stories testifie, that at the first conuersion of this Land to Christianitie, the Temples of the Pa∣gane Britons, and of the Idolatrous Saxons, were conuerted into Churches of the Christians. Therfore these Churches forsoth had Pagane founders, and not beleeuers of Purgatorie: as likewise Pantheon in Rome. As though that they which conuerted them to the Christian vse, were not rather their founders: as now also king Henry the eight is called of you, a founder of many places that he did not buyld, but only alter. So then here is one ende of their Churches, all one and of our Churches, to wit, to pray for the dead. But they were all buylded in the honor of God, of Christ:Ar. 53. to 55. and the most of yours in the honor of creatures, of Saints. Mary, well ymet. The aforesaid Church of Constantinus was it not called, The twelue Apostles Church? And doth not S. Augustine De Ci∣uit. Dei talke of Basilicae Martyrum & Apostolorum,Au. de Ciu. li. 1 ca. 1.4. The Apo∣stles and the Martyrs Churches or Palaces, calling thē also Chri∣sti Basilicas, The Churches of Christ, which you make to be oppo∣site one to the other? besides infinite like examples. And therfore your places out of S. Basill and Didymus, & S. Augustine,Bas. ep. 141 Did. de sp. sanct. Au. ep. 174 Ench. c. 56. Cont. Ma∣xim. Ar. l. 1. Titul. 11. De ver. rae. ca. 55. that a Temple is onely for God, make no more against our Churches now, then against theirs at that time. But the places, where S. Augustine answereth the matter, for you to alleage them against it, is most vayne impudencie. He Au. de ci. li. 8. c. 27. & li. 22. ca. 10. telleth you & the Paganes for him selfe and for vs together: But we do not to our Martyrs build Temples as to Gods, but Memories as to dead men, their soules yet liuing with God. Nec ibi erigimus Altaria, in quibus sacrificemus Martyribus, sed vni Deo, &c. Neither in those me∣mories do we erect Altars (etiam super sanctum corpus Martyris, Not so much as them that are made ouer the holy bodies of Mar∣tyrs) vpon them to sacrifice to the Martyrs: But to the one, both ours and the Martyrs God, do we offer the Sacrifice. Although at
that Sacrifice, they, as the men of God, be in their place and order named, and we honor the Memories of them as of holy men of God.Ar. 55. Sozo. li. 2. ca. 2. This is the meaning and none other of S. Peters Church, S. Laurence Church, of S. Peters Altar, S. Laurence Altar. And euen so of Angels Churches also, Sozomenus telling of a Church in Constantinople called Michaelium, S. Michaels, in memorie of an Apparition of that Archangell there. Pur. 344.345.But in the third end you pay vs home, for the great grauntes that Constantine made to Syluester Byshop of Rome, he made to marryed Byshops of Rome. And that were so, then crie on a Gods name, Viuat Iouinianus, Blessing vpon Iouinian, and A∣nathema to S. Augustine who called him a monster, yea and vp∣pon all the Churche of Rome, where not so much as one Priest would marrie for all his perswasions, but so faithfully resisted him, that out of hand they extincted his heresie, here Cap. 8. pag. 149. Séeing this your impudent most false assertion of Rome, who will maruell to heare you say as boldly of England? Many of these Churches and Colledges, yea the most notable Cathe∣drall Churches in Englande, were buylded, for Preachers of the Gospell, and their wiues to Then is the Q. Iniunction to blame.dwell in, and they were first inhabi∣ted of marryed Priestes. Is it possible? Our stories are plenti∣full in that poynt: if you be skilfull in antiquitie, you cannot be ignoraunt of this, which is testified of Ranulphus Castrensis, Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, the storie of Peterburghe and many other. You talke sometymes of a Whetstone as bygge as a Mountayne? You haue wonne it, you must néedes haue it. This our Stories tell, that manye of our Priestes had néede sometymes of reformation, and that also with violence, suche was their obstinacie in that durte: as also in other Countryes, too often. But that any Churches were builded for suche swine, or first inhabited by such, is a chicken of your owne hatching. Ar. 55.56.57.After this wée haue to consider what you say of Chauncells and the Roode lofte, of Altars, of Chalices, and Uestmentes. The Churche of Tyrus (Eusebius lib. 10. cap. 4.) had (Can∣cellos) the Chauncell in the myddest: and the Altar beyng but one,Fulk driuen to confesse altars in the Church. in the myddest of the Chauncell. So also as the Priestes and Deacons stoode rounde about it. Agayne, Many Chur∣ches
haue Crosse Iles. Belike you are sodainely become our Proctor. For Chauncelles, Altars, and Crosses were not (I trow) in your fellowes late buyldinges (which you mention Pur. 342.) at Orleans, Antwarpe, and other places. And there∣fore as sodainly you chaunge agayne, and say, that the Chaun∣celles are but additions buylded since the Churches, of lyke∣lyhood by the persons that disdayned to haue their place in the myddest of the people as the olde manner was. Euen as likely as that it was of disdayne, that Saint Ambrose by his Archdeacon commaunded the Emperour Theodosius senior,Theo. li. 5. ca. 17. Sozom. li. 7. ca. 24. out of the Chauncell, telling him that it was for the Cleargie onely, solis sacerdotibus. If you knowe that maruellous Sto∣rie, you may better remember your selfe, because you saye, In the Orientall Churche, as their Ceremonies are diuers from yours, so no doubt the fashion of their Temples differeth from yours. You may there perceaue that both in the East and West Churche, the diuersitie was not in the Ceremonies nor Tem∣ples, but in the Byshops, for many were flatterers, or vn∣skilfull, euery one was not an Ambrose. Howbeit some little differences are in the Temples also of one Citie, but without iarre, yea all very sightly becomming our Church,Psal. 44. as varie∣tie in the Quéenes goodly garment. But your Religion may not beare any Chauncels at all, neyther in the myddest nor at the East ende. It may not beare the length into the East, which was and is the common and Apostolike fourme, but will haue all rather to bée rounde, accordyng to the example of those fewe which before were lyghtly Temples and Sy∣nagogues of the Paganes and Iewes: as Sainct Maria Ro∣tunda in Rome, which was Pantheon, and those two at London and Cambridge which you doo mention. It may not bear the out Isles to make it in forme of a Crosse lying along vp∣pon the ground. No it may not beare any Crosse or Roode at all, to be in the Church, although Constātinus had Eus. in vi. Cōst. li. 2. c. 12. l. 4. c. 56 Soz. li. 1. c. 8. Tabernaculum Crucis, a Tabernacle or moueable Church of the Crosse, carryed about with him in the warres: and also in Hierusalem Eus. or. de laud. Cōst. pag. 367. dedi∣dicated an holy Temple Salutari Signo Crucis, to the health∣full signe of the Crosse: and also set vp Euseb. de laud. Cōst. pa. 368.388 Trophaea victoriae
contra mortē partae, Triumphant signes of the victorious Crosse, in the Churches and Temples consecrated to God. And in his Church of our Lords Passion, the very Crosse it selfe that our Sauiour dyed vpon kept in secret. Quam Episcopus vrbis eius quotannis,Paulin. ep. 11. ad Seu. cum pascha domini agitur, adorandam populo, prin∣ceps ipse venerantium, promit, The which most holy Crosse, the Bishop of Hierusalem (as S. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and S. Augustines great familiar friend writeth) bringeth forth euery yere to be adored of the people, him selfe beeing the first & chie∣fest of them that worship it: and that at Easter, die qua Crucis ipsius Mysterium celebratur, ipas{que} sacramentorum causa est, quasi quoddam sacrae solennitatis insigne,Creeping to the Crosse vpon good Friday. ere cap. 3. pag. 9. and cap. 6. pag. 39. Vpon the day that the mysterie of the Crosse it selfe is celebrated, and it selfe is the cause of the seruice, as it were a certayne banner of the holy solemnitie. Your religion may not beare these things, as which (you say) the auncient Church tooke of Ualentinian Heretikes: nor so muche as one Altar in a Church, howbeit then also were many Altars in one Church. For the same Paulinus in the same place wri∣teth, that the same Church was Auratis corusca loquearibus, & aureis diues Altaribus, glistering with gilded Roses, and rich with golden Altars.Beda hi. l. 5 c. 16.17.18. And his Church of the Resurrection, tria Altaria continebat, had three Altars, as we reade in S. Bede. And what do you talke agayne of Chalices of wood and of glasse, and of selling the golden and siluer vessels, euen the holiest vessels of all, to redeeme captiues? séeing that you may beare no Chalices at all,Ar. 57. Pur. 69. no holy vessels at all, but say playnly: Your vest∣mēts are of as good stuffe as your Chalices, the old Church knew none such. Then belike you neuer read of that Sacra Stola ex aureis filis cōtexta,Theod. li. 2 ca. 27. Holy Cope, wouen of gold thredes, the which Constantinus gaue to the Bishop of Hierusalem, Vt ea amictus sacrosancti Baptismatis ministerium obiret, to weare when he did solemnly celebrate the administration of holy Baptisme. Be∣cause S. Fulgentius (out of Vita S. Fulg. c. 18. whose life Ant. 2 p. hi. li. 11. c. 12. your author S. An∣toninus tooke it) had neuer an Hier. li. 1. con. Pelag. holyday coate, but onely one oate for all times, and for all things, you imagine that he saide Masse (sacrificabat) without holy vestments. When those moste perfect Monks are in Histories noted to haue bene monochitonos, do you so vnderstand it? How then was S. Sasill so commended of
the Emperour Ualens, Quod in Natali Domini tanto cum orna∣tu, tam{que} decenter sacerdotio fungeretur, For executing in Christ∣mas with such ornamentes, and such comelynesse? As also,Sozo. li. 8. ca. 21. when S. Chrisostomes Priestes and Deacons were beaten at Easter by his enemies in the Church, Et in ornatu (vt erant) per vim rap∣ti, and in their ornamentes (so as they were) carried away violent∣ly. For though some in great pouertie, as commonly in times of persecution and spoile, as now also in England, vsed either none or very simple vestmentes, and wooden, glasen, leaden, or copper Chalices: and although you say,Ar. 57. The seruice of God hath small neede of furniture in outward things, for God being a spirit, is not worshipped with outward pompe: yet it is euident, that the Churches then, in times of peace, were much richer in such stuffe and (as Paulinus calleth it) in alma sacri pompa ministerij,Paulin. epi. 12. ad Seu. in the magnificall pompe of the holy ministerie, then they be now: in so much that Acacius Bishop of Amida (of whom you talke) was able therewith to redéeme at once seuen thousand captiues,Socr. li. 7. ca. 21. to féede them, and to giue them to bring them home into Persia. There was belike in England such necessitie to redeeme Cap∣tiues, or to build Temples of God,Ambr. off. li. 2. ca. 8. for the enlarging of the Mar∣tyrs monumentes, or to prouide that requies defunctorum might be at the buriall of Christian men, which are the three vses that S. Ambrose hath in the place that you alleage. Sane si in sua ali∣quis deriuat emolumenta, crimen est. Marry if any man turne them to his owne commoditie, it is an heynous fault.As you haue done in Eng∣land. But it was not for that, it was for the foresaid causes: and then withall a reuerent choise was made first of non initiata vasa, vnconsecra∣ted vessell, and after when necessitie vrged also to the consecra∣ted, great respect was had, ne Ecclesia Mystici poculi forma non exiret, that a Mysticall cuppe went not from the Church in his owne forme, ne ad vsus nefarios sacri calicis ministerium transfe∣retur, least the instrument of a sacred Chalice (which he there cal∣leth also a vessel of our Lords bloud, & Gold in which our Lords bloud is powred) might be conuerted (by the buyers) into wicked vses. Are you not ashamed to cite such places out of antiquitie, you that hate Chalices because they be Chalices, and because they be consecrated? After all this you say full wisely: We are content,Ar. 57. that your
Church by her gorgeous garmēts, aswel as by other things, should declare it self to be that woman which is prescribed to be clothed in purple, gold, pearles, and such like ornaments, Apoc. 17. The true sense of which place I haue giuen cap. 8. pag. 126. But you in the meane time to giue vs a blow, care not that the stroke ligh∣teth withall vpon the Primitiue Church (for it was not yours, why should you spare it?) as I haue here shewed, & as your selfe confesse in speaking aboue of those golden and siluer vessels that Acacius sold,Pur.. 342. and elsewhere of those Princely buyldings, that by Constantine and other Christian Princes were first set vp, & must confesse much like of those former Cryptes, Caues or vaultes vn∣der the earth, if you know well the story of S. Laurences mar∣tyrdome, namely that the Tyrant said to him. Prud. Hym de S. Laur. peristeph. ij.Hunc esse vestris Orgijs Morē{que} & artē, proditū est, Hanc disciplinam foederis, Libent vt auro antistites: Argenteis scyphis ferunt Fumare sacrum sanguinem: Auro{que} nocturnis sacris Adstare affixos cereos. This is the vse and order of your Ceremonies, as some haue con∣fessed, this is the doctrine of your Testament, That the Prelates do sacrifice in gold: In siluer cuppes (they say) the sacred bloud doth smoke: and that the tapers stand vpon gold, at the sacrifice in the night. Likewise by that litle which I haue said of the Crosse and the Signes thereof, it is euident that in your vsuall rayling agaynst dumbe Images,Ar. 4. Pur. 20.21.22.460. 2. Cor. 6. stockes, and stones, you do no more but vtter that you are no more of the auncient true Church, then of our Church now which you denie to be the true Church. S. Paule in déede saith, that the Temple of God and Idolles can not agree togea∣ther, speaking of Christians that did draw with Infidels, as re∣ceiuing of meate sacrificed to their Idolles, such as now receiue of Caluins bread. But that the true Temples of God, and Ima∣ges belonging to the same God, agrée well together, you can not denie, but you must reuoke your owne confession made here of those auncient Temples of Christ. And therefore you do but like your selfe, to say: I care not what your fathers called or counted Sacrilege. But God our heauenly father cōmaunded vs to breake, burne, and destroy al your Idols, and to deface al the monuments of them, Deut. 12. And all the godly Patriarkes and Fathers both
before Christes cōming and since, haue giuen vs example hereof. What els? they gaue vs example to set vp Crosses, & you exam¦ple to pull them downe. You may roll in suche Rhetorike before fooles that receiue your absurde principles, to wit, that the Idols of the Paganes were Images of the Christians. But when the simplest Catholike doth no more but denie your principle, you are by and by non plus. No syr, but to auoyde prolixitie, I could tell you playnely and at large who were your fathers in these spoyles that you haue made of Christes churches, to wit, the Do∣natistes, the Arrians, the Eutychians, yea Iulianus Apostata, yea and that you haue out-shot them all, and left nothing to An∣tichrist him selfe but onely to fill vp the measure, as I haue suffi∣ciently touched cap. 8. pag. 128. And therefore neither will that serue, which againe you say:Pur. 341. Suche liuings as are appoynted vs by the Prince, and the law, we may enioy with a good conscience. No syr, it will not serue. For you may remember the storie in S. Ambrose, De Basilicis tradendis.Ambr. li. 5. post epist. 32. & ep. 33. He would dye rather then to deliuer the Churches to the Emperour, and the Arrian Empresse his mother. And so you enioy our Churches with as good a con∣science, as the Arrians should haue done at that time: as you shal féele when you come in your course, after your seniors, before the iust iudge our mothers husband, whose Dowries they be. 22. Seruice.Motiue 32. Article. 6. The 22. Demaund is of the Seruice, which Fulke in worde chalengeth no lesse then we, saying here cap. 2. pag. 4. Constanti∣nus buylded those Churches for our assemblies and Seruice, and in the Cryptes also before that, our assemblies were kept. But in déede he confesseth that it was ours, and reiecteth it accordingly: so that I must stande here to defende it rather then to clayme it.Pur. 377. His defence of their new Communion booke is this: Whosoe∣uer were children of the true Church, would neuer finde faulte with our Communion, which can not be condemned by the worde of God: and therefore careth not for the comparison of the custome of other men, which whether they vsed the like or not, in forme of words (whith is not materiall) so they vsed not other substance of matter, except they did it besides the worde of God. And yet it must be preiudiciall to our Masse booke,
(not that the hooke was made since the Apostles time,Ar. 21.38. Pur.. 402.413. but) that any peece was added since by certain Popes, yea though the very same péeces be reteined in their cōmunion booke also. Let al men therfore consider, how iust the defence is that I made in this De∣maund, to wit, that no péece, be it neuer so new, neither in the Masse booke, nor in our other Seruice bookes, is contrary to the old faith of the Apostles conteined in the word of God written or vnwritten: yea the same in substance, and cōmonly in forme of words also, was in the Apostles and Fathers Churches. The Primitiue Church had the same seruice that the church  hath.Let one example hereof be, Prayer for the dead, and that also in the Canon of the Masse, as Fulke him selfe confesseth here at large cap. 3. pag. 16. to .21. And whatsoeuer he obiecteth against the Primitiue Church and vs for it, saying they had it of the Diuell &c. (cap. 3. pag. 22.) that it is against the Scriptures, and contrary to the same Doctors them selues: I haue answered all cap. 6. pag. 47. to 56. and cap. 8. pag. 133. to 134. and cap. 9. pag. 161. to 164. pag 193. to 214. Let another example be, praying to Saintes, as he also con∣fesseth here cap. 3. pag 10. And what he obiecteth against the Fa∣ters and vs for it, I aunswere cap. 6. and cap. 8. pag. 138. sauing one place of S. Augustines,Ar. 55. vpon which he saith: Note that no Sacrifice ought to be offered to Martyrs, but prayer is a Sacrifice, therfore it ought to be offered only to God. Secondly, that Mar∣tyrs were not called vpon in the time of the Sacrifice, but onely named for remembraunce. Cunningly noted, as appeareth by these words of his in another place:Aug. tract. 84. in Ioa. De ve. Ap. sermo 17. Non sic beatos Martyres, &c. We do not make such a commemoration of the blessed Martyrs as of other that rest in peace: that we also pray for them, but ra∣ther that they may pray for vs. Was this, to be onely named for remembraunce? Neither in the Aug. ciui. li. 22. ca 10. place that you alleage doth he say, that they were not called vpon in the time of sacrifice, but, Non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat, inuocantur, The Priest that sacrificeth,Aug. Ciuit. li. 8. ca. 27. Offerimus (do∣mine pater) praeclare maie∣stati tuae, &c. doth not inuocate them. And what he meaneth by his inuocation that sacrificeth, he declareth there afore, saying: Which of the faithfull euer heard the Priest standing at an Altar, though also made vpon the holy body of a Martyr for Gods honor and seruice, to say in the prayers or Canon: Offero tibi Sacrificium Petre, vel Paule, vel Cypriane, I offer sacrifice to thee, O Peter, or
Paule, or Cyprian? But otherwise for praying to Martyrs, S. Augustine is very playne in the same worke, the same booke, and almost the same chapter, telling certaine Myracles, one in a wo∣man, that prayed to the holy Martyr S. Steuē,Aug. ci. l. 2. ca. 8.9.10. in S. Augustines owne Church, ad sanctum Martyrem orare perrexerat: another in a poore man, that prayed aloude to the twentie Martyrs in the same towne, ad viginti Martyres clara voce orauit. And such My∣racles are done (he saith) by God, at the Martyrs suite & instance, eis orantibus & impetrantibus. And therfore whether prayer be a sacrifice, or no: and how it is, or is not, we nede not stand here a∣bout it. As also, because he doth not say, that no sacrifice ought to be offered to Martyrs, as you pretend, but he speaketh of exter∣nal sacrifice (the definition wherof you may conceiue by that litle which I said cap. 6. pag. 49.) and of one certaine externall sacri∣fice, We offer the sacrifice to the one God,Aug. de ci. li. 8. ca. 27. That prayer to Saintes is not a sacrifice to Saintes. who is both the Mar∣tyrs God, & ours: At which sacrifice they be named in their place and order. In so much that by this one Sacrifice he answereth the Paganes, touching certaine dishes of meate brought by some Chrystians to the Martyrs churches, euen as I answere you touching prayer made to them. Non autem ista esse, &c. But that these be not sacrifices to the Martyrs, he knoweth that knoweth the One Sacrifice of the Christians, which is there offered to God. Those Christians do meane no more, but to haue them there san∣ctified by the merites of the Martyrs, in the name of the Lorde of the Martyrs. Let the third example be of ceremonies generally, suche as he confesseth here cap. 3. pag. 15. to haue bene in the primitiue church also. And two obiections of his against them, I haue answered cap. 6. pag. 45. But now he will reproue them out of Scripture also, & first by his vsual argumēt ab authoritate negatiue.Ar. 19. Because they are destitute of God his word, which only is able to giue thē strength and estimation. And yet in other places, cleane contra∣ry, not only Scripture, but also example of the Primitiue church is sufficient for them: as where he saith:Ar. 21.42. If any thing be allowed without controuersie on both sides, it did either procede from the Scripture of God, or frō the Primitiue Church,Ar. 48. Iust. Apol. 2. or els it is a thing meerely indifferent. And to this purpose he citeth Iustinus Mar∣tyr, who declareth playnly (he saith) what order of seruice and
ministration of Sacramentes our Church vsed before Papistrie preuayled. As though the booke or books of seruice were no more then these few lines in Iustinus. And yet also to sée ye blindnesse of this mā, so litle as he bringeth out of that Martyr, yet is there plaine against his Communiō booke, Water mingled with wine, But no one word against the Masse booke, yea it is the very sūme of the Masse, vnlesse you be so foolish to thinke, that the Bishops sermon, the Receauing of all present, the Carying of it to them that be absent, and the Rich mens offering, may not be omitted in any Masse, nor for any cause. Now let vs here against Cere∣monies,Ar. 19. your authorities of Scripture affirmatiuely. We detest and abhorre all your beggarly Ceremonies which you count ho∣ly and solemne obseruations. For we know, that God is not to be worshipped with such thinges, but that the true worshippers must worship him in spirite and veritie. Ioa. 4. Then belike you detest all Ceremonies and all outward thinges, those also of the Pri∣mitiue Church, yea and of the Scripture it selfe, which erewhile you allowed. You saw this reply and therefore in another place you would moderate the matter, saying: The seruice of God hath small neede of furniture,Ar. 51. in outward things. For God beeing a spirite, is not worshipped with outward Pompe, but with spiritu∣all and inward reuerence. And as for other furniture that is ne∣cessarie, was decreed to the Church by the Emperour Constantine and his Successors: Notwithstanding the Church was in better case before such furniture was graunted, then since. Like one that will not hold his peace, and yet cannot tell what to say. If Gods being a spirite admitteth some outward furniture well ynough, then haue you missensed that text. The meaning is, that outward thinges, without the inward man please not God: But for all that the inward man may vse outward gestures, outward wor∣des, and other outward thinges, as Christ him selfe, his Apostles, and all the Church euer did. For so to do, is to adore God who is a spirit, in spirit & truth. And touching the other text that you al∣leage not, but allude vnto, those weake & beggerly elemētes Gal. 4. are the Ceremonies of the old law, specially after the death of Christ whom they shadowed, and much more the Galathians be∣ing Gentiles, to whom they neuer parteyned: and you wrest it against the Ceremonies that are vsed in the administration of the gracious Sacramentes of Christ, and that by the order of
them that could say, Visum est spiritui sancto & nobis:Act. 15. It hath seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to vs. Like as agaynst the Lessons, Responses, Versicles, and suche other distinctions or varieties in the Seruice, you alleage Matth. 15.Ar. 20. In vayne do they worshippe me, teaching for doctrine the preceptes of men. Such is your ignorance in the Scripture, by reason of your malice. The preceptes of men, are those which be of men, and not of God: as those traditions of the two late Elders, Hilleb & Sam∣mai, béeing partly friuolous, as those vayne lotions, partly also contrarie to Gods Commaundementes, as that of Corban,Tit. 1. wherevppon S. Paule biddeth Titus to be earnest wih the Cretensians, that they listen not to Iudaicall fables, & manda∣tis hominum, and to the preceptes of men that turne away from the trueth: Wherevpon the inuentions also of Luther, Caluine, and all other Heretikes, are the preceptes of men, and their fol∣lowers worship they knowe not what, Ioan. 4.Pur. 21. and if they be also zelous, it is without knowledge, Rom. 10. But so are not likewise the preceptes of them, to whom our Sauiour saide, He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you,Luc. 10. de∣spiseth me. And therefore S. Paule commaunded them of Sy∣ria and Cilicia,Act. 15.16. to keepe the preceptes of the Apostles and Priestes, that were decréed in the Councell of Hierusalem. S. Augustine likewise (here cap. 6. pag. 45.) embraceth the Ce∣remonies decréed in Councels of Bishoppes, and muche more them that are vsed throughout the whole Churche. And you fal∣sifie the Councell of Laodicia, when you saye, It decreed,Conc. Lao ca. 59. that nothing should be song or read in the Churche, but the Ca∣nonicall bookes of holy Scripture. No Syr, that did rather your friende Paulus Samosatenus, who reiected the Psalmes and Songs which to the honour of our Lorde Iesus Christ,Eus. li. 7. c. 24. de∣cantari solent, are wont to be song (saith Eusebius) tanquam recentiores, as beeing but lately made, and set out by men of late memorie: Renewing the Heresie of Artemon agaynst the Godhead of Christe, the whiche a certayne Catholike doth there confute long afore ex Hymnis a fidelibus fratribus an∣tiquitus perscriptis concentu quodam,Eus. li. 5. c. 27. By the Hymnes made of olde in meeter by faythfull brethren. He maketh mention also of Eus. li. 7. ca. 19. the Hymnes of Nepos: Theodoretus and Zosome∣nus
of Theo. lib. 4. ca. 24. Zoso. l. 3. ca. 15. the Hymnes of S. Esrem in the feastes of Martyrs, and S. Augustine very often of Aug. retr. li. 1. ca. 21. Confes l. 9. ca. 6.7.12. the Hymnes of S. Ambrose. The Councell of Laod. doth no more but forbid priuatos & vulgares Psalmos, priuate and vulgar Psalmes (made by simple men) to be said in the Church, as the Con. Mil. ca. 12. Con. Cart. 3. ca. 23. Mileuitane Councell also com∣maundeth, that no other prayers, or collectes, or Masses, or prefa∣ces, or commendations, or handlayings be said in the Church, nisi quae a prudentioribus tractatae. But such as haue bene examined by some more skilfull, or allowed in the Synode, least it chaunce something to be made against the faith, or by ignoraunce, or by negligence. Likewise touching lessons, the Councel of Laod, doth no more but forbyd the Apocryphall Scriptures, libros non Ca∣nonicos, to be read, sed solos Canonicos veteris & noui Testimen∣ti, but the onely Canonicall bookes of the olde and new Testa∣ment:Con. Cart. 3. ca. 47. Ar. 20. as also the .3. Councell of Carthage decreeth, that beside the Canonicall Scriptures, nothing be read in the Church vnder name of the diuine Scriptures, for which cause both Councelles doth there declare, which bookes be Canonicall, and the Carthage Councell addeth also, that the Martyrs Passions may be read, when their anniuersarie dayes be celebrated. These examples declare manifestly, that you detest in our ser∣uice euen those things, which were in the seruice of the Primi∣tiue Churche, and all without cause: and that it is an horrible blasphemie, where you say: If you demaund, whence your Cere∣monies,VVhy then do you kepe them novv. festiuall dayes, feastes, and varieties of Seruice did pro∣ceede? I aunswere plainly, out of the bottomlesse pit of Hell. For touching dayes also (which may be the last example) of Fasting, and Feasting: you confesse (cap. 3. pag. 13. and cap. 6. pag. 43.) that Aerius and Iouinianus were condemned in the Primitiue Church for Heretikes, because they denyed the dayes and merites of Fasting, and the Scriptures that you obiect a∣gainst the Fathers, & vs for it, I haue aunswered cap. 8. pag. 140. to .143.Ar. 20. Likewise you confesse, that Festiuall dayes were vsed in the Primitiue Church: adding, to shewe of what Church you be, that they might haue bene omitted, without any hurt of Christi∣an Religion wel. But they were not kept in honour of the Saints as they are of the Papistes (for that is great Idolatrie, as also to build Churches in the honor of Saintes, but only for the memory
of the martyres and other Saintes, that their good life might be followed. Whether for that onely, let S. Augustine be witnesse, where he saith: The Christian people doth celebrate together the martyres memories with religious solemnitie,Aug. cōtra Faust. l. 20. ca. 21. Et ad exitandam imitationē, et vt meritis eorum consocietur, atque orationibus ad∣iuuetur, Both to stirre vp imitatiō, and to be ioyned in felowship to their merites, and holpen with their prayers. Was not this to kéepe their memories in their honor also? As againe it is ma∣nifest not onely by certayne places alleaged before, but also in the very words that you alleage, de ver. Relig. cap. 55.Ar. 20.54. The saints must be honored for imitation, not adored for religion. Honora∣mus eos charitate, non seruitute, We honour the blessed Angels with charitie, not with seruice. Doth he not here expresly auouch their honoring? As for your note, that Seruitus is the same that Dulia is, contrary to the Papists which will worship them with seruice called Dulia or Seruitus, it is but your vnacquayntance in S. Augustines writings. Reade De Ciuit. Dei li. 10. ca. 1.Seruitus. Latria. La∣triam quippe nostri, vbicun{que} sanctarum Scripturarum positum est, interpretati sunt Seruitutē: For whersoeuer in the holy Scrip∣tures in Gréeke is put Latria, our Latines haue translated it Ser∣uitus. And so you may sée, that he vseth Seruitus for Latria, not for Dulia, as also he vseth Religio for thresceia béeing synonymum to Latreia. But saith he, speaking of cultus Deitati debitus, the wor∣ship due to the Godhead, Propter quem vno verbo significandū, quoniam satis mihi idoneum non occurrit Latinum, Greco, &c. Because to signifie it in one word, I finde no Latin word apt y∣nough (neither Religio nor Seruitus, although in that booke De vera Relig. he so vsed them, being yet but a Lay man) I do, where it is necessarie, vtter my mind by the Greeke word, Latria. Lo I haue alleaged here no more but as an answere. And yet I haue made it manifest, that notwithstanding all his obiections, yea also by his owne confession, the Seruice of the Primitiue Church was ours, and not the Protestants: defending it also ea∣sily against his vaine cauils.Ar. 38.40.49. Neither shal he euer be able to shew that any Church, Latin or Gréeke, Brytish or other, had authen∣ticall seruice, but it was ours, as D. Allen told him before. Now as for the Language in which the Seruice is,Seruice in Latine. that ma∣keth no difference in the Seruice it selfe. For praying for ye dead
is all one, whether it be in Latine or in English. Yet because he holdeth, that it ought to be in the vulgar tongues, let vs sée what be his groundes thereof. Ar. 49.40.We can easily shew it out of the Scripture, so he saith, but no word that he alleageth any where. But bylike he meaneth the place to the Corinthians, by which his fellowes do commonly reiect the Latin Seruice, as if it were that miraculous gifte which the Apostle there calleth,1. Cor. 14. Loqui linguis, to speake with tongues. Which also he doth not reiect, but moderate, for the va∣rietie of certayne much like to Pur. 7.some Protestantes that thinke all learning to be the tongues. Now if any learned man, séeing it is not the seruice that S. Paule there speaketh of, thinke yet that one may argue thence at the least a simili: Let him consi∣der, first, that so the maner of the simple Catholikes, who praye to them selues priuately in the Latine tongue which they vnder∣stande not, is not condemned, but iustified. For, He that spea∣keth in a tongue, speaketh not to men, but (yet) to God. And, he that speaketh in a tongue, doth also edifie him selfe (in spirite, that is, in affect.) For if I pray in a tongue, my spirite (or affec∣tion) prayeth, though my vnderstanding be without fruite. And therefore If thou blesse, or giue thankes in spirite, thou doest it well. But if there be no Interpreter, let him be silent in the Chur∣che, and speake to him selfe and to God. The difference is one∣ly this, that those Corinthians receiued immediately of the holy Ghost, such prayers in such a tongue. And these Catholikes now receiue the like prayers of the same holy Ghost, but by ye Church. Secondly, that the Church in her publike praiers doth not speake in a tongue, because the Latine tongue is not in Englande a straunge tongue, so, as it were if one should say Masse at Rome in the English tongue. And so the question is not now the same, as was betwéene the Apostle and the Corinthians: but, where∣as the Church would do all things for edification, (as S. Paule commaundeth,) the question is, whether this be obteined in the Publike prayers of the whole worlde, rather by the Latine tongue, that is to saye, by the Common tongue, or els by the se∣uerall vulgare tongues, that is to say, by the Priuate tongues, To which question, the Catholikes, drawing all to common or vnitie, haue one answer: Heretikes and Schismatikes, drawing
from the Common, and scattering into many Priuates, haue an other. At Corinth the case was otherwise, both because the ton∣gues were vtterly straunge, and also because the prayers were not Set and Solemne, in writing and custome, but momenta∣neous, suggested of the Holy ghost to some one for the time, so that of them they were not vnderstood, there was no profite at all in their publication. And therefore they should not publish them, but speake to them selues and to God. Reade the learned Latin booke of F. Ledesima the Iesuite vpon this matter. He sheweth at large and substantially, that it is neither necessarie, no nor ex∣pedient, the Publike Seruice to be in all vulgare tongues, how∣beit the Popes holines may (by the Councell of Trent) do ther∣in with any Nation as he seeth cause. And Fulke can not nor doth not denie, but that in the Primi∣tiue Church all the Natiōs of the Latine Church had the seruice in Latine, neither can he, or doth he denie, but many of the same Natiōs had vulgare tongues of their owne which were not La∣tine, as the Punike tongue, the Dutch tongue, the Brytish tōgue &c. What doth he then? He holdeth, that all the people (and yet once he dare not but adde, For the most parte, which is ynough a∣gainst him) of the said Nations, besydes their vulgare tongues, spake and vnderstood Latine. And how doth he proue this absurd position? By the Germaine or French Councelles of Towres,Turon. 3. c. 17. Magunt. c. 25.45.43. Rhem. c. 15. Magunce, and Rhemes, in the time of Carolus Magnus. Where∣as one of his places is so plaine against him, that it saith, as we do now also, yf any man cannot learne (so strange and hard was the Latine tongue vnto them) his Créede and Pater noster in Latine, Vel in sua lingua hoc discat, Let him learne it at the least in his owne tongue. One other taketh order for Homilies to be translated out of Latine into the Rusticall The French is yet in some place called, the Romane.Romane or Dutche tongue, playnly: quo facilius cuncti possint intelligere quae dicun∣tur, that al may more easily vnderstand that which is said. Wher∣of he gathereth, that all the Dutch men vnderstood also the pure Latin tongue, though hardly and not perfectly. He might gather aswell, that all English men vnderstand the Latine tongue, and the pure Latine tongue, if the Bishops should say as they may, Let Latine Homilies be translated into the Englishe tongue playnely, that all maye more easily vnderstande what is saide.
Another doth forbid the Priest to say Masse alone, because some body must answer to Dominus vobiscum, and Sursum corda, &c. as also at this time, and therefore he gathereth properly forsooth, that the people commonly vnderstood the Latine Seruice.Ar. 41.49. Cap. 9. Last of all he alleageth the great Councell of Laterane An. 1215. as though it commaunded the Bishops to translate the Seruice into English and other vulgar tongues, whereas it doth no more but commaunde them (because at that time the Latines were Lords of Constātinople, Antioch, Hierusalem, &c.) to prouide ministers according to the rites and languages in which the Seruice pre∣sently was, as it is euident by the words of the Councell. And otherwise I aske him, why it prouideth but only for those Cities and Diocesses, in which people of diuers languages be mingled together, and not for all in generall? Besides, that in no place a∣ny such translating of the seruice was put in execution. Amongst those 1300. Prelats, was there not one but he was either so neg∣ligent, or so desirous of the peoples blindnes? And that neither among those of thē which procured the making of that Canon? This is the stuffe that they haue against Gods Church, or rather this is the execation and infatuation of them that haue forsaken Gods Church. Motiue 34.23. Apish imitation. The next Demaund sheweth them to be but the Apes of the Catholike Church, in so much as they retayne of her Seruice and other orders: leauing it to the consideration of the learned in the Scriptures and other writings, that false Religion was always the Ape of true Religion, as in the rest that they haue reiected, they shew them selues to be Apostataes, according to that I no∣ted here cap. 8. pag. 144. Wherein the Puritanes are offended with their brethren the Protestants, onely because they will not procéede so farre in this Apostasie, as they and their master An∣tichrist who commeth to méete them as it were halfe way, would haue them.Pur. 379. And that is it which Fulke saith to D. Allen: The ciuill Magistrates haue thought good in some outward ceremo∣nie or vsage, to beare with the infirmitie of the weaker sorte of your side,Fulke is no Pu∣ritant. in hope to winne them. Where he saith further: All your doctrine is abolished, and nothing left but a fewe ragges of your robes to looke vpon. And therefore I accorde with you,
that in déede they be infirme, or rather down & dead already, that will be wonne from Gods Church to such companions by so ba∣bish meanes. Whether that were the ciuil Magistrates meaning or no, I séeke not, but his meaning who mystically worketh in you, was and is, as I haue said, Apostasie. And therefore againe, where you say: I will vrge the Papists to tell me,Pur. 295. what we say or do in the celebration of the Communion, which Christ cōmaun∣ded vs not to say and do, or what Christ did or cōmaunded vs to do, which we do not therein. I say that you be answered already, that whatsoeuer is therein against the holy Masse, (of which we vrge you in like sort) is against Christes commaundement, who said expresly to his Apostles and their Successors, being the orde∣rers of the same: He that despiseth you, despiseth me.Luc. 10. Insomuch that S. Augustine talking of such matters, condemneth you (here cap. 6. pag. 45.) of most insolent madnesse, onely for calling in question the Masse or any part therof that is vniuersally recei∣ued. Of which matter, and of your said Apostasie, this Demaund following giueth further occasion. 24. Priesthood and Sacrifice.Mot. 21.38. Article. 13. Heb. 7. In the 24. Demaund, being of the Priesthood and Sacrifice, I touch your Apostasie at the very roote. For S. Paule saith, The Priesthood being translated (from Aaron and them of his order, to Melchisedec or Christ and them of his order,) it is necessary that translation of the Law also be made. That your Heresie of Caluinisme is not a méere Heresie, that is, a corruptiō of Christi∣anitie in one or two pointes, but a mutation of the whole new Law almost of Christ, it commeth of this (I say) that you haue made a mutation of the new Priesthood. And that you haue chaū∣ged the new Priesthood, or Priesthood of the New Testament, I shew, because you haue chaunged our Catholike Priesthood. For this Priesthood wherin we serue, came to vs from no other, but from Christ and his Apostles. The Priesthood that they dely∣uered, our forefathers and we haue to this day kept the same vnchaunged. To be perspicuous, I come to particulares. First, the very Apostolike names, Episcopus and Presbyter,Note. that is, Bishop and priest, we neuer went about to change them, you haue labored to change them into these, Superintendent and
Elder. Wherevpon it followeth that you haue chaunged the A∣postolike order, as it followeth, ye Apostles to haue chaunged the Aaronicall order, because they chaūged the former names, Ponti∣fex & Sacerdos, for which we haue no English. I touched this here afore in the .6. Dem. pag. 231. and you haue no where answered it. but I finde where you haue holpen it. For wheras the Fathers keeping those new names,Isa. 66. s. 21. yet (according to ye Prophesie of Esay) vsed euermore also ye former names, considering that ye newe or∣der no lesse then ye old, is a true species of that genus, Sacerdotiū: & wheras we accordingly do in translating put the English word Priest not only for Presbyter,Pur. 283. but also for Sacerdos: you sir trans∣lating a passage of S. Cyprians, do put the Priestes twise, where he putteth Sacerdotes, but where he putteth Presbyterum, you shun the word Priest, which is the very same, and put your newe inuented word, an Elder. Secondly, you helpe another argument of ours, where you say: I would desire none other place in all the scripture,Ar. 29. Pur. 297. to ouerthrow the Popish Hierarchie (which is the gretest glory of their Church) then this place of Paule Eph. 4. He speaketh of Apostles, Euange∣listes, Prophetes, Pastors & Teachers. But where are Popish By∣shops, Priestes, Deacons, Subdeacons, Exorcistes, Cantors (or Lec∣tors) Acolytes, Ostiares? By this you declare that you haue chaū∣ged the order, Hierarchie, or Priesthood of the Primitiue church, wherein, as it is infinitly Eus. li. 6. ca. 34. witnessed, & you cannot denie, but the same degrées were, which here you call Popish. And doth not S. Paule him selfe in other places make expresse mention of Bi∣shops, Priestes, & Deacons? And so you might aswell by your wise reason out of Ephe. 4. ouerthrow S. Paules Hierarchies. Who also in the names of Deacons. 1. Tim. 3. includeth subdeacons and ye other inferiors, as in the name of Priestes. Tit. 1. he includeth likewise Deacons themselues. And the like is common in ye aun∣cient Fathers, who yet because Deacons or Ministers is a di∣stinct order,Sup. p. 251. do like better to call all vnder Priestes by the name of Leuites,Pur. 383. because that was the generall terme in ye old Law, of all the varieties of them that were not Sacerdotes, & to call all to∣together Clerum the Cleargie, or in Clericos, or in Clericali mini∣sterio constitutos,yp. ep. 66 or ad ordinatione clericalē promotos. Al which termes S. Cypriā hath in one Epistle, with ye names of Episcopus
and Presbyter, & Sacerdos cōmon to them both. And it is but your ignorance, to thinke yt S. Paule should haue named them Eph. 4. considering that he speaketh there onely, of the ministerie of the word, only of preachers, vt iam non circumferamur, &c. that we be not now caried about with euery wind of doctrine, whereas these other are belonging to the ministerie of the Altar. Which are two distinct offices, as you may sée Act. 13. where some prea∣chers had not orders as yet, & 1. Tim. 5. where some good Priestes do not labour in the word and doctrine. Thirdly, the Apostles Bishops & Priestes were made by other Bishops and Priestes, as also with vs it continueth to this day. But yours be onely of Lay mens making, as of Kings and other Ciuill Magistrates. I passe ouer the difference of liuing Single & Marrying, as a thing extrinsical, & touched before in the .21. Dem.Pag. 250. Fourthly, your selues confesse our orders to be good ynough, in that hauing béen ordered by vs, you séeke not to be reordered, as Cranmer, Parker, Grindall, Sandes, Horne, &c. whereas we (as you knowe) account your Orders for no orders.Ar. 50.51. To this you say: You are highly deceiued, if you thinke we esteeme your offi∣ces of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, any better then the state of Lay men. For we receiue none of thē to minister in our church, except they forsweare your religion, & so their admission is a newe cal∣ling to the ministerie. How true it is that you receiue none other∣wise, I passe yt ouer. But sir,A nevv vvay to giue Orders. we also make your ministers to ab∣iure, & yet after yt, they be but lay men still. And I would ask you, if two Catholikes abiure wt you, one a lay man, ye other a Priest, are they both Priests ipso facto? O your diuinitie, O your scrip∣ture As for the Sacraments of Baptisme & Matrimonie, we doe not iterate them after you (though we supply the Ceremonies) because a Bishop or a Priest is not the necessarie & sole minister of them, as he is of the Sacramentes of orders & of our Lordes Body. Which is a sounder cause, then yours of reteining the forme of woordes, and for as much as the Sacramentes take not their effect of the minister, but of God. For herevppon you al∣lowe (you say) our Baptisme. If that be ynough, what née∣deth Abiuring? Yea belyke with you it is the Sacrament of our Lordes Body, if a lay man, or wooman also, reteyne the wordes, for as much as the Sacraments take their effect of God.
What is this but to deny the Priesthood, and so to runne hedlong to Apostasie. As that also, where to defend Pilkinton not to be a mocke Bishop,Pur. 343.428. Ar. 72. you bring no more but his excellent learning, and diligent preaching: Inueying against our Catholike Bishops, as vnlearned or vnpreaching, and therefore no Bishops. Whereas in déede we that knew both sydes by experience, can truly testifie that in Catholike Countries, where your Desolation could not yet remoue the Orders of seculare and religious Preachers, ther is more preaching (to say nothing of the stuffe) in so many Chur∣ches for so many, in one yeare then with you in ten, and namely to declare the effect of the Sacraments (according to the Councell of Trent,Sess. 8. c. 7. which in another place you cite) to such as receaue thē. Fiftly, argumentes néede not you say playnly, The spirituall Priesthood is common to al Christian men and women,Pur. 450.451.299. 1. Pet. 1. (as true it is) and against all other Priesthood of any Christian men, you say in the same place: There is no Priesthood to offer sacrifice propitiatorie, but onely the Priesthood of Christ accor∣ding, to the order of Melchisedech. Heb. 7. By and by after ma∣king vs as in a great absurditie, to say: Christ is not onely our high Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, For euery hedge Priest is of the same order. Why you call thē hedge Priests looke you. But this cannot be denyed, that in the Scriptures and in the Primitiue Church certaine Christian men were Priestes otherwise then Lay men and women, as the Apostles, S. Timo∣thie, S. Hierome, S. Cyprian, &c. And therefore then there was some other Priesthood besydes the spirituall Priesthood which is common to all. And therefore againe you haue taken away the Priesthood, by your owne confession. Sixtly and lastly if to salue this deadly sore, you will inuent some third kind of Priesthood: I say that the primitiue or fathers Priesthood was according to the order of Melchisedech, & to offer a sacrifice in bread & wine,The sacrifice of the Masse. as Melchisedech and Christ did. And therfore you be against ye Priesthood, because you be against this Priesthood, arguing & rayling at it al that you can. But we Chri∣stians to whom this Priesthood is playnly descended from the A∣postles and Fathers, none of you all being able to shew any later origine of it, regard not your arguments, they be but obiections. And yet to defend the truth more fully, for our Fathers and not
onely for our selues, we solue them euery one. But first, that the Reader may see whose aduersarie you be herein, he shall heare S. Augustine. The Manichée had falsified S. Paule, making him to say, qui sacrificant,Au. cō. Ad uer. leg. & prophet. li. 1. c. 19.20. 1. Cor. 10. daemonijs sacrifi∣cant, They which sacrifice, do sacrifice to diuels: quasi omnes qui sacrificant, non sacrificent nisi daemonibus, as if al that sacrifice, do not sacrifice but to deuils. He therfore sheweth the Apostle not to say, qui sacrificant, they which sacrifice, but quae sacrificant, the things that they sacrifice, speaking of the Idolatrers. They do sa∣crifice to the diuels, and you therefore are communicantes with the diuels, if you eate of those sacrifices: euen as Israel secundum carnem, the Iudaicall people, eating of their sacrifices, was ther∣by partaker of the Altar in their Temple. Deinde secutus adiun∣xit, ad quod sacrificium iam debeant pertinere, Then he follow∣eth and addeth, to what sacrifice the Corinthians now must per∣taine, being Christians and Israel secundum spiritum, saying: The Chalice of blessing which we doe blesse, is it not the Com∣munication of the bloud of Christ? The bread which we breake, is it not the participation of the body of our Lorde? vt intellige∣rent ita se iam socios esse Corporis Christi, quemadmodum illi socij sunt altaris. That they might vnderstand, themselues now to be Communicātes of the body of Christ, so, as the Iewes are Com∣municantes of their Altar. And then a few lines after: The Chur∣che, from the Apostles time, by most certaine Successions of By∣shops, to our time and hereafter doth continue, et immolat Deo in corpore Christi sacrificium laudis, and doth sacrifice to God in Christes Body, a sacrifice of praise.Psal. 49. For this Church is Israel after the spirit, from whom is distinguished that Israel after the fleshe, who serued in the shadowes of sacrifices, by which was signified the singular Sacrifice which now Israel secundum spiritum doth offer. Iste immolat Deo sacrificium laudis, &c.Psal. 109. This Israel doth sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise, not after the order of Aaron but after the order of Melchisedech. Nouerunt qui legunt, &c.Gene. 14. The Readers know, what Melchisedech did bring forth when he did blesse Abraham. And now they be partakers thereof, they see such a sacrifice now to be offered to God ouer all the worlde.Mala. 1. Et quod Deum non paenitebit, &c. And where the Psalme sayeth, God will not repent him, it is a signification, that he will not
chaunge this Priesthood, for he changed the Priesthood after the order of Aaron. And not onely S. Augustine, but the whole rancke of the holy Fathers doth teach the same, such a Priesthood to be and to continue in the Church, to offer suche a sacrifice in the forme of bread and wine, tearming it after the order of Mel∣chisedech,Pur. 295. in so muche that you also confesse, and say: Those of the olde Writers which compare the celebration of the Lordes Supper with Melchisedeches bread and wine, which, you say, they call sometime the Sacrifice of bread and wine, noting that as though it made against Transubstantiation, (which vayne col∣lection I haue refuted here cap. 8. pag. 148.) and also adding fur∣ther, And yet but a sacrifice of thankesgiuing. Whether but for thankesgiuing, and not also for procuring mercy, I haue here at large examined cap. 9. pag. 196. to 204. But that is nothing to the matter which we haue nowe in hande. For a Sacrifice of thankesgiuing, is, and in the olde Lawe was a Sacrifice, no lesse properly then a Sacrifice of propitiation. And the Sacri∣fice of the Crosse was both, I trow: and therefore the Sacrifice of the Altar to be the one, what doth that let but it maye be the other also? Likewise a memoriall Sacrifice of Christes passion, no lesse then a prefiguratiue Sacrifice, is a true sacrifice, though it be not called his very passion, but by a similitude. And there∣fore al that you alleage out of Augustine,Pur. 292.316.320. Chrysostome, Cyprian, Irenée, Iustine, Ambrose, although they saide all as you woulde haue them, that this is a memory of Christes passion, and not his passion but only in a mysterie, is all nothing to the purpose. Pur. 292.294.320.321.326.And therefore you haue yet a better aunswere in store: We confesse (you saye) that of the olde Writers it is commonly cal∣led a Sacrifice, but vnproperly. And howe do you shewe that? Because Ambr. ad virg. lapsā. De virg. l. 1. orat. in fr. Satyr.one of them saith of a virgine that to her death is vn∣spotted, that her Parentes might count her Hostiam viuam, a liuing Sacrifice, propitiatricem suorum videlicet delictorum, a Propitiatrix or procurer of mercy for their sinnes, by making intercession for them to God in heauen. You might as well argue, that S. Paule in saying, Christes body by death to be made a Sacrifice, Heb. 10. speaketh vnproperly, because he also saith, our bodies by mortification to be made a liuing Sacri∣fice, Rom. 12. To knowe what is properly or vnproperly called
this or that, you should sée to the natures of the things in them selues. And then séeing in Christes death, open separation of his body from his bloud, and in Consecration mysticall separation of them (because the words do worke that which they signifie) you should say, in both those Christes body to be properly a Sacrifice (as I told you likewise before cap. 6. pag. 47.) but in perpetuall virginitie, and other mortification, because there is no such sepa∣ration of our substantial partes, but onely of our affections from vs, they be called Sacrifices not properly, but onely by a meta∣phore and similitude. Well then, what obiections haue you now against this Priest∣hood and Sacrifice of the Fathers and ours? Either that it is none at all: or that it is not a Sacrifice in Christes body, as S. Augustine said? First, Out of doubt,Pur. 294.295. if the bringing foorth of bread and wine had bene anye thing parteining to the Priesthood of Melchise∣dech, the Apostle, Heb. 7. would not haue omitted to haue com∣pared it with Christ. But the Apostle comparing Melchisedech with Christe in all thinges in whiche he was comparable, neuer teacheth it as any part of his Priesthood. If it were no part of his Priesthood, what was it then? It is playne by the text that Mel∣chisedech beeing both a king and a Priest, as a king liberally en∣terteined Abraham and his armie, and as a Priest blessed him. The text in our vulgar Latine translation is this: Proferens pa∣nem & vinum, erat enim Sacerdos Dei Altissimi. In your vulgar English translation, this: He brought foorth bread & wine. For he was the Priest of the most highest God. And in ye Hebrew, the poynting declareth that also the Rabbins thēselues take it in the same sort, as also the very words do signifie, specially standing in such order. And all our Fathers do agrée.Cyp. ep. 63. S. Cyprian shall suf∣fice for all, who declareth the order of Melchisedech, De sacrificio illo venire, to come of that Sacrifice, not of euery Sacrifice, but of that Sacrifice. And more distinctly, to descende of these thrée thinges: quod Melchisedech Sacerdos Dei summi fuit, that he was (not a common Priest, but) the Priest of the highest God, as S. Iohn Baptists preeminence among al ye Prophets is signi∣fied by this word, Propheta altissimi, the prophet of the highest.Luc. 1. quod panē & vinū obtulit, (hauing said afore protulit, which two
you thinke cannot stand together) that he offered (not as other Priests, but) bread and wine. Quod Abraham benedixit, that he blessed) not euery body, but) Abraham, the father of al the faith∣full of Christ. And in déede who is so blinde not to sée the corres∣spondence in Christ, but you onely that are not Abrahams chil∣dren? We Catholikes, his children in faith, and souldiers in con∣fession of the same, do sée playnly before our eyes, our true Mel∣chisedech, as first by him selfe at his last Supper, so stil by his mi∣nisters to bring forth bread and wine, and thereof, as our High Priest to offer for vs this most acceptable Sacrifice, and as our king of kings (who with so few loaues fed many thousands) to prepare for vs this most Royal feast which we can neuer inough admire:Mat. 14. & 15. so singularly by this, blessing both God and vs, that the sacrifice and feast it selfe is named Benedictio, and Eucharistia, Blessing, and Thankesgiuing. Which S. Cyprian doth there pro∣secute very swéetely, saying: For who is more the Priest of the highest God, then our Lord Iesus Christ? who offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the same (against those Aquarij, who offered water in the Chalice, and not wine) which Melchisedeth had offered, that is, bread and wine, suum corpus & sanguinem, his owne body perdie and bloud. Also that blessing going afore about Abraham, ad nostrum populum pertinebat, belonged to our people, saith he as a Bishop & minister of the true Melchise∣dech. To The end of bringing foorth vvas to blesse, as also S. Au∣gustine said aboue.the end therefore that in Genesis the blessing about Abraham might by Melchisedech the Priest be duely celebrated, there goeth afore an Image of Christes sacrifice, an image I say, consisting in bread and wine, &c. Where is now your argumēt ab authoritate Heb. 7. negatiuè, with your out of doubt, contra∣rie to your owne Logike here cap. 8. pag. 134. For besides all this, I aske you, whether Melchisedeth were a Priest without all sacrifice at all? If you say, yea, your Diuinity is contrary to Heb. 8. For euery high Priest is ordeined to offer giftes and sacrifices.Note. Wherefore it is necessary, & hunc habere aliquid quod offerat, this (Priest) also to haue somwhat to offer. If you say, he had some sacrifice, tell vs, I pray you, how he was comparable to Christ in his Priesthood, vnlesse he were also in his Sacrifice, considering that his Priesthood consisted in his Sa∣crifice? And so you sée that he was comparable to Christ in some
thing, to wit, in his Sacrifice, (supposing also that it was not the sacrifice of bread & wine) in which the Apostle compareth them not. What a blindnes is this in you, not to sée Melchisedech in his bread and wine, so expresly mentioned, to be comparable vn∣to Christ, whereas by the Apostle also the very omitting of his father and mother and genealogie is in Genesis a shadowing of Christ? séeing also bread and wine so notably vsed in the world by the institution of Christ. Such is either your ignorance in the Scriptures, or also peruersenes against your owne knowledge. Your second argument may be, where you take on like Cai∣phas, Mat. 26. and say, it is a blasphemie,Pur. 298.299. &c. for the Fathers and vs to say that we haue the Priesthood after the order of Melchi∣sedech, confirmed vnto vs by oth, Psal. 109. For then (you saye) we must be Christ him selfe, with his eternall diuinitie and euer∣lasting natiuitie, and sitting on the right hand. Why syr, doth not the Scripture likewise say, that there is one Baptizer,Ioan. 1. Mat. 3. Hic est qui baptisat, and he such a one as vpon whom the holy Ghost cō∣meth and abideth, and to whom the Father saith, This is my na∣turall sonne? Must we then be said to blaspheme,VVhat a doctor Fulke is and take al that to our selues, if we say that we are baptizers? You are a great Doctor forsooth, so to argue. No syr, we are baptizers and priests,Aug. de ci. li. 17. c. 17. but as his ministers (we offer Sub Sacerdote Christo quod pro∣tulit Melchisedech, Vnder Christ the Priest, saith S. Augustine:) and therfore he singulerly is the one baptizer, and the one priest. So were not all the rest in the time of the olde Testament, the ministers of Aaron: but Aaron him selfe was Priest only in his owne time, and after him euery one in his time was priest aswel as he: and therefore in that law were many Priests. So that the old Testament was like to England since the Conquest, hauing successiuely many kings. But ye new Testament is like to Eng∣land during the time of one king: who being but one, yet hath many ministers, as one might say, so many ministeriall kings. Your third argument: The Apostle to the Hebrues teacheth vs, cap. 10.Pur. 289.201.45.451. that Christ offering but one sacrifice for our sinnes (& that but once, cap. 9.) hath made perfect for euer those that are sanctified: that our sinnes are taken away by that Sacrifice, and therfore there is no more sacrifice for sinnes left. Do you vnder∣stand ye words that you alleage? Do you know what he meaneth
by those that are sanctified? by their making perfect? by Sacrifice for sinne? Verely you do not, as by & by it will appeare. The scope of that Epistle is to exhorte the Hebrewes, that is, the Christian Iewes (who were sore assaulted of the other Iewes, partly with obiections, partlye with persecutions) to perseuer in the faith of Christ. He doth therfore tell them, that in the old Testamēt there was not Remission of sinnes, but continuall commemoration of them, Heb. 10. But now that Christ hath offered him selfe vpō the Crosse, Vna oblatione cōsummauit in sempiternum, by that one oblatiō he hath made perfect for euer, sanctificatos, the sanctified, Heb. 10. that is (1. Cor. 6) the baptized. So that of their former sins there is now no more remēbrance, Iere. 21· & therfore no more a∣ny offering for the same, Heb. 10. but if they dye, they go straight to heauen. So mightily and so graciously doth that one oblation work in baptisme. But what if after baptisme they sinne againe? For that S. Paule there doth not (at the least,The true mea∣ning of the E∣pistle to the Heb. directely) tell any remedie, because his purpose there was no more but to exhorte the standing to perseuerance: and therefore he doth rather terri∣fie them saying, If they fall againe, Iam non relinquitur pro pec∣catis hostia, now is not leaste Sacrifice for sinnes, that is to say, Christes death will not worke with them in another baptisme. This he telleth them: but remedie he doth tell them none. But we by his other Epistles, & by the other Scriptures, and by Tra∣dition of the Church, do tell such also against the Nouations, that the same one oblation of Christ hath prepared for them also a remedie, though not another baptisme, yet the Sacrament of Penance. We magnifie it yet moreouer, and say, that it hath also prepared many other Sacraments besydes these, to other singu∣ler effectes, and in one of these Sacramentes, a Sacrifice also, in which it worketh to sundrie purposes. By this appeareth (I say) your ignorance in things which yet you feare not to affirme, as that the Catholikes should saye, Christ hath not made them that are sanctified,Pur. 451. perfect by a Sacrifice once offered for all: for the greatest parte is lefte to the Masse. As though when one commeth to vs to be baptized, we diuided the remission of his sinnes betwéene Baptisme and the Masse. This is your blind∣nesse, to think that to be against the honor of this one Priest, and of his one Sacrifice, which is highly for it, to wit, to haue vnder
him many ministers, and many ministeries as it were cōduites, to deriue his purchase and redemption to his people. If we ascri∣bed ought to any man, or to any thing, but from that Priest, and from that Sacrifice, then you might well exclayme against vs. And we in the meane time worthily exclaime against you, for A∣postating from the ministerial Priesthood, the mysticall sacrifice, and gracious Sacraments, which he by his death purchased and left to his Spouse the Church our mother for our saluation, and she hath kept them to this day, & deinceps, and will kéepe them (as S. Augustine said) hereafter euen to the ende, at what time your vile tongue shall reape as now it soweth. Now after your Scriptures let vs heare your Doctors against this Sacrifice, to proue that there is none such, or at the least not consisting in Christes body.Pur. 316.292. That Augustine by this Sacrifice meaneth not the body of Christ, is manifest in his booke De fide ad Petrum Diac. cap. 19. Because there he calleth it Sacrificium panis & vini, the Sacrifice of bread and wine. The same writeth (being Fulgentius, and not Augustine) in the very like place (as you may sée here cap. 6. pag. 63. and calleth it Sacrificium Cor∣poris & Sanguinis Christi, The Sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ. By the firste name, for the matter: by the seconde, for the hoste. But he sayth further (you obiecte) that In isto Sacrificio gratiarum actio atque commemoratio est carnis Christi quam pro nobis obtulit, & sanguinis quem pro nobis effudit: In this sacrifice is Thankesgiuinge, and com∣memoration of the fleshe of Christ whiche he offered for vs vppon the Crosse, and of his bloud whiche hee shedde for vs. But what a commemoration? In illis Sacrificijs, quid nobis esset donandum, figuratè significabatur: In hoc autem Sacrificio, quid nobis iam donatum sit, euidenter ostenditur: In the Sacrifices of the olde Testament, was figuratiuely signi∣fied what should be giuen vs. But in this Sacrifice is (not fi∣guratiuely signified, but) euidently shewed, what is alreadye giuen vs. In them praenunciabatur occidendus, He was pre∣nounced to be killed for vs: in this annunciatur occisus, he is announced already killed. In such maner as in Rome the mar∣tyrdoms of S. Peter & Paule are, vpon their feast cōmemorated,
euidently shewed, and announced by their very bodies and heads then sene and visited. For which cause the Relikes of Martyrs be often in Aug. de ci. li. 22. ca. 8.antiquitie called The memories of the Martyrs. And yet no Martyrs Relikes or body doth so expresse the very species of his martyrdome, as the mysticall separation of Christes body and bloud in this diuine Sacrament doth expresse the species of his passion. Ar. 55.But you haue one wonderfull place of S. Augustines. For if it were well wayed, it will (you say) interprete and answere all pla∣ces of the auncient Doctors, where mention is made of sacrificing the body of Christ at the time of the Communion. In that place go first the words which I put here in the 22. Dem. pag. that he calleth it the one singular sacrifice of the Christians. Then fol∣low afterwards the words that you meane: Ipsum vero sacri∣ficium corpus est Christi, And that same (one singular) Sacrifice is the body of Christ, quod non offertur ipsis, quia hoc sunt & ip∣si: Which (body) is not offered to the Martyrs, for this be they also. This, to wit, the body of Christ. Hereof you gather, that the body of Christ, which he saith was the Sacrifice that was offe∣red, was not the naturall body of Christ, but his mysticall body: because he saith, the Martyrs and it were all one. He saith not so, not that they are all one or the same: but that they are of the my∣sticall body of Christ, which whole mystical body is offered there to God in the offering of his naturall body, (for there are speciall memories of euery sort, of the Saintes in heauen, of the Soules in Purgatory, of the Catholiks in earth. The bread & wine also, in which his said naturall body and bloud are consecrated, are such things, Au tract. 26. in Ioan. Quae in vnum rediguntur ex multis, as of many cornes and grapes are brought into one loafe and cup: Water also, Cyp. epi. 63. to signifie vs againe, béeing mingled with the wine: Herevpon he saith in the same Aug. ciu. li. 10. c. 6.20 worke, that in the Sacrament of the Altar it is shewed to the Church, that in the oblation which she doth offer, her selfe is offered. And that aswell she by him, as he by her is vsually offered.) And therefore it can not be thought that this naturall body there offered, is offered to the Martyrs (or to the Church) as the Paganes and Manichées did charge the Christian Catholikes, vpon their offering of that naturall body ouer the shrines of Martyrs. You might therefore haue gathered
as well, that the Body which he offered vpon the Crosse, was not his naturall body, but his mysticall body the Church, because in offering it there for his Church, he offered his Church to God with it. Reade De Ciu. li. 10. ca. 6. and there you shall sée that he sheweth, how the workes of mercie are a sacrifice, item a person consecrated to God. Item, our body, Item our soule, Item tota ipsa redempta Ciuitas, hoc est, congregatio societas{que} sanctorum, the whole redeemed Citie it selfe, that is, the congregation and so∣cietie of the holy, which he calleth vniuersale sacrificium, An vni∣uersall Sacrifice. And that after all these metaphorical Sacrifices, he distinguisheth from them all, not onely the Sacrifice of the Crosse, but also the Sacrifice of the Altar, which you confounde with that vniuersall Sacrifice, not considering that he so often calleth it the one and the singuler Sacrifice of the Christians. Besides these,Pur. 361.293. you haue two places out of Tertullian and I∣reneus. The former sheweth (you say) what was the chiefest Sa∣crifice that they did offer, to wit, Prayer. The other likewise she∣weth, that by the name of the Sacrifice of the Church, he meaneth not the Sacrifice of the Masse (which they call propitiatorie for the sinnes of the quicke and the dead) but the Sacrifice of thankes∣geuing and prayers.Tertul. in Apol. Tertullian telleth there the Gentiles in de∣fence of the Christians, first, what thinges they prayed for in the Canon of the Masse, to wit, for their Romane Empire among other thinges (the place goeth here before cap. 9. pag. 197.) Then, why not to their Goddes: Haec ab alio orare nō possum quā, &c. These thinges I cannot praye for, of any other, but of whom I knowe that I shall obteyne them, quoniam et ipse est qui solus praestat &c. For both he it is who onely doth geue them, and I am he to whom is due to obtayne, being his seruant, which wor∣ship him onely. Then also, why not with their blood Sacrifices of fat calues &c. qui ei offero opimam et maiorem hostiam, quam ipse mandauit, orationem de carne pudica, de anima innocente, de spiritu sancto profatam, which offer to him a fat and greater host, that which he himselfe commaunded, to wit, prayer pro∣nounced out of a chast body, out of an innocent soule, out of an holy spirite. Where in the name of that Prayer he comprehen∣deth all that is saide and done in the Masse of the faithfull, which to this day also the Priest therefore beginneth, saying vnto vs
after the Gospell, Dominus vobiscum: Oremus, Let vs pray, and immediatly goeth to the bread and wine,Hier. epist. ad Euagriū. &c. Because this pure Sacrifice is made & celebrated with Prayer (ad Presbyterorum preces Christi corpus sanguisq́ue conficitur, Christes body and bloud is made by the Priestes prayers, saith S. Hierome,) and be∣cause euen the old house of those Leuiticall bloud Sacrifices also was called,Mat. 21. Isa. 56. Domus orationis, The house of prayer. And as Tertullian setteth out agaynst the impure Paganes, the puritie of the Church in her Sacrifice, so doth S. Irenée set out the same against the Iewes and Heretikes,Iren. li. 4. cap. 34. Mala. 1. to shewe, that the pure Sacrifice in Malachie is offered by her alone, quoniam cum simplicitate Ecclesia offert, Because the Church offreth with simplicitie of faith, hope, and charitie, whereas the Iewes hands are now full of bloud, and all the Synagogues of those olde He∣retikes helde the bread and wine to be of an yll creation. For this cause he telleth them, that the conscience of him that doth offer beeing pure, doth sanctifie the Sacrifice, and causeth God to accept it as comming from a friend. And that the Sacrifices do not sanctifie a man, Non enim indiget Sacrificio Deus, for God doth not neede a Sacrifice, so as néede should make him glad of it, as it maketh a begger glad, whether the giuer be a friend or a foe. And do not we say the same? Can any Heretike pleade as vpon our verdite, that he pleaseth God in offering to him bread or wine, yea or also the body it selfe and bloud of Christ, so as all Priestes doe in their Caluinicall Communion, no lesse then we doe in the Masse? And yet the Sacrifice of it selfe is suche, as pleaseth God, and sanctifieth the offerer, but for his owne indisposition. Like as Baptisme of it selfe would cleanse the conscience,Heb. 9.10. though oftentimes it doth not for fault in the receiuers of it. For it is not the worthines of men, but the worthines of Christ, whereof the owne and proper vertue of his Sacramentes, and of his Sacrifice both of the Altar and of the Crosse, dependeth. Motiue 35.25. Monkes. My 25. Demaund noteth, that these Heretikes haue cutte off from the Church, her best and perfectest member, to wit, Monkes and Nunnes, who were so common in the Primitiue Churche,
that to bring all to the fashion of the Primitiue Church, as they pretende, they shoulde haue made all to be Monkes, rather then none to be Monkes. And Fulke doth nothing here, but helpe our side, in that he Ar. 29.85. Pur. 87.297.250. Hic cap. 9. often reiecteth Monkes, Heremites, Ana∣chorites, Canons, Fryers, Nunnes, graunting them no place in the Churche of Christe, partely by an argument ab authoritate Ephes. 4. negatiuè, whiche I aunswered here in the 24. De∣maunde, treating of Bishoppes, Priestes, and Deacons, whom he likewise reiected thereby: partly by a saying of S. Chrysostomes, which I returned cleane agaynst him, cap. 9. pag. 193. And yet confesseth, the first Colledges of Monkes in solitarie places to haue béene of the Churche of God,Ar. 52. and namely them at Ban∣gor in Wales. Saying further, that they were as occasion serued, taken to serue in the Church, as appeareth by Chrysostome in his booke De Sacerdotio, of Basilius, who was a Monke with him. Among the infinite vtilities that come to the Church by the Religious, that is one to this day, that the Church hath out of them most excellent Pastors, as of late that worthy Pope Pius quintus, who was a Dominicane, besides infinite moe at all times, as then S. Basill and S. Chrysostome. Of this vtilitie, and of all the rest your Heresie hath spoyled the Church of God, in suppressing the Monasteries. As for that you say, they were nothing els but Colledges of Studentes, any that is skilfull in an∣tiquitie can tell, that the number rather were no students at all, and that their profession was then euen as it is now. Witnesse S. Augustine, telling of an euil Monke in his owne Monasterie,Au. de bo∣no perseue. ca. 25. and saying: Vsque adeo profecit in malum, vt deserta Monasterij societate, fieret 2. Pet. 2. canis reuersus ad suum vomitum. He did so much procede in euill, that forsaking the felowship of our Monasterie, he became a dogge that turneth backe to his vomite. Of others also in another place, that enter into Religion, and finding there some euill brethren, after their Vow go foorth againe through im∣pacience. Of such a one he saith:Aug. in Ps. 99. Paucorum hominum molestia irritatos dū non perseuerauit implere quod vouit, fit desertor tam sancti propositi, & reus voti non redditi. Being incensed with the vexation of a few persons, whilest he doth not continue to fulfill that he vowed, he becommeth a forsaker of so holy a profession, and guyltie of not performing his vow. In Colleges of students
they are not Votaries, I trow, nor Apostataes when they geue ouer. And therefore it is more wisdome for you to sticke to your old set song,Pur. 297. that they haue no testimonie out of the word of God eyther of their names, or of the signification of their names: as your friends the Donatistes said long ago to our Catholike Fa∣thers:Aug. in Ps. 132. Con. Petil. li. 3. ca. 40. Hier. cōtra Vigil. Chrys. adu. vitup. vitae Monasticae Ostendite vbi scriptū sit nomen Monachorum, Shew vs in what place of the Scripture is the name of Monks. But it is wel, that the Donatistes, Vigilantius, and such like companiōs were the dispraysers of Monkes and their professiō: And S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostome, S. Paulinus, with such like, were their defenders, yea and them selues Monkes also. Of whom al∣so you may learne, in what Scriptures are found both their po∣uertie, continencie, obedience, and also the vowing of the same. So wisely you haue made your match. Motiue 14.26. Fathers. The 26. Demaund noteth, that none but Heretikes refuse to be tried by the Fathers, in such maner as I declared ca. 6. pa. 58. to wit, by their consent. And that Fulke refuseth to be so tryed (though he confesse them to haue bene of the true Church, cap. 2. pag. 4.) I haue shewed out of his owne words, cap. 7. pag. 89. to 92. For the which he hath two pretences: the one, in charging the Fathers with sundry errors, partly denied, partly confessed of vs to be errors. Which both sortes I haue answered cap. 6. pag. 39. to 43. The other in holding, that Onely Scripture is of authoritie: for which poynt notwithstanding, I haue shewed that he hath neither Scripture to auouch it, cap. 8. pag. 109. to 116 nor Father. cap. 9. pag. 171. to 183. We on the other side, as the Catholikes alwayes, are content to stand to ye iudgement of the Fathers: which is for vs so plain∣ly, that Fulke doth confesse it in many poynts, here cap. 3. and is fayne to refuse it, as I now said. And for the Protestantes in no poynt, no not so muche as the iudgement of any one Father at all, as I haue shewed cap. 9. in answering all that he alleageth out of them against vs. Or if any fewe testimonies be missing there, it is because in some other Chapters they are answered more conueniently.
27 Councels.Motiue 13. The next Demaund is of Councels confirmed by the Sée A∣postolike, which (as I haue said here cap. 6. pa. 60.) can not erre. And therefore none but Heretikes do obstinately resiste suche Councels. But Fulke here, to saue him self, chargeth such Coun∣cels with errors, those also which him selfe confesseth to haue bin of the true Church, as the third of Carthage (for whiche I haue answered cap. 6. pag. 62.) and not onely those that are without his compasse of the first 600. yeres, though for them also I haue answered in the same chapter pag. 63. to 78. Where I shewed, that the Councell of Basill was not so confirmed as he preten∣deth: and therefore it might erre well ynough in deposing Euge∣nius quartus,Ar. 91. howbeit also that is not such an error as he should bring vs, to wit, an error of doctrine. For who doubteth, but also the Pope himselfe may erre in deposing a bishop, or a king? Who doubteth also but a General Councel may vse that prayer when it endeth: Precamur vt ignorantiae parcas, & errori indulgeas:Ar. 90. We pray thee to spare our ignorance, and to pardon our error, fea∣ring in their conscience, least either ignorance hath drawen them into error, or perhaps rashnes of will hath driuen them to de∣cline from iustice? As both euery general Councell, and the vni∣uersall Church vseth this prayer, Forgiue vs our trespasses. Of which also you would no lesse inferre that the vniuersall Church may erre. But you haue the answere cap. 8. pag. 117. to wit, that they both do so pray, by reason of certaine ignorances and frayl∣ties of their members, not for any false decrées or beléeuings of their whole bodies.Ar. 89. Au. de bap. cōt. Donat. li. 2. ca. 3. And that which S. Augustine saith euen also of plenarie Councels which are made of the whole Christian world, we say the very same, Saepe priora posterioribus emenda∣ri, That the former oftentimes be amended by the later, yea and by the Sée Apostolike alone, when they come to the Pope to be confirmed. But what is this to proue that Councels already confirmed did erre in doctrine? Euen in one Councell sometime the later Session doth amend the former, Cum aliquo experi∣mento rerum aperitur quod clausum erat, & cognoscitur quod latebat, When by some experiēce is opened that which was shut, or is knowen that which was vnknowen. This is done in the Catholike Church with holy humilitie, with Catholike peace,
with Christian charitie. And much more do Prouincial Coun∣celles yeeld to the general, sine vllis ambagibus, without any more adoe: and much more againe particulare Doctors. And yet you with your swelling of sacrilegious pride, with your stubbernes of arrogant Ventositie, with your contentiousnes of peuish enuy, will not yeeld neyther to Prouinciall, nor to general Councel, neyther after their confirmation and receauing, so much more desperat then those Donatistes of whom he speaketh, as they had one Doctor, to wit, S. Cyprian, plainly of their opinion, and you haue nere a one: and yet will neither yéeld to all the Councels to∣gether, but against them all come in with your ambages, and aske, But where is their Scripture? as here cap. 7. pag. 89. thin∣king that you haue a witty deuise for this your tergiuersation, when you say:Pur. 430. The Councelles that are receiued, are therefore re∣ceiued because they decreed truely: and not the truth receiued be∣cause it was decreed in Councels. Else why is the determination of the Nicene Councell which is but one, beleeued, against tenne Councels holden by the Arrianes, but that the Nicene decreed ac∣cording to the worde of God, & all the rest against it? You might aswell say: The Scriptures that are receiued, are therefore re∣ceiued because they are written truely, and not the truth recei∣ued because it is written in the Scriptures. Els why is the Gos∣pel according to Mathew beléeued, and not the Gospel according to the twelue, but that the former is the word of God, and the o∣ther is not? But we say, that the Scriptures being once receiued into the Canon, and the Councels being once receiued by the Sée Apostolike, what soeuer they say must be beléeued to be truth, and that then none but Heretikes do make exceptions against them. And that you therfore be an Heretike, who not onely against all Councels so receiued for these 900. yeres, but also against the very Nicene it selfe, which you your selfe receiue, do take your exception of Onely Scripture, and that as it were by authoritie of S. Augustine, cap. 9. pag. 179. and 173.180. Motiue 12.28. See Apostolike. Now for the Sée Apostolike it selfe (which as it was the con∣firmer, so was it both the gatherer with the Emperours helpe,
and also the President by the Patriarches and other Bishops, and sometimes Priestes also béeing her Vicares, of all ap∣proued Generall Councells: what soeuer Ar. 97. you or any other Heretike affirme to the contrarie without any testimonie:) I saye in my 28. Demaunde, that none euer but Heretikes and Schismatikes did obstinately refuse eyther the fayth or the com∣munion of that Sée. Beholde two notable examples, one vn∣der Pope Victor about the question of Easter, the other vnder Pope Stephanus about the question of Heretikes Baptisme. We shall catche this Ratte in them through his owne rumb∣ling. Victor anno 200.Ar. 27.36. Pur. 373. (saith he) was the first that went about to vsurpe authoritie ouer other Churches. He passed the bondes of his authoritie, in excommunicating of all the Churches of Asia. Then manye Bishoppes withstoode him, specially Ire∣neus of Lyons, and Polycrates of Ephesus, as Eus. li. 5. c. 23.24.25. witnesseth Eusebius. But who sayth, that he eyther vsurped authoritie, or passed the bondes of his authoritie? No doubte Polycrates and his fellowes of Asia would so haue sayd if they had béene of your opinion about the Bishop of Rome, or if that Bishoppes authoritie ouer all▪ had not béene in those Primitiue dayes a playne matter. The Storie was thus: The Churches of Asia minor had receyued of S. Iohn Euangelist to kéepe oure Lords Pasch or Easter day not alwayes vpon Sonday, but with the Iewes, vpon the 14. of the Moone. In which custome the Bi∣shops of Rome (who had receiued of S. Peter and Paule the other maner) did tolerate them, so long as it tended to the ho∣nour of burying the Law, and not to the necessitie of obseruing the Lawe. But when they sawe that a Niceph. li. 4. ca. 36. necessitie was put therein, in so much that the other maner was condemned by the Iudaizing Heretike Tertul. d Praes. Eus. li. 5. ca. 14 Blastus, then loe they thought good to tolerate them no longer, but S. Victor, after that his Niceph. li. 4. ca. 36. pre∣decessours Pius, Anicetus, Eleutherius, had sent out decrées a∣gainst that maner, and Eus. li. 5. ca. 22. all Bishops had ratified Decretum Ec∣clesiasticum, the Ecclesiasticall Decree, seing that they of Asia nei∣ther so obeied to walke vnto the truth of the Gospell, vsing seue∣ritie when it was high tyme, commaunded them eyther to obey without any more adoe, or to be depriued of the Churches com∣munion. Which censure of his did séeme to sharpe to S. Irenée
and other Bishops of his owne obseruance. As now also if he would excommunicate them which receaue not the Counsel of Trent, it would séeme likewise to many, who notwithstanding confesse that he hath authoritie ouer all. But what was the end of the matter? At length folowed the first Nicene Councel, and confirmed the same that the Popes had commaunded: in their Epistle to them of Alexandria, writing this of the Asianes also: You shall vnderstand,Apud Theod. li. 1. ca. 9. that the controuersie of Easter is wisely pacified: in so much that all our Bretheren, that inhabite the East, will now hereafter with one accord in keping the same, followe the Romanes, vs, and all you. So they promised the Councel. And who so refused yet after that to do it, were counted obstinate He∣retikes,Aug. Haer. 29. Soc. li. 6. ca. 10.20. Ar. 37. both in the Gréeke and Latine Church, named testarescai∣decaticai, that is quartadecimane: some such being yet in Asia in S. Chrysostomes tyme, were by him, as Bishop of Constantinople, turned out of their Churches, no lesse then the Nouatianes. Lykewise (saith Fulke, towching the other case) when Pope Stephanus threatned excōmunication to Helenus and Firmilia∣nus, and almost all the Churches of Asia, because they thought that such as were baptized by Heretikes should be baptised a∣gaine:Diony. Al. ep. ad Xy∣stum Papā. Succes. Ste. apud Eus. li. 7. ca. 2.3 4.5. he was misliked by Dionisius of Alexandria and diuers o∣ther godly Bishops. Cyprian also reproueth him very sharpely for the same opinion, accusing him of presumption and contu∣macie, Cypr. ep. 74. Epist. ad Pompeium. And in his Epistle to Cyp. epi. 71. Quintus, he saith playnly, that Peter him selfe was not so arrogant, nor so presumptuous, that he would say, he held the Primacie, and that other men should obey him as his inferiours. You would make the Reader beléeue, that he there saith Peter had not the Prima∣cie, wheras he saith expresly in the very same Periode, Petrus quem primum Dominus elegit, & super quem edificauit Eccle∣am suam, Peter whom our Lord chose the first, and vpon whom he buylded his Church. Neither he, nor Dionysius, nor Firmi∣lianus denieth the Primacie of Peter, or of Stephanus his suc∣cessor and a most glorious Martyr. They thought that they had reason and Scripture on their side, and the Pope nothing but authoritie and custome. And therevpon when he had written and commaunded to the contrarie, contra scripsisset at{que} praecepisset, they made much a doe for a while, and in anger (as S. Augustine
writeth, poured out words against him. But in the end,Au. de bap. con. Dona. li. 5. ca. 23 25. when they must néedes eyther yéelde or be Schismatikes, because he would tolerate them no longer, they did like Catholike men, they conformed their new practise (for all their Councels both in Phrigia and in Africa) to the old custome that the Pope obser∣ued, as I noted here in the 5. Dem. pag. 272. And at the last the Nicene Councel also gaue voyce with the Pope, and condemned the Donatists (who pretended to folowe S. Cyprian) of Heresie for their obstinacie. Therfore these are two notable examples of vnitie with S. Peters chayre, as a thing most necessarie. And generally al other Catholike writers that you do (here cap. 9. pag. 218.) or can al∣leage as it were against that Sée, did sticke vnseparably to that Sée.Aug. epist. 166. Which S. Augustine for that cause calleth Cathedram vni∣tatis, The Chayre of vnitie, in which he saith God hath placed Doctrinam veritatis, the doctrine of veritie. But you for al this haue found a place in S. Hierom to breake this bond. For you say vpon it: Lo Syr, here is Pur. 374. Hier. Euag. Hovv agreeth this vvith him selfe here, cap. i. and ij. a Churche, and Christianitie, and a rule of trueth, without the Bishop of Rome, without the Church of Rome, yea and contrary to the Church of Rome. Notably gathered. For he saith the cleane contrarie. Nec altera Romanae vrbis Ecclesia, altera totius orbis existimanda est. We muste not thinke that there is one Church of the Citie of Rome, another of all the world. But both is one. And why? be∣cause the Galles, and the Brytons, and Affrica, and Persia, and the Orient, and India, and all the Barbarous Nations, Vnum Christū adorant, vnam obseruant regulam veritatis, Do worship the one Christ, do obserue the one rule of trueth, and so be not diuided from the one Church by any Schisme, nor by any Heresie. So perfect was the vnitie of all Catholikes at that time, which a∣gréeth handsomly with your imaginations of local yea & vniuer∣sall corruptions, here cap. 3. Now in this vnitie of trueth, yet was there diuersitie of vsages. In Rome a Priest was ordeined at the Deacons witnesse: which is now obserued euery where. Therupon, and specially for the great estimation of the Archdea∣cons, some Deacons thought them selues higher in order then Priests. S. Hierom saith therfore: Quid mihi profers vrbis con∣suetudinem? &c. What bring you me the custome of the Citie? If
authoritie be sought, the world is greater then the Citie. And who doubteth, but the vsages of the whole Church in vnitie, be of gre∣ter authoritie then the priuate custome of Rome alone? He tel∣leth them also that a Bishop of the meanest Citie, is eiusdem Sa∣cerdotij, of the same order as the Bishop of Rome, of Constanti∣nople, of Alexandria. And consequently, that a Priest, who by his order may do all things that be of order, sauing onely giuing of orders, is of another maner of order then a Deacon. All this is most true, and much for vs, nothing for you. You haue also a few textes of Scripture against this head of the Churches vnitie. But by the argument ab authoritate nega∣tiue, which your owne Logike condemned here cap. 8. pag. 134. I would desire none other place in al the Scripture,Ar. 29. &c. but Eph. 4 of Apostles, Euangelistes, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers. And especially seing the Apostle both there and 1. Cor. 12. by these of∣fices proueth the vnitie of mind, he acknowledgeth no Pope as one supreme head in earth, which might be very profitable (as the Papists say) to mainteine this vnitie. Which he would in no wise haue omitted,Pur. 450. &c. Againe: We beleue that the Catholike Church hath no chiefe gouernour vpon earth but Christ, vnto whom all power is giuen in heauen and earth, Mat. 28. Supreme head and chiefe gouernour be termes of your owne schole. Belike therfore you would, as a Puritane, pull down also your owne setting vp, specially Suppose also one Christian king or Empe∣rour to raigne sometime as far as the Church reacheth.considering that Kings or Quéenes be no more then Popes named among S. Paules officers. And truely you might also as an Anabaptist pull downe all Gouernours no lesse then the chiefe, by that reason of Christes power ouer all. You might also denie Euangelistes and Pastors (which are named Ephe. 4.) because they are omitted 1. Cor. 12. Likewise Powers, Healers, Helpers, Gouernments, Tongues, Interpreters, (which are named 1. Cor. 12. with Apostles, Prophets and Teathers) because they are omitted Ephes. 4. I must often say, you vnderstande not the Scripture, you do so often vtter your ignorance. Our Sauiour did say after his Resurrection to his Apostles, All power is giuen to me in heauen and earth, to signifie that he might with good au∣thoritie cōmit what power to thē he would, inferring thervpon, Ite ergo, Go ye therefore, and teach and baptize Eche of the tvvelue had Apostolike po∣vver ouer all.all Nations. And to one of them singularly, Feede my Lambes, and my sheepe.
Wherefore S. Paule also in those two places doth say, that all diuersitie of giftes and offices is, Secundum mensuram donatio∣nis Christi, according to the measure that it pleased Christ to giue to euery one, and the holy Ghost to diuide to euery one as him pleaseth. Therefore no cause why the lesser should enuy the grea∣ter, or the greater despise the lesser Schismatically, but all in v∣nitie content them selues with Christes distribution, specially béeing so made by him for the necessitie and good of the whole. He had therefore in suche places to expresse the diuersitie of greater and lesser: but not necessarily of the greatest and least. And yet to stoppe such Hereticall mouthes, he saith 1. Cor. 12. expresly, Non potest caput dicere pedibus, The head (vnder Christ) can not say to the feete, you are not necessarie vnto me. Also Ephe. 4. in the name of Apostles, he includeth the Successours of the Apostle S. Peter, whose Sée for that cause is called The Apostolike See in singuler maner, and their Decrees and Actes estéemed of A∣postolike authoritie, in all antiquitie, I say of S. Peters autho∣ritie, to whose Chayre cōparing it with the Chayre of Carthage, S. Augustine doth ascribe Apostolatus principatum, The princi∣palitie of Apostleship, Apostolicae Cathedrae principatum,Au. de bap. con. Dona. li. 2. ca. 1. Epist. 162. The principalitie of the Chayre Apostolike, which (saith he) hath al∣wayes florished in the Romane Church. All this considered, no reasonable man can doubt, but this present plague and thraldome of the Gréekes is fallen vpon them (and the like or worse to fall vpon the like) for their departing from the Church of Rome, as it was foretolde them full often: though you counte it false and vnreasonable so to say. And why?Pur. 396. because the Affricanes were plagued and subuerted for other sinnes. So substantiall are your reasons. As if you would say: Ten Tribes were not subuerted for their Schisme, because the two Tribes were subuerted for other sinnes. 29. Traditions.Motiue 9. The 29. Demaund mentioneth, that the Apostles left to the Church not Onely Scripture (as Fulke would proue by the Scriptures and Fathers here cap. 8. pag. 100. to 110. and cap. 9. pag. 171. to 183. which all I haue aunswered,) but also vnwrit∣ten Traditions, wherof no one is against vs, and many of them
so directly against the Protestants, that although he cōfesse them, (as, for exāple, the memorie of the dead in the Canon of ye Masse) to haue the most approued Fathers testimonie to be Traditions Apostolike, here cap. 3. pag. 15. to 20. yet he is fayne to denie that eyther they or any Traditions at al be of the Apostle, ca. 7. pa. 80. to 89. So as neuer did the Catholikes (I say in this Demaund) but onely Heretikes. Pur. 383.409.412.But against this I find that he alleageth a saying of S. Irene, as though by his iudgement we rather be (Valentinian) Here∣tikes, who (with the Fathers, here cap. 3. & 7. pag. 19. & 84. be∣sides Scripture do holde with Tradition of vnwritten verities. And Lord, how he croweth against D. Allen, for alleaging the same saying against the Protestantes, vpon their denying of the Machabées: not considering, that by S. Irenée there they no more be Heretikes, who will haue Tradition, then they who wil haue Scripture.Iren. li. 3. ca. 2.3. S. Irenée him selfe, as all Catholikes, will haue both. But those old Heretikes would in effect (saith he) haue neither: Neque Scripturis iam neque Traditioni consentire, &c. They would yeeld neither to the Scriptures nor to Tradition. For whē they be confuted out of the Scriptures, they turne to accuse the Scriptures thē selues, as though they be corrupted, nor be not Ca∣nonicall, and that they be ambiguous, and that out of them can not be found the (sincere) trueth by such as know not the Tradi∣tion: because that was not deliuered by writings (but a certayne mingle mangle: and the sincere truth) by word of mouth. Well then, saith the Catholike, let vs hardly try by Tradition. What do they then? they say, that the Apostles either them selues knew not all things, or that they taught their Successors of one sort in open place, and these mens Patriarches in secret of another sort. Cum autem ad eam iterum Traditionem, &c. And when againe to that Tradition which is from the Apostles, which is conserued in the Churches, by Successions of the Priestes, we prouoke those (Heretikes) who are aduersaries to Tradition (as the former were to Scripture:) they will say, that they beeing wyser then not onely the Priestes, but also the Apostles, haue found the sin∣cere truth. Aduersus tales certamen nobis est, O dilectissime, A∣gainst suche we haue to fight, O my dearest, who as slipery as snakes seeke on euery side to flye. What way shall we then take
with them? Traditionem Apostolorum in toto mundo manife∣statam, in Ecclesia adest perspicere omnibus qui vera velint audi∣re He that list to heare lyes, may séeke to these Heretikes and the secrete Tradition which they pretend. But all that will heare the truth, may in the Church see the Apostles Tradition whiche was published in the whole world. Et habemus annumerare, And we can reherse them, who were of the Apostles ordeined Bishops in the Churches, and their Successors euen vnto vs. Who taught nor knew no such thing as these men dote vpon. For if the Apo∣stles had knowen straunge mysteries, which they taught the per∣fect Seorsim & latenter ab reliquis, apart from the rest, and pri∣uilie: no doubt they would haue committed them specially to those, to whom they committed also the Churches. And then, be∣cause it is to long (he saith) to rehearse al Successions, he recko∣neth the Successors of S. Peter and Paule in the greatest and aun∣cientest, and knowen to all men, in the Romaine Church, Whose Tradition which she hath from the Apostles, comming euen vn∣to vs by Successions of Bishops, we reporting, confundimus om∣nes eos, do confound all Heretikes and Schismatikes. Et est plenissima haec ostensio, And this is a most full demonstration, that it is al one quickening faith, which from the Apostles is kept in the Church till now, and deliuered in trueth. Loe now Syr, who hath such yll grace to alleage the Doctors against him selfe? For who denieth (here cap. 9. pag. 165.) the authoritie of suche Scriptures as are Canonized by the Church which himselfe con∣fesseth to be the true Church? Who also refuseth the Tradition and saith (I say not, by those Heretikes pretended, but euen) of the Apostolike Churches, euen of the Romaine Church, and not now onely, but then also when your selfe do graunt that it was the true Church? As for vs, we reiect neither ye Churches Scrip∣tures, nor the Churches Tradition, but answere all that you de∣tort to maynteine your Heresies, and restore it to the right mea∣ning. 30 Their owne Doctors.Motiue 16. That the Apostles, and all men and things that be of them, are against our Protestantes, and in no poynt with them a∣gainst vs, it is many wayes shewed by the aforesaid. Besides all these, I note in the next Demaund, also their owne masters and
felowes, namely Luther and Caluine, to haue condemned them: Such leaders hath our miserable Countrey chosen to followe, forsaking the sure guydance of Gods Church, in which our Fore∣fathers together with the Catholikes of all other Countries so many ages before prospered in earth, and atchiued to heauen. 31.32.33. Vniuersalitie, Antiquitie, and Consent. In thrée Demaundes following I do shewe that the rules of Vniuersalitie, Antiquitie, and Consent, taught by Vincentius Lirinensis and the other Fathers, doe make for vs, and against the Protestantes. Which is so playne, that Fulke is faine to re∣fuse those rules, abusing a saying of S. Augustines, as it were for Onely Scripture against them (here cap. 7. pag. 80. and cap. 9. pag. 180.) Motiue 10.11.28. Arti. 15.26.34. Authoritie The Protestantes finding the Primitiue Church (whiche they dare not denie, but it was the true Church, here cap. 2.) to be in many poyntes so playnly against them, that they must con∣fesse it them selues, (as here cap. 3.) do hold, that the true Church may erre vniuersally, and also did erre, cap. 3.4. And therefore make their exception against it also, cap. 7. pa. 89. And that with pretence of Scripture to warrant their so doing, cap. 8. pag. 117. vnto which I haue fully answered. Herevpon in my 34. Dem. I affirme, that the vniuersall Churches authoritie was alwayes counted so irrefragable, that she would be and was beléeued vp∣pon her onely word in all matters, before she yéelded or we could conceiue the reasons of her doctrine. And that S. Augustine wrote a booke vpon this against the Manichées, which he called De vtilitate credendi, Of the vtilitie of beléeuing first, before you vnderstand.Aug. retra. li. 1. ca. 14. Because his friend Honoratus béeing a Manichée, did irride in the discipline of the Catholike faith, quod iuberentur homines credere, that men were commaunded to beleue, and not taught by certentie of the groundes (certissima ratione) what was true. Which to our Doctor Fulke is so strange, that of D. Allen, saying he taketh it to be the naturall order of a Christian schole,Pur. 4.5. he requireth to shew where he learned that methode, & affirmeth S. Paule Rom. 10. to teach a cōtrary order, and calleth it a blind
faith which must be thrust vpon mens consciences, to be accepted before they see what ground it hath. Whereas S. Paule doth not say, that men must vnderstand the groundes of euery matter be∣fore they beléeue (for that were contrary to his owne doing, who did not alwayes to all at the first speake wisedome, 1. Cor. 2. but that they must heare first ye Churches preaching, to know which be the articles, before they can beléeue them. And that is it which we say, that hearing what the Church teacheth, they may be bold to beleue it forthwith, although they heare not or can not attaine to the groundes: euen as they which heard Christ him selfe, and his Apostles after him, might boldly beléeue them. As he also did worke those Myracles in the beginning to commend his own authoritie & credite, and thereby to draw vnto him a multitude, which multitude should alwayes after him moue the worlde to beleeue, as Myracles did at the first.Au. de vtil. cred. ca. 13. S. Augustine in that booke deduceth this at large, and concludeth: Rectè igitur Ca∣tholicae disciplinae maiestate institutum est, vt accedentibus ad Religionem fides persuadeatur ante omnia: It is rightly therefore apoynted by the maiestie of the Catholike Churches Schole, that they which come to Religion, be first and formost moued (or per∣swaded by certayne generall motiues) to beleeue. Wherefore I say, that the Protestantes can not possibly be the Church, because they do renounce the claime of suche au∣thoritie. I say also, that neyther they nor no other secte in the world is so happy & sure of their faith, as we be, hauing a Schoole and Masters that we may boldly beléeue in all thinges, because Christ hath geuen them the Spirite of truth,Ioan. 14. and to vs also ac∣cordingly (sayth D. Allen) the spirite of obedience. But therunto Fulke answereth, as more at large, here cap. 7. pag. 90. That also the Protestantes wil be ruled by their Superiours. What, simply?Ar. 58. so farre as their Superiours are ruled by Gods word. Any other submission they allowe not. O humble submission of yours, who will ouerrule your Superiours as it were by Gods word: and O worthy authoritie of theirs, who by your owne cōfession may swarue from the truth of Gods word. But howsoeuer the Pro∣testantes are affected to their Superiours, the Greeke Church (with the Moschouites and Russianes) in doubtes wil be ruled by their Patriarche of Constantinople, and so will the rest of the
Orientall Churches by their chiefe Patriarches & Bishops: though they be not of our felowship and Catholike communion: So you say. But if you knewe the storie of the Florentine Councell, wherein their Patriarches agréed with the Catholike Latines in all thinges, and yet could not for all that reduce their Coun∣tries from Schisme, you would not so say. Ar. 83.84.And as towching your grammaticatiō vpon the article of our Créed, I beleeue the H. Catholike Church, I haue shewed plainly (cap 8. pag. 138) out of antiquitie, that the meaning of it is, accor∣ding to this presēt demaund, I beleue in the H. Catholike Church. And therefore you erre where you say: To beleeue all and euery thing that the Catholike Church, by commō consent doth main∣tayne, is no article of our faith. And is not this a goodly interpre∣tation which you bring, We say & confesse against all Heretikes and Schismatikes, I beleeue that there is a Catholike Church, or that God hath an Vniuersall Congregation? For, what Heretike and Scismatike may not say the same? And what Catholike may not also cōfesse that there is a Lutherane Church? The meaning of the Créede is as I haue sayd, I beléeue that to be the true Church, whose name is Catholike (as in the Articles afore going, I beléeue that Christ which is named Iesus, and that God who is the Creator) and I beléeue all which the same Church doth bid me to beléeue, as being the mouth of the Holy Ghost, and by her (being the communion or company of the Holy, so that none be Holy which do not cōmunicate with her) I beléeue that we haue remission of our sinnes in the Sacramentes, and shall haue Re∣surrection of our bodies in glorie, and for euer afterwardes in Soule and Bodye together lyfe euerlasting. All which is the worke of our Sanctification, and appropriated in the Créede to the Holy Ghost, as our redemption to the Sonne, and Creation to the Father. In calling this a foolish and false interpretation, you do but vtter your ignorance in the auncient Doctors. They are the boyes that you count worthy to haue many stripes for their construing it otherwise then thus, I beleeue that there is a Catholike Church. Suppose the Apostles had said, Credo S. Ro∣manam Ecclesiam, how would you haue construed it? not, I be∣leue that there is a Romane church, for so much you may confesse being yet a Protestant, but, I beleeue the Romane Church. And
what should that meane, but as I haue here sayd out of the Fa∣thers? As also, against all Apocriphalles, to say, Credo Sanctas Scripturas Canonicas. I beleeue the H. Canonicall Scriptures. I∣tem against Manicheus, Montanus, Luther, and all other false∣named Apostles or Euangelists of Christ, to say, Credo S S. Duo∣decim Apostolos, Credo S S. quatuor Euangelistas, I beleeue the H. Twelue Apostles, I beleeue the H. Fower Euangelistes. 35 Vnitie.Motiue 27. Arti 15.17. Well, of this irrefragable authoritie of Gods Church ouer vs, and of our humble submission againe and affection vnto it, procedeth (I say in my next Demaund) our inseperable vnitie,Aug. cōtra Epi. Fund. ca. 4. Ioan. 17. whiche S. Augustine in his Motiues to the Manichies calleth Confentionem Populorum, at{que} Gentium, Consenting of Peo∣ples, and Nations in one. Which Christ in his prayer for it, ac∣compteth a most iust motiue for the world to beleeue in him. But Fulke notwithstanding, because his Protestantes haue it not,Ar. 93. nor can not possibly atteyne vnto it, telleth vs, that also the Ma∣hometistes and Turkes haue their Vnitie. As though Christ, or S. Augustine, or we, did speake of any other then Vnitie of Christi∣an People and in Christian faith. And if any Heresie among the Christians haue had their vnitie also, that doth no more but de∣clare, that the same Heresie, whatsoeuer it were, might, for this at the least, claime the true Church better then the Protestantes. For another shifte he sayeth:Ar. 107. that the Church may be called the howse of peace, because there is in it peace and agreement in the chiefest Articles of the Faith. By which reason he might say, that very many of the old Heresies were within the Howse of Peace, because they agréed with the Church in the chéefest Ar∣ticles. But we say that any one Article, be it of the chéefest or of the meanest, may breake ye peace, as quartadecimani did disagrée onely in the day of Easter, and many other like in S. Augustines Catalogue of Heresies to Quodvultdeus. And therefore it hel∣peth his side nothing, that he saith to excuse their diuision,Ar. 63.61.62.10.58.96.103. that the Lutherans & Zuinglians do differ but in one matter, and that not the greatest, to wit, concerning the Sacrament, the one affir∣ming a Real presence, the other denying it. Be it so, that among them are no more but these two Sectes, and betwéene these no
more difference (which yet is most false, as not onely large ta∣bles of their names set out by Catholikes, but also innumerable Bookes about innumerable matters set out be them selues a∣gainst one another, and euen their own Puritanes now at home do notoriously declare.) One matter, I say, is inough, yea also if it be but a ceremonie, though you say of some of yours, They dif∣fer onely in Ceremonies, which can not diuide them from the faith. Yes Syr, when they holde their owne Ceremonies to be necessarie, or condemne the Churches Ceremonies as vnlawful, as those Quartadecimani did, they are Heretikes, and therefore diuided from the faith. Howbeit also diuision is made sometimes without any disagréemēt so much as in a ceremonie, as whē it is a méere Schisme, & not mixt with any Heresie at all. Such were the Schismes that were towards among the Corinthians,1. Cor. 3.4. swel∣ling one against another, onely vpon their Baptizars and Tea∣chers. And therefore what is the matter that you differ in, for∣ceth not. Onely if you diuide your selues, and will not come to one anothers Churches, where is your vnitie: As for difference of opinions betwene our Canonists and Di∣uines, or also betwene our Schole Diuines among them selues, it is (as I said in the 8. Dem. pag. 283. all without diuision, all in vnitie,Aug. cōtra Iul. li. 1. c. 2. De bap. cō. Donat. li. 1. ca. 18. all no otherwise then as S. Augustine saith: Some∣time also the most learned and best defenders, regulae Catholicae, of the Catholike rule, do without breaking the frame of fayth not accorde, and diuers be of diuers iudgementes without anye breake of peace, vntill a generall Councell allowe some one parte for cleare and pure. Suche was the difference of S. Cy∣prian & his fellowes from the other Catholikes about Baptisme (here in the 28. Dem.) And suche was the difference betwéene some about the Popes or Councels superioritie, before the Flo∣rentine Councell, which by your owne confession (here cap. 6. pag. 70.) resolued the matter. But your differences, we say, are with diuision, with pertinacie, without end: a generall Coun∣cell can not finish them: yea to nourish them for euer, your very doctrine is, that in Church or Generall Councell is no autho∣ritie of such importance.
36 Owners and keepers of the Scriptures.Moti. 8.30. Articl. 2.3. My next Demaund to the Protestantes, is S. Augustines Demaund to the Manichies, which D. Allen doth prosequute in two Articles. And it is grounded vpon the foresaide authoritie of the Church.Aug. cōtra Ep. Fund. ca. 5. If thou shouldest meete with one (saith S. Au∣gustine to a Manichee) who doth not yet beleeue the bookes of the Gospell, what wouldest thou doo to him saying vnto thee, Non credo, I do not beleeue them? As of his owne selfe he there sayth: Ego vero Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Ca∣tholicae Ecclesiae commoueret authoritas. I verily shoulde not beleeue the Gospell, but that the Catholike Churches authoritie did make me. And then he gathereth therevppon, and asketh, Quibus ergo obtemperaui dicentibus, crede Euangelio, cur eis non obtemperem dicentibus mihi, Noli credere Manichaeo? Those therefore to whom I obeyed saying, Beleeue the Gospell: Why should I not obey the same men saying vnto me, Do not beleeue Manicheus, do not beléeue Luther? Nowe to this what shifte hath Fulke? He can not denie, but that our Demaunde is vpon that Churth whiche is called Catholike, nowe (accor∣ding to my sixte Demaunde, pag. 227.) as S. Augustines De∣maunde was vpon that Church whiche was called Catholike then, and as muche maligned of those Manichees, as nowe of these Protestantes. Neither can hee shewe, but that as it hath still the same name, so it is still the same Churche, as I haue defended agaynst all his vayne Cauilles eyther out of the Scriptures (cap. 8. pag. 124.) or out of the Doctors (cap. 9. pag. 155.) And therefore béeing still all one Churche, you shall sée, if you marke, that he sayth in his aunswere nothing of the one, but it is common to the other: and that it is all one for vs to frame our Demaund of the Catholike Church then,Ar. 10. and of the Catholike Church now. For thus he sayth: The Primi∣tiue Churches testimonie of the worde of God we allowe and beleeue. But I deny, that the Primitiue Church dyd affirme Lu∣ther to be an Heretike, or the doctrine which he taught, which we holde, to be Heresie. Here you denie it, but in other pla∣ces you confesse it, where you graunt that they affirmed Ae∣rius to bee an Heretike for denying prayer for the dead,
and were fayne therevpon to take exception against the same Primitiue Church by your colde shift of Only Scripture, cap. 7. pag. 79. Tell vs then (we say) why we should obey the same Primitiue Church commaunding vs to beleue the Gospell, and not obey it commaunding vs not to beléeue Aerius, Iouinianus, Vigilantius, &c. (cap. 3. pag. 9. to 14.) and consequently not to be∣leue Luther, nor to care for all your carping (in these two Arti∣ticles) of her Images and Inuocation of Saintes, of her Sacrifice, of her estimation of Customes, Traditions, writings of Doctors, Decrees of Popes and Councels, of her auncient Latine Transla∣tion, of her corrupting either of the text of the Testament, or of the true Religion conteined therein, of her not translating of the Scriptures into all vulgar tongues, of her workes of supereroga∣tion, Abbeys, Priories, and Chauntries. For touching all these things, either it is euident in it selfe, or in sundry places eyther you haue confessed, or I haue proued, or at least I haue defended that they were the Primitiue Churches also, no lesse then they be the Churches nowe, answering whatsoeuer obiections you haue brought against them. Ar. 5.Againe you say, As for the Popish Church, she is so blind that she can not discerne betwene the Canonicall bookes of the Scrip∣rere, from the Apocryphall writings: as appeareth by receiuing the bookes of the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus, &c. to be of equall authoritie with the bookes of the Law, Psalmes, &c. The Popish Church that Canonized those bookes, was ye Primitiue (although ye call them Heretikes which did it) as I haue shewed playnly,Pur. 214. and by your owne confession, cap. 9. pag. 165. and that you are fayne to saye, that also the Primitiue Church therein did erre. S. Augustine therefore, as he saith to the Manichie denying the Actes of the Apostles, Cui libro necesse est me credere, si credo Euangelio: quoniam vtram{que} Scripturam similiter mihi Catho∣lica commendat authoritas. I must needes beleue this booke, if I beleue the Gospell: because the Catholike authoritie commen∣deth vnto me both those Scriptures alike: so he saith vnto you denying the Machabées, Ecclesiasticus, Iudith, &c. I must néedes beléeue them if I beléeue the Gospell: because they also be in the Canon of the same Church: as he telleth you playnly here cap. 9. pag. 165. And therefore they are but words, when you said ere∣while,
We allow and beleeue the Primitiue Churches testimonie of the word of God. And againe:Ar. 10.9. We haue most steadfast assu∣rance of Gods Spirite, for the authoritie of Gods booke, with the testimonie of the true Church in all ages: and so we know it to be true. You beleue the Gospell for the Churches testimonie, euen as much as the Manichies did: because you reiect her autho∣ritie & Canon in other bookes, as they did in the Actes. And there∣fore againe you do but condemne your selfe, when you say:Ar. 4.5. The Church of Christ commended the bookes of holy Scriptures to be beleeued of all true Christians. And againe: The Church of Christ hath of the holy Ghost a iudgement to discerne the word of God of infallible veritie, from the writing of men which might erre. In so saying you both iustifie vs, who as we confesse that Church, so we beleue her Canon, and condemne your selues, who confesse it to be the true Church, and yet deny her Canon, yea and generally her authoritie (here in the 34. Dem.) holding stiffely, that she may erre, and did erre in many things, and therfore ma∣king Only Scripture your ground for all things. Wherin how contrarie you be to your selfe, any man may sée, and I must note it in the next Chapter. In the meane time I note,Cap. 11. cō∣tradict. 33.34.35. Ar. 8. that you shew your selues not to be the Church that cōmaunded S. Augustine to beleue the Gospell, in that you say fréely: We do not chalenge credite to our selues, in any poynt, so presumptuously as the Pa∣pistes, that men must beleue it because we affirme it: but because we proue it to be true by the worde of God. By what place of Scripture did either the Primitiue Catholike Church proue to S. Augustine, or could you proue to the Manichée, the Actes of the Apostles to be of Canonicall authoritie? The true Church of all times is of like authoritie, and therfore that which was not pre∣sumption then, is not presumption now. But what will not your terme of Only Scripture serue you vnto? when by it you argue & say:Ar. 6. Our Congregation hath euer had both right and possession of the Scriptures: as appeareth by this, that our Church & Congregation beleueth nothing but that she learneth in them. And that be not a notable plea to proue a right and a possession, yea and a continual possession, I report me to your Lawyers. What a forehead and face haue you, to say,A substantiall lye. that your companie had euermore possession of the Bible? Is it
not euident, that Luther and all that are come of him, tooke their Bibles of the Papistes? Leaue your impudent facing: it is not your new vpstart Congregation, it is our Catholike Romane Church, which hath continually kept her possession of this Trea∣sure, which she receiued of the Apostles. She it is that reiecteth no one booke therof: she it is, that with Gods spirite hath kept them from corruption of all Heretikes.Ar. 5. If also the Arrians, Donatists, Nouatians, Eutichians, and other Heretiks, receiued all the bookes of Scripture, What doth that proue, but only, that those Heretiks should rather be the true church, then you, and that we might not vse against them this piece of our argument, as we doe against you: but this rather, that they had those Scriptures of vs, and ca∣ryed them out with them whē they went out from vs. So did al∣so the Greeke Church,Ar. 6. and other Esterne Churches of Asia, and therefore If vnto this day they haue kept them neuer so safely, they are not for all that the true Church. Euery Article of D. Allens is not to proue absolutely, that we be ye church, but some only, that you be not the Church. When our Church was oppug∣ned by other enemies, she knew what she had then also to do. So she had, & hath her proper Motiues against the Iewes: and there∣fore it is a wise Demaund of yours, when you say, Why are not the Iewes, the Catholike Church, which haue kept the old Testa∣ment in Hebrue, more faithfully then euer the Papistes? We doe not now encounter with the Iewes, but presupposing the Reli∣gion and Church that Christ and his Apostles did institute, to be true, we geue plaine notes, how a man may know, that the Pro∣testāts haue it not, (as because they deny some Canonical bookes of Scripture, & the Churches authoritie which is the foundation of the Canon.) And therefore that no wise man should be moued when he heareth them to claime it (and that by pretēce of Scrip∣ture, and false carde of Onely Scripture) from vs who doe so faithfully beléeue, and haue so vncorruptibly keapt all the bookes of the same. As for the Iewes old Testament, I towched your blindnes therein cap. 7. pag. 103. sufficiently, and also your des∣perate impudencie (pag. 103.) in charginge the Church with reiecting of the Scriptures.
37. Stoarehouse of all Trueth.Motiue 29. As in our Church at this day a man may find all ye holy bookes which the Church in old time layed vp in her Canon thereof: so likewise all other Truthes (I say in my next Demaunde) which in any of her Councels or otherwise she ruled ouer & canonized at any time against any Heresie of her rebells, or against any er∣ror of her owne obedient children: & that ye Protestantes & all o∣ther Heretikes haue no truth among them, but they had it of our Church: which Church therefore, I say, is now and euer, and she onely, the Stoarehouse both of Canonicall Scripture,Iren. cōtra Heraeses. li. 3 ca. 4. and of all trueth beside. And therefore againe (as S. Irenée saith) Non o∣portet adhuc quaerere apud alios veritatē, quam facile est ab Ec∣clesia sumere, No man must yet (after all these most euident De∣monstrations) seeke the Trueth among any others, which they may so easily take of the Churth, because it is Depositorium di∣ues, the riche Stoarehouse of the Apostles. 38 Old Heresies.Motiue 4. Among the Protestants, on the contrary side, I say, that there are to be founde very many of the Olde condemned Heresies. Which is so playne, that Fulke confesseth (here cap. 3.) Aerius, Iouinianus, and Vigilantius, to haue bene counted Here∣tikes of the true auncient Church, for sundry opinions of theirs, nowe reuiued by the Protestantes. And therefore is fayne (cap. 7. pag. 80.) for his owne cause to goe about to defende them, partly with his stale of Only Scripture (cap. 7. pag. 80.) to the which I haue made aunswere cap. 8. pag. 110. and cap. 9. pag. 171. partely with abusing sundrie places of the Scrip∣tures, and of the same Fathers which condemned those Here∣tikes, to the which I haue answered cap. 8. and 9. partly also with more insolencie to charge those Fathers rather as defen∣ding Heresie agaynst Aerius, &c. (cap. 3.) wherevnto I haue an∣swered cap. 6. sauing that the two Heresies which he layeth to them that hold with the Machabées and with Traditions (as the Fathers do cap. 9. pag. 165. & cap. 3.7. pa. 12.85.) I haue answered in this present chap. in the 36. & 29. Demaunds. And so with one labour I haue cléered both the Fathers & our selues together, not
to be Gnostici, Valentinians, Carpocratians, Collyridians, Ossenes, Caianes, in our Traditions, in our Crosses and other Images, in our Inuocation of Angels and Sants and worship∣ping of their Relikes: nor to be Manichées, Tiacianistes, Mon∣tanistes, Aerians, in our Abstinence and Fastingdayes, in our single life: nor Gentiles, Carpocratians, Origenists, Heracleo∣nites, Montanistes, in our name of Sacrifice, in our Purgatory, Anealing, and praying for the dead: nor Arrians in our beeres for burying. For such is his modesty and Christianity and truth, to charge the Pillers of Christ with such heresies, yea and more∣ouer to saye generally, (as I noted cap. 3. pag. 9.) that if the Gen∣tiles or Heretikes had any thing that seemed to haue a shewe of pietie or charitie, they woulde drawe it into vse: whiche was the greate corrupting of those auncient tymes. That we maye nowe be more content to heare him charge vs, and say with all generalitie that is possible:Pur. 287. In all tymes when soe∣uer, and wheresoeuer, was any peese of miste, or darke corner (though all the rest were light) there were the steppes of your walke. Which two golden sayings of his, procéede of these two diuine opinions of their new Gospel, that the Primitiue Church should prepare the way to Antichrist, and that Christes Vicare should be Antichrist. Wherof I haue spoken ynough cap. 8. and 9. Such opinions must vtter such sayings. And yet not able for all that, truely to charge the Church either Primitiue or of later time, with so much as one point of Antichristianisme or Heresie, as partly I haue declared cap. 6. and now wil declare for the rest. They are such matters as agrée no otherwise to vs, then to them whom he dare not to condemne, and therfore not in the same ma∣ner as to the old Heretikes. Ar. 21.22. Epiph. s. 3. Haer. 80. 1. Cor 11. Hier. in E∣zech. 44.Of the Messalians or Martyrians, you lerned (saith he) to shaue your beardes, and to let your lockes grow long, Comas muliebres producunt, They kepe their heare long, like women. Do we so? Be our heades like womens long heades? womens heads bylike are rounded heades: or S. Paule did meane that men should poll their heades, Ita ad pressum tondentes vt rasorum similes vide∣antur, Cutting them so neare the skin that they should be like to shauen heades. Or do not some Protestantes weare round heads and shaue their beardes, as well as some Catholikes: and some
Catholikes, euen also the Cleargie in Italie and Spayne, weare beardes and polled heades, as well as some Protestantes? Epi∣phanius noteth it in those Monkes, because they did it, in conten∣tione, of contention, and at that time and in that place, when and where the Apostles statutes and the Churches orders were to the contrarie, as yet they be touching womanly heades, but not also euery where touching shauen beardes. It is a signe, that you a∣bounde with substantiall stuffe against vs, that you lay our heares to our charge. Nothing was wont with you to be heresie, vnlesse it could be proued contrarie to expresse Scripture,Sup. dem. 36. (so ea∣sily we might answere all, by your principles) and that also ex∣cepting ceremonies. Yet now conformitie and obedience to com∣ly order for lacke of better matter must go for heresie. Sée, whe∣ther we do not more substātially charge you with the Messalians heresie, for saying, that the Sacraments, and namely Baptisme,Theo Haer. fab. li. 4. Dam. Haer. 80. Eucharist, and Orders, do not conferre grace. Reade Theodo∣rete and Damascene. Of the Pharisees you receiued your superstitious masking gar∣ments, which you call Amictus, Dalmaticus, and Pallia, as witnes∣seth Epiphanius in his Epistle to Acacius and Paulus. Doth not also your owne order appoynt speciall and gorgeous garmentes in the ministrations? And that in the Primitiue Church also were such, I haue shewed here in the 21. Demaund: and by name, if you will, you may reade of the Deacons Dalmatica and Alba, to be worne in the time of the oblation, and lesson out of the Gos¦pell, Con. Carth. 4. cap. 41. as also in other places both of them and the rest. You might as well, or also better haue brought this against the Leuiticall garments in the ministeries of the Iudai∣call Temple.Epipha. ep. ante lib. de Haer. & Haer. 15.16. You do not consider that Epiphanius there repor∣teth the seuen sectes of the Iewes, and describeth them, namely the Scribes and the Pharisées, in their common daily garments, being Stolae siue Pallia, and Dalmaticae siue amicula, as we might say, cassocks and gownes or clokes vpon them, with simbriae, frin∣ges commaunded Nu. 15. Deut. 22. to haue made for ostentation of holines certayne superstitious additions & enlargementes, by which our Sauiour, Mat. 23. doth note their hipocrisie. Doth not this make sore against holy vestments in the Seruice of God? An other sect of the Iewes were Hemerobaptistae (touched by
our Sauiour Mar. 7.Epipha. ep. ad Acac. & Paulum. & Haer. 17.) who said, Neminē assequi vitam aeternam nisi qui quotidie baptizaretur, None to obtaine life euerlasting, but such a one as were baptized (or washed) euery day. Of these were deriued your holy water, saith Fulke to vs, which you say you vse to put men in mind of their Baptisme. O I sée our fault: although we baptize but once for life euerlasting, yet we would haue men to remember it euery day. S. Paule deceaued vs Rom. 6. he was to blame. As also to tell vs that the Creatures of God are Sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, 1. Tim. 4. Spe∣cially to attribute so passing muche to the prayers of the holy Ghost, that is, to the prayers of the Church, encouraging vs, and saying:Rom. 8. the Holy Ghost also doth helpe our weaknes, praying for vs with groanes vnspeakable, as he that knoweth the hartes of the Catholike Church can tell, howsoeuer blinde Heretikes do thinke, that God will do nothing by water for prayer. Epip. Haer. 19.Againe he sayeth: Of the Ossenes (who were another sect of the Iewes) you tooke the great estimation of water, salte, oyle, bread, &c. And vse to sweare by them, as they did. You do not charge vs, I trow, as teching this swering in cōmon talke with∣out truth or without cause. Nor you be not, I trow, an Anabap∣tist, to condemne eyther all swearing, or swearing by Creatures. What besides these you should meane to charge vs withall, I know not. But I know what Epiphanius chargeth the Ossenes withall, to wit, for frequentinge othes, as we do prayers, and that for diuine honor of septem testes, seuen witnesses prescribed vnto them by their master Elxai, which were these: Salt, Water, Earth, Bread, Heauen, Ayer, and Winde. At another time these: Heauen, Water, Spirits, the holy Angels of prayer, Oyle, Salte, and Earth, but in no case fire. Therefore if Catholikes be not plaine Ossens, I report me to you. The same Elxai prescribed a prayer, saying in the booke of his fables: Let no man seeke the interpretation, but onely say these words in his prayer: [Abac anid moib nochile daasim ani daasim nochile moib anid abac selam.] Of him therfore we lear∣ned (saith Fulke) to cōmaund the people to pray in an vnkno∣wen tongue. Epiphanius sheweth, that his prayer was nothing at all when it was interpreted. Belike the Pater noster and Aue, are such: or els the Priuate prayers of the Corinthians in
more strange tongues then the Latin is to the people of the La∣tin Church, which yet S. Paule commendeth, as I shewed in the 22. Dem. But he commeth also to our publike prayer and saieth:Epip. Haer. 34. The Marcosians, when they baptized (after their strange maner mentioned here cap. 6. pag. 50.) vsed to speake certaine Hebrue wordes, quae magis admirationi sint, that the ignorant people might maruel the more at them: as you do in Baptisme, Ephata, &c.Mar. 7. Euen as truly as S. Marke in his Gréeke Gospell sayeth the same in the very same maner with the interpretation,Ambro. de Sac. li. 1. c. 1. Apoc. 19. as we do in Baptisme, and as in S. Ambrose time also we did, to be (for∣sooth) maruelled at the more: Epphatha, quod est, adaperire, which is to say, Be thou opened. And as S. Iohn in his Greke Apoca∣lypse so often vseth for maruell (forsooth) the Hebrue words A∣men, (which in other Scriptures also, yea and in your owne prayers is commonly vsed) and Alleluia, of which two S. Augu∣stine saith (that I may note somewhat here against your Ser∣uice, where you note nothing agaynst ours) not onely that in the Latine translations of the Bible they be reteined Prop∣ter sanctiorem authoritatem, for more holy authoritie,Au. de doc. Chri. li. 2. c. 11. & inter. Epist. 174. al∣though it was possible to interprete them, but also that all Na∣tions doe sing them in the Hebrewe worde, quod nec Latino nec Barbaro licet in suam linguam transferre, Not being lawfull nei∣ther for the Latine, nor for the Barbarian to translate them into his owne language. Of the Marcionistes you learned to giue women leaue to Baptise. You doe therein your selues by order of your booke,Epip. Haer. 42. as muche as we doe. Marcion is noted for confounding all order, as consecrating the mysteries in presence of Catechume∣ni: so likewise allowing women to Baptize solemnely, as though they might haue that office as well as Priestes. We say onely, that for necessitie Christ alloweth any person to Baptize:Ruff. hist. li. 1. ca. 14. in so muche that the Primitiue Church also hath allowed the baptisme which a boye hath giuen to his playfellowes. Which you woulde neuer carpe, but that like a Pelagian Puritane, (here cap. 6. pag. 65.) you denie the necessitie of Baptisme,Aug. Haer. 88. Pelagia. saying that children, etiam si non baptizentur, although they be not baptized, may come to life euerlasting, and to the king∣dome of God.
Pu. 13.405 Ar. 44.So playnly you are proued to be Pelagians. But yet we in our consciences forsooth must néedes be Pelagians for holding Free wil, and merites of works as they did, and not Predestination and grace as Augustine did. How they did holde it, eyther you knew not, or it was not for your hipocrisie to report it. Sure it is, that Hier. pro. con. Pelag. Au. de fide con. Mani. ca. 9 10. Chry. hom. 45. in Io. 6. Manichaeorum est, liberum auserre arbitrium, It is the Heresie of the Manichies to denie Free-will. Sure it is againe, that S. Augustine denying the Pelagians merites, that is, such as procéede of man him selfe, and go before grace: yet holdeth the Catholike merites, that is, such as procéede of grace. Aug. epi. 46. The Pe∣lagian Heretikes do say (quoth he) the grace of God to be giuen according to our owne merites. quod omnino falsissimum est, Which is vtterly moste false, not that there is no merite, either good of the godly, or euill of the vngodly: but the grace of god doth conuert a man, that of a wicked one he may be made a iust one, and so may beginne to haue good merites, which God shall crowne when the world shall be iudged. This is the doctrine of the Catholikes, and is most euident to be séene in the Councell of Trent.Con. Trid. Ses. 6. But you denying all good merits, do like Hipocrites con∣ceale from the people that distinction of merites before grace and merites after grace, making as though all which hold merites, so much as after grace, be Pelagians. But that we hold also merits before grace, as they did, you will proue by the distinction De cō∣gruo & condigno: For God is as much bound to congruity as to dignitie or worthines: and as he can do nothing against worthi∣nes, no more can he do any thing against congruitie, which is a kind of equitie. We also our selues do hold, that a man of him selfe without Gods speciall helpe, can not merite so much as de congruo, the grace of God (though we haue no resolute warrant to call the contrarie Pelagianisme or Heresie) and that with bet∣ter argumēts then this of yours, or els we might hold our peace, which you can not. For you imagine that if God do not that which is congruous, he doth against congruitie. Not so, good syr, for it is congruous to his mercy to saue the simple, that followe you only of ignorance, and otherwise do liue in good works, espe∣cially his welbeloued seruantes also praying for them. Yet to damne such also because they be out of the Church, is congruous to his iustice. Yea for God to saue al the world, is cōdigne to the
merites of Christ: yet he damneth innumerable, because that it is condigne to their owne merites. Thus while you went about to stayne Gods Church in vaine, it is fallen out only by the way, yt you your selues are Messalians for denying the grace of the Sacraments: Pelagians, for deny∣ing the necessitie of Baptisme: and Manichees, for denying Frée-will. This is all that you haue gayned. 39 In confessed Heretikes onely.Motiue 46 When we make the Protestantes to confesse (as in the last Demaund) that the Primitiue Church noted certaine to be He∣retikes for holding their doctrine, they set themselues against the Primitiue Church also (such is their obstinacie) & say, that those persons were not Heretikes therein. We therefore not leauing them so (if it be possible any way to open their eyes, or at lest the eyes of the poore deceiued people) do shew them (as in this next Demaund) that the same persons were Heretiks in other poynts also so playnly, that we make them to confesse that also. And nei∣ther yet will their hard stonie hartes relent.Ar. 44. If Aerius had not bene an Arrian (saith Fulk) his opinion (against praying for the dead could not haue made him an heretike, though both Epipha∣nius (of the Gréeke Church) and Augustinus (of ye Latin Church) do so register him. Then what do we more? We aske them,Pur. 421. Why God openeth these mysteries alwayes and onely, to suche as you your selues (saith D. Allen to them) can not deny to be Heretikes: and not to Athanasius, Epiphanius, Augustinus, or some other blessed men of that time? but contrariwise leaueth these his elect and doctors of his Church in ignorance, yea and with pertinacie condemning those true mysteries for soule Heresies, and hath no body in the meane time to be their reformers, but such as are in∣famous and of no credite by reason of abominable confessed he∣resies? And do they yet relent? No, I warrant you. Such a yoke it is to be once wedded to heresie. And yet they haue no answere herevnto, that may satisfy any man of reason, as now we shal sée. For thus saith Fulke vnto it:Pur. 409.422.424. Ar. 44. What if any Heretike hath af∣firmed some thing that is true? Is trueth worse in an Heretikes mouth? The diuels them selues confessed Christ. As though it were agréed that it was trueth which those Heretikes affirmed,
as it was agréed that he was Christ whom those diuels confessed. No syr, that is the question. But if the diuels had said one thing, and the Apostles the contrarie: which then were like to haue bene the trueth? For so the Catholike Fathers saide with vs, and the Arrians said with you: which therefore is like to be the truth? You say: truth hath testimonie of Gods word, and whe∣ther it be affirmed or denyed by the diuell, it is all one. Mary in déede, he that would defende the diuell saying agaynst the Apo∣stles, affirming that he can bring Gods word, must néedes haue audience though he put vs to our trumps. So you defending Ae∣rius the Arrian Heretike against ye Catholike fathers, & bringing Scripture do trouble vs forsooth, as the reader hath séene here in the 8. chapter, where I haue answered al your Scriptures, as all must nedes be answerable that is brought against truth: and so they find which reade our writings. But because yt way (to reade all, is long, we tel such as would not make so great a iorney, that they may be sure without more trauell, that not to be of God the reuealer of all trueth, which Heretikes held against the Catho∣liks, as also yt which the diuels might hold against the Apostles, And the more, because we reade that Christ and his Apostles cō∣maunded the diuell to silence,Luc. 4. Act. 16. when also he confessed trueth, for proceeding out of his lying mouth, it might (as Fulke saith wel) the sooner be discredited. Whereas in our case (by the saying of the Protestantes) he commaunded the diuell and his Heretikes to teach the trueth, and the Fathers to silence, or rather not to silence, but suffering them to resiste the trueth all that they could. Pu. 422.421.But he can aunswere one question with another: Why was it first reueiled (sayth he) to the Arrians in Councell, that the Ar∣ticle of Christes discent into hell, was meete to be added to the Crede, which was not reueiled to so many godly men as set forth the Symbole, nor to the holy Nicene Councell? Answere me if you can. He speaketh so of this matter without any quoting of Author, as if it were a thing notoriously knowen. Belyke it is receiued among them who would put it out of the Crede againe, as a principle of their Aristotle, and I (who reade not their bookes, but with leaue and for necessitie) am not so well acquain∣ted in their mysteries. Perhaps a friends ghesse of mine is true, that they say so, because they find it in some Arrian Crede that is
recorded in the Ecclesiasticall Storie.Theo. li. 2. cap. 21. For it is found in déede in Theodorete, that the false Nicene Arrian Synode saide in their newe Crede, Crucified, dead, and buried, descended into hell, whom hell it selfe did tremble at. According to the ydle or rather hypocriticall diligence of Heretikes, who vse in Credes or con∣fessions of their false doctrines to infarse some nedeles truethes. Whereas the Catholike Nicene Councell thought it ynough in their Crede, to repeate and explicate onely those Articles of the Apostles common Crede, of which Articles Heretiks had as then made question. Is not this then a substantiall cause, to say that it was firste reuealed to the Arrians to put it in the Créede: whereas it was before in the Apostles Créede? Though also if it were true, that the Arrians did first put it into the Créede, what is that to our case? They had not the Catholikes in that against them: yea it was a common Article of the Catholikes faith. The Articles of the Arrian Aerius were not such. As al∣so the Article agaynst Rebaptization, which Article some He∣retikes perhaps helde right, when S. Cyprian and some other Catholike Bishoppes were deceyued in it. But yet the Pope with the rest of Christendome helde it as they had it of the Apo∣stles. What is this to your Articles, which onely olde wicked Heretikes did holde (we saye) against all Catholikes: They were fitte Articles for Heretikes at all times (but neuer for Catholikes:) as at this time also for Anabaptistes, Serueti∣ans or Arrians, Suenkfeldians,Pur. 421. & all the others that you count Heretikes as well as we doe, sayth D. Allen, because they are their inheritance as well as yours, descending from your com∣mon father Luther. But for that wound also you haue a plaister, if not to heale it, yet to couer it as you hope.Ar. 96. Pur. 423. For there were manye more Heresies at the firste preaching of the Gospell, in and imme∣diatelye after the Apostles time: then at the laste restoring of the publike preaching thereof vnto the worlde in our dayes: when the Gentiles continued constant, and the Iewes without schisme in their errours. This is iumpe as I saye in my 35. Demaund, That you be not able to alleage anye excuse for your diuision into so many Sectes, which the Arrians, Dona∣tistes, and other olde Heresies might not as well alleage for
excuse of their diuisions:Aug. de a∣gone Chri∣sti. ca. 29. and so, when S. Augustine noteth, that as Donatus went about to diuide Christ, euen so he him selfe is of his owne (Donatistes) diuided euery day into sundry pieces, to tell him, as you do vs, that also in the Apostles time the professours of Christianitie were rent and torne into an hun∣dred Sectes and Heresies. You want but that (whiche is soone had, we know) figures and prophetes of another olde Testa∣ment, and miracles of healing the diseased of all sortes, of ray∣sing the dead, and such other petite matters, to make demon∣stration, that Donatus then, or Luther now, is another Christ: and then we must be forced to graunte that you are as the A∣postles, and they as you. And yet for all that I thinke we should not be forced to graunt that you haue the trueth: but rather it would folow (per impossibile) that the Apostles had not the truth. But it is well, that the Apostles were not the cause of those Sectes and Diuisions, no more then we now, their heires, be cause of your Sectes and Diuisions. Your owne Diuiding of Christ (whiche is the Apostles and ours by Senioritie in right possession) is the meritorious cause of them, as S. Augustine told the Donatistes. And the efficient cause, is your denying of all Catholike Principles, and holding of Onely Scripture, and that but so much as you liste of your owne heades, and to be in∣terpreted by euery ones priuate fantasie, which you call the Spi∣rite. Finally your Articles do fitte them all very well, in so much that their Sectiones lightly be not made by going from a∣ny Article of yours, but from some more Articles of ours, as the Anabaptistes, from baptizing of Infantes, from lawfull swea∣ring, &c. If the case had bene thus with the Apostles, the world had neuer beléeued them. Ar. 27.40 They neuer afore now. Next after this I note, that the Protestantes were neuer in the world before our time. Fulk saith: With the Apostles, Euan∣gelistes, and Prophetes, we consent whollie in all pointes of Doc∣trine. No, not in one point at all (vnles it be such a one as with vs also you consent in) as I haue shewed cap. 8. and much lesse wholly in all pointes. He saith further: With Iustinus, Irenaeus, Cyprianus, Athanasius, Hilarius, Ambrosius, Augustinus, &c. Gil∣das,
we consent (though not wholly in all pointes of Doctrine, yet) in the cheefe and most substantiall articles of faith. Neither with them in any one pointe (in maner aforesaid) as I haue she∣wed cap. 9. Howbeit in this your owne saying, you confesse my purpose. For Vigilantius, Iouinianus, &c. did muche more a∣grée with them in the cheefe and most substantiall Articles which you meane: and yet were not of their Church, could not be, nor would not be. If you say, that you were then in those Heretikes, Vigilantius, and Iouinianus (for I trow, you will not say, that you were in Aerius the Arrian, nor in the Manichées, nor Pela∣gians, though they were your parteners in some pointes, as we saw erewhile in the 38. Dem.) that is a plaine confession that you were not in the Church of the Fathers. Yet also that you were not in those Heretikes, is plaine by this, because they held no more of yours then the Fathers noted them for, who would haue noted them also for denying prayer for the dead, as they noted Aerius for it, if they had denyed it as he did. If you say, that you were in that Church which went out of sight▪ an. 607. (as you say here cap. 2.) it is a chimera onely of your owne imagination, you can not shewe any companie of Christians that departed from that Pope Bonifacius the thyrd and his adherents, much lesse that they were Protestantes. You come lower to Bertramus, Marsilius de Padua,Ar. 27.30.33.34.75.77.95.97. Pur. 420.341.344.345. Ioannes de Gauduno (al. de Gaudano, you call him) Bruno Andeganensis, Wickleue, Iohn Hus and Hierome of Praga with their Bohemi∣ans, &c. (as Berengarius, Apostolici, Waldo with his French Wal∣denses and Pauperes de Lugduno, and Albigenses, the Grecian I∣mage breakers, the maried Canons somtime in England, and Em∣perours that defended their maried Priestes. Of these you say as you did of the Fathers: We consent with them in the chiefe and most substantiall articles of faith: sauing that in one place where you passe some of them ouer with silence, least we should obiect that they held with you but in some one or two pointes:Wal. tom. 3. ca. 7.8.9. Melan. epi. ad Fred. Micon. there you say: But Wickleue, I wene, you will not denie, but he was of our Church and Religion. Against this ignoraunt wene of yours the Catholike may reade Thomas Waldensis, that excellent writer our Countreyman, the Protestant may reade Philip Me∣lancthon: who report sundrie articles of Wickleues which you
your selfe will detest, namely humaine merites, as Pelagius helde them, in so much that Waldensis doth exhort Catholikes to say at euery worde, the grace of God (as nowe we sée vsed in our language) because Wickleue did teache his to haue al∣wayes in their mouthes merita propria, their owne merites. And Melancthon saieth, Prorsus non intellexit, nec tenuit fidei iustitiam, Verely he did not vnderstande, nor holde the iustifi∣cation of faith. He nameth fiue other pointes of like weight: and besides them all, Deprehendi in eo multa alia errata, ex quibus iudicium de eius spiritu fieri potest, Looking in Wicklefe, I found in him many other errors, whereby one may iudge of his spirite. Of Hus the like is written by Luther him self:Luther a∣pud Rof∣fen. ar. 30. Non recte faciunt qui me Hussitam vocant. Non enim mecum ille sentit. They do not well that call me an Hussite. For he is not of my iudgement: as there he exemplifieth, in the Popes Supremacie, &c. And how say you to the seditious article (as Melancthon calleth it) of both Wickleue and Hus,Con. Con∣stan. Sess. 8. art. 15.17. touching ciuill dominion, that it is lost im∣mediately if the King doe fall into mortall sinne? Hauing shewed this in them, whom you thought your selfe most sure of, I néede not to goe particularly through the rest: which otherwise, and if it were not too long, I myght easilye doe to your confusion. For what a poore and fowle shifte is this of yours? Whether Apostolici in Bernardes time, were sclaundered for denying of Baptisme to Infantes, I am not able to say.Bern. Ser. 66. super Cant. Saint Bernard himselfe (no meaner witnesse) at the very same time writeth it: and you doubt whether they were not sclaundered. But certaine it is, that the godly called Paupe∣res de Lugduno and VValdenses, were sclaundered with many detestable opinions, which it is nowe well knowen that they neuer did hold. So you say, but you shew it not. I referre the Reader (for breuitie) to Doctor Saunders Monarchie lib. 7. pag. 493. who alleageth his Authors, and them of iust credite, that these Pauperes de Lugduno were a very order of fryers, be∣gunne by one Valdesius, and that they helde many detestable opinions (as you do well terme them) namely against all iudge∣ing to bloud or to any other corporall punishment, Item, all car∣nall commixtion, &c. Finally therefore I note that you say: Wee haue alwayes
abhorred the (detestable) Heresies of the Anabaptistes,Ar. 61.62.63. Pur. 19.420. Liber∣tines, Suenkefeldians, Dauidians, Seruitians, and all such detesta∣ble and abhominable Heretikes of this time. None but fooles will thinke them to be Protestantes. So say wée, that none but fooles will thinke those others to be Protestantes, although they agrée with you in some things? For so doe these also in some things, yea and in more things, then any of the others. 41. Studying all Trueth.Motiue 31. Hauing in these last Demaundes shewed, that our Church is the Conseruer and Kéeper of all trueth, and the Protestants con∣trariwise no more but brochers of old and new heresies: I do in this Demaund note what Schooles and Vniuersities our church hath erected, and what orders she hath set for the Teaching and learning of all diuine trueth, to defend all against all sortes of e∣nemies, wheras the Protestant students for the most part know not, what the course of Diuinitie meaneth. Touching this mat∣ter, I finde where Fulke saieth, that of late dayes,Ar. 52.53. diuerse Vni∣uersities, Schooles, and Colledges are erected by Protestantes in Germanie and other Countries that haue receaued the Gospell. Whereas Doctor Allen demaundeth of such erections as were any time before Luther beganne: them he noteth all to haue béen ours, and none of the Protestantes, which is so plaine, that Fulke rehearseth the first Colledges of Monkes, saying, they were Colledges of studentes, and like a blind man seeth not, that to make with vs, as more at large I haue shewed here in the 25. Demaund, being of Monkes. Now when certaine Princes seduced by you, destroyed all Monasteries (with the which also the Colledges of the Vniuersities in England went together by the Parliament, in such an hazard they were) was it not forsooth a gratious prouision of them, to set vp a fewe petite Schooles in stéede of them, howbeit that also no otherwise then by apish imi∣tation of ye Catholike Churches scholes, nor before that they saw by experience all learning to be packed away together with the Friers & other Catholiks? And yet you brag that there was neuer so great store of learning in any age,Pur. 7.8. as there is nowe in these our dayes, in the Protestantes. Wherin you shew your selfe to be still as we were when wée were children in the Grammer schole,
where we thought that no man could be better learned then our Master: you may bragge so before babes. We that knowe both your and the Catholike scholes, can but laugh at your childish∣nesse. You speake of knowledge of the tongues and rationall sci∣ences. There are more declamations in Gréeke, in one common schole of the Iesuites, then in both your Vniuersities (I dare say) being ioyned together: and better Masters of Arte, of two or thrée yéeres teaching through all Logicke and Philosophie, then with you in seuen yeares. And the very Masters of such things with vs, of Hebrew, of Gréeke, of Latine, of Poetrie, of Logicke, of Philosophie, doe they (thinke you) count themselues therefore learned in Diuinitie, which they neuer studied? or better learned in it then the professors of it, lacking the tonges or the eloquence of thē, as S. Thomas Aquinus, S. Augustine, ye Apostles? What a madnesse were that. This rather is rudenesse and barbarous∣nesse, as in our Countrey to thinke a mere Grammer Schole∣master sufficient to be Doctor of Diuinitie, yea and a Bishop al∣so, not for other qualities (of them I speake not) but euen for Diuinitie. No, no, M. Fulke, Regnum Grammaticorum is past date, all are not children as they were when this geare began, your tongues will not nowe serue, no nor your studie of Diuini∣tie it self in Caluines schole. Come once to the Catholike scholes (as Gods grace can bring you, and I beséeche him to doe it) and you will be ashamed of your selfe as many a one alreadie is, that thought himselfe, and was thought of others at home a iolly fel∣low. Peraduenture you haue read Francis. Stancarus, (a Doc∣tor procéeded out of your owne Schole, and hath his Gnatoni∣cos,Stanc. li. de Trin. & Mediatore. as well as your other Gnatoes) where he writeth thus: Plus valet vnus Petrus Lomberdus, &c. One Petrus Lombardus (who is, you know our Master of the Sentences) is more worth, then 100. Luthers, 200. Melancthons, 300. Bullingers, 400. Peter Mar∣tyrs, et 500. Caluini, and 500. Caluines. Who all if they were punde together in one Morter, there could not be beaten out of them one ounce of true Diuinitie, specially in the Articles of the Trinitie, Incarnation, Mediator, and Sacramentes. He vseth here his fellowes, your Masters, very boldly, but what remedie? So yll were they studied in those Articles, and specially in the thrée formost, because their care and studie was not to vnder∣stand
and defend Christian trueth, but onely to picke vaine qua∣rels against Gods Church in other matters. And therefore you the petite Protestants, must néedes forsooth be great Doctors. 42. Vnsent.Motiue 21. In my next Demaund I note, both those your Masters, and you their Disciples, to be such as God speaketh of by his Pro∣phete: They did runne, and I did not send them. A wise Church,Iere. 23. that hath no Preachers and Teachers, but onely such as tooke the honor to themselues, or at their handes who tooke to them selues the authoritie to send, which no man gaue them. Mere lay men are the roote, the spring, and the giuers, both of your Or∣ders (as here in the .24. Dem. I said) and also of your Commissi∣on and of your spirituall iurisdiction. Who euer heard the like in the Church of Christ? You haue no answere vnto it. You are (as the auncient writers doe tearme such) children without any Fa∣thers. You are like the Poetes men that Deucalion made of stones, you doe not descend of Adam. Rayle as long as you may at Gods Church and her spirituall external iurisdiction in her Censures, penalties,Ar. 17.18.19.30.98. and al other dis∣cipline, as Excommunication, Suspention, Interdighting, also Dagradation, &c. you doe no more but shew that you vnderstand not the things whereof you speake. All is done still as it was in the Primitiue Church with the selfe same authoritie, and with the same affection and discretion, if the Iudges doe not swarue from the Churches Lawes. 43. Succession.Motiue 22. Article 8. Consequently in the next Demaund I say, that ye true Church must be descended by lineall and continuall Succession from the Apostles, and that our Church is so descended, and that the Pro∣testantes Church is not so descended. About this Fulke doth ma∣ny wayes contradict himselfe (as I will shewe in the next Chap∣ter) because he can not tell what to say vnto it. Yet to helpe him as much as may be, and as I doe vse euery where, to frame his arguments to his purpose, and to bring them into some order: He may say two things: first, that they may haue ye true Church, although they haue not Succession: secondly, that we may lacke
the true Church, although we haue succession. To the first he may referre these words of his owne, vnto D. Allen:Ar. 26. You are neuer able to proue that any suche orderly Suc∣cession according to persons and places, was promised to the Church: that we should shewe you the performance thereof in our Church. Whether that can not be proued, my first De∣maund here will shew, which declareth that S. Augustine hath already proued out of the Scriptures for vs, that the Churche should beginne at Hierusalem, and from thence grow ouer all Nations continually to the worldes ende: as also with our eyes we sée that vnto this our time it hath done. And euen the place which you goe about to answere, proueth it playnly: Continuall Succession of persons in the ministerie (I say with D. Allen) euen vntill Christes comming agayne.Ephe. 4. Christus ascendens, &c. Christ ascending gaue giftes to men: some to be Apostles, some Euangelistes, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, to the completing of the holy for the worke of ministerie, for the buil∣ding of the body of Christ: Donec occurramus omnes, &c. Vn∣till we meete all in the vnitie of faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God, in a perfect man, in the measure of the age, plenitudinis Christi, of the fulnesse of Christ, that is (Ephe. 1.) of his Church. He sayth so expresly, vntill the finishing of the Church. But that you would not sée: you thought better to ca∣uill, and say: The offices of the Apostles, Euangelistes, and Pro∣phetes, were not appoynted to continue alwayes in the Churche, but for a time vntill the Gospell had taken roote in the world. Why doe you not say the like of the other two, Pastors and Tea∣chers? if they at the least, were appointed to continue alwayes, you sée a Succession of Persons. And how can Saint Paules saying be otherwise verifyed, vnlesse some of those fiue shoulde alwayes continue, if not all, as the wordes doe rather import? For you séeme to deceyue your selfe, by thinking that none are Apostles but the twelue, none Euangelistes but the foure, none Prophetes but the foretellers of things to come. Where∣as in déede all the Successors of Saint Peter are Apostles (as I noted in the .28. Demaund,) and also whosoeuer else be the first conuerters of any Nation: and all the expounders of the Euangelistes and Prophetes, are Euangelistes and Prophets,
which you will not denie if you haue any skill in vnderstanding the Scriptures. No difference being betwéene these offices in the beginning and nowe, but onely that then they were giuen by mi∣racle, and now by order. As touching the second, you graunt our Church to haue such continuall Succession, and inferre therevpon, Ergo it is not the true Church (here Cap. 2. Pag. 5.) because the true Church should at some time or other be driuen out of sight. Wherevnto I haue answered Cap. 8. Pag. 144. shewing that you doe fouly abuse the Scripture to that false conclusion, and namely, that the time of the Churches flying into the wildernesse is not yet come. Againe you argue: If it be sufficient,Ar. 27. or any thing worth to rehearse the names of them that haue orderly succeeded in all ages in the Bi∣shops Sees, in an outward face of the Church: the Greeke Chur∣che is able to name as many as the Latine Church, and in as or∣derly succession: What of that, but onely this, that they therfore may better claime the Churche then you? And yet in trueth these Hereticall and Schismaticall Gréekes can no more shew Suc∣cession▪ then you. For your false Bishops are now in the Sées of C. Pole, of B. Bonner, of B. Therlebie, &c. and yet I trowe, you will not thereby claime Succession. So these later Gréekes haue not Succession but from them onely, who beganne this Se∣paration of theirs, and their heresies about the H. Ghostes pro∣céeding, &c. For in Saint Gregories time (whiche is ynough) they were in vnitie. Nam de Constantinopolitana Ecclesia,Greg. li. 7. Epist. 63. quis eam dubitet Sedi Apostolicae esse subiectam? &c. For as tou∣ching the Churche of Constantinople (saieth he) who can doubt that it is subiect to the See Apostolike? which thing both our most clement Lord the Emperour, and our brother Eusebius Bi∣shop of the same Citie, doe dayly professe. 44. Apostolike Church.Motiue 23. Next vnto this I say, that it is we, & not ye Protestants, which beleue ye Apostolike church, because we beleue ye Romane church, which hath ye See of ye two most glorious Apostles S. Peter & S. Paul, & which was ment by those Fathers who in their Coūcell added to ye article of ye créede ye word Apostolike, therby to specify the better the Catholike Church against such heretikes, as durst
challenge to themselues the Catholike Church, but had no colour to challenge the Romane Church, namely that Bishop of Rome which sat in the Apostles chaire, that is, which orderly and cano∣nically succéeded the Apostles. For otherwise the Donatistes and some others (we know) had their mocke bishop at Rome in a cor∣ner, whom they sent thither out of other countries, to lurke there for a stale to their simple people, which thing (among others) might cause the Fathers in their exposition of the Créede, to say rather, the Apostolike Church, then, the Romane Church. Ar. 96.Vnto this, Fulke hath two shiftes. First he saith: You are neuer able to answere the arguments that are brought to proue that Peter was neuer Bishop at Rome. And then where is al your bragges of Apostolike Sea, and succession, &c? Sée here cap. 2. pag. 3. how he confesseth, that S. Augustine and many other of the Fathers did likewise alleadge against Here∣tikes, the succession of that Apostolike Sée. And therfore consider to whom and for whom, it is that now he saith: And then where is all your bragges, &c I would not desire a better cause to discre∣dite quite these absurd Protestantes, then that they deny S. Pe∣ter to haue béen euer at Rome. For who knoweth not, that all the auncient writers are against them therein? and that no man for much more then a .1000. yeares together after the Apostles time, either denied it,Roff. in. li. A Petrus fuerit Ro∣mae. con. Vellaeum. Cochl. de Petro & Roma, cō. Velli. Wald. li 2. Doct. ar. 1. c. 7. & tom 3. ca. 129. Cop. dial. 1 ca. 15. or doubted of it? Besides sundrie most manifest argumentes to proue it: whereas the Wickleistes and Prote∣stants arguments against it (which he saith can neuer be answe∣red) are the most ridiculous things that euer man heard. Though Fulke bring not forth any one of them, yet I haue answered the very best of them here Pag. 237. And most excellent authors a∣mong the Catholikes haue alreadie written whole Bookes of this question, as Roffensis, & Cochleus: besides Thomas Wal∣densis, and many others that haue chapters of it in other bookes. Howbeit the scripture also it selfe is plaine ynough in it (if one be not too contentious) where S. Peter himselfe doth say that he wrote his first Epistle in Rome, calling it Babylon, as I noted cap. 9. pag. 156. And for S. Paules being there (which is ynough to proue the Apostolike Sée of that Church) the Actes are most e∣uident, Act. 28. In so much that also Fulke himself (after this ma∣ner to contrarie him selfe) doth confesse (here cap. 2. pag. 3.) that
the Churche of Rome was founded by the Apostles. In which place also he graunteth, that in the Fathers time it was an Apo∣stolike Church, howsoeuer now he would draw his necke out of the coller by denying Peter to haue bene there. But be it that Peter was there (he saith in his 2. shift:) except you proue Succession of doctrine and faith aswel as Succession of men, your Succession is not worth a straw. Yes sir, in prouing the Succession of men onely, we doe as much as the Fathers did: vn∣lesse you will say, that their doing also was not worth a strawe. For, a Succession of men there must be (the Scriptures are plaine therein, as the Fathers shewe.) But no companie, sauing the Romanes companie, can shew a Succession of men: There∣fore no companie but theirs, is the Church. In so much also that the Scripture and Fathers together doe say of that Succession, and of that onely: Ipsa est Petra,Mat. 16. Aug. in Ps. cōt. partem Donati. quam non vincunt superbae in∣ferorum portae. That is the Rocke, which the proude gates of hell doe not ouercome. And your selfe with your master Caluin doe confesse (here cap. 2. pag. 3.) that it continued in the Apostles faith and sounde doctrine for the first .400. yeares: which is y∣nough against you, because you also confesse (cap. 3.) that within the same time in it was praying for the dead, and many other pointes against your doctrine. 45. Chaunging.Moti. 24. Article 11. Dem. 14. But that you shoulde not haue any such euasion, I made my next Demaund expresly of that matter, noting, that the Romane Churche as it hath succession of men, so also hath succession of doctrine and faith, neuer to this day chaunging the doctrine and faith which it receiued of the Apostles. Now, what haue you to the contrarie? Of S. Victor who excommunicated the Asians,Ar. 47. I haue answered Dem. 28. that it is nothing else but your blasphe∣mous audacitie, to say, that he chaunged from his predecessors and vsurped authoritie in that doing. Touching also S. Boni∣face the third, against whom you alleage the saying of his Prede∣cessor S. Gregorie, None of my Predecessors would vse this pro∣phane title, to call himselfe Vniuersall Bishop: I haue answered Cap. 3. pag. 24. that you belie S. Boniface. For neither he nor any since him, no more then they before him, vsed that title, but the
cleane contrarie title, Seruus seruorum dei, which S. Gregorie of humilitie did begin. Thirdly you say, that the same Gregorie (as Hulderichus Bishop of Auspurge doth testifie) was the first that compelled Priestes to liue vnmaried. Which afterward, when he saw the inconuenience, he reuoked. And so you destroy your own ensample: for if he reuoked it, then is not he one that made a chaunge from his Fathers faith. You that will not beléeue all Antiquitie saying that Peter was at Rome, will yet haue no man doubt, but S. Gregorie saw such inconuenience in so shorte a time, that six thousand Infantes were straight begotten by the fornications of onely Subdeacons, yea and cruelly murdered, yea and all their heades caste into one certaine poole, and there∣fore found and taken vp by tale. Witnesse of all this, one that being Bishop of Auspurge wrote to Pope Nicolas the first, who was dead 56.Cop. dial. 1 cap. 22. yeares before this man was made Bishop. He that will Laugh more at large at the fable, let him reade M. Cope. As for Priestes Mariage, I noted cap. 3. pag. 12. & cap. 6. pag. 43. How they counted Iouinian an Heretike and a monster, long before S. Gregories time, for allowing of it. These are all the chaunges, that you note in the Church of Rome: vnlesse I must count this another, where you note D. Allen to confesse,Pur. 68. that the old vsage of the Church was, first to set satisfaction, and then to absolue, though now of late, to ab∣solue before satisfaction hath bene more vsed. Both maners haue bene alwayes vsed, but the first, of old more then the second, and the second, of late more then the first. This saith D. Allen, and it is euident to them that are skilfull in Antiquitie: namely such as did not make their confession before they fell sore sicke, they were absolued incontinently, and did their Penaunce after∣wards if they recouered. Hereticall Bishoppes and Priestes were oftentimes receyued (vppon cause) by onely absolution, without all satisfaction, yea and permitted to continue in their honours also. The Churches care both then and now, was and is, to haue all sinners truely contrite, before absolution: and that is sufficient before God. Neuerthelesse suche as haue offended afore also, are caused to doe their duetie accordingly. A straunge matter that these Heretikes, who haue quite taken all away, should controll the Church although she also had ta∣ken
all away: howe muche lesse, considering that she hath not taken any piece away, but onely putteth that more often to the second place, whiche she was wonte (as it is a thing indif∣ferent) to put in the firste place more often: and that accor∣ding to her power to edifie and not to destroye, seeing the people now so careles, that rather then they will doe suche pe∣naunce for satisfaction, they will not come to confession, and so dying without absolution goe to damnation: and seeing withall, that whereas satisfaction is no satisfaction vnlesse the partie bee firste in grace, his owne contrition before was alone, but nowe it hath the helpe of absolution whiche of it selfe conferreth grace, that nowe his satisfaction muche more probablye then before, is not baren. And therefore muche lesse satisfaction nowe, like to be more auayleable then muche more before: and yet he is warned withall if he be a great sinner, not to thinke but that he oweth muche more then he is inioyned: and therefore that he muste eyther paye it otherwise in his life, or procure pardon for it by greater authori∣tie, or els most certainely it will be exacted after his death. These (I say) are all the chaunges, to belong any way to the controuersies of this time, though you note some others, not so belonging. Which therefore I might omitte welynough. For it is inough for vs, that we can say with S. Augustine:Aug. epist. 165. In hoc or∣dine successionis nullus Donatista Episcopus inuenitur: In this orderly succession no Donatist (nor Protestant) Bishoppe is founde. As for other matters, if Iulianus Apostata chaunged into Paganisme, what were that to our purpose? Woulde that do any thing to proue a chaunge agaynst vs, namely that the Emperour whiche nowe is, Rodolph the second, is chaunged from the Religion of Constantinus the great? So therefore if any Pope had chaunged the Romaines into Arrians, or in∣to Monothelites, that were no vauntage for you. Howe muche lesse, considering you shewe neither so muche as that. You tell vs,Pur. 376. that Sabinianus condemned the Decrees of hys predecessour Gregorie, and Stephanus the Decrees of Formo∣sus, &c. Why then doe not you make Sabinianus rather the first Antichrist, but skippe him, and make the next to him the first, to witte, S. Boniface the third? Both he and some other
Popes are said (I graunt, though you alleage no author) to haue disanulled certaine Actes of their next predecessors, but not one to haue condemned any decrées made of doctrine. Againe you tell vs,Ar. 27.85.92. Pur. 344. Act. 23. that many of them were tyrantes, traitors, whoremongers, So∣domites, murtherers, poysoners, sorcerers, necromancers, warriers, and one whore also. So you blaspheme the Princes of your peo∣ple. But you shew not, that any of these (if they were such) did for all that chaunge Religion at Rome. S. Augustine long agoe told vs, where he reckeneth vp the Bishops of this Chaire, that it were nothing against the Church,Aug. epist. 165.166. Si quisquam Traditor per illa tempora subrepsisset, if any Traitor had crept into it al the while, because our Heauenly Master hath said vnto vs of euil Prelates, Doe what they say, but doe not what they doe, for they say and doe not,Mat. 23. warning vs thereby and assuring vs: That for them the Chaire of healthfull doctrine should not of vs be forsaken, in which the euill also are compelled to say that which is good. For it is not their owne that they say, but it is Gods, who in the chaire of vnitie hath set the doctrine of veritie. Wherefore also if any heretike créepe into it, we are secure, because we are warranted that he shall not teache his heresie out of it, much lesse shall he chaunge them whom he teacheth. For none teach heresies, but you and such others, that separate your selues from the vnitie of that Chaire.Ar. 91. Pur. 376. Therefore supposing that Honorius was a Mono∣thelite, both in opinion and in some secrete writing, yet did he not chaunge, nor goe about to chaunge the Romanes into Mo∣nothelites. Yea both he and the Church of Rome in his time and after his time did faithfully resist and mightily ouerthrowe that heresie, as you may sée in D. Saūders San. Mo. li. 7. pa. 418 Monarchie. Where you shall finde also the case ofIb. p. 518. Ar. 91. Pur. 443. Iohn .22. truely reported (he was so farre from chaunging the Romanes faith, that he vtterly denyed the error which his contentious enemies laid vnto him: Which was not, as you and Caluine doe belie the storie, against the Im∣mortalitie of the Soule, and resurrection of the body, but whether any Soules doe sée God before the Generall Resurrection.) Also of S. Sand. ib. pa. 324. ad 336. Liberius (of whom I also will report ye truth in the next Demaund, howbeit, your selfe likewise confessed Cap. 2. Pag. 3. the Romanes long after his time to haue continued without all chaunge.) Finally that fable of Sand. ib. pa. 436. Onuph. ad∣dit. ad Plat. in vita Io∣an. 8. Cop. Dial. 1.5.8. the woman Pope cléerely con∣futed,
and more copiously by Onuphrius and others. Mine owne chaunce it was in England long agoe, hearing a Protestant (who was counted a great Historian) stand vpon it, to say vnto him, that it was maruell, why among so many Historiographers not one made mention of her before Martinus Polonus, who was .400. yeares after her time. He therevpon brought out the same Martinus in a faire written hand, turned to the place, and behold, shée was not in the text, but in the Margine in an other hand. Nowe (quoth I, when I saw that) I perceiue, that also this Author fayleth you. He was confounded to sée it, and saide, he would at leasure looke his Bookes better. Therefore in harping continually vpon these most vnconsonant stringes, you do no more but declare your selues to be such as the Apostle pro∣phesied of: They will turne their yeares away from trueth,2. Tim. 4. they will not abide it, as that S. Peter was euer at Rome, &c. but vn∣to fables they will turne themselues most willingly, be they neuer so false, improbable, and absurd. 46. Our Auncetors saued, and theirs damned.Motiue 36. To make it yet more plaine, what a madnesse it is to forsake our Churche, and turne to the Protestantes, I note in the next Demaund, Saluation to be so certainly in our companie and Religion, that the Protestantes themselues dare not say, our people to haue béene damned for so many hundred yeares as they liued and dyed in our side. Whereas we say boldly, with the holy Fathers here Cap. 3. that whosoeuer is a Protestant, not onely in all, but so much as in any one point (as were Aerius, Ioui∣nianus, Vigilantius, &c.) is therefore a damnable Heretike. But they dare not so say, neither of our Masters, who knowing the preaching of those fellowes, condemned them, and therefore could not be excused by ignoraunce. No not so much as of the very Authors of our Monkes and Friers, as S. Bernard, Saint Frauncis, S. Dominike, of whom what Peter Martyr saide, I reported Cap. 5. Pag. 33. the whole Chapter is also of Fulkes owne wordes to the same effect, specially Pag. 30. where he dare not pronounce of manifest Papistes but that they might be sa∣ued for building vpon the foundation in his sence, though no
Protestant builde vpon the foundation in S. Paules sense, as there I shew. Therefore his Diuinitie maketh with me in this Demaund, rather then against me: although he denyeth some particulare Saintes of ours,Ar. 23.24.25.85. and also the Canonization of Saintes. An ea∣sie matter it is for Heretikes, when they can not proue the Ca∣tholike religion to be heresie agaynst God, to make it by their Parliament Treason against the king, and then when they put vs to death for it,Ioan. 19. to say, we be no Martyrs, but Traytors. Euen as the perfidious Iewes made as though our Master could not be king ouer our Soules, but by Treason agaynst Cesar. So the Heretikes say of his Vicare. In suche casting of their blas∣phemous mouthes into heauen, they doe but consent to the wic∣ked that shedde the Saintes bloud. Those whom Gods Church hath declared to be Saintes, it is not Fulke, nor his baudy Bale that with all their durt can blotte them out of the booke of life. If S. Liberius were once an Arrian, might he not be canonized for a Saint repenting afterwards? Was not S. Augustine once a Manichée? Yet the trueth is (as D. Sanders sheweth at large) that he neuer was an Arrian, nor neuer saide of any so to be, but onely by compulsion to haue subscribed to the Arrians a∣gainst his owne conscience, or rather not to the Arrians, but onely to the deposition of Athanasius: So one or two of the Doctors wrote, béeing deceyued with the false rumour that the Heretikes had spredde, before the trueth was set out in the Ec∣clesiasticall Historie. But where was your witte, when you alleaged against Canonization, the example of burning Her∣mannus the Heretikes boanes (who neuer was canonized) by commaundement of Bonifacius 8. in Ferraria, where they had worshipped him twentie yeres Apocryphally? You say, king Henry the sixt should haue bene canonized, but onely for lacke of money ynough. When you bring your authors, you shall receiue your answere. We can not proue, you say, that the Pope and our Church hath canonized the Apostles and principall Martyrs. To make holydayes of them, & to name them among the Saints in Diptychis, in the holy Canon of the Masse, is not this proufe sufficient of their canonization? yea and that the Primitiue Church which did so canonize them was not your church, because
you haue taken away their Dyptica, and their dayes, of S. Lau∣rence (I say) and of so many other most glorious Martyrs, which had suche canonicall memories in the Primitiue Churche also. Yea and would take away the Apostles dayes also, if you might haue your will, as you vttered here in the 22. Dem. in speaking against all dayes of Saintes. O but you haue a better waye to know Saints, to wit, they whose names are written in the booke of life. You might do well to set out that booke in print, that we might correct our Callendar after it. If you haue not the booke it selfe, haue you any more certayne way to know who are written in it, then is the Churches declaration? Or do you allow her te∣stimonie in canonizing some Scripture for Gods word,Saint Fulke by his ovvne in∣dustrie. & reiect it in canonizing some men for Gods Saintes? But it is great iniurie to the Saintes of God, that they be not so accounted while they liue. Belike you would be called Saint Fulke, & that out of hand. But for ought that I know you must tarry, vntill you ex∣tend your doctrine and certaintie of Predestination farther. For as yet you teach no more but that your selfe must and do knowe your selfe to be predestinate, and so may canonize your selfe for a Saint for euer: when you teach that others must know as much of you, then blame them if they also do not canonize you. And in the meane time blame not the Pope for canonization, nor cōpare it to the making of Gods which the Heathen vsed: séeing it is no greater a matter then your selfe can doe, nor the title greater then men aliue should haue, and specially séeing Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage haue (as you say) as solemne feastes in your Bohemians Callender, as Peter and Paule. No man els néedeth to take the paynes, your selfe build vp againe with one hand, that which you pulled downe with the other. 47 Communion of Saintes. The next Demaund is about The Cōmunion of Saintes,Moti. 43. that is to say, of all Christians: to shew our Countreymen to what a paucitie, and against what a multitude they ioyne them selues, and that in the matter of saluation or damnation. So it is, that Fulke doth brag of the most part of Europe, here in the 9. Dem. and cap. 9. pag. 177. naming England, Scotland, Ireland, Fraunce, Germanie, Denmarke, Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, Spayne, & Italy.
I denie not, but there are Heretikes in al these Countreys, at the least in corners. And therefore if all Heretikes be of your reli∣gion and communion, that you may bragge as you doe. But the trueth is, that euen those Heretikes also which be of your Reli∣gion out of England (if any be, for I doubt whether any will al∣low a woman to be head of the Church, but only your selues, to name no other of your peculiar articles) yet are they not, I say, of your communion, nor you of theirs, as appeareth euidently by this, that neither in a Generall Councell, if you should hold any) you haue authoritie one ouer another, no more then two distinct Realmes with their seuerall kings haue authoritie one ouer the other in worldly matters. But Catholikes in the meane time, whersoeuer they are, they be al of one Religion & of one commu∣nion. Therfore to giue the ignorant some light in these matters: as S. Augustine said often against the Donatists,Aug. de vn. Eccl. 3. De pasto∣rib. ca. 8. so do I. I say two things: first, that in all Nations & parts of Nations where any of al these Sects are found, Catholikes also are found, & day∣ly do encrease. One example for all, of our owne Countrie, best knowen to our Countreymen: where although they be turned out of all their Churches (as in very few others) yet the multi∣tude of the people is knowen to be stil Catholike, & in hart of our communion, though drawen against their wills to the contrarie, yea and innumerable of them recōciled, as all in maner would be (who séeth not?) if they were at their owne libertie. Secondly I say, that Catholikes are in many Nations and partes of Nati∣ons, where none at all of the Sectes are, or so fewe that they are not to be counted of: as in all Spayne, all Portugall, all Italie, most partes of Fraunce, many partes of Germanie, &c. Wherby any man may easily conceiue, that the Catholikes at this day in Europe are incomparably more then all the Sectaries put toge∣ther, encreasing withall euery day (specially by meanes of Se∣minaries and Iesuites for the purpose) and they diminishing. How much more, adding to these ye Catholikes that be in Africa, and in Asia, among the old named Christians of those parts? And more againe infinitely, adding yet the innumerable new Chri∣stians in the farder partes of them both, conuerted within these fiftie yeres by the Iesuites? And agayne the like in Nouo orbe vnder the king of Spayne, by the Friers: in so much that many
yeares since it is written of that alone:Surius ad An. do. 1558. Tot autem hominū mil∣lia in illo nouo orbe Christi, &c. So many thousand men haue in that new world receiued the faith of Christ, as may be in this our old world. So is the comparison at this present time. But how much greater yet is the oddes, if we looke backe to the times past, and consider, that in the Nations where now the Sectes are, a few yeares agoe all were Catholikes, they occupied all ye Chur∣ches, so many hundred yeares together as from the first conuersi∣on of ech Nation. Yea generally in all other Christian Nations also wheresoeuer & whensoeuer, euen from the Apostles time, all were of our communion, because all at ech time were of ye Popes communion, who for the time was, and al the Popes from ye first to the last of one communion, no one of them separating himselfe from his predecessors communion, as of purpose I shewed in the 28. Demaund. This is the Communion of Saintes in déede, & not these scattered Sectes, much lesse any one of them by it self alone as our English Protestantes, &c. Who also (as I shewed in the 40. Dem.) were neuer afore now: & therefore accordingly they professe to haue no communion with the Christians that liued before vs, & be now in Heauen & in Purgatorie: whereas with them also we haue communion of mutuall prayer & helpe, euen in the same manner as S. Augustine had (whose communion is confessed to be the communion of all Saintes) as this one place of his shall testifie for all, where he sheweth, that to be buried in the Martyrs Churche doth profite the deade, in this that their friendes aliue remembring the place, eisdem Sanctis illos,Au. de cura pro mort. ca. 4. & vlt. tanquā patronis susceptos, apud dominū adiuuandos orando cōmendent. doe pray and commend them to the same Sainctes, as clients to their patrones, to be holpen with our Lord. This is the most glo∣rious infinite Christian companie, that our Countrey hath for∣saken, to follow a fewe miserable blind guides into the pitte of euerlasting ruine. 48. By their fruites.Motiue 39. In the next Demaund is noted (according to S. Augustines writing against the Manichées, De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae) the fruites of ye Catholike Religion, that Christ worketh in this foresaid communion, both now & euer, in the good life euen of the
common sorte of our seculare people, and much more in the per∣fection of our Religious. And contrariwise the waste of all per∣fection and of all vertue, which the Protestantes Doctrine hath brought wheresoeuer it raigneth, by setting men at libertie to doe what they liste, with vaine securitie of Onely faith, not the Catholike faith (which onely is faith) but of a new inuented faith or persuasion for euery one that he is predestinate. That if euer any False prophetes mighte be knowen by their fruites,Mat. 7. these may. I néede not repete the rest that I say in this Demaūd to this effect,Pur. 1. to 31 241.459. Ar. 94. whereof D. Allen also hath in his Preface said suf∣ficiently. Fulke in comparing with vs to the contrarie, bragging at his felowes holines, and rayling at some of our euill liues, thinketh bylike that he can with wordes turne midday and mid∣night, one into the other. He nameth London as it is now, and biddeth D. Allen (if thou canst for thy guts) name any citie in the world that is comparable vnto it. Who would require vs to answere such beastly impudencie? With like audacitie he rayleth at Rome, as if it were hell it selfe. I maruaile then how it com∣meth to passe, that nothing more confirmeth our Countrymen in the Catholike faith, nor alienateth them from the Protestāts, then to goe and see Rome. Whereof we haue innumerable expe∣riences.2. Reg. 10. At one word, we find there as the Quéene of Saba did find with Salamon, whatsoeuer we heare by reading in S. Hie∣rome, &c. Also by reuelation of our brethren, whē we come to the place, and sée with our eyes, we are forced to say, that halfe was not told vs. I hope the world shall know Rome to your confu∣sion ere it be long, by a booke that may with the grace of God be set forth to reporte the trueth. As for London, no true and godly English heart can but feare vnto it euen as to Sodome and Go∣morre. We néede to name vnto you no other citie, but London it selfe when it was Catholike: and let the Auncients be iudges betwene vs both. They can tell you, that if any good orders be there at this present, they are lightly but the relikes of the Ca∣tholike time, as it were feathers stickt downe by such as stole the géese. So can they tell you of the whole realme, and the like of all other realmes.Pur. 238.236. You charge D. Allen, that he appealeth to the yonger sort, who haue not knowen, &c. But you charge him fals∣ly. He telleth good yong men, that they must looke backe a great
way, to learne their duties of the blessed times past. Which (thāks be to God) great numbers haue done, and dayle doe, and thereby returne and submit them selues to their mother the Catholike Church: which if the elder sorte who know these thinges better then the yonger, do not in like maner, it is for no other cause, but that they be more entangled with the world, then the yonger are: otherwise if the world were not on your side,2. Cor. 5. it is well knowen to them specially in whom God hath put the word of reconcilia∣tion, that your ministers might in all places almost reade and preach to the bare walles. 49 All enimies.Moti. 44. Article. 4. The 49. Demaund noteth, that it is our Church, against which all enimies of Christ haue fought, and which hath preuailed a∣gainst them all. As it is euident by this, that our Church holdeth still all those truethes, which Arrius, Aerius, or any other of hell gates did euer impugne, and because it ioyneth friendship with no enimie, but defieth them all alike: whereas the Protestantes ioyne in opinion with many olde Heretikes, and in friendship with all the miscreantes of this time, because their endeuour is not against falshood, but onely to ouerthrow our Church. Against this Fulke hath nothing, but rather with it expresly, where he saith:Ar. 11.15. The true Catholike Church hath alwayes resisted all false opinions, and by the ayde of God obteined the victorie. The true Church of Christ hath always stood stedfast, when all Heretikes haue bene, and shall be confounded. 50 Sure to continue.Motiue 47 After this I tell the Protestants, that they were best to leaue their vaine kicking with Saul against the pricke,Act. 9. because they can not preuayle, as neither their prowders could. The Fathers euen so tolde those prowder and mightier Heretikes in their time, that the Church (I say) and namely the Church of Rome is the Rocke, which the proude gates of hell do not ouercome. And we sée, that time hath iustified their saying. And so will it iustifie our saying also for hereafter. Euen as Fulke also him selfe saith:Ar. 78. Pur. 298. In despight of the diuel and all her enemies, she is to this day pre∣serued, and shall be to the worlds ende: and none other but she.
Moti. 48.51 Apostasie. Last of al I shew, that it is not so much an Heresie, as a plaine Apostasie from Christ, that the Protestants haue brought in vn∣der the name of ye Gospel: Wherof also I haue said ynough ca. 8. pag. 118. So, that if it were euer damnable to giue eare to any Heretikes, it is damnable to giue eare to these. Which it were good for all men to thinke earnestly vpon, before it be to late. ¶The eleuenth Chapter. What grosse Contradictions Fulke is driuen to vtter a∣gainst him selfe, while he struggleth against Gods Church and the Doctrine thereof. BEsides all that hath bene yet said, another most iust motiue, not to follow the Protestants, may be this to any reasona∣ble man, because they know not themselues what to holde nor what to say, and therefore doe vtter straunge contradic∣tions in their bookes, by reason that they will say any thing ra∣ther then yéelde plainely to the trueth. A notable ensample hereof we haue in Fulke, specially about the question of the Church in his booke of the Articles, as I will here note very briefely, lea∣uing to the discrete Readers consideratiō, what I might enlarge vpon euery particular. First, as touching the Church of Rome, on the one side, thus he saith:Ar. 96. You are neuer able to answere the argumentes that Pe∣ter was neuer at Rome. And then where is the Apostolike Sea, & succession, &c? Then on the contrarie side: The Church of Rome was founded by the Apostles, Pur. 373.361.374. it was an Apostolike Church. 2 Pur. 373.374.Those auncient Fathers (whom D. Allen doth name, the last of them is Vincentius Lirinensis An. 420.) did appeale to the iudgement of the Church of Rome, against all heresies, and Pur. 373.374.among the Apostolike Churches, specially named the Church of Rome: because it continued in the doctrine of the Apostles. Yet contra, where Apud Au. de gra. Chr. cont. Pelag. c. 43 Pelagius within that compasse commen∣ded S. Ambrose for the Romaine faith, and most pure sence in the Scriptures: Fulke saith therevpon, Pu. 405. And by the way note here the Hereticall bragge of the Romaine faith. 3 Speaking of the same Fathers and Church of Rome: Pur. 374. It had by Succession reteined euē vntill (their) dayes, that faith which
it did first receiue of the Apostles. Contra: Ar. 85. She (the Church of Rome) hath had no orderly Succession of Bishops: except so ma∣ny Schismes as they write of, be orderly Successions. By the time of those Fathers, there had bene foure Schismes. 4 Pur. 373.374.It continued at that time in the doctrine of the Apostles, Pur. 373.374.it reteined by Succession that faith which it did first receiue of the Apostles. Contra: He charged it with sundrie errors here, Cap. 3. & .4. namely P. Liberius with Arrianisme, P. Innocenti∣us for housling of Infantes, & eight Popes for the Supremacie. 5 Pur. 374. Ar. 79.It was a true Church, an Apostolike Church, Pur. 374. Ar. 79.a faith∣full Church, true (Pur. 374. Ar. 79. and Apostolike) Faith and Religion haue dwelled in her. Contra:Ar. 85.16 106.10.27. The Church of Rome neuer preached the word of trueth. She neuer had sence she first arose, the mini∣string of Sacramentes according to Christes institution. The true Catholike Church hath ouerthrowen Heresies of all sortes. But the Popish Church was neuer able to encounter with Heretikes. Ar. 85.16 106.10.27.Rome may be a nurse of Antichristians, but neuer did good vnto Christians.Ar. 85.16 106.10.27. I am able to proue, that the Primitiue Church affirmed, Supra pag. 29. your Church to be the Church of Antichrist. He mea∣neth the Supra ca. 9. pag. 155. places of S. Irenée, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, calling Rome Babylon, which he vnderstandeth as though they had so called the Church of Rome in their time also, as the Protestants doe now at this time. 6 Ar. 102.38. Pur. 287.The Popish Church is a puddle of all false doctrine and heresie, whereof the whore beareth a cuppe full, out of which all Nations haue drunke. Ar. 102.38. Pur. 287. Euen from the Apostles time the diuell neuer left to set in his foote, for his sonne Antichristes dominion, vntill he had placed him in the Temple of God, & prepared the wide world for his walke, and then cameAr. 102.38. Pur. 287. The Generall defec∣tion. Contra:Ar. 38.16.33.34. Supr. p. 117. All Nations neuer consented to the doctrine of the Papistes. For (as it hath bene often said) the Greeke Church and (all) other Orientall Churches (of Asia and Africa) neuer re∣ceiued the Popish Religion, in many chiefe pointes, and specially in acknowledging the Popes authoritie, they will not vnto this day acknowledge her doctrine to be Catholike, nor her authori∣tie to be lawfull. And yet we shall now heare that the preuailing of the Popes religion, and his Antichristian exaltation consisteth specially in that point.
Ar. 36.7 The religion of the Papistes came in, and preuayled in the yere of our Lord 607. in which the Pope first obteined his An∣tichristian exaltation, to wit, Bonifacius the 3. of Phocas the Em∣perour, that the Bishop of Rome should be called and counted the head of all the Church. Contra in the same place: Because you speake of the first entring of Popish religion, which depen∣deth chiefly vpon the Popes authoritie: it first began to aduaunce it selfe in Victor, about the yere of our Lord 200. And likewise in diuers others before S. Bonifacius the third, as he confesseth here cap. 3. and withall, that the Church of Rome all that while was the Church of Christ, and not of Antichrist. Ar. 102. Pur. 287.238.8 The Popish Church is a puddle of all false doctrine and he∣resie. Euen in the Apostles time, and from that time, in all times, whensoeuer, and wheresoeuer was any peece of myste, or darke corner (though all the reste were light) there were the steppes of your walke. It may be a shame for you Papistes, to leaue and condemne for heresie all that is true in the Fathers writings, and agreable to the Scripture.Ar. 43. Contra, where he distinguisheth the Religion of the Papistes, from the great heresies, and open aduer∣saries, that sought to beate downe the chief foundations of Chri∣stian faith, as the Valentinians, Marcionistes, Manichees, Arrians, Sabellians, and such like monsters. Ar. 43.36.38. Supra c. 10. pag. 223.9 We say not that the Religion of the Papists came in soden∣ly, but that it entred by small degrees at the first: and therefore was lesse espyed by the true Pastors beeing earnestly occupied a∣gainst great heresies, not preached against, winked at because it had a shew of pietie and charitie, and at length allowed of Au∣gustine and others, who followed the common errors of their time. Specially when a Generall defection and departing from the faith was foreshewed, what maruell were it, if none coulde preach against it as it first entred?Ar. 92.36.37. Contra: The Churche of Christ in such places as she is, suffreth no man damnably abusing her Religion, without open reprehension. Ar. 11.10 The true Catholike Church hath alwayes resisted all false opinions, contrarie to the word of God, as her duetie was, and fought against them, and obteined the victorie, and triumphed ouer them.Pur. 419. Ar. 35.36. Contra: In those auncient times (they of the true Catholike Church) did not alwayes weigh what was most agrea∣ble
to the worde of God: but if Heretikes had any thing that see∣med to haue a shewe of pietie or charitie, they would drawe it in∣to vse. So they tooke into the Church of Christ, many abuses and corruptions, vntill at the length, An. 607. the religion of the Papistes preuayled. And (c) since that time, that diuelish heresie hath alwayes increased in error, vntill the yere 1414. 11 That blasphemous heresie of Purgatorie,To the Reader. Pu. 26.166.184.177.269.362.363.419.186. which is moste blasphemous against Christ, against the bloud of Christ, against his merites and satisfaction for our sinnes, and against Gods vn∣speakable mercies: and occasion of most licentious wickednes in all thē that beleue it, nothing conuenient for the disciples & mem∣bers of Christ. No suffrages were made for the dead by the Apo∣stles or their lawfull successors. Contra here cap. 3. he confesseth that the Fathers held it, and yet notwithstanding that they were members of the true Church (ca. 2.) and held the foundation Ie∣sus Christ (cap. 5.) and all the substance of true doctrine. Pur. 393.405. And also that they did inuocate Saintes: denying in other Supr. pa. 139.140. places, that such be true Christians. The like Su. p. 141. of Fasting. 12 Pur. 51.26.166.177.184. The opinion of Purgatorie & satisfaction of sinnes after this life, is the very doctrine of licentiousnesse, to mainteine wic∣ked men in their presumptuousnes. For what hast will they make to amendment & newnes of life, when they haue hope of release after their death? Contra: As S. Augustine saith,Pur. 448. it is but for smal faultes: or as M. Allen saith, for great faultes that by penaunce are made small. And is God suche a mercifull father to punishe small faultes so extremely in his children, whom he pardoneth of all their great and haynous sinnes? O blasphemous helhoundes. Sée how vehement he is in contradicting him selfe, to iustifie that saying of D. Allens, [I am well assured there dare no man,Pur. 150. though he were destitute of Gods grace, yet not for shame of him selfe, affirme that the doctrine of Purgatorie is hurtfull to vertuous life.] Considering that people with vs are told, that to escape hell it selfe, they must do much more then the Protestants require, and more againe to escape Purgatorie, according to S. Augustines threatning here cap. 9. pag. 212. 13 How long soeuer the true Church were hidden,Ar. 73. Supra ca. 1. whether it were a 1000. yeres, or 2000. yeres, this is certayne, that out of this Church none could be saued. Contra, here ca. 5. he counteth
it ynough, if the faith of their saluation were in the onely foun∣dation Iesus Christ, and that in such a sense, as agréeth to men in déede out of the Church. Ar. 61 74. Pur. 238.14 They which hold the foundation that is Christ (to wit the Article of Iustification by the onely mercie of God, and of the onely Sonne of God) are doubtlesse members of the true Church of Christ. Contra here cap. 10. pag. where he saieth, that the A∣nabaptistes are abominable heretikes, and that they are not Pro∣testants: who yet do hold that article iump as the Protestants do. Ar. 36.38. Ar. 71.78.79.80.15 A generall departing from the faith, was foreshewed: and it was fulfilled An. 607. Contra: The Church was neuer lost (neither when the departing was Generall) but hidden (in the wildernesse, that is) from the eyes of the world. She is to this day preserued, and shal be to the worldes end. Christ hath neuer wan∣ted his Spouse in earth, he hath neuer ben a head without a body. Ar. 2.96.26.27.16 The Primitiue Church of the Apostles hath continued vn∣to this day by succession not of persons and places, but of doc∣trine, faith, and trueth. These very wordes conteine a manifest contradiction. For how can a Church, or doctrine, faith, and truth cōtinue, but in persons and places? in so much that he saith also: We doubt not, but God hath alway stirred vp some faithful tea∣chers, that haue instructed his Church in the necessarie pointes of Christian doctrine. Ar. 15.79.17 The true Church of Christ hath alwayes stoode stedfast & inseperable from Christ her head, though the blind worlde, when they see her, will not acknowledge her to be his Spouse, but per∣secute her, as if she were an adulteresse, Contra in the same place: The true Church vnder the Emperours Constantinus, Constans. and Valens, was greatly infected with the heresie of Arius. And in another place:Ar. 79. The visible Church may become an adultresse, and be deuorced from Christ. And so is that faithfull Church of Rome become an harlot. Ar. 79.18 The true Church consisting of Gods elect, and the liuely members of the body of Christ, shal neuer commit such adultery, &c. But the visible Church may separate her selfe from Christ. As though there were another Church besides the visible Church, and so two Churches.Ar. 65. Contra: Wheresoeuer the Catholike Church be in partes, it is one body of Christ. And therfore in dede
there is neuer no Church, but the visible Church, the other is but an imagination of the Protestants to delude the world withall. As though Luther and the rest that appeared with him, had afore their appearing bene secrete Protestants, whereas in deede they were open Papistes. 19 Anno 607. the Church fled into the wildernes, that is,Ar. 16.27.79.36. out of the sight and knowledge of the world, there to remaine a long season: where all this while God hath preserued her vntill suche time as he thought good, now in our daies to bring her out of her secrete place in the wildernes, into the open sight of the world a∣gaine. Contra:Ar. 77. Diuers times it was bold to chalenge preaching and ministring of the Sacraments, yea and so boldly, that it cost many of the chalengers their liues. As Berengarius, Bruno, Mar∣silius de Padua, Ioannes de Gaudano, Ioannes Wickleue, Walden, Ioannes Hus, Ieronymus de Praga, &c. Where besides his mani∣fest contradiction, I note two things against him: one, that it cost not all these, yea very few of these, their liues, as by the storie it is certayne. The other, that neither these afore their appearing were secrete Protestantes or Heretikes, but open Papistes or Catholikes, as I noted before of Luther. And so he hath not yet found his Chimera or inuisible Church. 20 To bring her againe into open light.Ar. 16.96. Which is now brought to passe in our dayes. Contra: From the yere of our Lord 1414.Ar. 36. (being the time of the Councell of Constance) the bright beames of the Gospell haue shined in the world. 21 The Reuelation of Antichrist (with the Churches flight in∣to the wildernes) was An. 607. when Bonifacius the third, &c.Ar. 38.36.16. For vntill then the mysterie of iniquitie was preparing for his re∣uelation and cōming, and for the Generall defection. Contra:Ar. 16. She hath not decayed there in the wildernes, but bene always pre∣serued, vntil god should reueale Antichrist, which is now brought to passe in our dayes. 22 The Churches being in the wildernes, was,Ar. 27.95. to be out of the sight & knowledge of the wicked. Contra, speaking of the same space, She was narrowly persecuted of the Romish Antichrist for a long season. Againe: Although it were vnknowen to the Pa∣pistes, yet it was in Italie when Marsilius of Padua preached: in Fraunce, when Waldo: in England, whē Wickleue: in Bohemia,
when Hus, and Ierom of Prage did florish. Why? all these were well knowen to the Papistes. Ar. 80.23 A rule of the Logicians: No man knoweth a relatiue, except he know the correlatiue thereof: Therefore though Christ had a bodie in earth, yet could it be knowen of none, but such as knew Christ the head of that bodie, of whom the Papistes were igno∣rant.Ar. 96. Contra: Our Church is now againe brought to light and knowlege of the world. So that now bylike the Papistes know Christ:Pur. 450. Ar. 77.79.80. or the Logicians rule is verified onely for the time of the Churches being in the wildernes, according as in other places he moderateth the matter, saying: We beleeue that the Church is not alwayes knowen to the wicked vpon earth. Pur. 405. Ar. 95.82.74.80.24 We beleeue that the vniuersall Church is not seene at all of men, because it is in heauen. Contra: Our Church, when it was most hidden, might rightly be called Catholike (that is vniuer∣sall) &c. Here cap. 10. Dem. 6. And whereas you say, that no man aliue could name the place where it was, you make an impudent lye: For although it were vnknowen to the Papistes and enemies thereof, yet was it knowen to the true members thereof. Pur. 377.25 And as for our Mother Church is no certaine place, or companie of men in any one place vpon earth, but Ierusalem which is aboue, is mother of vs al. Contra: Ar. 95.79.82.106. That no man aliue could name the place where it was, is an impudent lye. It was in Italy, when Marsilius preached, &c. Vt supra in contrad. 22. Ar. 95.79.82.106.Chrs;s;t hath neuer wanted his Spouse in earth, though the blind worlde when they see her, will not acknowledge her to be his Spouse, but persecute her as if she were an adulteresse. Ar. 95.79.82.106. She was knowen to them that were her children. Ar. 95.79.82.106. The Church of Christ is the nurse of Christians. Ierusalem that is from aboue, is mother of vs all. Ar. 95.26 It is not called Catholike because it should be euery where. For that it neuer was, nor neuer shall be. Contra: Ar. 73.83.80. Sup. pa. 117 It should o∣uerflow and fill all the world with righteousnes. Esa. 10.Ar. 73.83.80. Sup. pa. 117 That God hath an holy vniuersall Congregation, it is necessarie to be∣leeue. Ar. 73.83.80. Sup. pa. 117 It is dispersed in many places ouer all the world. 27 Ar. 12.3.69. Christes Church is now by God inlarged farther thē the Popish Church. Contra: Ar. 73.80 It is but a small flocke in compa∣rison of the malignant Church (of Antichrist) whose number is
as the sand of the sea. Apoc. 20. 28 It is a good argument that the Popish Church is not the Church of Christ,Ar. 27. because it was neuer hidden since it first sprang vp: in so much that you can name the notable persons in all ages in their gouernement and ministerie, and especially the suc∣cession of Popes, you can rehearse in order vpon your fingers. And it were a token that our Church were not the true Church, if we could name suche notable persons in their gouernement and ministerie. Contra: Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. Suche officers as are necessarie for the conseruation of Gods people in the vnitie of fayth and the knowledge of Christe, our Churche hath neuer lacked, notwith∣standing that through iniurie of the time Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. (because our Chur∣che had not so many Registers, Chroniclers, and remembraun∣cers) the remembraunce of all their names is not come vnto vs. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. For the authoritie of the Bible we haue the testimonie of the true Churche in all ages. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. Our Congregation hath euer had possession of the Scriptures.Their inuisible Church had al∣vvayes the Scripture in the vulgare tongues Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. God hath neuer suffered the true Churche to be destitute of the necessarie vse of the Scripture: Whiche the Popishe Churche hath so keapt in an vnknowen tongue, that the people coulde haue no vse, muche lesse the necessarie vse thereof. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. The Churche of God hath alwayes had Scholes and Vniuersities for the mainteinance of godly learning. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. The true Catholike Church hath alwayes re∣sisted all false opinions. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. It was neuer so secret nor hidden, but it might be knowen of all those that had eyes to see it. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. That thousand yeres there was gathering together for preaching, mini∣string, and correcting. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. God hath alway stirred vp some faith∣full teachers. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82. The Church hath neuer bene afrayde to do her office towards her children and true members, in teaching, ex∣horting, comforting, confirming, &c. 29 The Popish Church was neuer hidden since it first sprang vp. Contra:Ar. 27. Ar. 85. The Church of Rome hath not alwayes practised open preaching, and neuer preached the word of trueth. 30 Touching the text Mat. 5. of a Citie buylded vpon an hill,Ar. 100. which can not be hidden, after he hath giuen his sense of it, he saith: Hereby it appeareth how fondly some Papistes (and some of the Doctors in their error) do expoūd this place to proue, that the Church must alwayes be visible. Contra euen in his owne
exposition there: It is properly meant of the Apostles and their successors the ministers of the Church: he teacheth them aboue al other men, to looke diligently to their life & conuersation: for as they excell in place & dignitie, so the eyes of all men are set vpon them. As a citie builded vpon an hill, must needes be seene of all that come neare it, so they beeing placed in so high an office and dignitie, shall be noted and marked aboue all other men. One part of the Church is alwayes visible to the eyes of all men, and can not be hidden: and yet the whole Church, and so also that part, is not alwayes visible, but may be hidden, and was hidden for a 1000. yeres. So he saith. 31 Ar. 35. Pur. 458. The true Church decayed immediatly after the Apostles time. And so the error of praying for the dead was continued frō a corrupt state of the Church of Christ, vnto a plaine departing away into the Church of Antichrist. Contra: The Primitiue pure Church for the space of an hundreth yeares after Christ. Againe: Ar. 16. Pur. 458. An. 607. The Church fled into the wildernes, there to remaine a long season, where she hath not decayed, but bene alwayes pre∣serued, vntill God should bring her againe to open light now in our dayes.Pur. 364. The true Church shall neuer decay, but alway raigne with Christ. The false Synagoge shall dayly more and more de∣cay, vntill it be vtterly destroyed with Antichrist the head therof. If this be not contradiction, it is much worse, to wit, that Lu∣ther and his Apostles haue giuen vs a visible Church which shall not decay, Whereas Christ and his Apostles gaue vs a visible Church which did decay, yea and plainly departe away into A∣postasie. 32 At euery word he calleth the Pope Antichrist and the head of the malignant Church. Contra: in some places he maketh two distincte heades and their distincte companies.Ar. 16.95. As, when Maho∣met in the East, and Antichrist the Pope in the west, seduced the world, then the Church fled into the wildernes. Againe: The Po∣pish Church is not in euery parte of the world: for Mahomets sect is in the greatest parte. 33 That the true Church may erre, and hath erred, notwith∣standing any priuilege it hath by Gods Spirite, we hard him say cap. 3. Nowe to the contrarie. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62. Neither hath the Spirite of God failed to leade her into all trueth. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62. There be some prero∣gatiues
of Gods Spirite, that are necessarie for the saluation of Gods elect, as the gift of vnderstanding, the gift of faith, &c And these the Spouse of Christ hath neuer wanted. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62. True Faith &c. might be signes of the true Church. The Spouse of Christ hea∣reth the voice of Christ, and is ruled thereby. The Church of God is the piller & stay of truth, Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62. so called because that wheresoeuer the Church is, either visible or inuisible, ther is the truth. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.S. Paul by this title doth admonish Pastors and preachers, how great a burden and charge they susteine, that the truth of the Gospell can not be cōtinued in the world but by their ministery in the Church of God which is the piller and stay of truth. This their duety true preachers considering, are diligent in their calling to preach the trueth. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62. As our Church is the piller and stay of trueth, so is she also the house of trueth, which knoweth nothing but him that is the trueth it selfe Iesus Christ, & his most holy Scripture, in which this trueth is signed and testified. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62. We require you to beleeue the true Cathòlike Church onely: and immediatly againe to the contrarie: We require you not to beleue any one companie of men, more then another. 34 The error (of Purgatorie and praying for the dead) is con∣tinued from a corrupt state of the Church of Christ,Pur. 458. vnto a playn departing away into the Church of Antichrist. Contra: The true and onely Church of God is so guyded by Gods spirite,Ar. 88. and directed by his word, that she can not induce any damnable error to continue: No, nor suffereth any man damnably abusing her religion, without open reprehension: and yet Purgatorie, &c. came in with silence. 35 Ar. 5.4.9. The Church of Christ hath of the holy Ghost a iudge∣ment to discerne true writings from counterfectes, and the word of God of infallible veritie, from the writing of men which might erre. Ar. 5.4.9. She hath commended the bookes of holy Scripture to be beleeued of all true Christians. Ar. 5.4.9. We persuade vs of the au∣thoritie of Gods booke, because we haue most stedfast assurance of Gods spirite for the authoritie of it, with the testimonie of the true Church in all ages. Contra:Pur. 219. All other writings are in better case then the Scriptures are with you. For other writings may be coūted the works of their authors, without your censure: the ho∣ly Scripture may not be counted the word of God, except you
liste so to allow it. Other writings are of credite according to the authoritie of the writers: The holy Scriptures with you haue not credite according to the authoritie of God the author of them, but according to your determination. Ar. 65. Ar. 82.36 Those that by true Christians haue bene called and coun∣ted for Heretikes, haue proued so in deede. Contra: This De∣maund hath a false principle: that the Church ought to be a Christian mans (onely: it is not in D. Allens principle) staye in all troubles and tempestes. Ar. 65.37 And therefore the Papistes, being called and counted He∣retikes of true Christians (that is, of the Protestantes) without doubt are Heretikes in deede. Contra: He is a foolish Sophi∣ster,Ar. 66. that reasoneth from names to things: as you do most vaine∣ly and childishly. Ar. 86. Pur. 367.38 There is neuer Heresie, but there is as great doubt of the Church, as of the matter in question. Contra: Augustines ar∣gument of the publike prayers of the Church, tooke no holde of the Pelagians by force of trueth that is in it, but by their owne confession and graunt, of that prayer to be godly, and them to be of the Church that so prayed. But now the controuersie is not onely of the substance of doctrine, but of the Church it selfe also. The Donatistes chalenged the Church to them selues. Ar. 60.61.39 But for the chiefe poyntes of Christian Religion, and the foundation of our faith, that is, Real presence, &c. the most ap∣proued writers are vtterly agaynst you, and therefore can not be of your Church. Contra: But the Lutheranes and Zuing∣lians (as it pleaseth you to call them) are of one true Church, al∣though they differ in one opinion concerning the Sacrament, the one affirming a Real presence, the other denying it. Out of the same place may be deduced also many other contradictions, in that among the same chiefe poyntes and foundation he recko∣neth also, the honor of God, the offices of Christ, the fruites of his passion, the authoritie of Gods worde, Images, saying that the Fathers in these also were against vs, and therefore not of our Church, and yet graunteth that the same Fathers helde with vs euen those very poyntes which in vs he counteth contrarie vnto these and to the foundation, to witte, Honoring of Relikes, Inuocation of Saintes, Merites, Traditions vnwritten, Ima∣ges
of the Crosse: as by his owne words appeareth here cap. 3. and 7. And them so earnestly also, that they condemned the con∣traries for Heresies. Yet saith Fulke:Pur. 412. Whosoeuer is not able to proue by the word of God any opinion that he holdeth obsti∣nately, he is an Heretike. 40 Ar. 10.61. Pu. 403. We know that Luther did not obstinately and malici∣ousy erre in any article of faith, concerning the substance of Re∣ligion. Ar. 10.61. Pu. 403. Luther, Caluine, and Bucer, shall come with Christ to iudge the world. Ar. 10.61. Pu. 403. As for Illyrians, if you call them of Flaccius Illyricus, they be Lutherans in opinion of the Sacrament, & differ onely in Ceremonies, which can not diuide them from the faith. Contra: What Flaccius, or any such as he is, hath said,Pur. 147. neither do I know, neither do I regard, let them answere for them selues: But whereas you charge M. Caluine, &c. 41 There is neuer Heresie,Ar. 86. but there is as great doubt of the Church as of the matter in question. Therefore onely the Scrip∣ture is the stay of a Christian mans conscience. Contra:Pur. 367. The Church is the stay of trueth. If that argument of the Church without triall which is the Church, might take place, it woulde serue you both for a sworde and a buckler. The Church saith it, and we (or they of the first 600. yeres: for that néedeth no triall, you confesse it your selfe) are the Church. Therfore it is true. 42 Among the arguments that Augustine vseth agaynst the Pelagians, one (though the feeblest of an hundred) is,Pur. 349.367. that their Heresie was contrarie to the publike prayers of the Church. Con∣tra: All other persuasions set aside, he prouoketh onely to the Scripture, to trye the faith and doctrine of the Church, namely in beating downe the Schisme of the Donatistes, & the heresie of the Pelagians. Where also he contradicteth him selfe againe, in she∣wing the reason why he argued against the Donatistes of onely Scripture, but against the Pelagians of the Churches prayers also: The Pelagians graunted them to be of the Church that so prayed. And therfore when Augustine had to do with the Dona∣tistes that chalenged the Church vnto them selues, he setteth all other trials aside, and prouoketh onely to the Scriptures. 43 Pur. 432. We stand for authoritie only to the iudgement of the holy Scriptures. Contra: Ar. 9.5▪10 The ground that we haue to per∣suade vs of the authoritie of gods booke, is, because we haue most
stedfast assurance of Gods spirit, for the authoritie of that booke, with the testimonie of the true Church in all ages. Ar. 9.5▪10 The church of Christ hath a iudgement to discerne the word of god, from the writings of mem. Ar. 9.5▪10 The primitiue Churches testimonie of the word of God we allow & beleeue. Pur. 364.31. Supra ca. 7. pag. 89. Ar. 21.39.42. You should bring a great preiudice against vs and passing well proued for the credite of your cause, and the discredite of ours, if you could bring the con∣sent and practise of the primitiue pure Church for the space of 100. yeres after Christ, or some thing out of any Authentical wri∣ter, which liued within one hundred yeres after the Apostles age. Pur. 362.44 S. Paule 1. Cor. 11. declareth without cooler or couerture, the onely right order of ministration. Contra, in the nexte line: I know the Papistes will flie to those wordes of the Apostle, The rest I will set in order when I come. That is manifest to be spoken of matters of externall comelines, and therefore (say we) of the order of ministration. Pu. 438.45 The old Doctors neuer heard Purgatory named, nor, prayer for the dead. Contra: About S. Augustines time the name of Purgatorie was first inuented.Pur. 356. And long afore that also, Mon∣tanus had in all pointes the opinion of the Papistes. &c. Here cap. 3. pag. 23. And yet againe, Before Chrysostomes time it was but a blind error without a head. Pur. 54. Pur. 161.46 In S. Augustines time, Sathan was but then laying his foun∣dation of Purgatorie. Contra: That error of Purgatorie was somewhat rifely budded vp in his time. And specially here cap. 3. pag. 14. saying: And this I thinke is the right pedigree of prayers for the dead and Purgatorie, where he putteth the very last ge∣neration of it to haue bene in S. Augustines time, and the foun∣dation long afore Christes time. Pur. 242.243.47 M. Allen affirmeth, that after mens departure, the repre∣sentation of almes by such as receiued it, shall moue God exce∣dingly to mercy. O vaine imagination, for which he hath neither Scripture nor Doctor.Pur. 236.37. Contra: Chrysostome alloweth rather al∣mes that men geue before their death, or bequeath in their Testa∣ment, because it is a worke of their owne: then that almes which other men geue for them, howbeit also such almes are auayleable for the dead, he saith. 48 Here cap. 5. pag. 31. Fulke saith, that The auncient Doctors
did hold the oundation. Contra: cap. 4. pag. 28. He saith, The thyrd Councell of Carthage did define, that it is vnlawfull to pray to God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost. 49 Here cap 8. pag. 127. he sayth, that the iust of the old Testa∣ment went not to Limbus Patrum after their death, but to hea∣uen immediately. Contra:Pur. 183. The fierie and shaking sword that was set to exclude man from Paradise, was taken away by the death of Christ, when he opened Paradise, yea the Kingdome of Heauen (whereof Paradise was but a Sacrament) vnto all belee∣uers, so, that the Penitent theefe had passage into Paradise. 50 Who so denyeth the authoritie of the holy Scriptures,Pur. 214. ther∣by bewraieth him selfe to be an Heretike. Contra: I say not this (here cap. 9. pag. 170.Pur. 218. Ar. 10. that Eusebius was not accompted an He∣retike) to excuse them that doubt of the Epistle of S. Iames. As Martin Luther and Illyricus, for I am persuaded that they are more curious then wise in so doing. Loe here are 50. Contradictions, and diuers of them more then single ones. Yet doe I find in him many others besides these which I omit for breuities sake, and because these may suffice to shew what a writer he is, and what a Religion it is, that agréeth no better, he with him selfe, and it with it selfe. As also because I haue in sundry places vp and downe noted no small number ouer and aboue these: As (to repeate a few) that Origen acknow∣ledged no Purgatorie paines, And yet he it was that brought in the Fire. And the like of Tertullian. Item that the definition of the 3. Carthage Councell was the definition of the Church: And yet the Church doth not that which the same Councell did, Yea he is an Heretike that admitteth the Machabées, &c. for Scripture,Pur. 214. as that Councell did. Item that to conclude negatiuely of one place of Scripture is no good Logicke: and yet he concludeth so him selfe very commonly. Item that to conclude negatiuely of all mens authoritie, is a false argument: and yet he vseth it him selfe very often, yea and of one mans authoritie. Item that pistis is neuer, and yet twise taken for a promise. And that widowes (1. Tim. 5.) shall be damned for forsaking their widowhood, and yet not for marying. Item that they choose to them selues no new names, and yet these two, Protestants and Gospellers. Item, that the first Religion of our Saxons was in some poyntes Po∣pish,
and yet against all Popish Doctrine. Item, that the Primi∣tiue Church did affirme Aerius to be an heretike, and his doctrine against prayer for the dead to be Heresie: and yet did not affirme Luther to be an Heretike, nor his doctrine to be Heresie. This is he, that chargeth the holy Fathers with contradicti∣ons, both of the Gréeke Church, as S. Chrysostome, S. Epipha∣nius, S. Basill: and also of the Latine Church, as S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Leo, S. Bernard: and some of them with many contradictions: partly vnawares, I graunt, but for the most part wittingly and willingly, though alwayes vniustly and falsely, as I haue shewed in euery particulare. And so in conclusion, he hath in so charging ye Fathers, done nothing els but added to the heape of his owne contradictions, and declared his double blind∣nes, that he hath neither eyes to sée when he contradicteth him selfe, nor when others doe not contradicte them selues. And of the same sorte also be the Contradictions, which here and there he chargeth D. Allen withall. Let the Reader consider them but a litle, and he shall straight perceaue, that either they be not con∣tradictions, or (which is more common) that to make a shew of a contradiction he falsifieth D. Allens wordes. One example for all:Pur. 135.133. To this, that Purgatorie serueth, but for veniall sinnes, or else such Mortall sinnes as were forgeuen in this life, He maketh D. Allen contrarie thus: He that not onely leadeth a lothsome life but also contemneth all those meanes that Chritst hath wrought to redeeme him to the perfection of a Christian godly lyfe. (I vse his owne wordes, sayth he) and therefore can not haue remission of his sinnes in this life, shall notwithstanding by tolleration of the bandes in the Prison of Purgatorie recompence his debt, and come from thence into the blessed Presence of Christ. This Proposition neither in forme nor in sense, is D. Allens. Doth he say, He that leadeth a lothsome life? Yea doth he not playnely speake of him that now leadeth a Christian godly lyfe, but will not be reduced to the perfection thereof, by repentaunce or satis∣faction of his lothsome lyfe past? Loe, such are those Contradicti∣ons. And therfore to conclude, It is not M. Allen, but M. Fulke, that hath the most passing facultie of any that euer I heard, to build one thing in one leafe, and to ouerthrow it him selfe againe in the next.
¶A Nosegay of certayne strange Flowres picked out of Fulke, that they which delight in such a Gardi∣ner, may see his handy worke. The twelfth Chapter. NOw remaineth onely the last Chapter of my promise, which I made in my Preface: Wherein I haue to note certaine examples of his passing ignorance, & foule erring in the Scriptures, in the Histories, and in Doctrine. First,Pur. 283. as for the Sacrifice propitiatorie (saith he) it was offered in the Law, only by the High Priest once in the yere. And besides this, he findeth none but Sacrifices of thankesgiuing in the Law. Wheras Sacrifice propitiatorie and pro peccata, for sinne, are all one:Leu. 16. and Sacrifice for sinne was offered not only that one day in the yere which he meaneth, to wit, in the feast of expiation being the tenth day of the seuenth moneth, but also in many others of the Feastes ordinarily. Nu. 28.29. and extraordinarily whensoe∣uer occasion was ministred by sinne of the Priest, prince, multi∣tude, or any one priuat person. Leu. 4.5. and vpon sundry Leu. 6. other occasions besides. And touching the diuision of Sacrifices, there were foure kinds of them, as S. Paule sheweth out of ye Psalme,Heb. 10. Psal. 39. Leu. 1..23.4.7. Pur. 455. Pur. 224.456. and it is to be séene playnly in Leuiticus: Hostia, Oblatio, Ho∣locaustum, & pro peccato. For these other two, Sacrifice for thankesgiuing, and pro delicto, belong to the first, and the last. I will not here say to you as you do to D. Allen: But you that so like a prowde foole, take vpon you to helpe his ignorāce, bewray your owne intollerable arrogancie and more then beastly blind∣nes. For if you had read the Law whereof you make your selfe such a Rabbine, &c. So to say to any man, is not for modestie. But whether it might not be more iustly said to your selfe, I re∣port me to this poynt of your ignorance in the Law, on the one side, and to the poynt (on the other side) for which you so take vp D. Allen, whose right vnderstanding of the Law you call igno∣rance, as I haue declared cap. 8. pag. 136. Another point of your ignorance is, where to deface the Sa∣crifice  that Iudas Machabeus caused to be offered for the dead, you say, that both the High Priest at that time was a wicked and
vngodly man, to wit, either Iason, Menelaus, or Alcimus, and namely Menelaus, the worst of them all three: and also that the other Priests of that time were giuen to the practises of the Gen∣tiles. 2. Mac. 4. In so much that it is like, that Iudas Machabeus, if he deuised not that sacrifice of his owne head, yet tooke it by imi∣tation of the Gentiles. I maruell how you could reade that Sto∣rie, and yet thinke that Iudas Machabeus had any communion or societie with those Gentilizers, against whom all his fighting was. And when he had gotten Hierusalem and the Temple, is it not written playnly,1. Mac. 4. vers. 42. that for the repurgation thereof he chose Priestes without spot, hauing their heart in the Law of God? Af∣ter which time he made 1. Mac. 5. 2. Ma. 12. v. 3. many expeditions from Hierusalem against the Gentiles: In one of which expeditions or voyages, 2. Mac. 12. ver. 9. béeing to Iamnia, certaine of his souldiers did take De dona∣rijs Idolorum, some of the presents of the Idols of Iamnia: for the which God suffered 2. Mac. 12. ver. 32.40.thē to be ouerthrowen after Pentecost by the souldiers of Gorgias. And then Iudas sent that money to those vnspotted Priests at Ierusalem to offer Sacrifice for their sinne. The chiefe of which Priests in the absence of Iudas him self, were his brethren Ionathas and Simon, and not Menelaus, nor any of those other Apostataes. You might haue learned by those bookes, that the succession of the true Pontifices or High Priestes for that time, was this: 2. Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2. Ma. 4. ve. 7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34. 2. Ma. 5. ve. 5.7.9. Onias, 1. Mac. 2. ver. 1.70. Mathathias, 1. M. 3. v. 1. 1. M. 9. v. 18 Iudas, (i) Ionathas, (k) Simon. And that these others, 2. Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2. Ma. 4. ve. 7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34. 2. Ma. 5. ve. 5.7.9. Iason, 2. Mac. 4. v. 24.29. 2. Ma. 13. Menelaus, 2. Ma. 4. ver. 29.41. Lysimachus, g Alcimus, were but Antipontifices, or false vsurpers against these: to wit, 2. Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2. Ma. 4. ve. 7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34. 2. Ma. 5. ve. 5.7.9. Iason (the author of the Apostasie from the Law) against his brother Onias, and secondly Menelaus against the same 2. Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2. Ma. 4. ve. 7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34. 2. Ma. 5. ve. 5.7.9.Onias, and thirdly Lysimachus brother to Menelaus. After ye Apostasie thus begun, that liuely Image of Antichrist king 1. Mac. 1. 2. M. 5. v. 11Antiochus Epi∣phanes taketh Ierusalem, martyreth the Law-kéepers, & finally setteth vp in the Temple the abhomination of Desolation, being a Statuee of Iupiter. Against him & his riseth the foresaide 1. Mac. 2. ver. 1.70.Ma∣thathias, and after him, his sonne 1. M. 3. v. 1. 1. M. 9. v. 18Iudas Machabeus, who re∣purged ye Temple the same day thrée yeres that it was polluted, Anno 148. And the next yere Antiochus dyeth, his sonne Antio∣chus Eupator succéedeth: with him striueth for the kingdome g Demetrius Soter, An. 151. to whom fled the wicked of Israel,
and Alcimus their Capteine. (qui volebat fieri Sacerdos) to com∣playne of Iudas.1 Mac. 7. ver. 1.5.9. 1. Mac. 9. ver. 54.55. Which Alcimus dyed of Gods hand ye next yere after the killing of Iudas,1. M. 9. ve. 31.10. v. 18.13. v. 23. and could neuer get Ierusalem & the Temple: but alwayes after the repurgation it continued in the gouernmēt of Iudas, and of Ionathas after him, and then of his other brother 1. Mac. 13. v. 8.36.41.43.Simon. Of whose Priesthood also & High priest∣hood, the text is playne in their seuerall places here noted in the margine. I wil recite the wordes that are written of the last: 1. Mac. 13. ver. 42.The yere 170. the people of Israel began to write in their Court-rolles and Records, thus: Anno primo sub Simone Summo Sa∣cerdote, magno Duce & Principe Iudaeorum. The first yere vnder Simon the High Priest, the great Duke and Prince of the Iewes. Certaine other poyntes of your grosse, or rather malicious ig∣norance  in ye Scrirtures, are about Antichrist. As, that ye Church of Christ should prepare his way or worke his mysterie: that his Reuelation or comming should be so soone after the beginning of the Church, and so long before the consummation of the world: that the Churches flying into the wildernes in his time, should be to be driuen out of the sight of the wicked and knowledge of the world: that his raigne should last so many hundred yeres: that he should be a Succession of certayne men, and not one only certaine person: that the Church should be come againe out of the wildernes, and yet Antichrist raigning still. These are the very foundations of your new Lutheran and Caluinistical Gos∣pell, and yet no ground at all for them or any one of them, in the holy Scriptures of God, but onely in the weake sande of your owne blasphemons, but bold asseuerations in presence of fooles, who haue auerted their vnhappie yeres away from trueth, and conuerted them vnto your fables. Againe, that the body of Christ is not offered to him selfe, but  thanksgiuing is offered to him for the offering of his body for vs.Pur. 316. Why Syr, did not he vpon the Crosse offer his owne body, as a man and a priest, to him selfe as to God? You noted others (here cap. 4. pag. 28. and cap. 6. pag. 63.) as for saying, that it is not law∣full to pray to God the Sonne: and there S. Fulgentius tolde you as the Fathers Créede doth, that ech person of the blessed in∣diuiduall Trinitie, Simul odoratur & conglorificatur, Is with other at once adored and conglorified: no sacrifice, neither that
of Christes body, whether it be vpon the Crosse, or vpon the Al∣tar, béeing priuate to one, but common to all thrée. Agayne, that you call it a vayne amplification and fond sup∣position,Pur. 155. to extend the force of Christes death beyond the limits of his will. As though it were not of force to worke any whit more then it worketh in acte, as to saue so muche as one of them that shall not be saued. Contrarie to this expresse Scripture: He is the propitiation for our sinnes,1. Ioan. 2. and not for our sinnes one∣ly, but also for the sinnes of the whole world. And contrarie to this saying of your owne in another place:Pur. 34. Concerning the suf∣ficiencie of Christes Redemption, there is nothing can be spo∣ken so magnifically, but that the worthinesse thereof passeth and excelleth it. Againe, that to remit sinnes is proper vnto his Diuinitie. As though he,Pur. 26. that is to say, our Sauiour Christ, doth not remit sins according to his humanitie also. No maruell to sée you denie this power to his ministers, when you denie it to the Sonne of man him selfe.Mat. 9. The people in the Gospell vnderstood him otherwise, when your fathers the Scribes called it a blasphemie for any to remit sinnes but onely God, and the people contrariwise, séeing his mirable that he wrought to proue his and his Churches doc∣trine herein, did glorifie God for giuing such power to men, ho∣minibus. Whervpon he, when the time was come, gaue commis∣sion to his Apostles,Ioan. 20. saying: As my Father sent me, I also sende you. Whose sinnes you forgiue, they are forgiuen them. Againe, that pestilent doctrine of desperation, wherein you say, Pur. 274.127.128.135.283. There be sinnes for which the Church ought not to pray, euen of men remayning in this life: Pur. 274.127.128.135.283. for which it is not lawfull to pray: Pur. 274.127.128.135.283. which by the mercy of God are not pardonable: for Pur. 274.127.128.135.283. it is false, that so long as men are in this world they maye repent. And how many such sinnes are there, and which? In one place you name two: Obstinate and wilfull Apostasie, and blas∣phemie against the holy Ghost: & after them you adde there, &c. Therefore looking in other places which be those caetera, I finde where you name Pur. 274.127.128.135.283. Contempt of all that preach Christ and re∣pentance of our lothsome life past, and saye, then the which no vice is more mortall, nor farther from forgiuenes. In another place you name Saule,1. Sam. 16. for whom Samuel was not heard when he
prayed: and the obstinate Iewes,Ier. 7.11.14. Ezech. 14. for whom Ieremy is often times forbidden to pray, and the wicked generally, because the Lorde testifieth, that if Noah, Daniel, & Iob prayed for them, they shuld not be heard. And you conclude therevpon: Therefore there be sinnes for the which the Church ought not to pray: and though she should pray, yet she should not be heard, euen of men remay∣ning in this life. Whereby it appeareth, that in summe you say, that it is vnlawfull to pray for any wicked person, of what sorte soeuer his wickednes be, so long as he continueth in his wicked∣nes: yea and that Pur. 274.127.128.135.283. it is vnpossible for the wicked but to conti∣nue in his wickednes. Such holsome doctrine you teach, and that so often and so constantly: yea also abusing the holy Scriptures for the same, not onely in those places before noted,1. Ioan. 5. Mat. 12. Heb. 6. but also thrée places more: There is a sinne vnto death, for which we ought not to pray. and, He which sinneth against the holy Ghost, shall ne∣uer be forgiuen, (whosoeuer prayeth for him.) and, There be some which sinne so horribly in this life, that it is vnpossible for them to be renewed by repentance. We were wont to matche you with your fathers the Noua∣tians,Another old Heresie of the Protestants. for denying the authoritie of Priestes to remit eyther all sinnes, or some certaine sinnes, and reseruing it to God alone. But now, when you say, that some sinnes neither by the mercy of God are pardonable, we must néedes confesse that you haue outshot them, and therefore wonne the game from them. What Acesius a Bishop of the Nouatians said to Constanti∣nus the Emperour in the Nicen Councell, yéelding the reason of their Schisme, you may sée in Socrates, who as a fautor of the Nouatians, doth report it for their prayse,Soc. li. 1. ca. 7.9. That they who after Baptisme fall into that kind of sinne, which the holy Scriptures call, Peccatum ad mortem, Sinne vnto death, ought not to be ad∣mitted to receiue the Diuine mysteries, (as other sinners custo∣mably were and are admitted, after confession and the Priestes absolution) but to exhort them to repentaunce or penance, and that they looke for hope of forgiuenes not of the Priestes, but of god, who both can & hath authoritie to forgiue sinnes. But with you it is vnlawfull, as to pray for them, so also to exhort them to repentāce & hope of forgiuenes at Gods hands. Wel, it is inough for a Christian man, that it is the heresie of the Nouatians which
you hold, yea, a maiori also, and that the Catholike Church did then also practise as now,The Protestāts also admit al to their Caluines bread. by her Priestes to forgeue all sinnes without any such exception, and so to admit all to our Lordes Body. Yet for more comfort against all desperation, I will an∣swere to your places particularly. 1. Ioan. 5.I say therefore, that Sinne vnto death, (for the which S. Iohn saith not as you make him, but onely thus: Non pro illo dico vt roget quis, I bidde not any man to pray for that) is when one is dead in Mortall sinne, and therefore now damned in hell: which I shewed (cap. 8. pag. 134.) out of the text it selfe. If that be not inough with you (because you say,Pur. 273.274. It is a new exposition, and not onely voyde of all auncient authoritie, but also hath all the olde writers against it, and yet you do not, nor can not alleage so much as one) I say further,Au. in r. 19. de Cor. & gra. ca. 12. it is S. Augustines exposition in diuers places, and namely in his Retractatiōs (which is much to be no∣ted) where to take away occasions from such Nouatians, hauing aforetime written that he thought, Peccatum fratris ad mortem, The brothers sinne vnto death, to be oppugning of the Brother∣hood, and enuying at grace it selfe, he sayth, Addendum fuit, Si in hac scelerata mentis peruersitate finierit hanc vitam: It should haue bene added therevnto, If in this wicked peruersenes of minde he finish this life: quoniam de quocun{que} pessimo in hac vita con∣stituto non est vbi{que} desperandum, For because no man, be he ne∣uer so wicked, is to be despeired of, so long as he is in this life: Nec pro illo inprudenter oratur, de quo non desperatur, Neither is it vndiscretely done to praye for him, who is not despeired of. Which is all one, almost word for word also, with that which D. Allen saith,Pur. 274. and you gainesay, where you say twise, I deny your antecedent. Heb. 6.10.Of S. Paules place also I gaue the right sense ca. 10. Dem. 24. He speaketh of Lapsi by name, that is, of such as deny their faith in persecution. Of whom alone, the Nouatians Heresie against the Priestes Power of forgeuing sinnes, was in the first begin∣ning,Soc. li. 4. ca. 23. & li. 7. ca. 25. as we reade in Socrates and others. Now will you that all such dispaire? But the Catholike Church in time of the No∣uatians would not, no nor the Nouatians them selues would so much (as I haue shewed,) neither would S. Paule. He saith, Impossibile est eos qui prolapsi sunt reuocari ad paenitentiam, It
is vnpossible for such denyers to be renouated againe vnto repen∣tance. To be renouated againe, what is that, but all which he there said was done once afore, to be done againe, eos qui semel sunt illuminati, they who once haue bene baptized, (for that Sa∣crament the Gréekes call Illumination) haue also tasted the hea∣uenly gift and bene made partakers of the holy Ghost (in the Sa∣crament of confirmation,Act. 2. ver. 33.38.) and haue tasted (in the Sacrament of the Altar) the good word of God and the puissances of the world to come. For these Sacramentes were and are ministred adultis together with Baptisme. And euen so the Fathers constantly ex∣pound this place against the Nouatians, that it saieth no more, but that a sinner can not be rebaptized, can not be renouated ad inchoationem Christi, to beginne Christ againe, or ad fundamen∣tum paenitentiae, &c. to the foundation of repenting from dead workes and of beleeuing in God, of Baptismes and of Hands im∣position. They be the Apostles wordes in the same place, and to them is linked your place with enim, Impossibile est enim, for it is vnpossible, &c. And that which our Sauiour saith to the Pharisées & Scribes,Mat. 12. Mar. 3. of Sinne or blasphemie against the holy Ghost, because they said, Spiritum immundum habet, He hath an vncleane spirit, euen Bel∣zabub the prince of the diuels, to cast out diuels by: doth he say it, to driue them to desperation? yea, doth he not plainely speake it, to moue them the more and to the greater repentance? As your selfe also, contrarie (after your manner) to your selfe,Pur. 461. though in expresse wordes counting D. Allen and his fellowes such as Heb. 6. can not (by you) repent, hauing sometime bene lightned,As though D. Allen had euer bene a Prote∣stant. and ta∣sted of the good gift of God: doe yet exhort them, truely to re∣pent, and to returne to the acknowledging of trueth once knowē and professed, and doe beseech God that so many among them as are curable, may haue grace so to do. So the whole circumstance sheweth, that Christ there exhorteth them to most humble pe∣nance. For, neither doth he otherwise say, that such sinne & blas∣phemie shal not be remitted, then he saith, that all other sinne and blasphemie shall be remitted. And yet, I trow, many a one, yea a∣boue all number, may be and is damned in hell for other sinne and blasphemie. Euen so many a one, yea and aboue all number, may be and is forgiuen the sinne against the Holy Ghost. Wher∣by
it is euident, that he doth no more in that place, but report the ordinarie rules of Gods prouidence: to wit, To forgeue al other sinne ordinarily, by giuing the partie grace to repent: and, not to forgeue ordinarily the sinne against the holy Ghost, that is, when one maliciously calleth the Miracles of Christ and of his Ser∣uauntes, the workes of the Deuill, or the lying signes and won∣ders of Antichrist. Which sinne, your new Gospell hath made ve∣ry common in these dayes. But yet that no such also should dis∣paire, one of theseAct. 23.26. Philip. 3. Pharisées, & he the very worst of thē all, saith most comfortably: 1. Tim. 1. Act. 7.9. A sure saying, and worthy of all embra∣cing, that Christ Iesus came into the worlde to saue sinnerss of whom I am the principall. But to this end I had mercie, that in me the principall (who afore was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an oppresser in my Vide Au. expo. inch. ad Rom. prope finē. blind incredulitie) Christ Iesus might shew all clemencie, for a samplar to all that should after beleue in him. Nowe for that which you alleaged out of Samuel, Ieremie, and Ezechiel: it is all spoken (in one sense) of temporall matters, to wit, of casting Saule from his kingdome, and the Iewes into captiuitie: in another sense, of the Iewes generall reprobation in which they presently be, since their crucifying of their Messias and ours. But to pray for the saluation of Saul or the Iewes no man was forbidden: no, nor for their temporall felicitie to continue, vntill it was quite past. So did Samuell mourne for Saul, euen to the moment that he was sent to annoint Dauid in his place. So did Ieremie still continue praying for ye Iewes, as appeareth in the same Chapters,Rom. 10. and as Saint Paule writeth of his owne doyng afterwardes, when the time of their repro∣bation was nowe present. Finally, there is in Ezechiel a nota∣ble and a comfortable rule for the wicked also by name, howe to take and vnderstande the comminations of God, to wit, not simply (as you doe) and absolutely,Ezech. 33. Iere. 18. but with a condition: If I say to the wicked, Thou shalt die the death, (sée, as it were ab∣solutely: but yet it followeth neuerthelesse,) and he repent him of his sinne, and worke iudgement and iustice, and make resti∣tution of pledge and of robberie, and (generally) walke in the commaundementes of lyfe, nor doe any euill: he shall liue the life, and shall not die. Another point is, that straunge interpretation of the Article
of our Creede: Christ descended into Hell to redeeme vs out of Hell by suffering the wrath of God for our sinnes. Hebr. 5. In that place is neuer a worde of that Article, and much lesse of that interpretation: neither that Christ suffred the wrath of God, although that may be saide, so as the Scriptures doe tearme payne or punishment by the name of wrath. But then what other wrath did he suffer, then that which is expressed plainely in the wordes afore, passus, crucifixus, mortuus, He suffered, was crucifyed, and dyed? Belike you meane the padde that your Maister Caluine leaft in the strawe:Pur. 451. Cal. Insti. li. 2. ca. 16. sect. 10. that all thys which I haue saide, was nothing, Nihil actum erat si Christus corporea tantum morte defunctus fuisset, It had auayled no∣thing if Christ had dyed bodily death onely. And so you will bring vs when you reply,Aug. ep. 99. howe he dyed some death of Soule also, eyther that which mortall Sinners doe dye here in sin∣ning, or that which they dye afterwardes in Hell when they be in damnation for their sinne. You say,Pur. 63. that Caluine affirmeth his descending into Hell to be vnderstoode of the wrath of God, which he sustayned for our sinnes before his death, at that time especially when he that was God, complained that he was forsa∣ken of God. What other forsaking was that, but that he did not deliuer him from the Crosse, which was to forsake by the iudge∣ment both of naturall desire, and especially of his most wic∣ked enemies, who saide there in their diuelishe insultation:Mat. 27. He trusted in God: let him nowe deliuer him, if he will haue him: for he said, That I am the Sonne of God. Neyther was it a complaint, as you say, but a prayer, as you myght haue séene euen Hebrues .5. if you had not béene blynd: Who in the dayes of his fleshe with a myghtie crie and with teares offered vp prayers and supplications to hym that was able to saue him out of death: and was heard for hys reuerence, to wit, be∣in raysed by him agayne. Whereby you sée, that in déede he was not forsaken neyther corporally. Where now is your Sipture, or Caluins, for any other but bodyly death of Chist, for any other wrath, for any other forsaking? Or what Chistian man did euer thinke, that Christes bodily death alone was nothing, yea or that it was not the full sufficient and a∣bundant raunsome or redemption of the world? All the world
must go to schole againe to Caluin, to learne, that Christes soule (besides his bodily death) was in such horrible distresse of consci∣ence, in such meruellous anguish, horror, frayeur, yea and damna∣tion, that his case was for the time (despairing & blaspheming ex∣cepted) euen the selfe same that the case of the damned is for euer: yea, that he was in feare least he should haue bene damned Fulke vvil a∣uouch this out of Heb. v. in his Reply.for e∣uer also. This is the doctrine of that beast (as D. Allen doth most worthily call him for it) against our Sauiours corporall death, which was his onely death: and that in many of his impious bookes, and namely in that Catechisme which they haue ioyned with their French Bibles in the end, belike that it may among fooles créepe in time into Canonicall authoritie, as alreadie Lu∣ther with the Lutherans, and Caluine with the Caluinistes is péere to the Apostles them selues. And for touching of this doc∣trine it is, that Fulke, more zealous for Caluine then for Christ, goulpeth vp such geare against D. Allen as the Reader may sée in the place: falsifying also D. Allens wordes, because otherwise he had no marke to shoote at, as though he had said, Caluine to af∣firme that Christ went downe into hell after his death. Whereas D. Allen saith nothing of the time when he descended by Caluin, but onely of the hellike torments which Caluine buildeth vpon his descending. Howbeit I would aske Fulke, why it is such a mysterie, that Christes soule was in damnation for the time vp∣on the Crosse, and not also and rather after his death for the time vntill his resurrection, specially considering, that in the Créede, Crucifixus goeth before Sepultus, and Descendit ad inferos follo∣weth Sepultus, as also commonly in the Scriptures the time of his Soule in hell, is made concurrant with the time of his body in the graue? And who séeth not thereby, that the Catholikes in∣terpretation is also most naturall and proper, that after Mortu∣us, which signifieth the separation of his body and soule by death, followeth Sepultus to shewe where his body was afterwardes, & Descendit ad inferos to tell where his Soule was afterwardes, (though not in damnation, according to these mens new blasphe∣mie) vntill both were conioyned againe in his Resurrection, as there it followeth immediately, Tertia die resurrexit a mortuis. Thus I am faine to stand long vpon euery point, be it neuer so absurd and impious against our Lord God him selfe, and against
our onely Redēption in his bloud. For they can wrest the Scrip∣tures to such poyntes also. We should (I thinke) afore now, if this poynt of Christes damnation for our Redemption had not bene by diuers Catholikes so handled to their shame, haue had that other poynt likewise of some Caluinistes made more com∣mon, that Christ also did despeire in God, or blaspheme God, or commit some other sinne against God for our Redemption.Synod. Gē. 5. Ses. 4. & Ses. 8. ca. 12. For I sée not but they are already come to say with that old most de∣testable blasphemous Heretike Theodorus Mopsuestenus ma∣ster to Nestorius, that he had in him fomitem peccati, inclination to sinne, and that he was not from his conception impeccabilis, that is, vnsinable, considering they say he feared to be damned for euer: vnlesse they will say, that he was so ignorant to feare a thing that was vnpossible to befall vnto him. Which yet them selues can not feare, because of their Speciall faith forsooth.Pur. 290.296.298. O Lord these blasphemous helhoundes are more worthy to be bea∣ten downe with thunderboltes, and so forth, as Fulke knoweth how to amplifie, but that afore he lacked matter. It is no maruell now after this, to sée this man so cold for the  honor, or rather so impiously set against the honor of Christes Mother. As first to quit the Heluidians and Antidicomarianitae,August. ad Quodvult. Haer. 84. Epip. Haer. 78. Pur. 453. who were by the Primitiue Church condemned as Heretikes, for denying her perpetuall virginitie. But he notwithstanding saith: As for the perpetuall virginitie of the Mother of Christ, as we can thinke it is true, so bicause the Scripture hath not reuealed it, neither perteineth it vnto vs, we make no question of it. No, it perteineth not vnto you to accurse old Heretikes: but to ioyne with old Heretikes, that perteineth vnto you, and also to forge new principles, as that same of Only Scripture, in their fauour, yea and also to contradict your selfe for the matter. For but foure lines afore you say: All trueth may be proued by Scripture. And now of this, We can thinke it is true: and yet the Scripture hath not reuealed it. You might with more honestie haue said, that it may be proued by Scripture, namely where she saith, Quoniam virum non cognosco, Because I know not man: that is,Luc. 1. Au. de san. virg. ca. 4. because I haue made a vow of virginitie, how therfore cā I haue a child? But this place you could not aleage (you wot) for another cause: neither do I say that it proueth inuincibly her perpetuall virgi∣nitie,
although it so proue her vow. For I know, that besides her vow, it should be proued that she neuer sinned against her vow, nor had a dispensation of God for it. Secondly you controll D. Allen,Pur. 86.87. where, saying, that the iustest person sinneth, he excepteth Christ, and for his honor his mother. You thinke, it must then be said, that he was not sauiour of his Mother, and she had no neede of his saluation. If you had bene a reader of S. Augustine, as you be of Caluine, you might haue easily remembred that he saith the very same that D. Allen doth. A piece of Pelagius his heresie being that a man may liue without all sinne,Au. de nat. & gra. c. 36. he alleaged for it the example of so many iust persons commended in the Scriptures, and among the rest, our Lord and Sauiours Mother, saying, that to confesse her without sinne, necesse est pietati, It is necessarie for him that will not be impious. Howe you woulde haue answered him, we sée: specially thinking you haue Scrip∣ture for her sinning, because Christ said vnto her: Why did you seeke me,Luc. 2. Ioan. 2. &c. and, What to me and thee, O woman? &c. you thinke that Christ here reproueth her, and that he had done her wrong herein if she did not sinne. You might do well to tell vs what were those sinnes of hers. S. Augustine could not sée any there, nor els where, but saith playnly in his answere to Pelagius▪ al∣though the contrarie had bene for his vantage against him: Ex∣cepting the holy Virgin Mary, of whom for the honor of our Lorde, I will haue no question in the worlde, when we talke of sinnes.Inde enim scimus, for by this we know, that more grace was giuen to her to ouercome sinne altogether, because she was worthy to conceiue and bring forth him, whom it is certayne to haue had no sinne.The honor of our Lorde is by Fulke his dis∣honor. Where also you sée, that her not sinning doth not argue (as after your Diuinitie) that she had no nede of Chri∣stes grace,Con. Tri. Ses. 6. can. 23. but the cleane contrarie, that she had so much the more of his grace, then any other of all the Saintes: as you may also sée in the Councell of Trent. Another poynt of your great skil, is, where to supply D. Allens lacke,Pur. 12. you bring forsooth the right definition or description of an Heretike, and say, that an Heretike is a man in the Church, &c. Wherof what pretie conclusions do folow, you may consider: as because Papistes be Heretikes with you,Ministerlike conclusions of Fulke. therefore they be in the Church: item Anabaptistes, Seruetians, &c. and of old, the Ar∣rians,
Pelagians, &c. againe on the contrarie side, because these are not, nor were not (by you) in the Church, therefore they be not Heretikes. It foloweth in your definition, That obstinat∣ly mainteineth an opinion contrarie to the doctrine of the Scrip∣tures. And then you adde: Which if any of vs can be proued to doe, then let vs not be spared, but condemned for Heretikes. We say to you the same of any of vs also. But you should haue defi∣ned also who is obstinate. You bring no Scripture against vs, but we answere it clearely, much lesse do you proue vs to be ob∣stinate. But we bring playne Scriptures against you, to proue that also the doctrine of the Apostles Traditions is the doctrine of the Scriptures, with very many particular pointes of contro∣uersie, expresly against you, as namely, that neither the Church of Christ should euer flye out of sight, much lesse any thing neare the yere 607. nor Antichrist reigne so long as from that time, nor the day of Iudgement to be so long after the cōming of Anti∣christ. Againe for the Real presence, This is my body: and so forth. And if you also goe about to answere some of our Scrip∣tures, it is no otherwise then the Arrians, Pelagians, &c. did in old time, who notwithstanding were obstinate against the truth, because they yéelded not neither when the Church had giuen her sentence. So do we proue you to be obstinate, & much more then any, because you neither yéeld after sentence, and also do hold that the Church hath no such authoritie to end contentions. Your ignorance in so wondering at D. Allen for saying, that  a Christian Scholer should first beléeue, and after séeke for vn∣derstanding, I noted before cap. 10. Dem. 34. Of the like ignorance it is, where you wonder to heare, that  the Sacrifice of the Masse is a likenesse of the Sacrifice of Chri∣stes death vpon the Crosse, and say,Pur. 200. that it is contrarie to the whole See here cap. 10. Dem. 24. scope of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, that there should be now any shadowes, or resemblances, when the body and sub∣stance it selfe is come. As though we had now no Sacramentes at all. Do you not know, that all Sacramentes be liknesses of other things? as S. Augustine, (whom your selfe somewhere al∣leage) saith: Si enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem, &c.Aug. ep. 23. Pur. 292. Sup. de. 24. For if Sacramentes had not a certayne likenes of those thinges whose Sacramentes they be, they should not at al be Sacraments.
And so you may remember that S. Paule him selfe will haue Baptisme to be a likenes or similitude of Christes death,Rom. 6. buriall, and resurrection. As againe S. Augustine in the foresayd place noteth that it is truely sayed, Christum immolari quotidie in Sacramento, Christ to be sacrificed euery day in the Sacrament, although he were but once sacrificed, in seipso, in him selfe, that is, in his owne visible and not sacramentall forme: because of the likenes in the Sacrament, to that immolation vpon the Crosse. For, there was visible seperation of his Body and Bloud, the one from the other: Here is mysticall or sacramentall seperation of the same, as the sacramentall wordes doe signifie. And there∣fore this seperation is but like to that, if we attende the maner of both: and yet it is the very same seperation, if we attend the thinges that were and are seperated. Which D. Allen vttered very aptly in these few wordes: It is the selfe same in another maner.Pur. 198.201. Whereunto you say, that Euery boye in Oxford can tell him, that by Logicke, like is not the same. An high point: D. Al∣len knew it not. How then did he say, in another maner? Did he not thereby geue you the meaning of that Logicall Principle, to wit, that like is not the same with the same maner. But other∣wise what boye hath not heard it sayd of one and the same man, being chaunged by age, sicknes, apparell, shauing, &c. He is like, or vnlike him selfe? Against so playne a declaration you could not replye, and yet you must néedes say something, but yet that which neither boy, nor man, nor your selfe can vnderstand. This it is: to say, It is the selfe same in another maner, will not helpe, so long as the same respect remaineth. Which same respect, I pray you? for I am not so quicke, to vnderstand him who vnder∣standeth not him selfe. For who can imagine that the very same respect remaineth, when the same maner doth not remayne Pur. 20.21.Againe, where you attribute that to diuorsement, which the Scripture in many places both Mat. 5. Mar. 10. Luc. 16. . Cor. 7. deny to diuorsement, and doth Rom. 7. attribute only to death, to wit, to make her no wife that was a wife: there you vtter your great skill in many matters. As in saying, that such mariage after diuorsement is dispensed withall by the Pope. Item, that the Popes Canon Law hath farre many more causes of diuorsement then for adulterie, which only Christ alloweth and we,Mat. 5. quoth you. As though also the Canon Law al∣low
not that onely as a cause of perpetuall diuorse, in such sort that if the Adulterer become afterwardes neuer so chast, yet the innocent cannot be compelled to receaue him againe. But other∣wise if the mans furie be such, that the wife in his house is in continuall feare & daunger of her life, doe not you also allow her to dwell away from him vntill such time as his amendment doe appeare sufficiently? Item, you speake there as though Moyses iudiciall Law ought to be still obserued.Leu. 20. We wish that adulterers were punished as God commaunded in his Law: it followeth, and then the other question of Mariages were soone answered. As though the man were punished by death, if he sinned against his wife with a single woman. If not, how then is the question of his wiues Mariage with another resolued by his punishment? Such is your skill in the Law. I note here your ignorance, but I mis∣like not your moderation in saying, we wish. Why then doe I charge you with such an opinion of that Law? For this, that you there charge the Catholikes, to allow dispensation for such per∣sons to marrie, as the Law of God and nature abhorreth. What Law of God doe you meane, but Leui. 18? Doe you thinke then, that Law to binde Christians? and that so straightly, as neyther to allow any dispensation in it, be it otherwise neuer so iust? As for any Law of Nature, you can alleage none against the Chur∣ches dispensations, no otherwise then against Gods owne dis∣pensations in ye time of the old Testament: yea & if you remem∣ber your selfe well, they were allowed then, some of them at the least, by law also, and not only by dispensation sometimes, which you meane now to be against the Law of Nature. Béeing so many wayes ignoraunt in Gods Lawe, it is lesse  meruaile, that you be ignoraunt in the Churches Lawe: and a∣gayne in the Churches Diuinitie, so, that in one place you make it a thing certayne:Pur. 35. that the Pope geueth his pardons by the Sacrament of penance. As though the Pope beyng at Rome myght be minister of a Sacrament to one in England. You might as well thinke that he doth excommunicate by the Sacrament of penance. So great a Doctor doth not know, that the power of binding and loosing is exercised many other wayes, besides that Sacrament. Yea not onely in our diuinitie, but also in your owne, you be
so ignoraunt,Pur. 13. that you wonder, that a Catholike should say, that God sometime punisheth sinne with sinne: which is a position common to be séen in all Catholike Doctors:Thom. 1.2. q. 87. ar. 2. & complaine, that when you say but halfe so much we charge you, to make God the Author of sinne. Why? is not that a common position, and long discourses vpō it, in your masters bookes, that God is the author of sinne?Cal. Insti. li ca. 14. num. 17.18. Melanct. in Epist. ad Rom. If you be ashamed thereof, and therefore doe say, not as an euill author, but as a righteous iudge, I doe not reprehend you. But if you say it of ignoraunce in your owne Scholes learning: you must know, that your Masters hold it of all sinnes alike, as well of that sinne which goeth first in any man, as of that sinne which commeth after in him and is sometime the punishment of the former sinne. And therefore they holde it of God otherwise then as of a righteous iudge, Ergo (by your owne diuision) as of an euill author. For the difference betwéene them and vs, is this: They denie our Fréewill, and make God to worke all sinne in vs, in the same sort, as he worketh all good in vs, to wit, per se, willing, appointing, and predestinating vs to sinne: euen no lesse, then he which leadeth a blind man to fall. But we say no more, but that when a man hath sinned against him mortally, God ta∣keth away his inward grace, and sometime also his outward as∣sistance, more or lesse according to his most iust will. So as if a blinde mans guide should for his desert, as because he wil néedes fall when he might stand, forsake him either quite or for a time, and he afterwardes fall, the cause of that fall, per se, he onely is himselfe, as of the former, & his guide, onely per accidens, though of the former neither per accidens. Euen so doth God, who is both the light of our eyes by his grace infused, and also our guide by his infinite helpes externall. Howbeit he dealeth not with vs all and alwayes according to his iustice: but of his infinite mercie commonly he will not let vs fall when we will néedes fall, and when we be fallen, he will not let vs fall farther, yea he raiseth vs often againe when we would lie still, yea also when we resist him and fight against him rebelliously: a notable example in S. Paules conuersion,Act. 9. Iac. 1. that most worthily S. Iames is so vehement to hold and affirme, that all good is of him, but no euill at all, not so much as tentation to euill. Moreouer your great skill in Histories Ecclesiasticall, appea∣reth
by that you say,Supra. ca. 2. & ca. 10. Dem. 11.3. Ar. 15.16. the Britons to haue kept their Easter so as the Asians did: and the Latines to be departed from the Greci∣ans, in this present Schisme. Which both I noted before. Again, because you say (as it seemeth) that Iulianus the Apostata was Emperour after Valens the Arrian. Againe, speaking of the Estern Churches of Asia at this presente: that the newe Testa∣ment is printed in the Syrian tongue, at the Emperours charges,Ar. 6. for the encrease of Christian faith among them. What Empe∣rour and what faith, I pray you, but Catholike or Popish?Pur. 373. A∣gaine, that the Fathers alleaging Succession of Bishops against Heretikes, specially named the Church of Rome, it was because those Heretikes for the most parte had beene sometimes of the Church of Rome, as Valentinus, Marcian, Nouatus. Those Here∣tikes yt D. Allen speaketh of, were not only the Valentinians and Nouatians, but also the Donatistes, the Arrians, yea and all Here∣tikes in generall. Now, had the most part of these béen sometimes of the Church of Rome? Yea Nouatus him selfe,Supra p. 16 was he not a Priest of the Church of Carthage vnder S. Cyprian? Who can reade S. Cyprian, and be ignorant thereof, specially now a dayes, after that so many haue noted the error of some Gréeke Histori∣ans, who in olde time and being farre of, could not distinguishe Nouatus of Carthage, from Nouatianus of Rome? And also of Valentinus and Marcion, where haue you that they were of Rome? vnlesse all that goe to Rome be of Rome: For so wée reade in Ireneus,Iren. l. 3. ca. 4. & li. 1. ca. 29. Philast. in Catal. ye time noted when Valentinus came to Rome (for by Philastrius, he was of Cypres) and that Marcion was of Pontus, being therefore called Ponticus. You might in another sense say, that they & all other Heretikes were sometimes of the Church of Rome, because all lightly were first Catholikes, and al Catholikes were (as all ought to be) of that Churches communi∣on. And that to haue bene the cause, why the Fathers named that Church specially. But so you would not say, because you woulde not condemne your selfe for a Schismatike. Last of all, where you must shew vs, wherein the Communion  of Saintes consisteth: you shew your self againe a great clearke.Pur. 199.200. The Scriptures make the Communion of Saints to be, as is the Communion of our members in our body. Yet you say, One can not merite for another, no not for him selfe, but euery man hath
his worthinesse of Christ. As though neither Christ could merite for any other, no nor for himselfe, because he had his worthinesse of God. Againe graunting, that some of the members be here on earth, and some elsewhere, & yet denying that they may either by prayer also helpe one the other: you so define the Communion, that you allow it no place for the prayers also of the members a∣liue to be made for others aliue. But only for the dispensation of the grace and giftes of God, which as euery one hath receyued of God, so of charitie he is bound to imploy the same, to the profite of his fellowe members here on earth. And why is he not of cha∣ritie bound as well to pray for them? And if he be, why are not those members in heauen as well? or haue not they also receiued of God some giftes? If they haue, why are not they of charitie bound as well? or doth not the Scripture say plainly, ye Christes friendes in heauen, do reioyce with his penitentes in earth? How then coulde you pretend,Luc. 15. as though the mutuall offices of loue whereby one member hath compassion with another, can by no meanes touch the state of the dead? Is not the state of ye holy An∣gels, now the state also of some that be dead? Be not they also a∣mong Christes friendes in heauen? So much you say touching the Communion of the Church militant here on earth. For you haue another besides it, which you call the communion of the whole body, & that you make to be the participation of life, from Christ the head. If that be all, then is there no Communion. For what communion were it betwéene the members of your natu∣rall body, if they did onely receiue life, from your head, and could not vse their said life to profit one another, but liued euery one to himselfe alone? How much better had you bene to follow D. Al∣lens most proper and true discription of it, then to vtter thus you know not what? at ye least, if you could not correct him, yet you could belye him: as to say, that he will haue other workes and wayes of saluation, beside the bloud of Christ. He saith, that in this Communion all workes, and all wayes of saluation, are common to the whole body, & al grounded in the bloud of Christ. But of any beside the bloud of Christ, he saith not. Yea it is clene contrarie to that which he saith.
¶The .13. Chapter, or Conclusion. That in his two writings against D. Allen, there is yet stuffe ynough to make another Booke as bigge as this, to the further discredite of his partie. THus at the length with the helpe of God I am come to the end. And yet the Reader must vnderstande, that I finde in this man such store of this stuffe, as would suffice to make another volume as big as this: partly by enlarging these two last Chapters with many more of his like contradictions, & errors or ignorances (for all the former Chapters be full freyted) partly by making many new Chapters vpon new matters. As one, to shewe howe he behaueth himselfe in all places where he chargeth either the Catholikes doctrine or D. Allen himselfe, with contradictions. Another, to lay together all his falsifications of the Scriptures, Doctors, and D. Allen, by adding, diminishing or chaunging their wordes. Another, of his most impudent fa∣cing lyes without any colour of truth. Another, of his detestable raylings not only at D. Allen, but also at the old Doctors, and at Rome, and at the whole Churche, which he can not auoide (the Scriptures, with his owne confession, are so plaine for it) but it is the true Church his owne Mother, and Spouse of Christ. Ano∣ther of his ridiculous answeres to many of D. Allens Demaun∣des, sometimes like him that answered a pokefull of plumes whē he was demaunded the way to London: sometimes to answere the very same thing that is in question, &c. Moreouer, diuers others chapters yet of Purgatorie, about his answeres to D. Allens allegations, to sée, whether he haue so an∣swered thē, as I haue here answered al his allegations against it yea & against any other Article of ours. One of those Chapters might be, to gather all the Scriptures alleaged by D. Allen, & the auncient Fathers before him, and Fulkes answeres vnto them, with my replies which are e dispersed in this booke: like as in the 8. chapter I haue gathered al Fulkes scriptures, & answered thē. Another, of such bookes in antiquitie, as he denyeth, namely the workes of S. Dionysius Areopagita, and the Constitutions of ye Apostles by S. Clement: because he could not otherwise auoide
their plaine testimonies for prayer for the dead, they also liuing euen in the Apostles time, and familiarly with the Apostles. Of which bookes notwithstanding there are such probations as can not possibly be answered. Reade the Preface of Fr. Turrianus in his new edition of those Constitutions: and the Preface of Mat. Galenus ad Areopagitica,Cop. Dial. 2. ca. 5. as also the Preface and Scholies in the Gréeke edition by Morelius at Paris Anno. 1562. In ano∣ther Chapter I might shew, how vainely he laboureth to answer certaine testimonies of the other Doctors, considering that he graunteth other testimonies of the very same Doctors them sel∣ues, or of their seuerall times, to be so euident for it, that they can not be answered: for which cause also he passeth by many of them with silence: as, that S. Augustine in one place prayed for his mothers soule, and yet to stand with D. Allen about other places of his, that they proue it not: as though Doctors opinion and iudgement being confessed, there néedeth any more to doe to be made about his sayings. And yet it is nothing also which he an∣swereth to those other places, as I haue shewed in very many of them. Another might be, to lay together all D. Allens argu∣mentes or reasons for it, with my replies to Fulkes answeres, such as I haue made in diuers places of this booke. In another I could shewe, that Fulke hath made no answere lightly to these Scriptures, Doctors, or reasons, but D. Allen did foresée it afore hand, warned the Reader of it, and made so iust a replie vnto it, as standeth still vpright, euen after that Fulke hath done the worst he could. Another might be, to shew out of Iustinus Mar∣tyr, Ireneus, and Clement Alexandrinus, in how many things they also make with vs most euidētly (as in nothing against vs) because he doth so oftē require vs, to proue prayer for the dead by any of them, as though he would yéeld to them, although he will not to their fellowes: wheras in déede he excepteth against them no lesse, as I haue shewed, then against the rest. Another might be by occasion of his zeale for Caluine, Luther, and such other his Maisters and fellowes: to shewe more copiously, that they are worthily charged, not onely with those shamefull opinions by D. Allen, but also that they may be likewise charged with ve∣ry many moe no lesse, yea and much more shamefull then those. These matters are such, as being so handled, would worke the
further discredite of Fulke and of his side, and yet being no more handled, then alreadie, doe leaue no blotte in our side, no nor so much as in D. Allen particularly. For which cause I minde not neither hereafter, to prosecute them, vnlesse I haue greater occa∣sion geuen then yet I sée. But presently I omitted them, to a∣uoide more prolixitie, and specially because in this booke I tooke in hand to defend, not D. Allen, but the Church: and therefore whatsoeuer this Heretike pretended against the Churche or a∣gainst any thing of hers, I haue answered it all and euery whit, omitting nothing to my knowledge: and so shall be able (with the grace of God) and also readie, to answere him hereafter also, if he harden his heart yet further to make more resistance against the trueth. Counselling him rather, yea and beséeching him in the bowels of the mercies of Christ, to be better to his owne soule, and to so innumerable other soules redéemed with the most pre∣cious bloud of Christe, then to stande any longer against the Church of Christ, to the damnation of so many soules, specially hauing neither any text of Scripture, nor any other authoritie Catholike, against the same Churche, as I haue here most eui∣dently declared. But if he list still without cause to blaspheme the Holy Citie and Tabernacle of God, let him knowe,Apoc. 13.22.3. and all such as he is, that his name will be stricken out of it to his e∣ternall confusion, when our names, that through the mer∣cie of God be of it, shall before all the worlde to our vn∣speakable glorie appeare written in it together and in the booke of life of the Lambe and Sonne of God, to whom be glorie in the Churche throughout all ages for euer and euer. Amen. FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader. In two thinges I am to desire thée (curteous and friendly Reader) to extend thy accustomed gentlenes in perusing and rea∣ding of this godly worke: One is, that thou wilt friendly correct with thy penne these faults, and what others els thou shalt ther∣in espie committed in the Printing: for although I haue had great care and bene very diligent in the correcting thereof, yet because my Compositor was a straunger and ignorant in our Englishe tongue and Orthographi, some faultes are passed vnamended of me. The other, that thou wilte not like the worse of this learned worke, because it hath not the varietie of letters which is requisite in such a booke, and as the Printers in England do customably vse, my abilitie was not otherwise to do it, and hauing these Characters out of England, I could not ioyne them together with any others, and so was forst to vse one Character both for the words of Fulke, and for all Allegations. Remember that when man can not do as he would, he must do as he may. Iohn Lyon. The Errata. Cap. 3. Fol. 11. for, man reade men Pag. 80. for anima reade omnia. Pag. 54. for anima reade anna Pag. 66 for obnaxius reade obnoxius for lanacri lauacri Pag. 190. for milenis reade milleuis Hag. 355. for Ephata reade Epheta for Ephphata Ephpheta.
¶The contentes of this Booke at large. ¶Chapter. 1. Fulke confesseth, out of the true Church to be no saluation. ¶Chapter. 2. He confesseth the knowen Church of the first. 600. yeares after Christ, and the knowen members thereof. ¶Chapter. 3. He confesseth, the foresaid true Church to haue made so plain∣ly with vs in very many of the controuersies of this time, that he is faine to hold, that the true Church may erre, & also hath erred. The first part of this Chapter. That the true Church may erre. The second part. That the true Church did also erre: & that in the same pointes as we now doe erre in. i. Where he chargeth them with many pointes together. ii. As touching Vigilantius, & Inuocation of Saintes, by it selfe. iij. As touching Iouinian: of Fasting, of Virginities merite, of Votaries Mariage. iiij. As touching Ceremonies. v. As touching Purgatorie, and praying for the dead. 1. What he saith of particular Doctors, and their particular times, for it. 2. What he saith of the whole Church in some of those times. 3. To what origin he confesseth the Doctors to referre it, to wit, vnto Scripture and Tradition of the Apostles. 4. He cōtrariwise feareth not nor basheth not to say, they had it from the diuell and his limmes. vj. As touching the Popes primacie. ¶Chapter. 4. He chargeth the said Primitiue true Church also with sundrie errors, wherewith he neither doth, nor will, nor can, charge vs. ¶Chapter 5. What reason he rendreth, why they in those auncient times had the true Church notwithstanding these their errors. ¶Chapter. 6. An answere first to all the foresaid errors, wherewith he hath charged the Church of the first. 600. yeares, & afterward likewise to all errors that he layeth to the Church of these later times.
His zeale in answering for Caluine and others beeing in deede of his Church. The first part of this Chapter. Concerning the errors that he layeth (cap. 3. part 2.) both to the Fathers and to vs. 1. Of Crosse and Images. 2. Of Inuocation of Saintes, and worshipping of their Relikes. 3. Of Abstinence from fleshmeate, and from Mariage. 4. Of Ceremonies. 5. Of Sacrifice. And for the dead. Purgatorie. And Purgatorie fire. Prayer for the dead. And Oblations for the dead. Beeres to carie home the corpses. The Second Parte. Concerning the errors that he layed (cap. 4.) to the Fathers & not to vs. 1. Touching the Heresies which were in their times. 2. Touching the errors of S. Cyprian, S. Irenee, and S. Iustinus. 3. Touching Second Mariages, And S. Ierome. 4. Touching praying to the Sonne, and to the Holy ghost. 5. Of ministring the B. Sacrament to Infantes. The third part. Concerning the errors that he layeth to the Church of later time, and not of old. 1. Touching the bodies of Angels. 2. Touching the Popes Superioritie ouer the Councell. 3. Touching the Constance Councels presumption. 4. Touching certaine false interpretations of Scripture. ¶Chapter. 7. That he hath no other shift against our manifold Euidēces (so cleere they be) but the name of Onely Scripture, as well about ech cōtrouersie, as also about the meaning of Scripture it selfe, & how timerous he maketh vs, & how bold he bereth himselfe thervpon. The first parte. How he excepteth by Onely Scripture against all other Eui∣dencies, in the Controuersies that are betwene vs. 1. Against the Rule to know Heresie by finding the first authors and theire old Heresies. By Antiquitie. By names. 2. Against the Apostles Traditions.
3 Against the true Churches Authoritie, that is, against her practise, and her Iudgement, Against her Councels, Against her Chiefe Pastors Determinations, and their whole Succession. 4 Against the Fathers both in generall, and in particuler. The second part. Being tolde that the question betwene vs is not (as he maketh it) of the Scriptures authoritie, but of the meaning: How there likewise against al expositors he taketh the same exceptiō of on∣ly Scripture, requiring also Scripture to be expounded by Scrip∣ture. The third part. What he meaneth by his Only Scripture: and that thereby he excepteth also against Scripture it selfe. The fourth part. What great promises he maketh to bring most euident Scrip∣ture against vs, and also by Scripture to proue his sense of Scrip∣ture: Triumphing also before the victorie, and saying, that we dare not be tried by Scripture, but reiect the Scriptures. Wherevp∣pon a fourefolde offer is made vnto him. ¶Chapter 8. To shew his vanitie in his forsaid rigorous exacting of playne Scriptures, and great promises to bring playne Scripture, confer∣ring place with place so euidently: All the Scriptures that he al∣leageth, are examined, and answered. The first part. Concerning the question of Onely Scripture. The second part. Concerning the question of the Church. 1. Indefinitely. Whether the whole Church may erre. Whether she may be diuorced. Whether she it is that should prepare the way to Antichrist. Whether she be alwayes a base companie. Whether it be alwayes inuisible, yea or so much as then when Antichrist commeth. 2. Namely of their Church and of ours. Certaine places cōferred diligently together, concerning the De∣fection and Antichrist. The third part. Concerning the question of Purgatorie.
1. Ab authoritate Scripturae negatiuè, that is, by the Scriptures authoritie negatiuely. 2. Ab authoritate Scripturae affirmitiuè. First, about certaine foundations of Purgatorie and prayer for the dead. The distinction of veniall and mortall sinne. Whether after sinne remitted, paine may remaine. Whether Purgatorie follow thereupon. Whether in Christ, the workes of one may helpe another. His cōmon argument of the omnisufficiencie of Christs passiō. It is omnisufficient, ergo it worketh alwayes to the full. It is omnisufficient, ergo nothing worketh with it. Secondly, directly of Purgatorie it selfe, & prayer for the dead. Whether all the elect goe straight to Heauen. Afore Christes comming. Or at the least, since Christes comming. Whether the Iudgement may stand with Purgatorie. Whether faith, hope, and Gods will. The fourth part. Concerning all other questions that he mentioneth. About Good workes. 1. In generall. Whether they do iustifie. Whether we haue Freewill. 2. In speciall. Of prayer. Prayer to Saintes. Of Fasting. About the Sacramentes. 1. In generall. Whether they be but two. Whether they do confer grace. 2. In speciall. Baptisme, the necessitie, and effect of it. Eucharist: Real presence. Transubstantiation. Mariage of Votaries. Of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. ¶Chapter. 9. To defend, that the Doctors, as they be confessed to be ours in very many pointes, so they be ours in all pointes, and the Prote∣stantes in no point. All the Doctors sayings that he alleageth, are examined and answered. The first part. Of his Doctors generally.
1. His chalenging wordes. 2. A generall answer to his challenge, declaring that we neede not to answer his Doctors particularly. 3. I ioyne with him neuerthelesse particularly. The second part. Of his Doctors, particularly. First, whether they expound any Scripture against vs. 1. About Antichrist, and Babylon. 2. About Onely faith. 3. About Purgatorie. Touching Scripture expounded against it. Touching Scriptures for it. Whether they say no Scripture to make for it. Of certaine perticular textes. Secondly, whether they geue any other kinde of testimonie a∣gainst vs. 1. About the Bookes of Machabees. Whether, somewhat also of other controuersed Scriptures, spe∣cially. 2. About Onely Scripture. Where, of S. Augustine threefoldly alleaged. 3. About certaine Traditions. 4. About the Mariage of Votaries. 5. About the Real presence. And Transubstantiation. 6. About the Sacrament of penance. Absolution. Temporall debt remaining after Absolution. Satisfaction. Pardons. 7. Of Purgatorie. Of the Canonicall Memento, of oblations, and of Sacrifice for the dead practised by the Church. Of particular Doctors. VVhether S. Augustine doubted of Purgatorie. Or denied it. Other Doctors about praying for the dead. Whether it be onely for Veniall sinnes. 8. Of Limbus patrum. ¶Chapter 10. That, notwithstanding al which he hath said against D. Allens Articles, in his first booke beeing of that matter, or also in his o∣ther of Purgatorie: Euery one of my 51. Demaundes (and there∣fore also euery one of my Motiues, & likewise euery one of those
Articles) stādeth in his force (euery one I say) and much more all of thē, to make any man to be a Catholike, and not a Protestant. 1 Collatio Carthaginensis tou∣ching the Church of the Scri∣ptures. 2 Building of the Church amid persecution. 3 Going out of the Church. 4 Rising after the beginning of the Church. 5 Cōtradicted of the Church. 6 This name Catholikes. 7 This name Heretikes. 8 This name Protestantes. 9 Cōuersion of heathē Natiōs. 11 Our Britannie. 10.12. Miracles & Visions. 13.15. Honor of Crosses and Saintes. 14.16 Vertue of Crosses and Saintes. 17 Exorcismes. 18 Destroying of Idolatrie. 19 Kings and Emperours. 20 In all persecutions. 21 Churches. 22 Seruice. 23 Apish imitation. 24 Priesthood and Sacrifice. 25 Monkes. 26 Fathers. 27 Councels. 28 See Apostolike. 29 Traditions. 30 Their owne Doctors. 31 Vniuersalitie. 32 Antiquitie. 33 Consent. 34 Authoritie. 35 Vnitie. 36 Owners and kepers of the Scriptures. 37 Stoare house of all truth. 38 Old Heresies. 39 In old Heretikes Onely. 40 They neuer afore now. 41 Studying al truth. 42 Vnsent. 43 Succession. 44 Apostolike Church. 45 Chaunging. 46 Our Auncetors saued, & theirs damned. 47 Communion of Saintes. 48 By their fruites. 49 All enimies. 50 Sure to continue. 51 Apostasie. ¶Chapter 11. What grosse contradictions Fulke is fayne to vtter against him selfe, while he struggleth against Gods Church and the Doctrine thereof. ¶Chapter. 12. A Nosegay of certayne strange flowers piked out of Fulke: that they which delight in such a Gardiner, may see his handyworke. ¶The .13. Chapter, or Conclusion. That in his two writings against D. Allen, there is yet stuffe y∣nough to make another Booke as bigge as this, to the further dis∣credite of his partie.
