5811 99844375 9182
THOMAS CORIATE Traueller for the English VVits: Greeting. From the Court of the Great MOGVL, Resi∣dent at the Towne of ASMERE, in Easterne INDIA. Printed by W. Iaggard, and Henry Fetherston.
To the Reader. THree years (poore Countrimē that haue not trauaild) And some odde daies; in Odde-combs grace & yours, I haue enricht my feete (though something grauaild) VVith measuring millicents of Townes and Towres. And yet I sweare, my head is nothing full, But rather empty of such things as fit One that makes nothing of the Great Mogul, But farre beyond, or wide, as farre as it Is from my Od-combe. Meane to trauaile still, Till I haue equald in some seauen yeares more The Wise Vlysses; for of him, my will VVants nought in wit, but seauen yeares and some score Of foolish dayes; of which, I hope to spend Ten millions more: For all my life shall be Endeard to that most lou'd; most fortunate end, And to bring honor, to my Land and Ye. But do not long for me too soone; or doubt, As doth my mother; who doth wish, I heare, To haue me there, though in a shitten clout; Though I not tred out my Vlyssian yeares.
For who can purchase wisedome? Ten yeares? No. Before I get it, I will go, and go. His Parallel with Erasmus. Erasmus did in praise of folly write; And Coryate doth, in his selfe-praise endite.
Loe heere the wooden Image of our wits; Borne, in first trauaile, on the backs of Nits; But now on Elephants, &c: O, what will he ride, when his yeares expire? The world must ride him; or he all will tire.
To THE RIGHT Honourable, Sir Ed∣ward Phillips, Knight, and Maister of the Rolles, at his house in Chancery-Lane, or VVanstead. From the Court of the most mighty Monarch, the Great Mogul, resident in the Towne of Asmere, in the Easterne India, Anno 1615.
Right Honourable, I Am perswaded, that if euer any accident wor∣thy of admirati∣on euer happe∣ned vnto your honor in al your life time, it will be the receiuing of this present Letter, from me out of the Easterne India: yet perhaps it will seeme vnto you so wondrous, that I beleeue you will doubt whe∣ther this bee the true hand-writing of your once Odcombiam Neighbor, Thomas Coryate. But your Honour may soone very infallibly and ap∣parantly perceiue it to be true; part∣ly by the forme of the style, which is
iust answerable to that manner of speech that you haue heard and ob∣serued in me, sometimes in my Lin∣sie-woolsie Orations; and somtimes in my extrauagant discourses: and partly by the testimony of the bea∣rer heereof, M. Peter Rogers, Mini∣ster at the time of his being in India, to the English Merchants resident at the Court of the most puissant Monarch the great Mogul, at a town called Asmere; whose comfortable and sweet company I enioyed at the same Court, about the space of foure Moneths. Now, though there hath itched a very burning desire in mee, within these few yeares, to suruay and con∣template some of the chiefest parts of this goodly Fabricke of the VVorld, besides mine owne natiue Country: yet neuer did I thinke it would haue broken out to such an ambitious vent, as to trauell all on
foote from Ierusalem, so farre as the place where I wrote this Letter. Howbeit since Fortune, or rather (to speake more properly, in vsing a Christian word) the prouidence of the Almighty, (for Fatuus est, S. Augu∣stine saith, qui faro credit) hath so ordai∣ned, that I should securely passe so far into the Orientall world, with al humilitie vpō the bended knees of my hart, I thank my Creator & mer∣ciful redeemer, Iesus Christ; (whose Sacrosanct Sepulcher I haue visited & kissed, terque quaterque in Ierusalem) & do very much congratulate mine owne happines, that he hath hither∣to endued mee with health, (for in all my trauels since I came out of England, I haue enioyed as sound a constitutiō of body, & firme health, as euer I did since I first drew this vi∣tall ayre) libertie, strength of limbs, agilitie of foot-manship, &c. Neither do I doubt, but that your Honour it selfe will likewise con∣gratulate
the felicitie of our Sommer∣setshire, that in breeding me, hath produced such a traueller, as dooth for the diuersitie of the Countries he hath seene, and the multiplicitie of his obseruations, farre (I beleeue) out-strippe anie other whatsoeuer, that hath beene bred therein since the blessed Incarnation of our Sa∣uior. Yea, I hope my generall coun∣trie of England, shall one day say, that Odde-combe, for one part of the word, may truelie be so called: (for Odde-combe consisteth of two words, odde, & combe, which latter word in the olde Saxon tongue signifieth besides the vertical point of a cocks head, the side of a Hill, because the east side of the hill wheron Od-combe standeth, is very conspicuous, and seene afar off in the Country East∣ward) for breeding an odde man, one that hath not his peere in the whole kingdome to match him.
Three yeares and some few odde dayes I haue spent already, in this second peregrination, and I hope with as much profite (vnpartially will I speake it of my selfe, without any ouer-weening opiniō, to which most men are subiect) both for lear∣ning foure Languages more, then I had when I left my Country: viz. Italian, Arabian, Turkish, and Persian; and exact viewing of diuers of the most remarkeable matters of the Vniuerse; together with the accu∣rate description thereof, as most of my Countri-men that are now a∣broad. Yet such is my insatiable greedinesse of seeing strange coun∣tries: which exercise is indeede the very Queene of all the pleasures in the world, that I haue determined (if God shall say Amen) to spend full seauen yeares more, to the ende to make my voyage answerable for the time to the trauels of Vlysses; &
then with vnspeakable ioy to reui∣site my Country; which I will euer entitle (notwith-standing all the goodly Regions that I haue seene in my two perambulations) with the stile of the true Canaan of the world, that flowes with Milke and Hony. Onely wish me good successe, I be∣seech your Honour, as I will from my heart, to you and all your fami∣lie; hoping to salute you after the fi∣nall catastrophe of my exoticke wanderings; when you shall bee in the great climacterical year of your age; you being about fifty three, if my coniecture doth not faile mee, when I tooke my leaue of you: a thing verie likely by the mercifull goodnesse of God. For your Fa∣ther, that was my god-father, who imposed vpon me the name of Tho∣mas, liued more then eightie yeares. Honourable Sir, take it not, I be∣seech you, for a discourtesie, in that
I write nothing in this Letter of my past trauels. I am certaine, that a Letter which I haue written to M. VVhitaker, your learned and elegant Secretary, wherein I haue compen∣diouslie discoursed of some of my obseruations in Asia, will quicklie come to your hands, at least if hee remaineth still in your seruice: ther∣fore it would be superfluous to haue repeated the same things. Dutie ioyned with the recordation of the manifold benefits, and singular fa∣uours I haue receiued from you, hath inioyned mee to send this Let∣ter to your Honour, from this glo∣rious Court of the Mogul; wherein seeing I relate not the singularities I haue seene in those Orientall Re∣gions, I will desist to be farther te∣dious; humbly recommending your Honour, and vertuous Lady, your well-beloued Sonne & Heire-apparant, Sir Robert, (to whom I
haue written a few times also) & his sweet Lady; M. Martin also, M. Chri∣stopher Brooke, whom I thanke still for his no lesse elegant then serious verses: M. Equinoctiall Pasticrust of the middle Temple, M. VVilliam Hack∣well, and the rest of the worthy gen∣tlemen frequenting your Honou∣rable table, that fauour vertue, and the sacred Muses, to the most Hea∣uenly Clientele of the eternall Ie∣houah. Your Honors most obsequious Beadsman, Thomas Coryate. From the Court of the great Mogul, resident in the Towne of Asmere in the Easterne India, on Michaelmas day, Anno 1615. I beseech your Honour, to speake courteously to this kind Minister M. Rogers for my sake: for he euer shewed himselfe very louing vn∣to me.
Most deare and belo∣ued Friend, Maister L. W. animae dimidium meae. From the Court of the most Migh∣ty Monarch, called the Great Mogul, resi∣dent in the Towne of Asmere, in the Ori∣entall India. Anno 1615. COrdiall salutations in the Author of Saluation, Iesus Christ: where I writ vnto you last, I re∣member wel; euen from Zobah, as the Prophet Samuel calleth it (2 Booke 8. chap. ver. 3) that is, Aleppo, the principall Emporium of all Syria, or rather of the Orient world; but when, in trueth I haue forgotten, for I keepe not coppies
of my Letters, as I see most of my Countrey-men doe, in whatsoeuer place of the worlde I finde them: Howbeit, if my coniecture doe not much faile me, I may affirme that it was about xv. moneths since, about a month after I returned vnto Aleppo from Ierusalem, after which time, I remained there three months lon∣ger, and then departed there-hence in a Carauan into Persia, passing the noble riuer Euphrates (the cheefest of all that irrigated Paradise,Gen. 2, 10. where∣hence, as frō their original, the three other riuers were deriued) about foure dayes iourney beyond Aleppo: on the farther side of which, I ente∣red Mesapotamia, alias Chaldea, for the Euphrates in that place distermina∣teth Syria & Mesopotamia. Therehence I had two dayes iourney to Vr of the Chaldeans, where Abraham was born,Gen. 11.28. a very delicate and pleasant Cittie. There I remained foure dayes, but I
I could see no part of the ruines of the house, wher that faithful seruant of God was borne, though I much desired it. from thence, I had foure dayes iourney to the Riuer Tigris, which I passed also; but in the same place where I crossed it, I found it so shallow, that it reached no high∣er then the calfe of my legge: for I waded ouer it afoot. Now I wel per¦ceiue by mine occular experience, that Chaldea is named Mesopotamia, for that it is inclosed with the fore∣said riuers. Traiecto Tigride, I entred Armenia the greater: After that, Me∣dia the lower, & resided six dayes in the Metropolis therof, heretofore cal∣led Ecbarana, the sommer seate of Cy∣rus his Court, a City eftsoone menti∣oned in the Scripture, now called Tauris, more wofull ruines of a City (sauing that of Troy & Cyzicū in Na∣tolia) neuer did mine eies beholde: whē I seriously contemplated those , the doleful testimonies of the
Turkish deuastations, I called to minde Ouids verse. Ludis in humanis diuina potentia rebus. And that of Hesiod, . From that, I had two daies iourney to a Citty that in Strabos time was called Arsacia in Media the higher, now Casbin, once the royall seate of the Tartarian Princes,  daies iourney from the Caspian sea. From Casbin, I had  daies to Spahan in Parthia, the place of residence of the Persian K. But at my being there, he was in the Countrey of Gurgistan, ransacking the poor Christians ther with great hostility, with fire & sword. There I remained months, & so with a Ca∣rauan trauelled into the Easterne In∣dia, passing  months & odde daies, in my trauell betwixt that (through part of the true Persia, & a large tract of the noble & renownd India) and the goodly city of labore in India, one of the largest Cities of the whole v∣niuerse. For it containe that the least xvi. miles in compasse, & exceedeth
Constantinople it selfe in greatnesse: but a dozen dayes before I came to La∣hore, I passed the famous Riuer In∣dus, which is as broad againe as our Thames at London, and hath his ori∣ginall out of the Mountaine Cau∣casus, so much ennobled by the an∣cient both Poets and Historiogra∣phers, Greeke & Latine; which Plato for curiosity sake, in his trauelles of these parts, went to see. It lyeth not farre from that vppon the Confines of Scythia, now called Tartaria: My selfe also conceiuing some hope of seeing it before my finall farewel of India. I had almost forgotten one memorable matter to impart vnto you: About the middle of the way, betwixt Spahan and Lahore, iust about the Frontiers of Persia & India, I met Sir Robert Sherley, and his Lady, tra∣uailing from the court of the Mogul, (where they had beene verie graci∣ously receiued, and enriched with
presents of great value) to the King of Persia's Court; so gallantly furni∣shed with all necessaries for their trauailes, that it was a great com∣fort vnto me to see them in such a florishing estate. There did he shew mee to my singular contentment, both my Bookes neatly kept; and hath promised me to shew them, e∣specialy mine Itinerarie, to the Persi∣an King; and to interpret vnto him some of the principall Matters in the Turkish tongue, to the end, I may haue the more gracious accesse vnto him after my returne thither. For through Persia I haue determi∣ned (by Gods helpe) to returne to Aleppo. Besides, other rarities that they carried with them out of India; they had two Elephants, and eight Antlops, which were the first that euer I saw: but afterwards, when I came to the Moguls Court, J sawe great store of them. These they
meant to present to the Persiā King. Both he and his Lady vsed me with singular respect, especially his La∣dy, who bestowed forty shillings vpon me in Persian mony; and they seemed to exult for ioy to see mee, hauing promised me to bring mee in good grace with the Persian king,
and that they will enduce him to bestow some Princely benefit vpon me: this I hope will be partly occa∣sioned by my booke, for he is such a iocond Prince, that he will not be meanlie delighted with diuers of my factious Hieroglyphicks, if they are truelie and genuously expoun∣ded vnto him. From the famous Citie of Lahore, I had twentie daies iourney to another goodly Citie called Agra, through such a delicate and eeuen tract of ground, as I ne∣uer saw before; and doubt whither the like bee to be found within the whole circumference of the habi∣table world. Another thing also in this way, being no lesse memora∣ble then the plainenesse of the ground; a row of Trees on each side of this way where people doe trauell, extending it selfe from the townes end of Lahore, to the townes end of Agra; the most incompara∣ble
shew of that kinde, that euer my eies suruaied. Likewise wheras ther is a Mountaine some ten daies iour∣ney betwixt Lahore and Agra, but ve∣rie neere ten miles out of the way on the left hand: the people that in∣habite that Mountaine, obserue a custome very strange, that all the brothers of any familie, haue but one and the selfe-same wife; so that one woman sometimes doth serue 6 or 7 men: the like whereof I re∣member I haue read in Strabo, con∣cerning the Arabians that inhabi∣ted Arabia felix. Agra is a verie great Citie, and the place where the Mogul did alwaies (sauing within these two yeares) keepe his Court; but in eue∣rie respect much inferior to Lahore. From thence to the Moguls Court I had ten daies iourney, at a Towne called Asmere, where I found a Cape Merchant of our English men, with nine more of my Countrimen, resi∣dent
there vpon termes of Negoti∣ations, for the right worshipfull Company of Merchants in Londō that trade for East India. I spent in my iourney betwixt Ierusalem & this Moguls Court, 15. moneths and odde daies: all which way I trauersed a∣foot, but with diuers paire of shooes, hauing beene such a Propateticke, (I will not cal my selfe Peripatetick, because you know it signifieth one that maketh a perambulation about a place, , signifying to walk about) that is, a walker forward on foote, as I doubt whether you euer heard of the like in your life: for the totall way betwixt Ierusalem and the Moguls court, containeth two thou∣sand and seauen hundred English miles. My whole perambulation of this Asia the greater, is like to bee a passage of almost sixe thousande miles, by that time that in my re∣turne backe thorough Persia,
afterward also by Babylon and Nini∣uie, I shall come to Caico in Egypt, and from that downe the Nylus to Alex∣andria, there to be one daie (by Gods helpe) imbarqued for Christen∣dome; a verie immense dimension of ground. Now I am at the Moguls Court, I think you would be glad to receiue some narration thereof from mee, though succinctly handled: for I meane to be very compendious, lest I shold otherwise preoccupate that pleasure which you may here after this reape by my personall relation thereof. This present Prince is a ve∣rie worthy person, by name Selim, of which name I neuer read or heard of any more then one Mahometan King, which was Suliam Selim of Con∣stantinople, that liued about 80. years since; the same that conquered Ieru∣salem, Damascus, Aleppo, Caico, &c: ad∣ding the same to the Turkish Em∣pire.
He is 53. yeares of age, his nati∣uitie daie hauing beene celebrated with wonderfull pompe since my arriuall here: for that daie he weigh∣ed himselffe in a paire of golden Scales, which by great chance I saw the same day (a custome that he ob∣serueth most inuioablie euery year) laying so much golde in the other scale as coūteruaileth the weight of his body, and the same he afterward distributed to the poore. Hee is of complection neither white nor blacke, but of a middle betwixt thē: I know not how to expresse it with a more expressiue & significant e∣pitheton then Oliue: an Oliue co∣lour his face presenteth: hee is of a seemelie composition of bodie, of a stature little vnequall (as I guesse not without grounds of probabili∣tie) to mine, but much more corpu∣lent then my selfe. The extent of his Dominion is verie spacious, beeing
in circuite, little lesse then 4000. English miles, which verie neere answereth the compas of the Turks territories: or if any thing be wan∣ting in geometricall dimension of ground, it is with a great pleonas∣me supplied by the fertility of his soyle: and in these two thinges hee exceedeth the Turks, in the fatnesse (as I haue said) of his Land, no part of the world yeelding a more fruit∣full veine of ground, then all that which lieth in his Empire, sauing that part of Babylonia, where the terrestriall Paradise once stoode: whereas a great part of the Turkes Land is extreme barren and sterill, as I haue obserued in my peregri∣nation thereof, especially in Syria, Mesopotamia and Armenia; many large portions thereof beeing so wonderfull fruitelesse, that it bea∣reth no good thing at all, or if any thing, there Infelix lolium et steriles do∣minantur auenae.
Secondly, in the coniunction and vnion of all his Territories, toge∣ther in one & the same goodly con∣tinent of India, no Prince hauing a foote of land within him. But many parcels of the Turkes Countries are by a large distance of seas & other∣wise diuided asunder. Again, in his Reuenue he exceedeth the Turk & the Persian his Neighbour by iust halfe: for his Reuenues are 40. mil∣lions of Crownes of sixe shillings value, by the yeare: but the Turkes are no more then fifteene millions, as I was certainly informed in Con∣stantinople; and the Persians fiue millions plus minus, as I heard in Spa∣han. It is saide that he is vncircum∣cised, wherein he differeth from all the Mahometan Princes that euer were in the world. Hee speaketh very reuerently of our Sauiour, calling him in the In∣dian tongue, Ifazaret Eesa, that is,
the great Prophet, Iesus: and all Christians, especiallie vs English, he vseth so beneuolently, as no Maho∣metan Prince the like Hee keepeth abundance of wilde Beasts, & that of diuers sorts, as Lyons, Elephants Loepards, Beares, Antlops, Vni∣cornes; whereof two I haue seene
at his Court, the strangest beasts of the world: they were brought hither out of the Countrie of Bengala, which is a king∣dome of most singular fertilitie within the compasse of his Dominion, about foure moneths iourney from this, the midland parts therof being watered by diuers channels of the famous Ganges, which I haue not as yet seene, but (God willing) I meane to visite it before my departure out of this Countrie, the nee∣rest part of it beeing not aboue twelue daies iourny from this Court. The King presenteth himselfe thrice euery daie without faile to his Nobles, at the rising of the Sunne, which he adoreth by the eleuation of his hands; at noone, and at fiue of the clocke in the euening: but he standeth in a roome aloft, alone by him selfe, and looketh vppon them from a window that hath an embroidered sumptuous couerture, supported with two siluer pillasters to yeeld shaddowe vnto him. Twice euery week, Elephants fight before him, the brauest spectacle in the worlde: many of them are thir∣teene
foot and a halfe high; and they seeme to iustle together like two little Mountaines, and were they not parted in the middest of their fighting by cer∣taine fire-workes, they would excee∣dingly gore and cruentate one another by their murdering teeth. Of Elephants the King keepeth 30000. in his whole Kingdome at an vnmeasurable charge; in feeding of whom, and his Lyons, and other Beasts, he spendeth an incredible masse of money, at the least ten thou∣sand pounds sterling a day. I haue rid vpon an elephant since I came to this Court, determining one day (by Gods leaue) to haue my picture expressed in my next Booke, sitting vpon an Ele∣phant. The King keepeth a thousand women for his own body, whereof the chiefest (which is his Queene) is called Normal. I thinke I shall here after this, send another Letter vnto you, before my departure out of this Countrey, by a worthy man, which is the Minister & Preacher of our Nation in this place, one M. Peter Rogers, a man to whom I
am exceedingly obliged for his singu∣lar offices of humanity exhibited vnto me. Pray vse him kindly for my sake; hee vnderstanding, that there is a cer∣taine yong Gentleman, called Maister Charles Lancaster, that serueth the M. of the Rolles, intreated me to desire you to recommēd him very kindly vnto him.
Our Cape-Merchants name is M. VVilli∣am Edwards, an honest gentleman, that vseth me with verie louing respect. Dear M. L. VV. conueigh these twoe letters that I haue sent to you, to the parties to whom they are directed: my poore mo∣ther & mine vnckle VVilliams. You may do me a kinde office to desire him (with such conuenient termes and patheticall perswasions as your discretion shall di∣ctate and suggest vnto you) to remem∣ber me as his poore industrious pere∣grinating kinseman, nearest vnto him in blood of all the people in the world; to remember me I say, with some com∣petent gratuitie, if God should call him out of the world before my returne into my natiue Countrie. I praie you if hee be liuing, and doth vse to come to Lon∣don as he was wont to doo, that you would deliuer my Letter to him with your owne hands, and not send it vnto him. You may remember to relate this vnto your friends, that I will now men∣tion as a matter verie memorable; I spent in my ten moneths trauels be∣twixt
Aleppo and the Moguls Court, but three pounds sterling, yet fared reaso∣nable well euerie daie; victuals beeing so cheape in some Countries where I trauelled, that I oftentimes liued com∣petentlie for a pennie sterling a day: yet of that three pound I was cousened of no lesse then ten shillings sterling, by certaine lewde Christians of the Arme∣nian Nation: so that indeed I spent but fiftie shillings in my ten moneths tra∣uailes. I haue beene in a Citie in this Countrie, called Detee, where Alexander the Great ioyned battell with Porus, K. of India, and conquered him; and in to∣ken of his victorie, erected a brasse pil∣lar, which remaineth there to this day. Pray remember my humblest seruice to the right Honourable, your Maister of the Rolles. Si superat{que} et vescitur aura aetherea, nee adhuc crudelibus occubat vmbris. And to Sir Robert Phillips, once my Me∣caenas, but how affected to me at this time I know not: pray tell them that I meane to write to each of them before my departure out of India: remember
my duty also to their right vertuous La∣dies. About foure yeares hence looke for me, but not before. For if God grant me life and health, I meane to make it a voyage of full seauen yeares before I come home, whereof three are already spent. Commend me also I pray you to M. Martin, though at a mans house in woodstreet, he vsed mee one night verie peruersly before I came away: but you see that my being at Ierusalem dooth make me forget many iniuries. Com∣mend mee likewise to Maister H. Hol∣land, and Inigo Iones: at this time I haue many Irons in the fire; for J learne the Persian, Turkish, & Arabian tongues, ha∣uing already gotten the Italian (I thank God) I haue bene at the Moguls Court three moneths already, and am to tarry heere (by Gods holy permission) fiue moneths longer, till I haue gotten the foresaide three tongues, and then de∣part herehence to the Ganges, and after that, directly to the Persian Court. Your assured louing Friend till death, Tho: Coryate.
From the Court of the Great Mogul, resident at the Towne of Asmere in the Eastern India, on Michaelmas day. Anno 1615. I Do enioy at this time as pancraticall and athle∣ticall a health as euer I did in my life: & so haue done euer since I came out of England, sauing for three dayes in Constantinople, where I had an Ague, which with a little letting blood was clean banished, the Lord be humbly thanked for his gracious blessing of health that hee hath giuen vnto mee. I was robbed of my money both golde and siluer (but not all, by reason of certaine clan∣destine corners where it was placed) in a Cittie called Diarbeck in Mesopotamia, the Turks coun∣trey, by a Spaheê as they call him, that is, one of the horsemen of the great Turke; but the occasi∣on and circumstance of that misfortune, would be too tedious to relate. Notwithstanding that losse, I am not destitute of money I thanke God. Since my arriuall heere, there was sent vnto this King one of the richest presents that I haue heard to be sent to any Prince in al my life time: it con∣sisted of diuers parcels; one beeing Elephants, whereof there were 31. and of those, two so glo∣riously adorned, as I neuer sawe the like, nor shal see the like again while I liue. For they wore foure chaines about their bodies all of beaten gold: two chains about their legges of the same;
furniture for their buttocks of pure gold: twoe Lyons vpon their heads of the like gold: the or∣naments of each, amounting to the value of al∣most eight thousand pound sterling: and the whole Present was worth ten of their Leakes, as they call them; a Leak being ten thousand pound sterling: the whole, a hundred thousand pounds sterling. Pray commend me to M. Protoplast, and all the Sireniacall gentlemen, to whom I wrote one Letter from Aleppo, after my being at Ierusa∣lem; and another I intend to write before my go∣ing out of Asia. Their most elegant and incompa∣rable safe-conduct that they haue graciously be∣stowed vpon me, I haue left at Aleppo, not hauing made any vse of it as yet, neither shall I in all my peregrination of Asia: but when I shall one day arriue in Christendome, it will be very auaileable to me. I haue heere sent vnto you the coppy of certaine facetious verses, that were lately sent to me to this Court, from one of my Countrimen, one M. Iohn Browne, a Londoner borne, now re∣sident with diuers other English Merchants, at a Citie in India, fiue hundred miles from the place where I abide, called Amadauers, about sixe dayes iourney from the Sea: who vnderstanding of my arriuall at this Court, and of my tedious pedestri∣all peregrination all the way from Ierusalem hi∣ther; vnderstanding it I say, by Latine and Italian Epistles, that vpon a certaine occasion I wrote to some of that company, made these pretty verses, and sent them me. You may reade them to your friends if you thinke fit, and especially to the Si∣reniacall gentlemen; for they are alegant and de∣lectable.
The superscription of his Letter was this: to the painefull gentleman, M. Thomas Co∣ryate: The title within prefixed before the verses, this; To the Odeombian wonder, our laborious Coun∣triman, the generous Coryate. The Verses. What though thy Cruder trauels were attended With bastinadoes, lice, and vile disgraces? Haue not thy glorious acts thereby ascended Great Brittaines stage, euen to Princes places, Led on in triumph by the noblest spirits That euer deignd to write of anies merits? If then for that they did aduance thy fame, How will they striue to adde vnto thy glory, When thou to them so wondrously shalt name Thy weary foot-steps and thy Asian story? No doubt more ripe (as neerer to the Sunne) Then was that first that in the cold begun. Then rest a while, and to thy taske againe, Till thou hast throughly trod this Asian round, Which yet so many Kingdomes doth containe As Dackon, where the Diamond is found; And Bisnagar, Narsinga: and if you be Not weary yet, in Zeilan seeke the Rubie. Then could I wish you saw the China Nation, Whose policie and art doth farre exceed Our Northern climes: and here your obseruation VVould Nouelists and curious Artists feede
With admiration. Oh, had I now my wishes, Sure you shold learn to make their China dishes But by the way forget notA goodly Prouince in India, three hundred miles from hence Gugurat, The Lady of this mighty Kings Dominion: Visite Baroch, Cambaia, and Surat, And Amdauar; all which in my opinion Yeeld much content: & then more to glad yee, Weele haue a health to al our friends inA kinde of wine vsed in that part of India. Tadee Then crosse to Arab,He meaneth Arabia foelix. happiest in diuision; But haue a care (at Mecca is some danger) Leste you incurre the paine of circumcision, Or Peter-like, to Christ do seeme a stranger. From thence to Egypt, where the famous Nile And Memphis will detaine your eyes a while. This done, at Alexandria seeke your passage For Englands happy shores, wher How & Mundy Will striue to make your trauels out-last age, So long as stand their Annals of our Country. For Mandeuill wil come of thee farre short, Either of trauell, or a large report. YEt one Post-script more by way of a Corol∣lary, and so with the same, beeing the fourth and the last, I will adde the final vmbilicke to this tedious English-Indian Epistle. I haue written out two seuerall coppies of these verses, and in∣cluded them within the Letters, which I haue in∣treated you to distribute for me, but so that the Letters are not sealed vpon them; onely they lie loose within the Letters, therefore they are sub∣iect
to losing, except you haue an extraordinary care of them. Wherefore I intreate you to deliuer that to mine Vnkle with your owne hands, if he be in London, or to conueigh it to him by such a one as will not lose that loose paper of verses. The like care I desire you to haue of that to my mother, and to send it vnto her by some o∣ther man then a Carrier, if you can iet with such an op∣portunity: for in truth I am afraide the carrier wil lose the inclosed paper. Pray take aduice of some of the M. of the Rolles his people that are to ride to Euill. Pray remem∣ber my commendations with all respect to M. Williams the goldsmith and his wife; and to Beniamin Iohnson, and to reade this letter to them both: likewise to mistris Eli∣zabeth Balch, if shee continueth with your Lady. One appendix more and so an end. There happened betwixt the day of the writing of this Letter, and the day of the sealing of it vp, a memorable occurrent not to bee omitted. VVee receiued newes at this Court the ninth day after the writing of this Letter (for nine daies it was vnsealed) being the eight of October, of the arriuall of foure goodly English ships, at the hauen of Suat in In∣dia, and in the same, of a very generous and worthy Eng∣lish Knight, a deare friend of mine, Sir Thomas Rowe, to come to the Court with some mature expedition, as an Ambassadour from the right worshipfull company of London Merchants that trade for India: he cometh with Letters from our King, and certaine selected presents of good worth from the company, amongst the rest, a gal∣lant Caroch, of 150. pounds price. Also there came with him 15. seruants, al Englishmen. Forty daies hence at the farthest we expect () his arriual at this Court. This newes doth refocillate (I will vse my olde phrase so well knowne to you) my spirits: for I hope he will vse me graciously, for old acquaintance sake.
TO THE HIGH Seneschall of the right Worshipfull Fraternitie of Sireni∣acal Gentlemen, that meet the first Fri∣daie of euery Moneth, at the signe of the Mere-Maide in Bread streete in London, giue these: From the Court of the great Mogul resident at the Towne of Asmere, in the East∣erne India. RIght Generous, Io∣uiall, and Mercuriall Sirenaicks; I haue of∣ten read this greeke Prouerb,  that is, one hand washeth another, & in Latine, Mulus mulum scabi, one Mule scratcheth another; by which the Anci∣ents signified, that courtesies done vn∣to friends, ought to bee requited with reciprocall offices of friendship. The serious consideration heereof, dooth
make me to call to mind that incompa∣rable elegant safe-conduct, which a lit∣tle before my departure from England, your Fraternity with a general suffrage gaue me for the security of my future peregrination, concinnated by the pleasant wit of that inimitable artizan of sweet elegancy, the moytie of my heart, and the quondam Seneschall of the noblest society, M. L.VV. Therefore since it is requsite that I should repay some-what for the same, according to the lawes of humanity: Such a poore retribution as I sent vnto you from Aleppo, the Metropolitan City of Syria, by one M. Henry Allare of Kent, my fellow-pilgrime therehence to Ie∣rusalem; I meane a plaine Epistle, which I hope, long since came vnto your hands. I haue sent vnto you by a man no lesse deare vnto mee then the for∣mer, one M. Peter Rogers, a Kentish man also, from the most famigerated Regi∣on of all the East, the ample and large
India: assuring my selfe, that because I am not able to requite your loue with any essentiall gratulations, other then verball and scriptall, you wil as louing∣ly entertaine my poore Letters, beeing the certaine manifestation of an inge∣nious minde, as if J should send vnto you the minerall riches or drugges of the noble Country. Thinke it no wonder I pray you, that I haue made no vse in all this space since I left my natiue Country, of the superexcellent Commeate; for I haue spent all my time hitherto in the Ma∣hometan Countries, and am like to spend three yeares more in these Mus∣selman (as they call them) Regions of Asia, after of Europe, before J shal ariue in Christendome. For this cause I left it in Aleppo, with my Countrimen, there to receiue it from them againe, after that I shall haue ended my In∣dian and Persian perambulation: and therehence to carrie it once more
to Constantinople, and that by the way at Iconium, Nicaea, Nicomedia, & in the coun∣trie of Natolia, a iournie of forty daies. From that finally through the heart of Greece, by the Cities of Athens, Thebes, Corinth, Lacedemon, Thessalonica, and to the Citie of Ragouze, heretofore Epidaurus, so sacred for the image of Aesculapius in the countrie of Sclauonia, once called Il∣lyricum; from thence J haue three daies iourney to the inestimable Diamond set in the Ring of the Adriatique gulfe, (as once I said in the first harangue that euer I made to Prince Henry of blessed memory, translated since my departure from London, from the terrestiall Ta∣barnacles, to the coelestial habitations) venereous Venice, the soueraign Queen of the Mare superum: if the great Iehouah shall be so propitious vnto mee, as to grant mee a prosperous arriuall in that noble Cittie, I will there beginne to shew your safe conduct, and to decan∣tate, yea and blazon your praises for the same: and after in euery other place of note, vntill I shall arriue in glorious
London, communicate it to the most po∣lite, with that the Cities will yeeld, tho∣rough which my laborious feete shall carry mee, it would be superuacaneous to commemorate vnto you the almost incredible extent of Land I trauersed from Ierusalem to the Court of the great Mogul in India, where I now reside; with the variable Regions and Prouinces in∣teriacent betwixt them, and the mani∣fold occurrences and obseruations of speciall worke in this vaste tract: for it wold be such a fastidious discourse, that it could not be wel comprehended in a large sheete of paper: but M. VV. I hope will not faile to import vnto you in a few compendious Relations, which I haue acquainted him with, in a particu∣lar Letter to himselfe: of which, if I should haue written againe to you, it would haue proued Crambe his Cocta. The Gentleman that bringeth this Letter vnto you, was preacher to the English Merchants conuersant at the Court of the aforesaide mighty Monarch in the Towne of Asmere in this Easterne India:
and in diuers louing offices hath bene so kind vnto me, that I intreat your ge∣nerosities to entertaine him friendly for my sake, to exhilarate him with the purest quintessence of the Spanish, French and Rhenish Grape, which the Mermaid yeeldeth; & either one in the name of you all, or else the totall vniuersalitie of the one after another, to thanke him heartily, according to the quality of his merits. Farewell noble Sirenaicks. Your generosities most obliged Countreyman, euer to be commanded by you, the Hierosolymi∣tan-Syrian-Mesopotamian-Armenian-Me∣dian-Parthian-Persian-Indian Legge-stretcher of Odcomb in Somerset, THOMAS CORYATE.
PRay remember the re∣commendations of my dutifull respect to al those whose names I haue here expressed, being the lo∣uers of vertue, and literature; and so consequently the well-willers (I hope) of a prosperous issue of my designe∣ments, in my laborious pedestriall pe∣rambulations of Asia, Africa, and Europe. VVritten with mine owne hand, at the Court of the Great Mogul Shaugh Se∣lim, resident in the towne of Asmere, in the vmbilicke of the orientall India, the eight day of Nouember, being wednes∣daie. Anno Dom. 1615.
IMprimis, to the two Ladies Var∣ney, the Mother & the Daughter, at Boswell house without Temple Barre. 2. Item, to that famous Anti∣quarie, Sir Robert Cotten, at his house in the Blacke Friers. Pray tell him that I haue a very cu∣rious white marble head of an ancient Heros or Gyant-like Champion, found out very casually by my diligent peruestigatiō amongst the ruines of the once renowned City of Cyzicum, menti∣oned by Cicero in his second Oration (if my me∣mory doth not faile me) against Verres, situate in a peninsula of Bythinia, in the goodly country of Natolia, neere the Sea Propontis: to this head wil his best antiquities whatsoeuer veyle bonnet. 3. Item, to that courteous, sweet, and elegant-natured and nurtured gentleman. M. William Forde, Preacher to our Nation at Constantinople, if you happen to meete him in any part of Eng∣land; one that deserueth better of me then any man in all this Catalogue: for of him I haue learned whatsoeuer superficiall skill I haue got∣ten in the Italian tongue: pray reduplicate my commendations vnto him. 4. Item to M. George Speake my generous & ingenuous countriman, the Sonne and heyre ap∣parant of Sir George Speake in Sommerset∣shire: him you are like to finde in any Terme, ey∣ther at the middle Temple, or in some Barbers
house neere to the temple. 5. Item, to M. Iohn Donne, the author of two most elegant Latine Bookes, Pseudo martyr, and Ignatij Conclaue: of his abode either in the Strād, or elsewhere in London: I thinke you shall bee easily informed by the meanes of my friend, M. L. W. 6. Item, to M. Richard Martin, Counsellor, at his chamber in the middle Temple, but in the Terme time, scarce else. 7. Item, to M. Christopher Brooke of the city of Yorke, Councellor, at his chamber in Lin∣colnes Inne, or neere it. 8. Item, to M. Iohn Hoskins, alias Acquinoctial Pastitrust, of the citie of Hereford, Councellor, at his chamber in the middle Temple. 9. Item, to M. George Garrat; of whose bee∣ing you shal vnderstand by Master Donne afore∣saide. 10 Item, to M. VVilliam Hackwell, at his chamber in Lincolnes Inne. 11 Item, to Master Beniamin Iohnson the Poet, at his chamber at the Blacke Friars. 12. Item to Maist. Iohn Bond my countrey∣man, chiefe Secretarie vnto my Lorde Chan∣cellour. 13 Item, to M. Doctor Mocket, resident perhappes in my Lord of Canterburies house at Lambeth, where I left him. 14 Item, to M. Samuel Purkas, the great col∣lector
of the Lucubrations of sundry classical au∣thors, for the description of Asia, Africa, and A∣merica. Pray commend mee vnto him and his  Maister Cooke, by the same token, that he gaue me a description of Constantinople, and the Thracius Bosphorus, written in Latine by a Frenchman called Petrus Gillius: which Booke, when I carried once in an afternoone vnder mine arme, in walking betwixt our English Ambassa∣dors house in Pera, on the opposite side to Con∣stantinople, and the Flemish Ambassadors house, I lost it very vnfortunately to my great griefe, & neuer found it againe. 15 Item, to M. Inigo Iones, there where Mai∣ster Martin shall direct you. 16 Item, to M. Iohn Williams the Kings Gold∣at his house in Cheapside. 17 Item to M. Hugh Holland, at his lodging, where M. Martin shall direct you. 18 Item, to M. Robert Bing at Yongs ordinarie, neere the Exchange. 19 Item, to M. William Stansby, the Printer of my Crudities and Crambe, at his house in Thames street: also to his childlesse wife. 20 Item, to all the Stationers in Paules Church∣yard; but especially those by name, Mast. Norton, Mast. Waterson, M. Mathew Lownes, M. Edward Blount, and M. Barrat, &c. God bless thēall, & me too, that I may one day after the finall consummation of my fastidious peregrina∣tions
in the world, see and salute them all in health and welfare. Per me Thomam Coryatum Odcombiensem. PRay remember my verie humble dutie to my Lord Byshop of Bathe and Welles, generous M. Doctor Montacute; and tell his Lordship, that before I returne towards the Persian court out of this Orientall India, I resolue (by Gods permissi∣on) to write such a Letter vnto him (after I haue throughly surueighed so much of this country as I meane to do) as shall not bee vnworthy to bee read to the Kings most excellent Maiesty. You are like to heare newes of his Lordships abode in Kings street, neere VVestminster. A Distich to the Traueller. All our choice wits, all, see, thou hast engrost: The doubt yet rests, if they or thou haue most. FINIS.
To his Louing Mother. BY this present Letter, I am like to minister vnto you the occasion of two contrary matters; the one of comfort, the other of discomfort: of com∣fort, because I haue by the propitious assistance of the omnipotent Iehouah, performed such a notable voyage of Asia the greater, with purchase of great riches of experience, as I doubt whether any English man this hundred yeares haue done the like; hauing seene and very particularly obserued all the cheefest things in the Holy-land, called in times past Palaestina; as Ierusalem, Samaria, Nazareth, Bethlehem, Iericho, E∣maus, Bethania, the Dead Sea, called by the Ancients Lacus Asphaltities, where Sodome and Gomorrha once stood; since that, many famous and renowned Cities and countries; Mesopotamia, in the which I entred by the passage of the riuer Euphrates, that watered Para∣dise; in which the Citty of Vr where Abraham was borne; both the Mediaes, the higher and the lower. Parthia, Armenia, Persia, through al which I haue tra∣uailed into the Eastern India, being now at the Court of the great Mogull, at a Towne called Asmere, the which from Ierusalem is the distance of two thousand and seauen hundred miles; and haue traced all this tedious way afoote, with no small toile of bodye and discomfort, because that beeing so exceeding
farre from my sweet and most delicious Natiue soyle of England, you will doubt perhaps, how it is possi∣ble for me to returne home againe: but I hope I shall quickly remoue from you that opinion of discomfort, (if at the least you shall conceiue any such) because I would haue you know, that I alwayes go safely in the company of Carauans from place to place. A Carauan is a word much vsed in all Asia: by which is vnderstood a great multitude of people trauelling together vpon the way with Camels, Horses, Mules, Asses, &c. on which they carry Merchandizes from one country to another, and Tents and Pauillions; vnder which in∣stead of houses they shelter themselues in open fields, being furnished also with all necessary prouision, and conuenient implements to dresse the same: in which Carauans I haue euer most securely passed betwixt Ie∣rusalem and this Towne, a iourney of fifteene months and odde dayes: whereof foure wanting a VVeeke, spent in Aleppo, and two and fiue & od dayes spent in Spahan the Metropolitan Citty of Persia, where the Persian King most commonly keepeth his Court: & the occasion of my spending of sixe moneths of the foresaide fifteene, in those two Citties, was to waite for an opportunity of Carauans to Trauaile withall; which a traueller is not sure to finde presently, when he is ready to take his iourney, but must with patience expect a conuenient time; and the Carauan in which I trauelled betwixt Spahan and India, contained 2000. Camels, 1500. horses, 1000. and odde Mules, 800. Asses, and sixe thousand people. Let this therefore (deer Mother) minister vnto you a strong hope of my happy returne into England. Notwithstand all these lines for prouision for your
Funerall, I hope for to see you aliue and sound in bo∣dy & minde, about foure yeares hence; & to kneele before you with effusion of teares, for ioy. Sweet mo∣ther, pray let not this wound your heart, that I say four yeares hence, & not before; I humbly beseech you e∣uen vpon the knees of my heart, with all submissiue, supplications to pardon me for my long absence; for verily, I haue resolued by the fauour of the supernal powers, to spend 4. entire yeares more before my re∣turne, and so to make it a Pilgrimage of 7. yeares, to the end I may very effectually and profitably contem∣plate a great part of this worldly fabricke, determining by Gods special help, to go from India into the coun∣trey of Scythia, now called Tartaria, to the Cittie Sa∣marcanda, to see the Sepulcher of the greatest Con∣queror that euer was in the worlde. Tamberlaine the Great: thither it is a iourney of two months from the place I now remaine: from that I meane to return in∣to Persia; and therehence by the way of Babylon & Ni∣niuy, and the Mountaine Ararat, where Noahs Arke rested, to Aleppo, to my Countrymen. From that, by the way of Damascus, and once againe to Gaza in the Land of the Philistims vnto Cairo in Egypt: From that downe the Nilus to Alexandria: and therehence final∣ly, I hope to be imbarked for some part of Christen∣dome, as either Venice, or &c. After mine arriuall in Christendome, I shall desire to trauell two yeares in I∣taly, and both high & low Germany, and then with all expedition into England, and to see you (I hope) with as great ioy as euer did any Trauailer his Father or Mother, going in that manner as I do like a poore Pil∣grim. I am like to passe with vndoubted securitie, and
very small charge: for in my tenne months trauailes be∣twixt Aleppo and this Moguls Court, I spent but three pounds sterling, and yet had sustenance enough to maintaine nature, liuing reasonably well, oftentimes a whole day, for so much of their money, as doeth counteruaile two pence sterling. But least I be ouer tedious vnto you, I will heere make an end. &c. I will now commend you to the most blessed prote∣ction of our Sauiour Iesus Christ; before whose holy Sepulcher at Ierusalem, I haue poured foorth mine ardent Orisons for you, to the most sacro∣sanct Trinity, beseeching it with all humilitie of heart, to blesse and preserue you in a solid health, &c. Your louing Sonne, Tho: Coryate.
To his louing Friend, Tho∣mas Coryate. TOm Coryates Shooes hang by the Bels At Odcomb, where that Bel-Dam dwels who first produc't that monster: Monster of men I may him call, In that he is admir'd of all, else mought he me misconster. His head doth run the wilde-goose chace, Swifter then horse of hunting race, or Hare that Hound runs after: He pickes vp wit, as Pigeons pease, And vtters it when God doth please: O who can hold from Laughter? To see him in a Morning Sunne, In his rough Lambeskin and bare gowne the Scuttle hole ascending: Would make a horse his halter breake, To heare him vomit forth his Greeke, with all the Ship contending. On Christmas day he drunke in iest, Coniur'd a storme out of the East, in clambring vp the cradle: Before, the winde was wondrous faire, Now forc't to ride in Gebraltar, withouten horse or saddle.
But Asses there a hideous band, Thom-as discouered from the Land, His Booke is not without them: At Toms returne there will be sport, In Countrey, City, Towne, and Court, Those Asses round about them. Who liues his Leaues for to vnfold, At his returne, I dare be bold, will wonders finde farre stranger, Then was his conflict with the Iewes, Or entertainment at the Stewes; or lying in the Manger Amongst the horse at Bergamo, Or begging of the poore, I tro; these were but toyes and bables: Of Drums, Guns, Trumpets, he will tell, Of haling Ships, of Pyrats fell; of Tacklings, Masts, and Cables. VVith Starboord, Larboorde, Helme Alee, Full, Come no neere: 'tis done quoth he, who at the Helme doth stand. War-no-more, cries an angry Mate; Oh Odcombe, these be termes of state, Not vsuall on the Land. Oh learne this Tongue I thee beseech, For it is not beyond the reach ofBecause my Brother Cri∣ate called the Sailers Leaden pated Fellowes. I say, it is not beyond their reach to learne this Language: not that I call him Leaden pated, for the world knowes he is capeable of farre worth or Languages: beeing now adding Italian, to his excellent Greeke and Latine. Leaden pated fooles:
A Marine Language made, I say, Among ourselues, which till this day was neuer taught in schooles. Confront your Academies all, Of Brazen-nose and Penbrooke Hall, of learned not the least: Challenge the chiefe in our behoofe, And make the proudest spring his loofe, or send him South South-east. There let vs leaue them for a time: Now to the subiect of my rime, Tom Tel-troth simply witty: Neither Tom Dingell, nor Tom Drum, Tom Foole, Tom Piper, nor Tom Thum, the scorne of Towne and Citie. But Tom of Toms, admired most; More then a Goblin, or a Ghost, A Phairy, or an Elfe; VVhilst he amongst his Friends abides, Your Gizards at your Whitsontides,Gizard is in Scotch a mer∣ry Mummer. no merrier then the himselfe. Fryer Tucke, Maide Marian, and the rest, You Bag-pipes loud that loodle best, making the valleyes ring: You and all countrey clownes giue place, To Odcomb of esteemed grace, euen vice-toy to a King. Who for his mirth and merry glee, Is rais'd to higher dignity, then ere was English wight;
So honor'd since his comming out, He must no more be earm'd a Lout,Termed a Lout, hauing a reference vnto the Princes verses, who held all men guts & Louts that were not Trauellers. but styl'd a Troian knight. Where he hath writ of Toombs, of Stones Of Marble Pillars, dead mens bones, with Pallaces of pleasure: Of Gates, of Turrets, Churches, Towres, Of Princes, Pesants, Knaues, and VVhores; alas for time and leasure. For to repeate what he hath writ, VVhilst I am in this riming fit, plaine, simple, vnrefinde: Of this no longer must I stay, Be merry Mates, and lets away, whilst weather serues, and winde. FINIS.
